# ID: 86c1e3cf4ba2489c9f90f84e642de1c1
# Title: Budgeting for the Nation's Defense Following the End of National Conflicts
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
The purpose of this thesis is to examine the primary factors influencing the defense budgeting decisions of the Truman and Bush 41 Administrations. In particular, the thesis examines events following the end of the World War II and the Cold War. This examination and analysis should be of interest for the Obama Administration due to the many apparent parallels between these administrations. Like the Obama Administration, Truman and Bush faced an uncertain threat environment, economic concerns including inflation and high employment, and the challenge of navigating the nation through the end of a war. By understanding how these factors influenced each respective administration, Obama can better construct tomorrows defense budgets. There are four primary budget models, tied closely with environmental factors, which help explain the defense budget decisions made by the previous administrations. These four models include the historical, threat, economy, and strategy-based methods. Depending on the context, each of these factors and models pull or attempt to loosen the nations purse strings. Concerns with the economy consistently pull the purse strings close, while the nations threat perceptions justified defense expenditures. The nations geopolitical goals and strategies can influence defense budgets in either direction. The historical model is the most dependent on context. The nations behavior and defense budget can gain its own momentum, thereby influencing the process. Prior to World War II, the nations cultural norm was to maintain a small military force; therefore, the nation quickly demobilized and cut defense funding at the end of the nations conflicts. In the aftermath of the Cold War, it appears the nations culture norm was transformed and the nation relied on its military to create jobs and export democracy throughout the world. This new norm supported defense budgets. The thesis concludes that Truman, by 1947, cut the nations defense budget 90 percent due to his focus on the nations economy. Bush also cut the defense budget due to economic concerns, but only by 28 percent over an eight-year period. The nations new historical norm of maintaining a large military infrastructure kept the defense cuts small. In Trumans case, the nations cultural habit of maintaining a small military and quick demobilization eliminated any hurdles to defense cuts. In addition to the economy, Trumans national security strategy relied on economic strength instead of military strength. Trumans strategy sought free trade, an establishment of international governing body along with an allied police force to prevent war. If these strategies did not work, Truman held the atomic bomb monopoly to insure against mistakes. Bushs new world order required a strong military able to project forces quickly; therefore, Bushs strategy supported the defense budget. With regard to threats, each administration faced uncertainty. From 1945 to 1950, Truman couched Soviet threats in terms of a contest of political wills rather than military capabilities. His desire to achieve world peace required Soviet cooperation, not an arms competition. On the other hand, Bush faced the threats of terrorism, WMD, and ballistic missile proliferation. For Bush, a strong and capable military was the nations protector. vi President Obama, facing a $1.2 trillion deficit and inheriting a $12 trillion debt, is feeling the economic pressures to cut defense spending. In order to make any substantive cuts, he must appreciate the momentum of the nations current defense budget and the influence it exerts on the budgeting process. The nations new historical norm supports a larger defense budget than perhaps needed. Obama will need to construct a security strategy less reliant on military strength to accomplish objectives, and begin the process of justifying a threat evaluation that is, well, less threatening. In the past, the tension for allocating greater defense budgets was between the threats and the nations historical norm, economic concerns and national strategy. Today, while economic concerns are still resident, the other three factors continue to support larger than expected defense budgets. Obama will need to address each factor if he wishes to make lasting cuts to the nations defense budget.
, and Claire (10).
There are four primary budget models, tied closely with environmental factors, which help explain the defense budget decisions made by the previous administrations. These four models include the historical, threat, economy, and strategy-based methods. Depending on the context, each of these factors and models pull or attempt to loosen the nation's purse strings. Concerns with the economy consistently pull the purse strings close, while the nation's threat perceptions justified defense expenditures. The nation's geopolitical goals and strategies can influence defense budgets in either direction. The historical model is the most dependent on context. The nation's behavior and defense budget can gain its own momentum, thereby influencing the process. Prior to World War II, the nation's cultural norm was to maintain a small military force; therefore, the nation quickly demobilized and cut defense funding at the end of the nation's conflicts. In the aftermath of the Cold War, it appears the nation's culture norm was transformed and the nation relied on its military to create jobs and export democracy throughout the world. This new norm supported defense budgets.
The thesis concludes that Truman, by 1947, cut the nation's defense budget 90 percent due to his focus on the nation's economy. Bush also cut the defense budget due to economic concerns, but only by 28 percent over an eight-year period. The nation's new historical norm of maintaining a large military infrastructure kept the defense cuts small. In Truman's case, the nation's cultural habit of maintaining a small military and quick demobilization eliminated any hurdles to defense cuts. In addition to the economy, Truman's national security strategy relied on economic strength instead of military strength. Truman's strategy sought free trade, an establishment of international governing body along with an allied police force to prevent war. If these strategies did not work, Truman held the atomic bomb monopoly to insure against mistakes. Bush's new world order required a strong military able to project forces quickly; therefore, Bush's strategy supported the defense budget. With regard to threats, each administration faced uncertainty. From 1945 to 1950, Truman couched Soviet threats in terms of a contest of political wills rather than military capabilities. His desire to achieve world peace required Soviet cooperation, not an arms competition. On the other hand, Bush faced the threats of terrorism, WMD, and ballistic missile proliferation. For Bush, a strong and capable military was the nation's protector.
President Obama, facing a $1.2 trillion deficit and inheriting a $12 trillion debt, is feeling the economic pressures to cut defense spending. In order to make any substantive cuts, he must appreciate the momentum of the nation's current defense budget and the influence it exerts on the budgeting process. The nation's new historical norm supports a larger defense budget than perhaps needed. Obama will need to construct a security strategy less reliant on military strength to accomplish objectives, and begin the process of justifying a threat evaluation that is, well, less threatening. In the past, the tension for allocating greater defense budgets was between the threats and the nation's historical norm, economic concerns and national strategy. Today, while economic concerns are still resident, the other three factors continue to support larger than expected defense budgets. Obama will need to address each factor if he wishes to make lasting cuts to the nation's defense budget.
That we are in the midst of crisis is now well understood. Our nation is at war against a far-reaching network of violence and hatred. Our economy is badly weakened, a consequence of greed and irresponsibility on the part of some, but also our collective failure to make hard choices and prepare the nation for a new age. Homes have been lost, jobs shed, businesses shuttered. Our health care is too costly, our schools fail too many -and each day brings further evidence that the ways we use energy strengthen our adversaries and threaten our planet.
--President Barack Hussein Obama Political administrations must annually surmount challenges and endure debates regarding the allocation of taxpayer funds; the challenge lies in the balancing of federal budget priorities. The debate, as often constructed, is a choice between guns and butternational security versus economic prosperity. President Obama, during his inaugural address, clearly stated the United States is in a crisis involving both the national security and economic well-being of the country. 
1
3
However, the issues remain. How much funding should an administration allocate to defense spending? 
4
5
As the war terminates, the deficits snap the government's focus back to the economy as the nation, normally, drastically reduces defense spending, quickly demobilizes the force structure, and forces the services to use leftover equipment in preparation for a future war. The end of the war implies an end to hostilities and a lasting peace. Politicians can reprioritize the objective of national security with economic prosperity, and focus on protection against inflation, recession, and high unemployment rates.
An important aspect of the strategist's job, within this construct, is to examine the means at hand and determine the best use of the means to accomplish the political goals or achieve the desired political end-state. The broad political goals, as used within this thesis, are achieving national security and economic prosperity. The challenge is 
3
4
5
determining the method of allocating funding to ensure the nation has the right and proper mix of means. Colin Gray, one of the today's recognized experts on strategy, defines strategy in a manner useful for understanding the role of budgets. For Gray, strategy is the bridge linking means with political end states or objectives. 
6
In other words, budgets purchase and maintain the means available to achieve political goals and the means available will determine whether the bridge is a simple rope path, a covered wooden bridge or as complex as the Golden Gate Bridge. 
7
9
10
6
7
8
9
10 Dolman,
Pure Strategy,
12.
11
These domains include sea, land, air, space, and now cyberspace. 12   The United States is currently operating within that dynamic, complex, and uncertain environment. President Obama's administration faces a myriad of challenges from both an economic and national security aspect. Numerous imminent economic failures to include the failure of several national banks, the bankruptcy of America's traditional economic engine General Motors, and a steep increase in housing foreclosures challenge the administration. All of these threats are driving unemployment rates, business closures, and financial market indices to historical 25-year negative levels. The national debt is expected to triple over the next ten years, while reaching a $1.75 trillion deficit level in 2010.
Although the strategist may be daunted by the demands required, she must operate and develop strategies ensuring national security and economic prosperity within this dynamic environment.
13 
11
The new administration was going to be challenged by the federal budget, defense funding in particular, whether or not the economy was in decline; the worsening economy has simply sharpened the debate and exasperate the challenges. Key leaders within the House of Representatives have warned the military services to prepare for decreasing military budgets. Congressman Murtha, chairperson of the powerful House Appropriations Committee on Defense, stated in December of 2008, "Our job will be to manage the current and future threats under a constrained defense budget." 
14
15
16
15
16
18
The Truman and George H.W. Bush administrations each faced complex and uncertain environments early within their terms. President Truman had to navigate the United States through the end of World War II, the advent of the atomic age, the economy's conversion from a defensive to domestic focus while controlling inflation and unemployment, and creating a stable post-war geopolitical environment. Truman faced record debt levels, the conclusion of a two front war, a world in economic shambles due to the ravages of war, and an uncertain threat environment. While Truman set the nation's policy as it entered the Cold War, Bush had to reset the course with the fall of the Iron Curtain and the end of the Cold War. The Bush administration had to address record debt levels, an uncertain threat environment due to the loss of a bi-polar world, the economic hardships of Eastern Europe, the beginning of a national recession, and the hard push to realize a peace dividend.
Obama administration is facing serious problems, today's challenges are not new or unique.
Each of these administrations faced the challenges of balancing funding allocations between national security and domestic programs. Each president guided the country through the end of a major engagement into a hopeful new geopolitical world of peace. President Truman followed through on the creation of the United Nations while President Bush's administration called for a New World Order. Within each of these administrations, the geopolitical threats and risks were uncertain, and each embraced the 18 Shaun Waterman, "Budget Analysts Warn of Spiraling Defense Spending," Washington Times, 12 February 2009, http://ebird.osd.mil/ebfiles/e20090212656650.html (accessed 12 February 2009). hope for a better tomorrow. Through President Barack Obama's speeches and press releases, one can trace many policy parallels to these previous administrations. 
19
The thesis is divided into five chapters. While this chapter frames the question and purpose of the thesis, the remaining four provide case studies, definitions, historical constructs, models, issues, and a framework for future challenges. In the next chapter, the reader will gain an understanding of the various methods in formulating budgets as well as an historical review of defense funding allocation within the United States prior to World War II. Chapters three and four consist of case studies, focusing on the Truman and Bush administrations. These chapters will pay particular attention to how the nation's history, threats, economic conditions, and strategic goals influenced budget decisions. Finally, the last chapter will draw conclusions and lessons from the case studies applicable for the Obama administration.
Even though there was debate regarding the America's cultural norms during the nation's early history, the United States exhibited the cultural norms of distrusting a standing military, avoiding foreign alliances, and minimizing national debt in determining the nation's national security policy. The following chapter provides a review of how these factors influenced the nation's decisions. In addition to this historical review, the chapter will examine the four budgeting methods that will serve as our lenses for the subsequent case studies.
Over the centuries emperors, kings, princes, and democratic governments have pondered…how to have an armed force available to advance and protect the interests, at an affordable financial and political cost, and in such a way that it does not threaten them.
--General Rupert Smith
The most economical and efficient peace-time policy of defense is one that provides: (1)
The minimum necessary for an active establishment, maintained in the highest state of efficiency (personnel and material) and immediately available for active service;
(2) a war reserve sufficient for its purposes;
(3) and comprehensive measures of preparation for mobilization of the National effort. To neglect the active establishment, the war reserve, or the provisions for mobilizing the Nation, would be a blunder that might prove fatal.
A myriad of questions surround the formulation of defense budgets. How much should a nation spend on defense? What factors should drive the decision? Should one base the decision on striking a balance between national security and domestic programs?
Can the defense budget be set at a level to counter likely security threats? Should the defense budget be set at what is affordable or what is available after funding domestic priorities? Should the nation tie the defense budget to its security strategy? Annually, the problem of balancing limited resources and ensuring the nation's security confronts the government. Each administration must consider a range of economic conditions, threats, and geopolitical goals. The economic conditions can range from the lows of the Great Depression to the heights of economic prosperity experienced during the 1950s.
The nation can experience the threat of elimination due to nuclear war or peripheral risks such as Indian raids along the frontier. The country's geopolitical goals can be as simple as avoiding foreign alliances and entanglements, or escalate to policing the world and promoting stable, democratic governments. Each factor plays its part determining the size of the defense budget. The influence of each issue varies based on the environmental context.
This chapter will examine the historical ebb and flow of defense budgets and force structures from the Revolutionary War to the beginning of World War II as well as review the various defense budget methods offered in the literature. By reviewing the nations' first 150 years, the reader will gain an understanding of America's reluctance to support a large standing army or fund sizeable military budgets. Each of the factors identified above influenced the nation's choices; the benefits and the costs of these decisions vary depending on the analyst's perspective. Following the historical analysis, the chapter will review four budget formulation models to include the historical-based, threat-based, economy-based, and strategy-based models. These models will be used as the lenses to examine the Truman and Bush administrations' efforts in formulating defense budgets at the end of major conflicts in the following chapters.
Throughout the early history of the United States, the factors and processes establishing the defense budget varied little. The United States had an historical tendency to sharply reduce defense budgets and dramatically demobilize force structure at the end of wars. This tendency was rooted in the nation's historical distrust of a standing army. 1
As stated by a nineteenth century military historian, "[o]ur military policy has been largely shaped by the Anglo-Saxon prejudice against "standing armies as a dangerous menace to liberty." 2 In addition to this distrust, the nation was driven to eliminate debt and budget deficits, and struggled in devising means to raise revenue and capital. 3
Because of this combination, Congress disbanded the army at the end of the Revolutionary War due to financial concerns as the war had resulted in "the finances of the nation being completely exhausted." 4 This proclivity to maintain balanced budgets and avoid personal taxes strengthened the case for small standing armies. The nation repeated this behavior of cutting funds and demobilizing forces at the end of conflicts throughout its early history. In table 1, one can examine the ebb and flow of force structure, and how quickly Congress acted to demobilize the army. The War of 1812 is a case in point. The professional army was only 5,000 strong as the nation prepared for war. Congress acted to increase the force size as the war neared, yet Congress still expected the militia to carry the heavy load. This behavior is reflected in the fact that the professional army consisted of 15,000 regulars within a total force of 65,000 by the end of 1812.
5
Congress would not allow this sized force to exist for long. Following the victory at New
Orleans, Congress passed a bill reducing the regular army to 10,000, and while the ending professional force was a two-fold increase from the 5,000 originally defending the nation, Congress would whittle away at this professional army over the next 10 years.
6
The reorganization of the Army in 1821 illuminated Congress' continuing concern regarding a standing army and national debt. Since the War of 1812, the United
States had only faced one limited engagement against Indians in Florida; the Seminole War occurred in 1817, and the conflict was over in three months. Following the conflict, the nation enjoyed relative peace along the frontier allowing Congress, in 1821, to reduce the strength of the Army from 12,000 to 6,000.
7
8
The nation would continue its policy of mobilizing and demobilizing; only quickening the demobilization process. By the time of the Florida War in 1835, the nation had reduced the regular military force again from 6,000 to just 4,000 troops.
The nation's distrust of standing armies coupled with its drive to reduce the nation's debt seemed to outweigh concerns regarding potential threats posed by European powers or American Indians. 
9
Congress again increased the speed of demobilization during the Mexican War by linking the actual legislation that authorized the regular force increase with a provision reducing the regular force level "when the exigency requiring the increase should cease." 
10
This was due to public sentiment, the nation's steady foreign policy of avoiding alliances, Congress linked the demobilization of forces to the peace treaty and made the reduction automatic. The experiences of the Civil War, and Spanish-American War would be little different.
the continued distrust of standing armies, and funding considerations. Once it entered the war, the nation found itself, as to be expected, unprepared.
The nation had to mobilize forces, purchase equipment, retool industry, and reshape the economy. In order to support its allies, the United States needed to provide well-equipped, professional soldiers, and serve as the industrial engine producing the new instruments of war. These new instruments included the tank and the airplane. However, the nation did not live up to its promises; the United States could not deliver tanks or aircraft in time for the war.
11
Congress, recognizing a need for change, amended the National Defense Act on June 4, 1920. The Secretary of War stated in his 1921 annual report that Congress had finally recognized the need for a "permanent military policy commensurate with their great potential requirements for national defense, and yet thoroughly consistent with their national traditions."
Additionally, the army was not able to quickly mobilize and train a professional army; the mobilization of forces was difficult and costly. The allies would win the war, but possibly at a greater cost than was necessary. The results of America's efforts were a wake-up call for Congress; the threats and forms of war had changed and the United States needed to adjust its military policies.
12
13
Before Congress debated the act, Army leaders had requested a standing force of 500,000. Due to several factors, including Gen Pershing's force size recommendation
The solution was not a larger peacetime force structure-it was a process to mobilize the force structure needed for war.
and a Republican controlled Congress calling for budget cuts, the Army was authorized an end strength just short of 300,000. 
14
15
16
These cuts, during the 1920s, occurred against a backdrop of increased demand for force structure; in particular, occupation forces throughout the Pacific to include the Philippines. Bottom line, the force size was far short of the Army's request of 500,000.
17
18
19
The nation was focused on a defensive posture. The United States did not want to be lured once again into a European War, and these continuing policies would handicap the United States' entry into World War II. 20 
14
The causes were, as Blumenson observed, "A revulsion against war in general and disillusionment with WWI in particular," and confidence "in the oceans as bulwarks of protection" drove the nation into isolationism. 
21
The depression of the 1930s only furthered the problem resulting in fewer dollars being appropriated for development and procurement of weapons and equipment. This short paragraph encapsulates the impact of Congressional policies, funding restrictions, and isolationism on the United States' military force structure and funding.
General Emory Upton's second publication, The Military Policy of the United States directed its attention on the nation's ability to raise, train, and prepare an army for war. In his view, the nation was ill prepared for wars due to its cultural desire to maintain a small, regular army while relying on state militias to endure most of the early fighting.
He documented and sustained his statements by reviewing the conduct and experiences of the nation's conflicts from the Revolutionary to the Civil War. Upton reviewed the army's performance during both times of conflict and interwar periods. He paid particular attention to the ability of the army to prepare for the next war, the progress of each campaign, and the impact of Congressional policy. More importantly for our purposes, Upton reviewed the national policies at the conclusion of each war and their impact on the military structure and defense funding.
Upton believed, and was influenced, by a Prussian view that war was a recurring theme in man's history and therefore the nation had to be prepared. that war was inevitable, writing "Eternal peace is a dream, and not even a pleasant one.
War is a part of God's world order." 
23
24
Given the nation was at war 25 percent of the time, war was a natural condition of the nation and the nation needed a larger, professional standing army.
Upton's arguments would be sustained and repeated following WWI. The Secretary of War, in his 1921 annual report addressed the problems of being unprepared, repeating Upton's primary concern, stated,
The present period, marking a transition from the high efficiency which we achieved during the World War at the cost of a great initial waste of life and treasure as the penalty of unpreparedness, must be characterized as one of the most important in our history by virtue of the duty which it imposes upon us of insuring that the lessons of the Great War are not lost, but that they are perpetuated in enduring forms of organization and continuing policy. 
28
From this initial review of America's early history, four primary factors seem to have influenced the nation's defense budget behavior. These include the nation's cultural norm of distrusting standing armies, its geostrategic location and threat matrix, its economic goals, and finally, its national strategy. These factors resonate with the most 
The historical model has two aspects with one being the linkage to the influence of the nation's cultural norms on the defense budget and the second linked to using previous budget levels to determine future budgets within the same era. After reviewing the first part of this chapter, one can trace the cultural norms within the United States of distrusting standing armies, an aversion of foreign alliances, and avoidance of national debt or financial conservatism. These three elements drove the nation to maintain a small, relatively weak military. Once the nation's culture set the defense budget baseline, it then could become the basis for future annual budgets. Without a national event to spur additional funding, the defense budget developed its own momentum, sustaining itself. Congress, the defense structure, and the nation developed habits based on the annual peacetime budget amount apportioned to defense.
The idea of formulating budgets based on the past has links to the nation's cultural norm of distrusting standing armies. Following the end of conflicts, the nation reverts to historical budgets and force levels. The nation's culture, centered on the nation's distrust for a standing army and reliance on militias, directly influenced force structure and funding levels. Throughout the Revolutionary War, Washington had to fight this cultural norm of relying on militias rather than professional armies. The following selection, from one of the many letters Washington sent Congress, captures his frustration.
The jealousy of a standing army, and the evils to be apprehended from, are remote…but the consequence of wanting one, according to my ideas formed from the present view of things, is certain and inevitable ruin…[t]he best criterion to work by, so fully, clearly, and decisively reprobates the practice of trusting to militia, that no man who regards order, regularity, and economy, or who has any regard for his own honor, character, or peace of mind, will risk them upon this issue. 
35
36
37
35
This cultural norm was evident after each conflict and even echoed in the Secretary of War's 1921 annual report to Congress already annotated above. He stated, "permanent military policy commensurate with their great potential requirements for national defense, and yet thoroughly consistent with their national traditions." 
38
The role of culture helps explain why the United States, during its early history, drastically reduced funding for the defense structure at the end of each conflict. In his book Modern Strategy, Gray focused on the influence of culture on strategy and stated it is a central theme within his book.
(emphasis added) In writing "their national traditions," he is referring to the nation's norm of maintaining a small army.
39 He states the strategist cannot disconnect her decision process from her cultural background. As Gray observed, "[a]ll strategic behavior is cultural behavior." 40
Being "the most common framework" for Robb, the historical budget method compares current and past budgets in "absolute and relative terms."
In times of stress and disorder, the nation reverts to cultural behavior and this behavior was to reduce drastically defense funding and force structure at the end of conflicts. However, culture does not fully explain the basis for the historical model; simplicity, understandability, and reliability also play their respective part.
A strategist can identify this method in use quite easily. Using this method, individuals will justify increases or decreases in defense budgets using comparisons. For example, someone supporting a strong defense might use the argument that the future budget is some percentage less in constant dollars than the past budget. His argument will be that the nation is reducing its defensive purchasing power, thereby weakening its
The method uses past budgets as the prime basis for the new budget. The strategist takes the preceding budget, adjusts for inflation, and produces the new budget. Without a change in environmental factors, such as new threats, a reasonable analyst would assume the same budget level allocated the previous year would be adequate for the future. While the nation enjoys relative peace, this budgeting method seems reliable and adequate.
38 Department of War, Report of the Secretary of War to the 
President, 1921, 8. 39
40
41
ability to secure the nation. In the same manner, supporters and detractors might compare defense budgets between eras. Comparing the defense budget during the height of the Cold War to the budget of the mid-1990s would show that, in real terms, the administration had curtailed the budget by only twenty percent. 
42
Programs such as research and development, procurement and force structure remain stable. Programmers and planners can build programs with greater, although not complete, assurance the money will be available and grow to counter inflation. With greater assurance that funding will be available long-term, the military industry is better able to make long-term plans and thereby offer lower costs. There is less fear of sudden demobilization from year to year; thereby morale among the troops remains stronger.
However, these benefits serve the organizations and individuals within the defense complex and not the nation's strategy nor does it guarantee national security.
This argument infers that additional savings within the defense budget were available due to the relative decreases in threats.
Reliance upon this model can produce a gap between the real purpose of budgets (purchasing the means to accomplish the national strategy), and the organization's goal (survival measured by budget levels) develops. Gray also adds to this argument cautioning the nation not to establish budget levels to support the organization when he stated, "armed forces exist primarily to serve as a more or less complex instrument of the grand strategy of the state; they are not funded to function as a well-oiled machine that is an end in itself. The benefits do not always serve the national security objectives.
Military power, therefore, should be balanced against best estimates of the country's need for it."
43
44
45
Two factors drive the threat-based method: intentions and capabilities. The interplay of these two factors defines the seriousness or level of the threats faced by a nation. The threat posed by a readily identified hostile, but capabilities poor enemy, might be deemed by the nation as a low threat, or possibly, a growing threat. In contrast, an enemy with uncertain intentions, but with vast capabilities might serve as the basis for building up the nation's defense. Measuring the capabilities of another nation's military should be relatively objective; the key is access to information and intelligence. Within this calculus, it can be challenging to determine an opponent's intentions. The evaluation of intentions is more subjective and prone to be divined more from the strategist's perceptions. Normally, it is the threat-based method that justifies the opening of the nation's purse strings for defense spending.
The military policies and defense funding of early America had ties to a threatbased methodology. While the historical method is inward looking, the threat-based method is more externally oriented and there is a natural tension between the two methods. The nation's optimal choice was to rely solely on the militia to address external threats. Congress disbanded the standing army shortly after the end of the Revolutionary War, and the nation made the conscious decision not to fund or support a navy. While the nation's culture and economy influenced these decisions, it was external threats that spurred the nation to change its policy, and fund a standing army and navy. The nation would reestablish the professional army due to threats from Indians and domestic insecurity, while Congress would fund the building of naval ships and a navy due to confirmed threats on the high seas. Threats acted as a counter to the nation's cultural norm and economic concerns. However, the threats had to exceed another obstacle to overcome further Congressional reservations.
That obstacle was the nation's geostrategic location. The nation's geographic location provided another environmental factor that allowed the nation to maintain a small standing army and rely on the militia. Prior to aircraft, intercontinental missiles, or weapons of mass destruction (WMD) carried by small groups, the United States had the time needed to react to threats. The geographic location of the nation allowed for the time and space to respond; threats to national security were distant. Threats from the east would have to traverse oceans to strike the continental United States. European nations did not have the capabilities to transport large armies across the Atlantic, invade the nation, and threaten its sovereignty.
The ocean would serve as a barrier to any serious threats throughout America's early history. The Secretary of War, in his 1890 annual report echoed the justification for a small army based on the barrier when he wrote, "We are separated by an ocean from the powers which maintain great armies…no hostile force is likely to seek an encounter with us on our own soil. We have, therefore, little to fear from invasion, and are free from the necessity of maintaining large standing armies or of fortifying against land attacks." 
46
Between the Revolutionary War and the War of 1812, the number and scope of the threats motivated Congress to increase the size of the professional military. Shay's
Rebellion, Harmar's Miami expedition against the Indians in Florida, St. Clair's defeat by the Indians, and the Whiskey Rebellion in Pennsylvania refocused Congress' attention; the militia could not address these conflicts in a timely and effective manner. As a result, Congress increased the army to 800, and latter to 5,000, and provided the President with powers to increase the army's size in the event of an invasion.
While the ocean provided a barrier against European aggression, the nation did address threats along its western frontier.
47 Threats, such as Indian or domestic turmoil, exist across a spectrum. As can be surmised from the discussion above, not every threat is the same. Advocates stated the United States required a large defense budget to maintain the capability to fight two distinct campaigns such as against Iraq and North Korea.
Members of this group also cautioned against a rising China and a resurgent Russia; these defense advocates used capability-based arguments to sustain defense funding.
The discussion so far has focused on the capabilities aspect of potential enemies and not on their respective intentions. Thomas Schelling, in his book Arms and Influence, stated, "It is a tradition in military planning to attend to an enemy's capabilities, not his intentions." 51 However, he further stated and warned, "deterrence is about intentions" and should be the strategist's focus, for deterrence is linked to political objectives. 
52
54
55
Brodie further stated, "The margin of possible error is usually greater in reading the opponent's intentions than in reading their military capabilities." 56 Robert Jervis, a professor of Political Science, wrote one of the masterpieces of international relations when he penned Perception and Misperception in International
Politics. Published in 1976, Jervis' book covered a wide range of issues and ideas within the book regarding how nations, in particular individuals, process external stimuli and form perceptions. A number of these concepts have direct linkage to our discussion of tying budgets to threats and intentions. To understand the opponent's intentions, the strategist must make assumptions and inferences. The opponents of the United States are not likely to publish a national security document listing objectives or describing actions.
Therefore, the strategist will need to study the opponent and develop a useful analysis.
Attempting to understand the intentions and psychology of the opponent is at best problematic. There are obstacles in this process to include the tendency for humans to assimilate information with pre-existing beliefs. Strategists might fall to the error of mirror imaging, therefore characterizing the opponent's actions in his own terms. 
57
58
A second concept from Jervis addresses the capabilities side of the argument.
This relates to the spiral theory. When a strategist characterizes the opponent's actions as threats, the strategist will justify increasing the budget for weapons to counter the threat;
the strategist must maintain an advantage. If both opponents follow this path, then each will respond to the other's action by increasing their power to maintain balance or an advantage.
Within this construct, basing budgets on threats (opponent's intentions) is fraught with errors. It is difficult to gain a clear understanding of the opponent's intentions. 
60
There are, however, a number of problems with the threat-based approach.
Whether the strategist takes a capabilities, intentions or mixed approach, she experiences uncertainty. When there is an opponent, there is an uncertainty regarding the opponent's intentions. There is also uncertainty and complexity when there is not a readily identifiable enemy. The nation can focus in the wrong direction and fail to detect new Following this path leads to a weapons and budgeting race.
57 Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976), 353-355. Jervis lists multiple problems with nation's attempting to determine opponent identities along with their intentions, how an individual's predisposed beliefs, experiences, and international knowledge colors one's beliefs and cognitive understanding leading to misperceptions. 
58
59
60
61
63
With this understood, the strategist can begin to frame the budget while understanding
and stretching what the nation can afford.
The manner in which one frames the economy-based funding question helps focus the process. If the question is stated, "How much is left for defense?" the emphasis is on the economy. The question implies the nation funds domestic programs first and avoids defense spending. Both the Truman and Eisenhower administration took this approach, with each administration believing in balancing the budget, eliminating debt, funding domestic programs, and applying the remaining tax revenue to defense funding. The courses of action or strategies available become the lowest cost options with the strategist having to allocate limited funding and purchasing the means most likely to accomplish the nation's geopolitical goals. On the other hand, the defense program has greater importance when the question is framed, "How much can the nation afford for defense?"
This method implies allowance for deficits and debt. The nation's security outweighs the risk of incurring budget deficits and running up the national debt. There is a more nuance attempt to allocate funds with the administration determining the marginal utility of that next federal dollar. The nation must determine if there is greater utility applying the last dollar to the defense budget or domestic programs; the problem becomes more an economy of effort debate. While security is a valued commodity, absolute security is not possible or affordable in an uncertain and complex world.
The problem of national security does not have an end state or final solution.
Remember, the strategist must achieve a continuous advantage to help ensure security or achieve political milestones, not a political end-state. Given this condition, the nation must maintain and strengthen the economy constantly. The nation needs to support policies to sustain the economy, thereby maintaining the ability to support its security.
Brodie stated, "It is obviously true that national military security over the long term requires a healthy economy, for the economy must carry the burden." 
64
65
There is another on-going discussion regarding the relationship between defense spending and the economy. In the past, many assumed the relationship was a trade-off between guns and butter, "and that military spending had to occur at the expense of other sectors of the economy."
68
74
Whether this strategy was developed before or after considering the threat and economic environment is not as relevant as ensuring that future military and security policies consider them. Each administration must examine the geopolitical environment, especially following the end of a conflict, to establish a strategy that will allow for Dolman's continuous advantage. Within that environment, the strategist must examine and measure the threats posed by external actors, understand the nation's economy and ability to raise revenue, and take advantage of the nation's inherent attributes such as geographic location and resources. Based on this detailed review and analysis, the strategist or political leaders can develop a long-term strategy linked to geopolitical objectives.
The strategist should use the concept of marginal utility to spread each additional dollar. To accomplish this, the process requires in-depth analysis, not some simplified method linking the budget to a subjective percentage of the nation's GNP, what is left in the treasury or an amount equivalent to that spent the year prior.
The nation's geopolitical objectives then serve as milestones as the nation determines the allocation of funding between defense and domestic programs, how to tax and generate revenue, and use the various instruments of power. Instead of the defense budget being solely justified due to external threats, what is left of the budget or by historical practices, it is tied to missions supporting national security strategy. When the budget is tied to a strategy, one accepted and endorsed by political leaders and supported by the populace, the nation should be willing to endure the costs and appropriate the needed funding. Again, this linkage is very apparent in times of war, when the nation supports the conflict. It is during times of relative peace that this process becomes more complicated and the process requires greater analysis and review to ensure any errors are marginalized.
Budgeting for the nation's security is an economy of force problem at the grand strategic level. While getting the principle right at the operational level can be the difference between a battle victory and loss; failure to balance resources and properly budget limited resources at the grand strategic level can result in the loss of freedom.
The strategist's decisions today have lasting impact, determining the means decades into the future. Gray stated, "the problem is to know what to buy, when, and in what quantities, far ahead of the validation of the need by events." 
77
78
79
80
81
There are several problems inherent in formulating a defense budget absent linkages to strategic objectives. Although a good starting point, the historical basis is
In other words, the strategist needs to ensure the errors are survivable; the nation has the time and space to adjust.
disconnected from emerging threats and a changing geopolitical environment.
Arguments promoting increases or decreases in defense spending are simplistic and the respective advocates base their logic on the budget's relations to past budgets.
Proponents fail to address security objectives and the security environment. While the threat-based method does address the security environment, the method can be problematic. A strategist, attempting to justify budgets based on opponent capabilities, is prone to engaging in a competition to build the most powerful weapons, and this competition then drives the budget. Attempting to determine the opponent's intentions, as shown, is difficult. Traps include mirror imaging and attempts to resolve cognitive dissonance that color the opponents' actions by prior perceived beliefs. The threat-based method also focuses the strategist attention to the more obvious threats, thereby blinding him to new and emergent threats. On the economic score, Robb further stated the threatbased method "underestimates the importance of economic security and the value of security-enhancing actions less directly tied to the threats." 
82
While surely a restraint to the overall budget, the economy-based argument can be fraught with challenges. The nation cannot link the defense budget to a certain percentage of GDP or limit the budget to what remains after funding domestic priorities.
This process is simplistic and does not guarantee security; the decisions must be tied to an overarching strategy. The strategist must heed Gray's warning that spending too little to protect the economy risks the nation. 
83
The strategist must analyze the marginal utility of each dollar spent with a goal of balancing the military force and economy. Moreover, he must do this within the context of the nation's geopolitical objectives.
84 
82
the initial Continental Army of 800 to counter the threat of American Indians along the 
83
84
western frontier and believed the threat of a European invasion was low. When the British and French began to board American merchant vessels on the high seas, Congress recognized the threat to American commerce. Congress responded by allocating funding for the construction of seven naval vessels thereby creating the Navy. It was these threat, both capabilities and intentions, which drove the nation to provide more funding for defense. While these threats opened up the nation's purse, the nation's strategy of avoiding foreign entanglements, its geographic location, difficulty in balancing the budget due to limited revenue streams, and reluctance to raise taxes pulled the strings tight. Throughout America's early history, the threat of war was the prime reason the nation opened the purse and paid for a larger military force. The other budgeting models provide the reasons why, as soon as the war was over, the nation, led by Congress, cut funding and force levels. In particular, the chapter will examine how the factors influenced Truman's defense funding decisions. This case study examines the following questions. What were the threats, the economic conditions, and means available to the Truman administration?
How did Truman develop his security strategy? Lastly, what budgeting methodology dominated the decision process?
This case study, as well as the following case, is being conducted from a macro perspective. In particular, it is reviewing defense budget decisions from the perspective of Presidents Truman and Bush. Additionally, in analyzing the decisions, the models are being used to provide a perspective that simply adds context to the decision process. The case studies do not address the influences of Congress, bureaucracies, and other pertinent factors in any detail. As such, the reader should not construe these case studies and the findings as the sole reasons for the respective administration's decisions.
The allies had all but won World War II when Truman became president. By that time, the "Big Three" had already drafted the design for the new world order. The two conferences held at Teheran in November 1943 and Yalta in February 1945 had focused on redrawing borders and creating an international governing body, as well as determining the fate of the Axis powers. John Lewis Gaddis, in his recently written book
The Cold War: A New History, stated, "The leaders of the victorious Grand Alliance…had already exchanged their own handshakes, toasts, and hopes for a better world at two wartime summits."
1
As the war concluded and the allies met in conference to plan the post-war world, each of the allies positioned itself to secure its respective geopolitical objectives. The leaders discussed two types of issues at their conferences. The first centered on near term objectives, which included their affirmation for the unconditional surrender of Germany, setting the invasion date for France, and setting the conditions for the Soviet Union to declare war on Japan. There was disagreement regarding dates and the efforts being demonstrated, but there was consensus on the ultimate objective of unconditional surrender. The second grouping consisted of post-war issues; among these-issues certain
The allies seemed to be in accord and working toward that better world. While the alliance was strong when the outcome of the war was in jeopardy, this relatively harmonious relationship began to unravel as the outcome increasingly favored the allies.
ones, such as creation of the United Nations, setting the borders and elections for Poland, and occupation policy and the final disposition of Germany were more contentious, and these disagreements foreshadowed the coming Cold War. 
2
4
5
The following four budgeting models provide explanations.
The nation's historical behavior did factor in the administration's drive to reduce the defense budget and defensive force structure. The cultural norms of maintaining a small defense force, the nation's desires to rely on a militia, and avoidance of debt do help explain the cuts to the military force and defense budgets. The nation could and would not maintain a Spartan-like nation totally focused on its military force and power; it would not sustain the force levels achieved during World War II. While Truman wanted to eliminate the draft, thereby cutting the force levels and budget even more, he was constrained by the requirement for occupation forces in Japan and Germany. Even with this constraint, Truman would quickly begin cutting the defense budget, take steps to convert the nation to a domestic focused industry, and reduce defensive force levels below military recommended levels, all in an effort to balance the budget.
World War II was very close to being a total war. America employed the majority of the nation's people and industry in the war effort and there would have to be cuts; the nation could not sustain, nor did it need, the same force structure. In addition to the impractical possibility of maintaining such a large force, American's were ready to reunite families, and military members were ready to return home and begin their lives.
For the common American, the norm was to answer the call of duty when it rang; it was not the norm to remain part of the professional military force once the war was over.
Truman wanted the force level cuts to be orderly and well planned. However, for military leaders like Generals Marshall and Eisenhower, the reductions were too quick and drastic, and they resurrected Upton's earlier warnings. 
6
9
10
A second historical factor driving the drawdown was the nation's preference for a militia. Instead of increasing or maintaining the force structure to address the growing Russian threat, Truman and the Army turned to universal training. The Army, just as in the First World War, had problems with mobilization during the war's early phases.
Universal training was the proposed solution by providing a reserve force that could be mobilized effectively allowing for greater, quicker force projection. The nation would train every able body American male, providing each with basic military knowledge and thereby construct a new Minuteman force, ready to answer the nation's call.
Nevertheless, against the military's recommendation, Truman would even cut this force size as quickly as possible. 
12
13
Truman was a proponent of Wilsonian principles of world peace and this would drive the formulation of his geopolitical goals. Though Truman was credited with a solid foundation in domestic issues due to his Congressional experience, general opinion, as he took the presidency, deemed him to be "untutored in world affairs."
20
Truman, as Vice-President, delivered a number of speeches aimed at warning fellow citizens that America could not "sit smugly behind a Maginot Line."
21
A strong United Nations would be essential to prevent future strife or wars, thereby reducing the need for the nation to maintain a strong, standing army. 
29
30
Truman had supported President Wilson's ideas following World War I and he was motivated to overcome the hurdles and challenges that blocked the League of Nation's success in creating the new utopian world. Truman's desire to accomplish these goals would color his perceptions with regard to the threat environment.
Free trade would create an environment allowing the standard of living to increase in participating nations, a key factor in promoting democracy. Again, Truman's efforts were directed at establishing a more stable, peaceful geopolitical environment that, as a benefit, would allow him to cut military funding.
Of In regards to the Soviet Union, the relationship was not promising, as the report commented, "the Soviet Government has taken a firm and uncompromising position on nearly every major question that has arisen in our relations."
The United Kingdom wanted security, but also understood its relative power was declining. Churchill desired to "buttress their invasions to include Napoleon and Nazi Germany's incursions. From the ideological perspective, the Soviet Union would promote the class struggle supporting communist parties and insurgents around the world. The give and take between the nations was a test of political will. 
48
Truman's desire for world peace through a Kantian perspective framed his perceptions of Russian actions. Or at a minimum, Russian actions and intentions were couched in such a way as to validate continued force reductions and minimal defense budgets. 
49
50
51
The threat-based budget method does provide some understanding regarding policy in minimizing the costs of a strategic mistake, thereby also allowing the reduction of defense expenditures and allowing his focus to remain on the economy. This allowed
Truman the time to fix the United States' economy, rebuild Western Europe, establish the United Nations, and create the world police force.
Truman had experienced the Great Depression as a private citizen and as a senator, and these experiences would focus his attention on the economy upon becoming president. Taking his senate seat in 1935, Truman served on the Appropriations and Interstate Commerce Committees, and he gained national attention establishing and chairing the Special Committee to Investigate the National Defense Program, latter called the Truman Committee; his time on the special committee reviewing the defense industry would also give him a good understanding of the economy. 
52
His time as an appropriator gave him an understanding of the budget process and this experience would be useful in cutting budgets. During his tenure on the Truman Committee, he demonstrated his bulldog attitude at eliminating fraud and avoiding the waste of taxpayer's money, and this would be evident during his presidency. With all of this experience and perspective,
Truman was primed to tackle the economy, and it would be his focus, even though the country was in the midst of war and facing the future threat of Soviet aggression.
Reaffirming his belief in a strong economy as key to international recovery, Truman sent a letter to heads of the war agencies regarding the European economies. He (emphasis added) employment and full production, which will determine if we gain a great future at home and abroad." 
58
59
Americans now had money and wanted to spend. While his control of the economy was problematic at best, his war against the national debt showed greater results.
Truman was able to send Congress budget reduction requests almost monthly. In August of 1946, Truman informed all executive agencies to reduce expenses in order to reduce the national debt and keep inflation in check. He did not want the government competing for goods in the economy. Truman ordered construction work stoppage, and for agencies to reduce their 1946 budgets. 
60
61
Because of his efforts, Truman submitted a balanced budget for 1948. It was the first balanced budget since 1930.
democracy, containing Soviet expansion, and maintaining a stable, peaceful world. As such, Truman, with his experience and knowledge gained in Congress, quickly acted to cut the defense budget to balance the budget. The influence of the economic agenda only strengthened the nation's historical norm of quick demobilization and defense budget cuts.
Truman's first full year as President was uncertain, complex, and dynamic. He took his oath while the United States was in the midst of World War II and finalizing its recover from the Great Depression; aptly put, Truman would call his first full year in office as the "Year of Decisions." 62 In Truman's view, the threat posed by the Soviet Union was not its military force.
Stalin was not ready to start a new war over Western Europe; Russia was busy consolidating its gains from World War II. The communist threat was internal to nations located adjacent to the Soviet Union's borders. Stalin's primary efforts of kicking the allies out of Berlin and supporting insurgents in Greece and Turkey affirmed this view.
With the European economies severely damaged, the main threat was from communist political parties taking advantage of the situation and converting the governments internally into communist states. The United States needed to make sure Europe recovered from the ravages of war to block Soviet expansion.
While he faced serious challenges each year while in office, his first full year would nevertheless set the tone for his administration. Truman had to navigate the United States through the end of World War II, the advent of the atomic age, the conversion from a war to domestic-focused economy, while controlling inflation and unemployment, and creating a stable post war geopolitical environment.
The majority of his effort, along with that of his administration team, would focus on the economy. The economy would serve as the nation's foundation to solve domestic issues, ensure the nation's security, and act as the primary means in achieving his geopolitical objectives to include containing communism. This focus would set the tone and drive the administration to an economy-influenced defense budget. 
62
the Cold War. It signaled one crack in the dam holding back the Eastern Bloc's desire for freedom of movement, an increased standard of living, and the reunion of long separated families. These same cracks appeared in Poland with its labor movement, and spread with Gorbachev's reform movements throughout the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union's withdrawal from Afghanistan, and the peaceful transformation from communism to democracy of Eastern Bloc governments. Gaddis likened the Soviet Union and Cold War in 1989 as a sand pile ready to slide; it would just take a few more grains of sand to reach critical mass.
1
President George H.W. Bush pointed to the events of 1989 as demonstrating the end of the Cold War. Calling it the "Revolution of '89," Bush stated, "I believe we will see this time as the period when much of what the Western democracies sought since the end of World War II began to come to fruition." 2 However, there was work left to solidify the gains of 1989. The President ended 1989 meeting with Gorbachev in Malta attempting to do just that. The two leaders used Malta to establish an "ambitious agenda for moving beyond containment towards an era of enduring cooperation." 3
While the events and Malta did not eliminate the threat of nuclear war, the Cold War threat was diminishing and the future looked bright. But even with this outlook, Bush was not ready to cut the defense budget just yet. His administration was still supporting the funding of the B-2 stealth bomber, Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), and new mobile nuclear weapons. This support was due to Bush's desire to have as many cards as possible to bargain with as he began to negotiate a new world order and strategic weapon reductions. He repeatedly dismissed calls for cutting defense spending. At various press conferences, the media reported that Congress was beginning to cut defense spending to realize the peace dividend. Bush called for caution and for the nation to wait for a strategic review prior to making cuts. His opinion is captured with this response to a peace dividend stating, "when you mention Peace Dividend, there's almost a -well, there's an uncalled for euphoria in some quarters now that suggests that events where they stand today means that the United States can recklessly-in my view-recklessly
The Cold War reshaped the nation's historical norm of mistrusting standing armies. While Congress had quickly reduced force structure following the conclusion of previous conflicts, the nation was slow to cut force structure and defense budgets following the end of the Cold War. The nation had cut the defense budget and force structure by ninety percent within two years of the end of WWII. The nation, in stark contrast, only cut the defense budget by 28 percent between 1989 and 1998. 9 While a drawdown and budget reductions were expected, these cuts were not automatic nor to the level expected based on the historical norm. There were base closure throughout the United States and overseas along with force reductions. However, the nation did not revert to a force posture or budget proportional to those existent prior to 1949. The defense budget in 1949, relative to 2009 figures, was $182 billion. The smallest budget allocated to the Defense Department during the 1990s was $358 billion in 1998. 
10
was almost double what defense was allocated prior to the Cold War. From these figures, it appears that America had gotten over its distrust of a large military force during the Cold War. The nation's historical desire to maintain balanced budgets and eliminate debt also does not explain fully the defense budget decisions during the 1990s. Throughout the past sixty years, the nation had repeatedly attempted to balance the national budget and cut the national debt; the records, however, indicate these efforts failed.
Through three generations, the nation had relied on a strong, large military force to win the peace during WWII and maintain relative peace for the forty years of the Cold War. The nation had not experienced a military coup, soldiers were not guarding street corners, and democracy was working.
The fears of the Founding Fathers had floundered upon the shoals of the Cold War. 
13
Truman and Eisenhower exerted the greatest pressure and budget restraint during their terms. They were the only presidents to actually balance the budget and cut away at the national debt. However, these cuts did not reduce the debt below the levels each inherited. During the forty years of the Cold War, the national debt increased from $252 billion in 1949 to $2.8 trillion in 1989. 
14
Part of the reason for this focus on national security and maintaining a large defense structure is due in part to a change in the nation's geopolitical view. While generally understood that the nation advocated a position of avoiding foreign entanglements, a closer look at history paints a different picture. The United States, prior to WWII, had chosen a relative isolationist position, and relied on Great Britain to maintain world order. Great Britain, with its formidable navy, secured the oceans, and with its great empire, organized and ruled the mercantile system. The United States took advantage of this construct enjoying the market conditions and paying very little for its national defense. Following the conclusion of WWII, the power of the United Kingdom was spent. The empire no longer possessed the greatest navy nor could it rely on its empire and fund its resurgence. The war had ravaged England and the nation was in debt. 
15
The nation had taken on the superpower role countering and containing Soviet aggression during the Cold War. With the end of the Cold War, this role was being reevaluated. There were numerous opinions regarding the nation's direction. Powell believed the nation was obligated to lead, stating, "no other nation on earth has the power we possess. More important, no other nation on earth has the trusted power that we possess." 
18
19
While these were enduring elements were linked to the nation's history, the strategy's objective of maintaining the ability to project power around the world was based on the nation's new role as the world's superpower. Each of these elements or goals influenced the funding and maintenance of the nation's defensive structure. 
28
Attempting to promote and export democracy countered this philosophy. A number of the security strategy's objectives lined up with this goal. These included actions to stabilize and secure the world, foster political freedom, and stabilize regional military balances to deter regional dominance. This overall direction required the nation to maintain a strong military force and continue its forward presence. Powell, within his 1992 article, reinforced this idea stating peacekeeping and humanitarian operations were a given as future military operations in the future. 
29
Hamiltonian and Wilsonian foreign policy schools, these schools view free trade as a key
It would be these types of operations along with stabilization missions that would assist the exportation of democracy.
to supporting democracy. 
30
31
In addition to improving the chance for other nations to become democratic, free trade ensures access to foreign markets, thereby enhancing America's economy. For Hamilton, a healthy US economy was necessary to ensure opportunities for individual prosperity and provide the resource base for national endeavors.
The end of the Cold War required the nation to rewrite of its nation security strategy. No longer directly concerned with Soviet aggression, the nation began to promote Wilsonian and Hamiltonian ideas of free trade, democracy, and collective security. These new objectives did not allow for a huge reduction of defense budgets.
The Bush administration took a pragmatic approach to its relations with the Soviet Union and other threats. It wanted to reduce conventional weapons, but also sought additional funding for strategic programs. The nation increasingly focused on terrorism and failed 
30
The threat of a nuclear holocaust faded with the ending of the Cold War. Yet while the world seemed to breathe a sigh of relief regarding a war between the super powers, the proliferation of nuclear weapons along with biological and chemical weapons possessed by failing states continued to threaten the world. The peace expected from the end of the Cold War mutated into a world of new and expanding threats. The erosion of the bipolarity permitted and, in many ways, encouraged the growth of conflict and the proliferation of WMD and ballistic missiles. 
32
33
Due to the uncertainty and complex environment, the Bush During July of 1989, the Bush administration continued NATO's efforts to address capabilities by offering a proposal to cut conventional force levels in Europe.
Bush believed that positive movement within Eastern Europe (moving toward economic growth and free elections) required the drawdown of conventional forces on both sides.
He actually stated the cuts could go further and be more sustainable if they were linked with political change. 
35
36
37
38
During a session with reporters discussing the 1990 defense budget, Bush stated the nation needed these programs to ensure it had "the utmost flexibility in terms of arms control."
39
40
41
Threats posed included terrorism, the war on drugs, upheaval of regional stability, a rising China, and weapons such as integrated air defense systems, WMD, and ballistic missiles.
The world was increasingly complex. The Cold War threat had justified maintaining a large military complex and its required funding. As was to be expected, the nation's natural inclination was to demand drastic defense cuts once the Cold War ended. However, the termination of the Cold War did not have any historical parallels. In terms of threats, only the intentions of the Soviet Union diminished. The Soviets retained their capability to wage war even as the Iron Curtain fell. Even though Bush was able to reduce conventional forces, reducing strategic forces still held challenges for him. With the erosion of the bi-polar world, new threats had emerged requiring his attention and the nation's funding.
The justification for a large military force, forward projected, began to be based on the new threat environment by 1990.
As the only superpower remaining, the United States was saddled with addressing these new threats. For the Bush Administration, cutting the defense budget based solely on the demise of the Soviet Union was not advisable. His administration agreed that some cuts could be realized, but the cuts had to be surgical and not cut into the muscle of the military.
This revised threat environment does provide some explanatory power of why the nation did not follow its natural tendency to revert to force and funding levels prior to the conflict's beginning. Nevertheless, the reduction in the threat level because of the Cold War ending allowed the nation to actually grasp the purse strings; defense funding was no longer off-limits. Concerns with the economy and deficit spending provided the impetus to close the purse.
$100 billion; but Congress added additional spending to the budget. Even though the economy was growing, Bush believed the nation needed to cut the deficit to keep the economy growing. 
46
47
48
49
50
51
However, he again cautioned any defense cuts by stating, "it would be imprudent to make reckless cuts in our defense and think everything was just perfect in the world. It isn't." 
52
The threat environment served to constrain Bush from making defense cuts in 1989.
Bush had to find another method to address the deficit.
The Bush administration also understood the connection between the defense budget and the economy. While savings from defense funding cuts could help reduce the deficit, thereby improving the economy, those same cuts could also harm the economy.
Between 1989 and 1991, over 1.6 million jobs were lost as the nation reduced its force structure by 431,000; defense industry lost 400,000 and an additional 800,000 jobs were lost from the non-defense sector. 
53
Bush understood that by cutting the defense budget, he was also cutting jobs across the nation. 
54
During another press conference, the media asked about the impact of defense cuts and base closures. Bush responded by stating, "the key is to maintain a strong private economy so private investors can move into these areas and spur the local economy." 
55
53
55 Public Papers: Bush, 1990, 100-101.  jobs. This reluctance to cut defense funding drastically led Bush to break his promise and increase taxes. It was within this tension that cuts were made to the defense budget.
The United States celebrated and rejoiced with Europe as the Iron Curtain fell.
Not only was the threat of nuclear annihilation thrown off and the freedom of millions from communism realized, the nation entertained the eternal hope of cutting the defense budget and finally reducing its debt. The nation's debt was soon to exceed $4 trillion, increasing by $3 trillion over the past decade. The economy, although having experienced the longest peacetime expansion, showed worrying signs of decline and a possible recession. The lessening of the forty-year threat seemed to open the door to cut defense funding and resolve other domestic problems.
The four budget formulation perspectives provide explanatory power to explain why the nation did not drastically cut its defense budget. First, the Cold War transformed the nation's cultural norm. The nation no longer seemed to distrust a large standing army, grew to accommodate budget deficits supporting preferred security and domestic programs, and accepted its role as the world's lone superpower. Its prior cultural norm was in stark contrast. Had the nation followed its tendencies prior to the Cold War, the nation would have cut defense funding by over 60 percent. During the decade following the Cold War, the nation only cut its defense funding by 28 percent. The historical construct, in light of the Cold War's influence, explains why the automatic response was not to cut the defense budget.
Linked to the cultural norm was the nation's new strategic outlook. Instead of relying on the oceans to protect the nation from invasion and the United Kingdom to rule the mercantile system, the United States had to assume its own security and develop policies promoting global free trade. Instead of providing the world a beacon for democracy, the nation sought ways to export its form of government. The nation also continued to push Wilsonian and Hamiltonian concepts of international organizations, and free trade. The nation's strategy required the maintenance of a strong defense structure able to project forces around the world.
It needed a force to address the new threat environment. These new threats, including WMD, ballistic missiles, terrorism and regional conflicts, required flexible forces able to address two possible conflicts at once. Bush also required funding for strategic forces to ensure a strong position with pending strategic arms negotiations.
Both the threat and strategic perspectives supported maintaining a strong military force and large defense budgets.
The economic model is the best construct that explains why the nation made cuts to the defense budget. Bush fought defense cuts stating his primary role was to ensure national security; however, he was also concerned with the economy. He felt that a key to a strong and growing economy was a balanced federal budget. Given that he had refused to raise taxes, defense-funding cuts were the primary way to cut the deficit. The nation would cut the force structure by over 400,000, close bases, and reduce the annual budget by roughly 40 billion dollars. But, due to the nation's new historical norm, strategic goals and regional threat environment, the nation did not cut defense funding as drastically as would be expected. Bush, due to this tension of reducing the deficit to strengthen the economy and ensure the nation's security, would finally raise personal taxes thereby breaking his election promise and harming his re-election in 1992.
The Obama administration's Fiscal Year 2010 Federal Budget promises a "New Era of Responsibility" while "Renewing America's Promise." To fulfill the promise of transforming the economy and establishing a new foundation for long-term economic growth and prosperity during these difficult times, Obama must examine the policies and decisions of previous administrations that faced similar circumstances.
President Obama faces serious problems spanning the nation and the world. The nation's economy is in a downturn with a six percent reduction in overall growth during the last quarter and the loss of over six million jobs during the past year.
1
It is against this backdrop that the Obama administration must determine how much to spend for national security. As this thesis has pointed out, the problem of balancing limited resources while ensuring the nation's security and economic prosperity has confronted the nation since its birth. In confronting this recurring problem, the nation must answer a myriad of questions regarding the defense budget as addressed in chapter two. In answering these questions, the nation, and more importantly, the administration must understand the various factors that influence the decision process.
The nation faces, along with economic worries, a resurgent Russia, two ongoing wars, the proliferation of WMD, global terrorism, and the threat of world unrest due to worsening economic conditions. Along with these challenges, Obama is facing a possible pandemic, the collapse of the financial infrastructure, the demise of the United States auto industry, and continuing global environmental concerns. Any one or two of these problems would challenge the energy and skills of any previous national government;
Obama's administration faces multiple challenges.
As stated before, the nation cannot purchase absolute security, no matter the size of the budget, knowledge of the threat environment or the perfection of strategy. In light of these limits, the nation charges the strategist with developing a strategy and defense budget that limits the potential errors and their effects on the nation's security. During the nation's first 150 years, the cultural norms of avoiding foreign alliances, maintaining a small military, and financial conservatism kept defense funding at a minimum during eras of relative peace. The nation took advantage of its geographic location, and a world ruled by the United Kingdom to keep defense costs low and marginalize strategic errors.
In response to a direct threats of war, the nation was willing to mortgage the economy to secure the nation's freedom.
This thesis' purpose was to review the defense-budget decision process of the Although a good starting point in building the defense budget, the historical-based method is too simple. The method is disconnected from emerging threats and a changing geopolitical environment. Arguments promoting increases or decreases in defense spending based on past budgets are simplistic. The method does help the strategist understand the nation's culture when attempting to radically cut or reallocate defense budgets. The historical model demonstrates how the momentum of cultural norms' can influence the process.
While the threat-based method does address the security environment, the method can be problematic. A strategist, attempting to justify budgets based on opponent capabilities, is prone to engaging in a competition to build the most powerful weapons, and this competition then drives the budget. Attempting to determine the opponent's intentions is difficult. The threat-based method also focuses the strategist attention to the more obvious threats, thereby blinding him to new and emergent threats. The method does focus the nation's budget attention to the capabilities needed to secure the nation.
made. However, why were the cuts not deeper or similar to those experienced following World War II?
The nation's new historical norms, new threat environment, and new geopolitical strategy served to keep defense funding at a higher level than expected. While the threat of a superpower spurred nuclear war had diminished, the new threat environment was not benign. In fact, the threat environment became more problematic, chaotic, and uncertain resulting in calls to reallocate defense funding instead of cutting defense. This new threat environment of terrorism, WMD, and ballistic missile proliferation provided the impetus to maintain larger defense budgets than expected at the end of a conflict. In addition to the threat environment change, the nation's new cultural norms explain why the nation did not cut defense funding as deeply as expected.
The Cold War transformed the nation's historical norm of mistrusting standing armies, avoiding foreign entanglements, and financial conservatism, each having influenced the nation to cut defense funding in the past. The nation's new role as a superpower, global alliances, requirement for large forces, and deficit spending behavior during the Cold War had gathered a momentum of their own. This momentum and new cultural norms supported larger defense expenditures than expected from reviewing the nation's history. Lastly, the nation adopted a geopolitical strategy that required a large, flexible force able to respond to multiple regional conflicts.
The Obama administration can identify with many of the same challenges Truman Like both Presidents Truman and Bush, Obama is pressured by economic concerns to cut the defense budget to reduce the 1.2 trillion dollar budget deficit; a deficit Obama promises to cut in half by the end of his first term. Unlike its size during Truman's term, the current defense budget represents a minority share of the total federal budget, and if domestic programs were untouched, would have to be completely eliminated to accomplish Obama's goal. As a result, Obama will have to prioritize the nation's objectives and make tough choices to cut the deficit.
Within those tough choices, the Obama administration must determine the context of the threat environment. It is true that the administration will need a sense of its political objectives to identify potential threats, but the combination will assist its efforts.
The manner in which Obama couches the possible threats of a rising China or resurgent Russia will heavily influence his defense budget decisions.
Lastly, the strategy he chooses to address these threats will bear directly on his funding decisions. If he chooses to approach the world and nation's problems from a
Wilsonian perspective reliant on diplomacy and economics, this will translate into smaller defense budgets. With the recent use of military in Iraq and Afghanistan, and respective results, it is unlikely Obama will use the military for other than relief efforts or to counter a direct attack.
It appears from this review that the historical-based model is the primary support for maintaining large defense budgets. The budget's momentum, its job creation capability, and political support for bases and pet projects serve to prop up the budget.
On the other hand, the nation's economic condition and the administration's apparent diplomatic focused geopolitical strategy may call for and support cuts to the defense budget. These cuts might not cut the deficit in half, but they would be a start.
The wildcard, as it was to a degree during the Bush administration, are the threats perceived and recognized. If the 2010 defense budget, the appointment of Ashton Carter (a proponent of cutting Cold War weapons, as the Undersecretary for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics), and recent comments by Defense Secretary Gates are any indication, the threats from a rising China or resurgent Russia will be discounted. The Administration has cut many of the conventional-war acquisition programs and is reallocating funding to programs most likely to be employed in today's fight.
Given this framework, Obama will need to construct a case based on economic concerns, a new threat environment evaluation and his strategy to confront and challenge the momentum of the defense budget. By linking funding to his national strategy, the administration will be best able to achieve its objectives.
Complied from various sources: Upton, Military Policy of the US. United States, Bureau of Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970,1142. United States Treasury Department, "National Debt Historical Charts," http://www.treasurydirect.gov/govt/reports/pd/histdebt/histdebt.htm. Force levels and Congressional action sourced from Upton and Census Bureau documents. National debt levels sourced from Treasury web site.
Union would seem to make this method easier and the nation would simply acquire capabilities necessary to gain a continuous advantage over the enemy by measuring the relative sizes of navies, land, and air forces thereby allowing the nation to identify gaps and budget to fill them. With this method, the nation can readily determine the level of funding needed to counter the enemy. The "missile gap" of the late 1950s is an example of this argument. However, like the missile gap episode, threat-based approaches can distort the true strategic outlook.
Union would seem to make this method easier and the nation would simply acquire capabilities necessary to gain a continuous advantage over the enemy by measuring the relative sizes of navies, land, and air forces thereby allowing the nation to identify gaps and budget to fill them. With this method, the nation can readily determine the level of funding needed to counter the enemy. The "missile gap" of the late 1950s is an example of this argument. However, like the missile gap episode, threat-based approaches can distort the true strategic outlook.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 379.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 379.
73
73
The costs of WWI would spike the debt to $25 billion by 1920. The Roaring Twenties would see the debt drop back down to $16 billion only to double by 1939 due to the Great Depression. In World War II, the defense budget ballooned, as expected, and by 1944, national debt actually exceeded the national GDP.
The costs of WWI would spike the debt to $25 billion by 1920. The Roaring Twenties would see the debt drop back down to $16 billion only to double by 1939 due to the Great Depression. In World War II, the defense budget ballooned, as expected, and by 1944, national debt actually exceeded the national GDP.
http://www.treasurydirect.gov/govt/reports/pd/histdebt/histdebt.htm (accessed 15 March 2009)
Truman also needed a strong United Kingdom to secure the European Continent, thereby allowing the United States to cut its security expenditures. The United States, prior to World War II, had relied on England to not only maintain stability in Europe, but the rest of the world. Due to the costs of World War II, England could no longer maintain its reach or its influence around the world. Truman understood these limitations and the resultant increased responsibility forced upon the United States. In understanding these limitations, Truman was asking England to assume the limited role of supporting and assisting in rebuilding European democracies. With a stable Europe, the United States could reduce force levels and project remaining forces elsewhere.
position" through Russia and the United States in providing leadership in Western Europe-one of Truman's three geopolitical objectives.
position" through Russia and the United States in providing leadership in Western Europe-one of Truman's three geopolitical objectives.
White House, "Obama's State of the Union Address,
2009," http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/remarks-of-President -Barack-Obama-Address-to-Joint-Session-of-Congress/ (accessed 5 March 2009) However, there is a unknown risk if the nation allocates too little funding to the defense side of the ledger. As a leading strategist wrote, "Heavy defense expenditure may damage the economy, but inadequate defense expenditure assuredly will imperil the physical security of the country, as well as the health of the economy. A sound economy 2 Martin Feldstein, "The Economic Stimulus and Sustained Economic Growth," Full Statement for the House Democratic Steering and Policy Committee, 7 January 2009. Mr. Feldstein recommended increased spending in the defense sector and was surprised the economic stimulus bill did not contain funding for defense projects…thoughts are rooted to theories developed during the 1950s supporting large defense budgets to support the economy.
Gray, Explorations in Strategy, 112.   
Rebecca Christie, "Geithner  Tells China U.S. Will Tackle Budget Deficit," Bloomberg, 1 June 2009, http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601087&sid=aFaYiMwPZyq0&refer=home (accessed 1 June 2009).
White House, "Obama's State of the Union Address,
2009," http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/remarks-of-President -Barack-Obama-Address-to-Joint-Session-of-Congress/ (accessed 5 March 2009)
Upton, Military Policy of the US, 105, 137. United States, Bureau of Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1975), 1142.
Upton, Military Policy of the US,[143][144][145][146][147][148][149] 
Upton, Military Policy of the US, 149-150.
United States Treasury Department, "National Debt Historical Charts," http://www.treasurydirect.gov/govt/reports/pd/histdebt/histdebt.htm.
Upton, Military Policy of the US, 
Upton, Military Policy of the US, 204.
David E. Johnson, Fast Tanks and Heavy Bombers:  Innovation in the U.S.Army 1917 -1945 (London:  Cornell University Press, 1998), 22-29.   
Department of War, Report of the Secretary of War to thePresident, 1921 (Washington: Government  Printing Office, 1921), 8.   
Department of War, Report of the Secretary of War to thePresident, 1921, 8.   
United States, Bureau of Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970,Vol 2, (New York: Basic Books, 1976), 1141.
Mark S Watson, Chief of Staff Prewar Plans and Preparations US Army in WWII, (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1950), 15.
Watson, Chief of Staff Prewar, 15. David E. Johnson, Fast Tanks and Heavy Bombers,[66][67] 
Johnson, Fast Tanks and Heavy Bombers,[66][67][68] Johnson documents President Harding's military policies of focusing on the economy, need for a small, expandable army, voluntary reserve training and disarmament.
Watson, Chief of Staff Prewar, 15.   
Charles Heller and
and "the better organized our fighting force on land and sea, the better equipped, the more prepared for war, the sooner may we hope to safeguard peace or to carry out an unavoidable war with honor and success."
Upton furthered this thought by warning, "So long as Congress, in time of peace, shall neglect to provide for national defense, great confusion must ensue at the beginning of our wars."
  23  Helmuth Graf Von Moltke, Moltke on the Art of War: Selected Writings, trans. Daniel Hughes and Harry Bell, ed. Daniel Hughes (New York: Ballantine Books), 22. 24 Emory Upton, Military Policy of the US, IX.25  Moltke, Moltke on the Art of War, 30.26  Moltke, Moltke on the Art of War, 35.27  Upton, Military Policy of the US, 92.
Department of War, Report of the Secretary of War to thePresident, 1921, 7.   
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1959), 358.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 358.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 358.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 358.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 359.
Senator Charles Robb, "Rebuilding a Consensus on Defense," Parameters (Winter 1996-97), http://carlise.army.mil/USAWC/parameters/96winter/robb.htm. Charles Robb served in the Senate from 1988 until 2001. In the Senate, he served on the SASC, Foreign Relations and Intelligence Committees. Prior to the Senate, Senator Robb served as the Governor of Virginia and served 34 years in the Marine Corps and is a Vietnam Veteran.
Upton, Military Policy of the US, 16.
Upton, Military Policy of the US, 69.
Robb, "Rebuilding a Consensus on Defense," 6.
Colin S.Gray, Explorations in Strategy (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1996), 21.
Robb, "Rebuilding a Consensus on Defense," 6.
Robb, "Rebuilding a Consensus on Defense," 6.
Department of War, Report of the Secretary of War for the Year, 1890 (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 1891), 5.It is important to understand these two threat characteristics.
Upton, Military Policy of the US, 69-72.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 377.
Robb, "Rebuilding a Consensus on Defense," 3.
Robb, "Rebuilding a Consensus on Defense," 7.
Gray, Explorations in Strategy, 21.   
Gray, Explorations in Strategy, 115.   
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 367.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 368.
John B. Foster, Hannah Holleman, and Robert W. McChesney, "The U.S. Imperial Triangle and Military Spending" Monthly Review, Oct 2008, 2.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 371.
Foster, "U.S. Imperial Triangle," 3.
Foster, "U.S. Imperial Triangle," 3.
Foster, "U.S. Imperial Triangle," 5.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age,[380][381][382] 
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 378.
Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age, 379.
Gray, Explorations in Strategy, 113.   
Colin S.Gray, Fighting Talk, Forty Maxims on War, Peace and Strategy (Westport, CT: Praeger  Security International, 2007), 138.   
Robb, "Rebuilding a Consensus on Defense," 7.
Gray, Explorations in Strategy, 23.   
Gray, Explorations in Strategy, 112.   
John Lewis Gaddis, The Cold War: A New History (London, England: Penguin Press,  
2005), 5-6.
Gaddis, The Cold War,[5][6] 
Truman, Memoirs,
10.
United States Department of Defense, National Defense Estimates for FY2009 (Washington: Department of Defense, 2008), 67.
United States Department of Defense, National Defense Estimates for FY2009,
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S.
Truman, 1945
Public Papers, Truman, 1945, 102-103.   
Public Papers:Truman, 1945, 309.   
Public Papers: Truman,  
1945, 309.  19  ColinGray, Modern Strategy (Oxford, England: Oxford Press, 1999), 148-151, 155.   
Arnold A. Offner, Another Such Victory: President Truman and the Cold War, 1945-1953 (Stanford,  CA: Stanford University Press, 2002), ix.
Offner, Another Such Victory, 19.   
Public Papers:Truman, 1945, 3 -5.   
Public Papers: Truman, 1945, 4.   
Public Papers:Truman, 1945, 45.   
Public Papers:Truman, 1945, 10.   
Public Papers:Truman, 1945,41.   
Public Papers:Truman, 1945, 141.   
Offner, Another Such Victory,[24][25] 
Public Papers:Truman, 1945, 5.   
Kant, Immanuel, Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch. (1795)   http://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/kant/kant1.htm(accessed 10 November 2008)   
Cordell Hull, The Memoirs of Cordell Hull, Vol 1 (NY: MacMillian, 1948), 81.
Truman, Memoirs, 14.   
Truman, Memoirs, 15.   
Offner, Another Such Victory, 180.   
Offner, Another Such Victory,[118][119][120][121][122][123][124] 
Offner, Another Such Victory,[366][367] 378, 383.   
Offner, Another Such Victory, 24.   
Offner, Another Such Victory, 24.   
Truman, Memoirs, 22.   
Truman, Memoirs, 22.   
Kennan, "The Sources of Soviet Conflict" Foreign Affairs, 566-82.
Offner, Another Such Victory, 97.   
Offner, Another Such Victory, 97.   
Benjamin O. Fordham, Building the Cold War Consensus: The Political Economy of U.S. National Security Policy, 1949-51 (Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press, 1998), 38-39.
Offner, Another Such Victory, 13.   
Public Papers: Truman 1945, 29.   
Public Papers: Truman 1946, 1.   
Public Papers: Truman 1946, 175.   
Public Papers: Truman 1946, 369.   
Public Papers: Truman 1946, 196.   
John L. Gaddis , The Cold War, A New History (New York: Penguin Books,
2005), 238. 2 Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: George H.W.
Bush, 1989
US Department of Defense, National Defense Estimates,[58][59] 
Bureau of Census, Statistical Abstract, 2009, 342.   
Walter Russell Mead, Special Providence: American Foreign Policy and How it Changed the World (New York: Routledge, 2002), 15-18.
George Bush. National Security Strategy of the United States 1990-1991. AFA Book, xv.   
Powell, "U.S Forces," 33.
Powell, "U.S Forces," 33.
William Kristol and Robert Kagan," Foreign Affairs, 75, no. 4   (Jul/Aug 96), 18.
Public Papers:
Bush, 1989
Public Papers:Bush, 1989, 896.   
Public Papers:Bush, 1990,161-165.   
Public Papers:Bush, 1989, 22.   
Public Papers:Bush, 1989, 22.   
Bush, National Security Strategy, 3.   
Bush, National Security Strategy,4.   
Powell, "U.S. Forces: Challenges Ahead," 36.
Bush, National Security Strategy, 21.   
Bush, National Security Strategy,[32][33][34][35] 
Powell, "U.S. Forces: Challenges Ahead," 41.
Public Papers:Bush, 1989, 921.   
Public Papers:Bush, 1989, 653.   
Public Papers:Bush, 1990,214, 686.   
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: George H.W.Bush, 1990 (Washington DC:  Government Printing Office, 1991), 133.   
Public Papers:
Bush, 1989
Public Papers:
Bush, 1989
Public Papers:
Bush, 1989
Public Papers:Bush, 1990, 100-101.   
Public Papers:Bush, 1990, 132.   
Public Papers:
Bush, 1989
Public Papers:Bush, 1990, 80.   
Steven Kull, Americans on Defense Spending -A Study of US Public Attitudes: Report of Findings, (Washington: Program on International Policy Attitudes, 1996), 6.
Kagan and Kristol, "Toward a Neo-Reaganite Foreign," 19.
Public Papers:Bush, 1990, 131-132.   
Public Papers:
Bush, 1989
Public Papers:
Bush, 1989
United States, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employment Situation Summary, April
2009," Economic News Release, http://www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.nr0.htm (accessed 1 June 2009) 2 Rebecca Christie, "Geithner Tells China U.S. Will Tackle Budget Deficit," Bloomberg, 1 June 2009, http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601087&sid=aFaYiMwPZyq0&refer=home (accessed 1 June 2009).
My thanks go to the men and women I have served with during my fourteen years in the Air Force. It is their support, efforts and successes that vaulted me into a position to take advantage of attending SAASS. Additionally, I give thanks to my fellow students of Class XVIII and the SAASS faculty. The discussions and debates, in seminar, around the bar, and in the 'L' were instrumental in developing my ability to think critically about our world and its future.
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
The conclusions and opinions expressed in this document are those of the author. They do not reflect the official position of the US Government, Department of Defense, the United States Air Force, or Air University. addressed the severe food, fuel and logistic support shortages in Europe and that each agency must do all it could to help with the suffering. Truman wrote that "a chaotic and hungry Europe is not the fertile ground in which stable, democratic and friendly governments can be reared." 
54
55
56
57
During a January 1946 radio report to the nation regarding the status of the reconversion program, he stated, "This year we lay the foundation of our economic structure which will have to serve for generations. Decisions will be made whether we want full 
54
: Truman 1945, 61. 55 Fordham, Building A Cold War Consensus, 178. 56
: Truman 1945, 96. 57
Truman relied primary on American economic power to thwart Soviet aggression.
Given his goal was political stability and perpetual peace, the president needed to stabilize Western Europe, as he needed a strong Western Europe to buffer the threat of Soviet aggression, both internal and external. A strong Western European economy would promote democratic governments, prevent communism from gaining a foothold, and provide the capability to build enough military force to deter the Soviet military. If this did not work, America could rely on the power of the atomic bomb.
The four budget models help explain why Truman pulled the defense purse strings tight following World War II despite early signs of Soviet aggression. For Truman, the nation's economy was the essential linchpin to address the nation's future security, to achieve his geopolitical objectives, and to thwart Soviet threats. The cultural behavior of the nation to cut defense forces and funding automatically was only reinforced by Truman's economic focus. As a result, the Army saw its funding drop from $74 billion to six billion dollars in 3 years, while the force structure was cut by 93 percent during that same period.
The end of the Cold War would usher in a new era of peace; but would not result in the same drastic force or funding cuts as the nation had experienced in the past. The Cold War, lasting over 40 years, would actually transform much of the nation's cultural behavior. Economic factors, such as out-of-control deficits, would drive the Bush Administration and Congress to cut defense funding, force levels and programs; but a new cultural norm, New World strategy, and an uncertain threat environment would maintain defense funding and force structure at levels far exceeding those seen during other eras of peace.
For many, the end of the Cold War signaled the opportunity to cut defense budgets and force structure. The Peace Dividend would allow the nation to balance the budget, and address domestic issues while the Cold War's end would allow for the realization of a Wilsonian world. There were great expectations for the future. Yet, the nation did not cut the defense budget to the levels many expected. Instead, the Bush Administration's new national strategy and threat perspective, while allowing for some force structure and funding cuts, served to support larger than expected defense budgets.
Additionally, America's cultural norm of reducing force structure and funding levels to pre conflict levels did not occur. In fact, it appears the Cold War actually transformed the nation's cultural norm to one of embracing a large standing military, enduring deficit spending, and appreciating, or at least accepting, its role as a global power. As expected, economic concerns do provide the reason why the defense cuts were made. Within this chapter, the influence the factors above had on supporting the defense budget decisions following the end of the Cold War will be reviewed.
Attempting to date the beginning and the end of the Cold War is problematic. If you gather historians and political scientists together to discuss the topic, the likelihood of developing a consensus on either date is remote. Some experts have submitted the Cold War began as early as the initial "Big Three" meetings while World War II continued to rage or as late as the launching of Sputnik in 1957. Some scholars argue the Russian actions in Poland, Hungary, Greece, Turkey, and the Berlin Blockade served as events pointing to the new conflict. For others, the successful testing of an atomic bomb in 1949 was the wakeup call for the United States. Just as it is difficult to determine the start, dating the ending of the Cold War is just as contentious. The tearing down of the Berlin Wall in 1989 is a commonly accepted event signaling the end of the Cold War.
However, this event did not eliminate the threat of a nuclear Soviet Union, and thus end cut its defense spending. And we are not in that posture." 4 Even though at first he rejected any defense budget cuts in 1989, Bush started cutting the defense budget in 1990 due to economic pressures and attempting to keep his promise of not increasing taxes. While Desert Storm inflated the 1990 and 1991 budgets, the defense budget would go from a high of $538 billion in 1985 down to $358 billion by 1998.
This brings Truman's actions to mind as an opposite example. While Bush was attempting to slow defense cuts, Truman, in stark contrast, was leading the charge cutting the defense budget. Both, however, called for the nation to plan any reduction of defense funding purposefully. 
5
These lower budgets were a reflection of President Reagan's defense build-up during the early 1980s as various major weapon procurement programs were nearing completion by the end of the 1980s. These cuts also responded to increasing deficits and national pressure to control federal spending. 
6
The first of several base realignments and closures soon followed. Along with these funding cuts, the force levels went from 2.2 million in 1988 down to 1.4 million in 1998.
While this history helps explain defense cuts prior to 1989, the end of the Cold War, corresponding threat reduction, and the expectation of a peace dividend explain further defense funding decisions. 
Besides revitalizing the nation's defensive structure, President Reagan also introduced the concept of Reaganomics to revitalize the nation's economy. The nation during the 1970s had experienced, as President Carter described it, a malaise resulting from high inflation rates, equally high unemployment, and the national debt closing in on one trillion dollars. 
44
Reagan promised that his economic reforms would reawaken the nation and spur its recovery and growth.
Bush faced the challenges of balancing the federal budget, cutting the national debt, keeping tax rates static, and ensuring economic prosperity. Each of these challenges would pressure him to reduce the defense budget and apply the savings to accomplish domestic goals. Bush was faced with the age-old problem of balancing defense spending and domestic spending. The pressure to resolve these problems pushed Bush to enact defense-funding cuts.
The nation crossed the trillion-dollar debt threshold during 1982 and was approaching a debt level of four trillion dollars by 1992. As stated earlier, the nation had taken almost 25 years to double the national debt from $250 billion to $500 billion. Now, the nation was doubling the debt level every two and half years. The nation needed to control its deficit spending. Bush recognized this need when, during a press conference in 1989, he stated the nation still needed to make progress reducing the deficit and ultimately reduce the nation's debt. 
45 44 States Treasury Department, "National Debt Historical Charts, 1789
-2009,"
45
The strategy-based method is the best in developing a defense budget. By conducting a detailed analysis in developing the nation's geopolitical objectives, the strategist can better prepare a budget that can accomplish those objectives. The objectives serve as a beacon while the threats and economic conditions of the nation serve as constraints. However, the strategy-based method does not provide the best explanation of why the nation cuts or does not cut defense budgets following the nation's conflicts.
As the nation emerged from World War II, the geopolitical environment was transformed by the atomic bomb, expansion of communism, and the unrecoverable degradation of the United Kingdom's power. The threats posed by the Soviets were couched in terms of economic conditions and as a contest of political wills; for Truman, the Soviets did not pose as a military threat in the short term. Therefore, instead of maintaining a military to match Soviet conventional military capabilities, Truman chose a strategy closely linked to Wilsonian and Kantian concepts of world peace, and focused his efforts to sustain and improve the nation's economy. A threat-based budget approach to justifying larger defense budgets was trumped by the nation's historical-based response at the end of conflicts, the Wilsonian-based strategy, and most importantly, Truman's drive to improve the economy by balancing the federal budget. Truman focused and relied on the nation's economy to accomplish both his domestic and geopolitics objectives. As a result, the nation cut its force structure and defense funding by 90 percent within 18 months following World War II.
In stark contrast, Bush, after fighting to maintain the defense budget, proposed a defense budget that would cut funding by just 28 percent over the ten years following the Iron Curtain's fall. As the curtain fell, the demise of the Soviet threat allowed the defense budget to be considered for further funding cuts, while economic concerns of the early 1990s would actually pull the nation's purse strings and motivate the cuts that were