# ID: 86dc2457c875410dba5038ca73bc0e56
# Title: Hybrid Warfare and the Russian Nationalist Nexus
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The emergence of hybrid warfare in the 21st century has its roots in the political warfare used by the US and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
Russia uses a hybrid warfare strategy to undermine Western conventional military superiority, achieve foreign policy goals while avoiding military casualties, and spread its values system abroad as an alternative to liberal Western ideals.
Private military and security companies (PMSCs) are used by Moscow to further its hybrid warfare strategy abroad, while a state-sponsored nationalist movement is cultivated to shore up support for the Kremlin at home.
Given the economic and military weaknesses Russia suffers from in comparison with the US, this type of strategy gives Moscow a tool to achieve its objectives without expending a great amount of blood and treasure.
PMSCs play a significant role in Russia's use of hybrid warfare, extending its influence through patriotic youth camps and sometimes representing Russian interests abroad.
The most recent example of this strategy occurred in Crimea and eastern Ukraine, where Russian support to secessionist groups continues to undermine a peaceful resolution.
Russian nationalism is linked to hybrid warfare.
It is encouraged within Russia to protect the regime and to focus the public's attention away from troubling issues, such as the economy.
It is also exported abroad to recruit foreign fighters and is a potential tool for generating political unrest in Moscow's periphery.
The spread of Russian nationalism is also facilitated by PMSCs in the patriotic youth camps they run both inside and outside of Russia.
However, the Kremlin has a tenuous relationship with nationalist groups inside Russia, appropriating a nationalist message when it suits the regime and at other times cracking down on nationalist groups.
hybrid warfare; ambiguous warfare; political warfare; Russia; Ukraine; Crimea; professional military and security companies; nationalism