# ID: 86dc2457c875410dba5038ca73bc0e56
# Title: Hybrid Warfare and the Russian Nationalist Nexus
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching
Hybrid Warfare and the Russian Nationalist Nexus
McCarthy, Tara M.
The emergence of hybrid warfare in the 21st century has its roots in the political warfare used by the US and the Soviet Union during the Cold War. Russia uses a hybrid warfare strategy to undermine Western conventional military superiority, achieve foreign policy goals while avoiding military casualties, and spread its values system abroad as an alternative to liberal Western ideals. Private military and security companies (PMSCs) are used by Moscow to further its hybrid warfare strategy abroad, while a state-sponsored nationalist movement is cultivated to shore up support for the Kremlin at home. Given the economic and military weaknesses Russia suffers from in comparison with the US, this type of strategy gives Moscow a tool to achieve its objectives without expending a great amount of blood and treasure. PMSCs play a significant role in Russia's use of hybrid warfare, extending its influence through patriotic youth camps and sometimes representing Russian interests abroad. The most recent example of this strategy occurred in Crimea and eastern Ukraine, where Russian support to secessionist groups continues to undermine a peaceful resolution. Russian nationalism is linked to hybrid warfare. It is encouraged within Russia to protect the regime and to focus the public's attention away from troubling issues, such as the economy. It is also exported abroad to recruit foreign fighters and is a potential tool for generating political unrest in Moscow's periphery. The spread of Russian nationalism is also facilitated by PMSCs in the patriotic youth camps they run both inside and outside of Russia. However, the Kremlin has a tenuous relationship with nationalist groups inside Russia, appropriating a nationalist message when it suits the regime and at other times cracking down on nationalist groups. hybrid warfare; ambiguous warfare; political warfare; Russia; Ukraine; Crimea; professional military and security companies; nationalism
This paper began as an excuse to research Russian policy and the 21 st century use of hybrid warfare, topics which interested me but with which I had extraordinarily little background. My interest was personal rather than professional, although these issues have professional applications for anyone working in the US national security apparatus. I also had a notion that the rise of nationalism played a role in Russia's actions, although it took a lot of work to uncover those linkages.
I could not have written this paper without the assistance of many people, first and foremost my mentor at Marine Corps Command and Staff College, Dr. Craig Hayden, who helped me find a straighter road through a discussion that often meandered into the woods. His comments and those of Dr. Jonathan Phillips helped strengthen the arguments in this paper, for which I am grateful. I am also indebted to several classmates and colleagues, especially P., who helped me not only find excellent material to work with but gave shrewd advice as to the validity and objectivity of sources I found on my own. Thank you! Thesis: Russia uses a hybrid warfare strategy to undermine Western conventional military superiority, achieve foreign policy goals while avoiding military casualties, and spread its values system abroad as an alternative to liberal Western ideals. Private military and security companies (PMSCs) are used by Moscow to further its hybrid warfare strategy abroad, while a statesponsored nationalist movement is cultivated to shore up support for the Kremlin at home.
The emergence of hybrid warfare in the 21 st century has its roots in the political warfare used by the US and the Soviet Union during the Cold War. Given the economic and military weaknesses Russia suffers from in comparison with the US, this type of strategy gives Moscow a tool to achieve its objectives without expending a great amount of blood and treasure. PMSCs play a significant role in Russia's use of hybrid warfare, extending its influence through patriotic youth camps and sometimes representing Russian interests abroad. The most recent example of this strategy occurred in Crimea and eastern Ukraine, where Russian support to secessionist groups continues to undermine a peaceful resolution.
Russian nationalism is linked to hybrid warfare. It is encouraged within Russia to protect the regime and to focus the public's attention away from troubling issues, such as the economy. It is also exported abroad to recruit foreign fighters and is a potential tool for generating political unrest in Moscow's periphery. The spread of Russian nationalism is also facilitated by PMSCs in the patriotic youth camps they run both inside and outside of Russia. However, the Kremlin has a tenuous relationship with nationalist groups inside Russia, appropriating a nationalist message when it suits the regime and at other times cracking down on nationalist groups.
Russia's use of hybrid warfare challenges the West to counter actions that often appear ambiguous and obscure Moscow's hand. While this strategy rarely results in force-onforce military conflict, it still risks undermining the stability and democratic institutions of the nations that Moscow targets, many of which sit between western Europe and Russia. Moscow has many options for pursuing its goals and hybrid warfare is only one of them, however it may be the one strategy for which the US and the West are least prepared.
Moscow's successful 2014 annexation of Crimea and instigation of separatist violence in eastern Ukraine demonstrated an evolution in Russian foreign policy concentrated around the use of hybrid warfare to achieve its objectives. Rather than conducting an overt military campaign, Moscow instead used a hybrid warfare strategy executed by Russian private military and security companies (PMSC)s, small numbers of conventional and special operations forces, and pro-Russian separatist groups in eastern Ukraine to gain territory and disrupt Kyiv's sovereignty over a significant portion of Ukraine. The successful use of this strategy offset a faltering economy and waning public trust in the Kremlin, which rose to national prominence during antigovernment protests in 2011 and 2012 and that Russian authorities tried hard to crush. Russia uses a hybrid warfare strategy to undermine Western conventional military superiority, achieve foreign policy goals while avoiding military casualties, and spread its values system abroad as an alternative to liberal Western ideals. PMSCs are used by Moscow to further its hybrid warfare strategy abroad, while a state-sponsored nationalist movement is cultivated to shore up support for the Kremlin at home. Russian nationalism links the concepts discussed in this paper as it is used to recruit foreign fighters for conflicts abroad and as a tool to generate political unrest in Russia's periphery. PMSCs also facilitate the spread of Russian nationalism in the patriotic youth camps they organize both inside and outside of Russia. Not only does the spread of Russian nationalism challenge the rule of law and democratic institutions, especially in parts of eastern Europe such as the Balkans, but Moscow's use of hybrid warfare to achieve its foreign policy objectives could be leveraged in other parts of the world where the US has national security interests. This paper will begin with a definition of hybrid warfare and a discussion of how Russia uses it, followed by an exploration of the role Russian PMSCs play in the strategy and how Moscow uses it as a tool of foreign policy. Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea and involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine are then presented as case studies to demonstrate the effectiveness of the hybrid warfare strategy under favorable conditions. The paper then turns to domestic issues and chronicles the Kremlin's attitude towards Russian nationalist movements since the 2011-2012 timeframe and how these movements affected actions in Ukraine. It concludes with a discussion of how Russia's expanded use of this strategy challenges Western security and stability.
For this paper, ambiguous or "hybrid" warfare involves rapidly generating highly trained and disciplined forces who enter the battlespace out of uniform and in coordination with local supporters, using psychological operations, intimidation, and bribery to undermine nationalist resistance. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
11
12
13
1415
16
17
The proxy wars of the Cold War also continue today. The conflict in Syria is the best recent example, as Russia (and Iran) propped up the Assad Regime and fought against USbacked militia groups. The Kremlin uses Russian military contractors in this conflict to achieve its objectives. Putin himself in 2012 praised PMSCs as a potential "instrument for realizing national interests without the direct participation of the government." 18 Today's Russian private military and security companies (PMSCs) grew from companies that provided security for private citizens in Russia after the fall of the Soviet Union. They have since evolved into organizations that train foreign militias and national militaries, run paramilitary and pro-Russian ideological camps in eastern Europe and Commonwealth of Independent States countries, and even actively participate in military conflicts. 
19
19 Ostensen, Ase Gilje and Bukkvoll, Tor, Russian Use of Private Military and Security Companiesthe implications for European and Norwegian Security (Bergen, Norway: Chr. Michelsens Institutt, FFI Rapport 18/01300, 2018). https://www.cmi.no/publications/6637-russianuse-of-private-military-and-security, p. 9, 12, 14-15, 24.  demonstrated in eastern Ukraine. It is worth noting that PMSCs remain illegal in Russia and most companies are registered abroad. 
20
One role of Russian PMSCs is the training of foreign armed forces. Russian PMSCs likely provided training to the governments of both Sudan and Central African Republic (CAR), two countries with human rights violations. 
2122
2324
25
Russia also uses PMSCs to further Moscow's goals in Libya. 
26
27
28
29
26 Sudarsan Raghavan, "As Libya's international proxy war deepens, U.S. and Europe jolted back into crisis talks," Washington Post, January 18, 2020. At least one known Russian PMSC, ENOT Corp., appears to run military type training camps for foreign right-wing activists. 
30
31
32
Russian PMSCs provide a force multiplier to Russian armed forces, pursuing hybrid operations with plausible deniability for Russian leadership as the links between such groups and the Kremlin are often unclear. This uncertainty is leveraged by Russia in its military strategy to stall adversaries' responses and make short-term strategic gains. 
33
34
Geopolitics is the main organizing principle of Vladimir Putin's foreign policy and is evident in Ukraine. The policy promotes traditional values and concepts that appeal directly to nationalist sentiment in many Russian enclaves worldwide. The Kremlin pursues a Russian "national idea" based on conservative political and social values, free of the influence of Western liberalism, that leads the recent global resurgence of nationalism. This "national idea" openly defies US leadership and challenges the legitimacy of existing global norms and institutions. 
35
36
The Kremlin argues that the US and the West have used hybrid warfare tactics themselves in fomenting rebellions and social movements. 
38
39
Also known as "Euromaidan", the 2014 protests overturned a Ukrainian government seen as pro-Russian. The Ukrainian parliament's decision not to sign a significant trade agreement with the EU triggered a protest movement that only grew as the Ukrainian government's attempts to quell it became more violent. Eventually, this led to the ouster of the president, Viktor Yanukovych, who fled to Russia, and ushered in new elections. Following the Euromaidan, Russia took advantage of the ensuing unrest in southern and eastern Ukraine.
Following the overthrow of Yanukovych, Crimea was absorbed while the Kremlin actively encouraged Russian ultra-nationalist paramilitary elements to destabilize eastern Ukraine. 
40
41
42
43
44
45
4647
Ethnic nationalism was not encouraged in the USSR and Moscow's aversion to it continued for almost twenty years after the fall of the Soviet Union. State patriotism, however, was sanctioned and the main driver of political mobilization during Putin's first decade in power.
Ethnic issues were primarily viewed as an obstacle to social cohesion and a threat to public order. 
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
Corporation, to provide combat training to pro-Russian separatists. 
63
64
The West and Russia Following Russia's annexation of Crimea, NATO responded by sending hundreds of troops to Ukraine to train with government forces. Then-NATO Secretary Anders Fogh Rasmussen also pledged to increase the readiness of 4000 troops in the alliance's rapid reaction force. The US brought additional forces and equipment to its bases in Europe and immediately began incorporating them into annual military exercises. 
66
Can NATO deter hybrid threats, almost thirty years after the fall of the Soviet Union and nearly twenty years of war? Even with troop levels and defense budgets lower than recent US presidential administrations would like, Russia knows that in a full-on conflict with the NATO powers, it is outgunned and outclassed at every point on the military power scale. 
68
The relationship between Russian operativeswhether special forces or PMSCsin Crimea and secessionist-held parts of eastern Ukraine with pro-Russian Ukrainians has also provided Moscow with a new pool of paramilitary hopefuls for use in other areas of strategic interest, such as Syria, where the "Carpathians Unit" has been used operationally. 
69
7071
69 Oksana Grytsenko and Veronika Melkozerova, "Ukrainians fight and die among Russian Wagner mercenaries," Kyiv Post, February 27, 2018. from the former Yugoslavia to eastern Ukraine as an "Orthodox jihad" with similarities to the recruitment and training methods of Islamic extremist organizations. 
727374
Eastern Ukraine is allegedly used as a training ground for foreign fighters, who can then be sent to other conflict areas, such as Syria and Lybia, to aid Russian efforts. 
75
76
The case of Libya demonstrates Russia's willingness to step into conflicts from which the US has distanced itself. With the goal of expanding influence in the Middle East and securing lucrative energy contracts, Moscow could contribute to instability in a region that has long been a top US national security priority. At a time when the US is perceived as withdrawing from involvement in the Middle East, Russia is demonstrating its ability to step into the vacuum with goals incompatible with both US and NATO policies. Moscow may be a more attractive partner to some in the region because assistance does not come with the price tag of human rights concerns and intolerance of damage to civilians and infrastructure, tradeoffs of working with the US and NATO. Russia's weapons sales process also works faster than most Western nations', potentially turning an evenly matched conflict (with more possible opportunities for peaceful negotiation) into a lopsided victory for one side in a matter of weeks. Russian PMSCs are often the vanguard for involvement in these regions, allowing Moscow to exercise one element of its hybrid warfare strategy while keeping Russian soldiers out of potentially hostile situations. 
7778
79
How should the West confront Russian hybrid warfare? Understanding how Russia uses this strategy is essential to developing an effective counter strategy. It is used to regain territory, secure geopolitical access and influence, convey geopolitical strength domestically and 77 Aleksandr Gostev, "Russia's Paramilitary Mercenaries Emerge From The Shadows," Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, December 16, 2016,   https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-paramilitary-mercenaries-emerge-from-the-shadows-syria-ukraine/28180321.html.
78 Benoit Faucon and James Marson, "Russia Leans on Mercenary Forces to Regain Global Clout," Wall Street Journal, February 23, 2020.  both within Russia (twice in Chechnya) and in five neighboring states (Georgia, Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Ukraine). Its forces are arrayed across a vast landmass and it has military bases and training facilities in Georgia, Armenia, Tajikistan, Moldova, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan. 
86
Russian leaders desensitize their people to military conflict in order to increase society's willingness to wage future wars. As the economy slowed in 2013, "the Kremlin…sought to make military glory the new centerpiece of Russian pride and identity", according to a 2017 article by 86 Ahern, p. 14.   87 Ahern, p. 14.   88 Ahern, p. 14.  Col. Stephanie Ahern. 89 Moscow's domestic information operations are extensive, effective, and well-targeted, all while it tightens media controls and declares dissenters to be foreign operatives. Ahern's article cites a survey in which a majority of respondents "indicated that 'small wars' or military operations such as those in Ukraine and Syria are considered justified, defensive, victorious, and preventive, undertaken to avoid a 'great war' and 'because the besieged fortress must be defended. 
'" 90
91
Russia's use of hybrid warfare furthers its foreign policy goals of expanding influence in the periphery as well as further abroad, such as in the Middle East. This ambiguous strategy is less costly than an all-out military confrontation in terms of lives lost and provides the Kremlin with plausible deniability for its actions. Russian nationalism complements a hybrid warfare 89 Ahern, p. 14.   90 Ahern, p. 14.   91 Ahern, p. 14.   92 Ahern, p. 14.  strategy by deflecting popular attention away from the casualties it incurs and couching foreign intervention in terms intended to appeal to nationalist sentiment. It is used to recruit foreign fighters to serve in these conflicts, especially in the former Yugoslavia, and to cause unrest and disruption in Russia's periphery. PMSCs also facilitate the export of nationalist ideals in patriotic youth camps operating inside and outside of Russia.
PMSCs are one of the most effective tools in Russia's hybrid warfare strategy and they are responsible not only for conducting military operations abroad but also for expanding Moscow's influence through their work with foreign militias and national militaries as well as in the paramilitary and pro-Russian ideological camps they run inside and outside of Russia. 
93
94
95
96
97
98
Moscow argues that it does not pursue a hybrid warfare strategy, instead accusing the US and the west of pursuing such a strategy through the instigation of "color revolutions" and social movements, such as the 2004 Orange Revolution in Ukraine and the Arab Spring. 
99
100
101102
The threat of Russia's hybrid warfare exists on NATO's borders and possibly inside the alliance itself, such as in the Baltics and the former Yugoslavia. These tactics create uncertainty when used and it may be difficult for Western observers to grasp the situation before it is too late.
103
Connell, Mary  Ellen and Evans, Ryan, "Russia's Ambiguous Warfare and Implications for the US Marine Corps," MCU Journal vol. 7, no. 1 (Spring
2016), https://www.cna.org/CNA_Files/PDF/MCU-Journal-Russias-Ambiguous-Warfare.pdf, p. 30.2 Connell and Evans, 
Adam Taylor, "For Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn, murky allegations of Russian meddling loom over Britain's election," Washington Post,December 3, 2019.   
Ponarin and Komin, p. 63.   
Pleshakov, 
Connell and Evans, p. 30.   
Miriam Elder, "Two dead as far-right football fans riot in Moscow," The Guardian,December 13, 2010.   
Maya Zivanovic, "Donbass Brothers: How Serbian Brothers were Deployed in Ukraine," Balkan Insight,December 13, 2018.   
Marten, Kimberly, "The Puzzle of Russian Behavior in Deir-al Zour," War on the Rocks,
(July 5, 2018)
Axe and Beckhusen.   
OMB No. 
0704-0188