# ID: 86dc2457c875410dba5038ca73bc0e56
# Title: Hybrid Warfare and the Russian Nationalist Nexus
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
Moscow's successful 2014 annexation of Crimea and instigation of separatist violence in eastern Ukraine demonstrated an evolution in Russian foreign policy concentrated around the use of hybrid warfare to achieve its objectives.
Rather than conducting an overt military campaign, Moscow instead used a hybrid warfare strategy executed by Russian private military and security companies (PMSC)s, small numbers of conventional and special operations forces, and pro-Russian separatist groups in eastern Ukraine to gain territory and disrupt Kyiv's sovereignty over a significant portion of Ukraine.
The successful use of this strategy offset a faltering economy and waning public trust in the Kremlin, which rose to national prominence during antigovernment protests in 2011 and 2012 and that Russian authorities tried hard to crush.
Russia uses a hybrid warfare strategy to undermine Western conventional military superiority, achieve foreign policy goals while avoiding military casualties, and spread its values system abroad as an alternative to liberal Western ideals.
PMSCs are used by Moscow to further its hybrid warfare strategy abroad, while a state-sponsored nationalist movement is cultivated to shore up support for the Kremlin at home.
Russian nationalism links the concepts discussed in this paper as it is used to recruit foreign fighters for conflicts abroad and as a tool to generate political unrest in Russia's periphery.
PMSCs also facilitate the spread of Russian nationalism in the patriotic youth camps they organize both inside and outside of Russia.
Not only does the spread of Russian nationalism challenge the rule of law and democratic institutions, especially in parts of eastern Europe such as the Balkans, but Moscow's use of hybrid warfare to achieve its foreign policy objectives could be leveraged in other parts of the world where the US has national security interests.
This paper will begin with a definition of hybrid warfare and a discussion of how Russia uses it, followed by an exploration of the role Russian PMSCs play in the strategy and how Moscow uses it as a tool of foreign policy.
Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea and involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine are then presented as case studies to demonstrate the effectiveness of the hybrid warfare strategy under favorable conditions.
The paper then turns to domestic issues and chronicles the Kremlin's attitude towards Russian nationalist movements since the 2011-2012 timeframe and how these movements affected actions in Ukraine.
It concludes with a discussion of how Russia's expanded use of this strategy challenges Western security and stability.