# ID: 86f235dccd4a4fc09679f0b24d3f983a
# Title: The Russian Federation's Use of Non-state Actors in Hybrid Operations in Europe
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
Under what circumstances is Russia successful in waging hybrid operations, short of the use of armed force? For the last two decades, Russia has undertaken structured cyber attacks, political destabilization, subversive activities, and psychological influence throughout the world as part of what has become known as "hybrid warfare" or "New-Type War" (NTW).
This thesis examines two contemporary European case studies-Estonia and Montenegro-where Russia has used indirect means such as proxy forces, organized crime, and other tools to conduct influence operations in its attempts to achieve its foreign policy goals. The thesis investigates how Russia has used, or tried to use, these non-state actors; how effective these operations have been; and whether Russia was successful in reaching its foreign-policy objectives in target states.
The thesis finds that Russian NTW campaigns require that there be no cohesive society in the target country. Contradictions and a divided society in the target country are the basis on which Russia can build an NTW campaign and choose the elements of NTW-non-state actors-to carry out the campaign. Thus, the most crucial aspect of launching and conducting an NTW campaign is the psychological influencing and so-called unbalancing of the target country's society and government. INTRODUCTION A.
Under what circumstances is Russia successful in waging hybrid operations short of the use of armed force? For the last two decades, Russia has undertaken structured cyberattacks, political destabilization, subversive activities, and psychological influence throughout the world as part of what has become known as "hybrid warfare" or "New-Type War" (NTW). At the same time, Russia has sponsored the involvement and training of paramilitary units and organized crime in operations abroad. The initial covert use of its specialized military units and special services brought rapid and decisive progress to the Russian Federation in annexing Crimea and destabilizing eastern Ukraine. Today, the Russian Federation remains active in spreading its influence in Europe, Eurasia, and Middle East.
This thesis examines two contemporary European case studies where Russia has used indirect means such as proxy forces, organized crime, and other tools to conduct influence operations in its attempts to achieve its foreign policy goals. I investigate how Russia has used or tried to use these non-state actors, how effective these operations have been, and whether Russia was successful in reaching its foreign policy objectives in target states. The central proposition evaluated is whether the effectiveness of Russian use of nonstate actors is dependent on the target state's close geographic and/or cultural proximity to Russia.
In the first half of 2014, the Russian Federation annexed the Crimean Peninsula in a decisive, coordinated manner using various asymmetric military techniques. Despite the opposition and condemnation of the Western world, Russia skillfully combined the various Russian General Valery Gerasimov, the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Russia, called it new generation warfare in his, later much-cited and widely debated, 2013 article. 
8
10
The success of the Crimean operation raises the question of whether it was a unique case. Specifically, did Crimea present extremely favorable conditions that Russia could use effectively, such that similar success is unlikely in other cases? 
11
The main proposition of this thesis is that Russia uses violent and non-violent non-state actors as proxies that are central elements in the execution of its hybrid strategy.
It does so to exploit pre-existing vulnerabilities or to create the conditions necessary in the target state to make it vulnerable, either rendering it more susceptible to Russian influence or preparing the ground for further Russian activities and hostilities. The analysis seeks to determine whether the use of non-state actors is working to Russia's advantage or not, and under what circumstances it is working or not working. The factors proposed to determine the relative effectiveness of Russian hybrid operations are firstly, the target state's geographic, historical, and cultural proximity to Russia. The second factor is whether Russian conventional military assets are used in the target state.
8 Bowen, Russian Armed Forces: Military Doctrine and Strategy. 9 Klein, "Russia's New Military Doctrine -NATO, the United States and the 'Colour Revolutions,'" 3. 10 Klein, 3; Bowen.   11 Bettina Renz, "Russia and 'Hybrid Warfare,'" Contemporary Politics 22, no. 3 (2016): 284, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13569775.2016.1201316.
A heated debate exists over the nature and logic of hybrid warfare. Many authors are convinced that there is nothing new or groundbreaking about it because many states have used indirect means and unconventional tactics throughout the history of war. Alexander Lanoszka brings the example thatif one takes into consideration wellpublished elements of Russian hybrid activities towards other states such as propaganda, proxies, or sabotage actsthen even the Second World War could be considered a hybrid war. 
12
13
14
13 United States Joint Chiefs of Staff, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, JP 1-02 (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2016): 249, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/ 1004650.pdf.
14 David Kilcullen, "The Evolution of Unconventional Warfare," Scandinavian Journal of Military Studies 2, no. 1 (2019): 62, https://doi.org/10.31374/sjms. 35  opposed to identifying hybrid warfare as a novel Russian invention of warfare. 
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Russia's war with Ukraine is often cited as a primary example of this NTW. Russian activities in Crimea showed the significant dominance of irregular tactics and operations compared to nearly non-existent usage of the conventional military's actions to resolve the conflict. 
24
25
This thesis seeks to contribute to this debate through an evaluation of Russia's use of non-state actors to achieve its foreign policy objectives in Europe and the United States.
In so doing, it will help shed light on whether Russian NTW operations can be successful if they do not involve the use of significant armed force.
The central proposition to be evaluated in this thesis is that Russia's activities using unconventional means are more efficient and effective in an environment close to Russia geographically, with historical ties and cultural similarities and convenient preconditions for action. Factors such as a Russian diaspora, Russian language-speakers, are argued to be conducive to successful Russian NTW operations. The effectiveness of Russia's unconventional techniques is posited to decline in countries where these factors are absent and where vulnerabilities need to be created rather than exploited. Additionally, this thesis evaluates the proposition that Russian NTW operations are less effective when they lack the use of armed forces, unlike in the cases in Georgia, Ukraine, Libya, and Syria. The expectation is that Russia is less likely to use overt force against countries that are members of North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European Union (EU). According to the second proposition then, Russian NTW operations should be less effective in EU and NATO countries than in non-member countries. Examination of these countries and the non-member countries allows for refinement of our knowledge regarding whether and how covert, low-scale Russian-sponsored violence can successfully accomplish Russian objectives. A third proposition is that non-state actor coordination or independence impacts the effectiveness of Russian NTW. The expectation is that coordination will improve effectiveness while independence impedes it.
To evaluate these propositions, the thesis compares two case studies where Russia has used irregular means. The cases are chosen based on varying geographical proximity and historical ties to Russia. In each study, I conduct an analysis that provides an overview of Russia's activities and-given the nature of the region and the situation in the target states-its choices of which non-state actors to use to achieve its goals, as well as their relative success. The first case study centers on Estonia. Estonia, a post-Soviet state located in the so-called Russian near-abroad, is a NATO and EU member but remains in the strong sphere of the Russian Federation's interest and influence. The second case study investigates Montenegro. This case offers differing degrees of non-state actor coordination by Russian state agencies, allowing for evaluation of the third proposition.
The case studies examine which non-state assets Russia has used in different environments, the results in terms of Russian success or failure, and whether the cases have Finally, a scheme is compiled, showing which non-state actors Russia employs, how they are linked to the Russian leadership, and their cooperation with each other. This thesis's source materials include academic articles and books that describe and analyze the actors and their previous use and cases that are investigated. Also, newspaper articles and open-source materials are used to support the analysis using the latest information.
Chapter II examines the literature on Russian hybrid warfare and gives an overview of different state and non-state actors that Russia uses in its hybrid campaigns, and the types of coordination possible among them. The examination generates a schema to be completed through the empirical investigations of non-state actor usage and the effectiveness of such methods. Chapter III examines Russia's irregular use of non-state actors in Estonia, a former Soviet republic and now member of the EU and NATO. Chapter
IV similarly analyzes Montenegro. The final chapter draws conclusions about the three propositions, and the relative effectiveness of Russian irregular operations and the conditions that facilitate or impede them. The chapter provides a scheme based on the author's conclusions about the types, degrees of coordination, and probable pattern of using non-state actors in building up the NTW campaign. In addition, two more mini-studies, the Catalan referendum in Spain in 2017 and North Macedonia's aspirations to join NATO, are examined to confirm the drawn conclusions.
Whether Russia's contemporary approach to warfare is novel or not-and there are compelling arguments on both sides-the actual question may be: Could Russia increasingly achieve, in today's globalized and technology-and information-rich environment, its political objectives-eroding Western solidarity and unity-without resorting to the direct use of significant military assets? The notion of hybrid warfare, as it is unraveled, looks at the different phases of conflict and focuses on undermining the enemy in the first phase, seemingly peacetime, to prepare the ground for later phases of conflict. We need to divide up the conflict concept and see if Russia can achieve its goals mainly by non-military means, just by owning and threatening to use its military force, but not actually using it.
Russia's modern conflict with the West is primarily a confrontation and a struggle over values. It is highly unlikely that great powers with nuclear weapons are willing to get into a military confrontation with each other. This was already evident during the Cold War. But if the contemporary struggle between Russia and the West is not about occupying and then physically controlling territory, then why would it be necessary to include the kinetic military warfare part to the campaign? In such a case, Russia needs time to undermine and fracture the West's cohesion consistently, and in that case, the use of nonstate actors combined with information operations and cyberattacks would be the key players in this societal, psychological-informational, and remote conflict. These meansconsiderably cheaper than conventional and nuclear capabilities-provide deniability to Russia and create confusion and disagreements in the West. If these means can accomplish the political objectives of creating strong distrust not only of democracy, but Western organizations and Western unity, then Russia has already won. To that end, Russia considers it important to be active and find ways to divide the West in areas where it is easiest and where Russia feels more comfortableoften in its "near-abroad." It is also crucial for Russia to maintain its existing influence in regions that are often also in its immediate neighborhood, such as Georgia and Ukraine.
One of the central questions in the debate about Russian "new-type" warfare is, "is Ukraine unique?" This question is a side issue, and it does not matter whether Ukraine is unique if the actual problem is whether Russia can achieve its goals without having to conquer territory. If this is the case, then the most critical part of the whole concept of hybrid war or NTW is the first stage, the so-called preparation phase for later stages. What does make Ukraine unique is that stage one was already built-in due to Soviet history, and that goes to emphasize the relevancy of Russia dominating the first stage of a conflict.
What if dominating in the first stage and ultimately winning just the initial phase is enough for Russia to defeat opponents in a globalized and information-laden world? This argument suggests that non-state actors play an essential role in the first phases of Russian activities in trying to weaken or dismantle the target state as much as possible. If the target states are members of an organization such as NATO or the EU, an additional goal would be to alienate and divide the target states from other member states to isolate the target and shatter the organization's cohesion. So, at the end or in the decisive phases of conflict, Russian military forces would have the most straightforward task to formalize the job with minimal effort because the targets, now sufficiently and deeply politically divided, are unlikely to or incapable of implementing a coordinated anti-Russian policy. An even more favorable option would be that military combat operations would not be necessary at all, as non-state actors' activities would have thrown the target states into chaos, and the organizations to which they belong would be divided, fragmented, and experiencing existential threats.
We first need to understand the debate about the novelty of Russia's way of warfare.
Then we can turn to the central question of whether Russia can achieve its aims without significant use of force, leveraging only the background presence of its hard power.
How much does contemporary warfare differ from warfare of the past? Andreas Previously, the irregular and conventional "components occurred in different theatres or in distinctly different formations." 33 Now, these forces blend into common forces in the same "battlespace," where they are operationally combined and tactically mixed. Remarkably, the unconventional component of the force becomes dominant. 
34
35
36
37
38
44
45
46
47
Chekinov emphasize that the keys to success in the new generation of wars are dominance in the information sphere and psychological operations that devastate the adversary's defense structures personnel and society both morally and psychologically. 
48
49
50
54
55
56
Frank G. Hoffman argues that, concerning Russia, the combination of different methods in warfare is the realization of practices and experiences tested over time. 
58
59
61
There are also other tools of confusing the adversary that have Soviet and even Tsarist origins. For example, "Maskirovka, the complex of measures devised to confuse the enemy regarding the "presence and disposition of forces, their condition, readiness, actions and plans," has been an object of military-academic study in Russia since 1904." 
63
64
program, which meant that well-prepared intelligence officers were sent under deep cover to foreign countries. 
65
76
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
The Russian Federation in today's world "is setting itself up as an ideological alternative to the EU [and the West], with a different approach to sovereignty, power and world order. Moscow believes that laws are mere expressions of power-and that when the balance of power changes, laws should be changed to reflect it." 90 Hence, Russia is pursuing an aggressive, wide-ranging, and multifaceted campaign to fragment European unity and to prevent it from interfering or challenging its 'near abroad' actions. 
91
92
94
95
97
Galeotti refers to the mindset of a group of unidentified Russian intelligence, "If the West loses, we gain," as best at describing the Russian approach. 
98
99
100
101
102
105
The GRU, becoming more active worldwide to operate without diplomatic cover, seems to be the leading Russian intelligence agency for managing organized crime, insurgents, and other violent non-state actors abroad. 
106
107
108
114
115
116
117
118
The FSB, a successor service of the KGB, is the primary internal security agency in Russia. 
120
121
122
123
125
126
127
The FSB covers its cyber-attacks by exploiting and managing autonomous hackers and using its high-end cyber-espionage capabilities. 
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
139
140
141
142
145
147
148
149
150
151
152
2007
154
155
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
168
Indirect forces are the vital tools Russia uses to exploit the existing vulnerabilities or attempts to destabilize the target state while creating vulnerabilities. 
170
Affiliates are described as armed formations that are informally part of the state's troops and, while being external actors, aim to change the strategic outcome of the conflict in favor of the state. 
173
176
177
178
179
181
Auxiliaries are armed groups formed from volunteers who do not belong to regular forces but are directly participating in the operating environment in collaboration with or beside military troops deployed to the target state. 
183
184
185
186
Proxies are "third party forces that are employed by a state in any external conflict where the employment of its own forces may be deemed undesirable." 192 These are "armed groups that are not part of regular forces but that fight for and on behalf of states wishing to alter the strategic outcome of a conflict while remaining external to it. The proxy is indirectly embedded with the external state in as much as it becomes their conduit of armed violence on the basis of the state's provision of a range of support." 
193
194
The relationship between the Russian state's highest echelons and organized crime is very different from the West. 
196
197
Kremlin." 198
199
Russian state tool uniting battle-ready diasporas abroad. 
200
201
202
203
204
This chapter is a case study of Estonia, a small post-Soviet country in Eastern Europe. After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 Estonia became independent and a part of Western society. It has been a member of NATO since March 2004 and of the EU since May of the same year. 
207
208
The third section describes the Bronze Soldier events in April 2007 and the firstever anti-state cyber-attacks from April to May. First, the section describes the immediate circumstances and environment that led to the unrest in Estonian society. This is followed by a description of the events, which were street riots lasting three to four days and cyberattacks against Estonia that started simultaneously but lasted for three weeks. There is also a description of the Estonian embassy's besiegement, which happened in Moscow and lasted for a week simultaneously with the street riots and cyber-attacks. This activity was 207 "Eesti" [Estonia], Euroopa Liit [European Union], July 30, 2020, https://europa.eu/europeanunion/about-eu/countries/member-countries/estonia_et; "Eesti ja NATO" [Estonia and NATO], Välisministeerium [Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs], July 14, 2020, https://vm.ee/et/eesti-ja-nato.
208 Andrew Radin, Alyssa Demus, and Krystyna Marcinek, Understanding Russian Subversion: Patterns, Threats, and Responses, (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2020), 45, https://www.rand.org/content/ dam/rand/pubs/perspectives/PE300/PE331/RAND_PE331.pdf. a severe violation of international diplomatic rules and was part of the political pressure in Russia's attack on Estonia.
The fourth section analyzes which non-state actors, previously described in Chapter II, Russia used in the Bronze Soldier affair. Following the example of Chapter II, the analysis is divided into parts based on the actors. First, the actor-based analysis shows their activities before and in 2007, how they were connected to the Russian government or its state actors, and the consequences of those activities. In the same actor-based parts, the author then examines how Russia has tried to use these non-state actors in Estonia and against Estonia after 2007.
The last section of the chapter summarizes the use of non-state actors and concludes that Russia's actions against Estonia in 2007 were ultimately a failure, but nevertheless, it continues its activities against Estonia with similar approaches. The section suggests why the Bronze Soldier case did not evolve into a statewide long-term crisis and which actors Russia continues to prepare and possibly plans to use if new NTW campaigns should occur in Estonia again.
The Republic of Estonia, a small Eastern European country that borders the Baltic Sea and the Gulf of Finland, is located between Latvia and the Russian Federation. 
209
211
212
213
214
215
Historically, Estonia has been a battleground for neighboring and larger countries.
After being ruled successively for centuries by Denmark, Sweden, and Germany, Estonia was part of the Russian Empire for nearly two centuries. 
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
About a year before the end of the war, in September 1944, when German troops were forced to withdraw from Estonian territory, Estonia tried once again to regain its independence. 
227
228
229
230
A national resistance movement emerged among the people, the Forest Brotherhood, which sought not to allow the Soviet leadership to impose power freely.
At the end of March 1949, the Soviet authorities began another deportation operation, during which more than twenty thousand people were deported from Estonia to Siberia. 231 Its primary aim was to complete the collectivization that had begun in 1947, which had not succeeded through economic pressure alone. 
232
233
234
From the beginning of the 1950s, many non-Estonians from other Soviet territories, such as Pskov, St. Petersburg, Novgorod Oblast, and Central Russia, began to arrive or were resettled by the Soviet authorities in Estonia. 
235
236
237
238
239
240
241
242
1
239 Ainsaar, Estonian Population, 56.
240 "History," Baltic Way, December 5, 2020, http://www.thebalticway.eu/en/history/.
241 Baltic Way, "History."
Figure 
1
Estonia and Russia disagree on the Soviet history of the 1940-41 and 1944-91 periods in Estonia. 
244
245
The case of the Bronze Soldier in 2007 concerned not only the interpretation of history but also the question of how some Russian speakers perceive their place or status in Estonian society.
Estonia sees its independence not as secession from the Soviet Union but as a restoration of the former pre-Soviet state. 249 Therefore, after independence was restored,
Estonian citizenship was automatically granted to those who had been Estonian citizens before the country was incorporated into the Soviet Union and to their descendants as well. 
250
251
252
253
254
255
While Estonia's citizenship policy is similar to those of other states-and compared to the other EU countries, the naturalization requirements in Estonia are relatively liberalit has created controversy and resentment. 
256
257
258
The best-known case in recent history that involved the Russian Federation's use of non-state actors against Estonia is the so-called Bronze Soldier events of 2007. On April 2629, 2007, riots took place in Tallinn and, to a lesser extent, in four towns of eastern Estonia. 
260
261
262
263
265
266
267
268
272
273
2006-sixty-one years after the end of the Second World War-an individual took the Estonian flag and an anti-Soviet poster to the Bronze Soldier's location. The poster read, "This soldier occupied our country and deported our people!" 274 At the monument, people celebrating with Soviet and Russian symbols attacked the Estonian flag and its carrier in front of television cameras, and the police had to take him away. The fact that the Estonian flag was removed while the Soviet flags and symbols remained at the scene broadened tensions in society. 
275
276
The increase in tensions in society and the fact that the monument had become an influential political issue by that time led the Estonian government to decide that the Soviet On the evening of the same day, the first attacks against the police by the crowd quickly gained momentum, and police forces soon had to start pushing violent masses away from the Bronze Soldier's site. 
282
283
officers. 
284
285
that the person was not helped when he was wounded," and later declared that the Russian was dying in front of the Estonian police, and it was a "deliberate crime." 
286
Dmitri lost consciousness and did not return." 287 There is no official number for the size of the crowd in Tallinn on the evening of April 26, but most media reports estimated the number of rioters at 1,500. 
288
289
290
291
three Night Watch activistsDmitriy Linter, Maksim Reva, and Estonian journalist and politician Dimitriy Klenskiyand the leader of the Russian youth organization Nashi in Estonia, Mark Siryk.
292
On April 27, the day after the start of the street riots, Estonia was hit by two waves of cyber-attacks that lasted for about three weeks, until May 18. These cyber-attacks aimed to overload Estonia's computer and network servers with excessive volumes of message traffic, causing them to collapse. 
293
294
295
296
297
299
2. Governmental and political institutions such as Parliament, the president, different ministries, state agencies, and political parties; 3. Services provided by the private sector, such as e-banking, news organizations; 4. Private and random targets. 
300
301
302
The cyber-attacks affected and interrupted the Estonian internal economic sectors that mainly rely on information and communications technology and electronic communications in their everyday business, such as media, banking, and small and medium-sized businesses. 
303
304
From April 27 to May building and tore off the Estonian flag. 
311
312
313
How is Russia operating against Estonia?
1.
Russia does not have a great strategy other than to weaken the West, its alliances, and organizations and create a more favorable environment for spreading influence and pursuing its foreign policy goals. 
315
316
317
322
324
325
327
One of the main channels for implementing Russia's active measures towards Estonia is the media. A greater and more influential part of the Russian media is under the Russian central government's direct control. 
328
329
332
333
334
335
336
337
340
In this case, it is possible to observe the coexistence of two different narratives. First, "European governments cannot manage their refugee crisis and do not listen to their people"; therefore, "Europe has bad governments and good people." 341 An example concerning Estonia is the TV channel Rossiya's news story about the anti-refugee demonstration in Tallinn. 
342
In the field of politics, the topics of the "alleged mythical Russian threat"
and "Russia's so-called aggressive behavior" stand out more than others.
These topics are mainly circulated in the leading Russian online portals. 
346
347
356
357
358
359
360
361
362
363
364
365
366
367
368
369
370
371
372
373
374
375
376
377
378
379
While other malign and aggressive activities and events during the "Bronze Nights"
were relatively predictable, at least in later analysis, the cyber-attacks made this combined The exact purpose of the cyber-attacks in the Bronze Soldier case is not entirely clear. 
382
383
Ottis outlines three possible aims for cyber-attacks, which are likely to be interrelated. These are: 1. An attempt to unite the Russian diaspora against a so-called common enemy; 2. An attempt to destabilize the Estonian society and undermine the state's economy to weaken its ties to the EU and NATO; 3. A proof of [Ottis's developed] concept on the idea of a digital people's war while supporting the overall political campaign surrounding the statue. 
384
385
386
389
390
and therefore new to everyone, the FSB probably did not lead or task hackers but was aware of and conducive to their actions. It is also possible that the FSB took this first-time "cyber campaign" as a test in which hackers were given freedom of action and monitored for what kind of damage they could do to the target country. 391
In the final analysis, however, the damage was surprisingly modest and temporary. 
392
394
In 20062007, simultaneously with the information operations and the waves of propaganda, the so-called compatriot's policy, used as a foreign policy tool of Russia, became more active. 
395
396
397
the figure of the Bronze Soldier in Soviet uniform and distributing leaflets with hostile and manipulative messages. 
404
However, at the time of the unrest, their role was more marginal, as the majority of protesters joined the riots spontaneously and in improvised ways. This pro-Kremlin auxiliary group played a part in starting the unrest, but while it lasted, it was chaos that no one was able to control or direct. Besides the simple destruction of the city center's infrastructure, there was no central follow-up idea, and the police suppressed the riot. When destroying the city center was the goal, the Night Watch met its purpose, but if the plan was a long-term and more profound crisis that could have led to the government's resignation, the auxiliary group and its leaders failed.
During the Bronze Soldier street riots, Nashi leaders in Russia tried to send organization members to Estonia to support Night Watch auxiliaries. Nashi members who wanted to travel to Estonia did so mainly for financial remuneration and excitement, thus for personal gain and self-interest. 
405
406
In that case, protesters were paid 5501000 rubles (7.4513.50 U.S. dollars) a day for their activities. 
409
410
411
In Estonia's case, there is no proof that the Russian special services recruited people directly from the criminal world or that local auxiliary leaders knowingly cooperated with organized crime in the framework of the Bronze Soldier events to accomplish their objectives. The majority of destructive and looting protesters detained and arrested by the police were seventeen-to twenty-four-year-old Russian-speaking Estonian residents. 
430
Although the involvement of organized crime did not emerge in the Bronze Soldier By the beginning of the 1990s, when Estonia became independent, there was, as elsewhere in the former Soviet Union territories, organized crime, which global commentators often refer to as the "Russian mafia". 
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
439
440
441
442
443
444
445
446
447
448
449
They are also building safe-houses and supply caches and getting to know the operational routines and specifics of the Estonian border guard. All the nuances of operating on the Estonian-Russian border, both successful and unsuccessful, are likely to be passed on by criminals to the FSB as well. The FSB's tasks include gathering intelligence and coordinating criminal groups. 
450
451
It 
The 2007 Bronze Soldier riots were among the first post-Soviet events in which Russia's influence and the exploitation of the local Russian-speaking diaspora created internal tensions abroad, and which Russia then exploited and tried to steer to its advantage without using military force. Russia's strategy in the context of the Bronze Soldier incident was successful in the sense that it is not possible to directly demonstrate or prove the Russian state's involvement and support in carrying out or leading the riots and concomitant activities such as cyber-attacks. 
458
459
The conflict mainly involved the Estonian capital, Tallinn, and smaller towns in eastern Estonia closer to Russian border. Its active phase was relatively short-lived, and
Estonian law-enforcement and security structures were able to quell and resolve the crisis.
However, it showed that an influencing strategy of Russian origin could initiate a domestic social conflict in Estonia through information and cyber operations. Although the rioters became violent on the streets, their actions were improvised and accidental, and the organizers of the protests were unable to direct the events systematically. Russia did not use organized violent and armed non-state actors against Estonia. On the other hand, if systematically operating armed groups had also supported rioters, the Bronze Soldier case could have ended differently.
Despite the successful result for Estonia, it can be said that the unresolved causes of the Bronze Soldier incident, the impacts of the events, and the lessons learned by Russia that it continues to develop and apply in Estonia, have left the case open. After 2007, Russia has continued its malign information and influence campaigns attempting to divide Estonian society. As the influencing techniques that caused the crisis worked in 2007, Russia continues to use them and hinder the integration of Estonians and Russian-speakers living in Estonia through state-controlled media, journalists, influence agents, and NGOs.
The policy to integrate Estonians and Russian-speakers continues to pose challenges for Estonia. In turn, this situation leaves open the possibility that the discrepancy between nationalities and the resulting historical memory can be re-used in Estonia to create a next conflict similar to the Bronze Soldier case. It is possible that to create a new conflict, Russia will just have to find a new symbol that can be historically interpreted in many ways, around which to build a new campaign of subversion.
Possible Russian efforts to prepare local violent auxiliary groups, such as knife fighters, shows that their participation should already be taken as a given in the next similar crisis in Estonia. Also, cooperation between organized crime and Russian intelligence agencies at the state-border indicates that should the next crisis arise, Russia is likely to have prepared for escalation using these actors and their preparations at the border. Their cooperation can be the groundwork to enable additional Russian proxy, affiliate, and auxiliary forces to infiltrate Estonia to support locals in a crisis.
This chapter is a case study of Russian NTW activities in Montenegro, a small mountainous country on the Adriatic Sea in the Balkans. Montenegro was one of The second section of this chapter introduces the reader to Montenegro's geographical location and briefly describes the state structure. In order to better understand the reasons for the 2016 coup attempt, the author describes the relations between Montenegrins and Serbs and how they affected the events in the region and Montenegro's accession to NATO. The section then describes how Russia is trying to consolidate its influence in the Balkans and the reasons that led to the failed coup attempt in 2016 to prevent Montenegro from joining NATO.
The third section first briefly explains the events and environment immediately preceding the planned coup. It then describes which actors were involved in planning, organizing, and attempting to carry out the coup. This section also provides an overview of how the coup was planned and what activities were planned. Finally, this section describes why the planned coup attempt did not materialize.
The fourth section first analyzes Russia's influence in the region before the failed coup attempt in Montenegro, specifically what methods and pro-Kremlin non-state actors it used in its attempts to achieve its goals. The following part analyzes how Russia used the media in its influencing strategies and which local pro-Russian actors took part in these activities. Third, the section examines the cyber-attacks, which were the only activities carried out against Montenegro on its referendum day, when the coup attempt was to occur.
The fourth part of the section investigates the Russian state service behind the coup plot, the GRU and its two officers from the covert unit 29155, who were the coup planners, financiers, and initiators. The final part of this section analyzes the violent pro-Russian auxiliary, affiliate, and criminal proxy actors involved in the planned coup and their background, reasons to be involved, and roles.
The last section of the chapter summarizes the reason, the plan, and the preparation of non-state actors for the coup, which was intended to overthrow the Montenegrin government and suspend NATO accession. The section concludes that the Russian NTW campaign in Montenegro in 2016 was a failure resulting from one weak link, as one of the coup plotters became an informant for the Montenegrin police.
Montenegro is a parliamentary republic. Independent executive, legislative, and judicial authorities govern the state. The president is the head of state, who is directly elected for five years. The prime minister chairs Montenegro's unicameral parliament. The state's judicial system includes the Constitutional Court and a Supreme Court. 
460
461
462
463
464
465
466
As previously noted, Russia considers the Balkans to be part of its sphere of influence. Therefore, it is trying to counter any expansion of Western influence in the region, as this will reduce its own power in the area. 
469
471
472
473
Serbian-Montenegrins support stronger relations with Moscow. 
474
475
476
477
478
490
491
Behind the coup attempt plan were two GRU officers, Eduard Shishmakov (alias Eduard Shirokov) and Vladimir Moiseev (alias Vladimir Popov), who recruited Serbian citizen Aleksandar Sindjelic as the plot's main organizer. 
493
494
Velimirovic's task was to obtain weaponry from Kosovo, participate in the coup, and recruit additional cooperators from Montenegro to take part in the coup's riots. 
495
496
497
The coup plan had been to hold an anti-government demonstration in front of the parliament building on referendum day, October 16, and to infiltrate the protest with armed, trained, and conflict zone-experienced operators. 499 Some of the operators were to be dressed in Montenegrin police uniforms. 500 Then, after the elections at eleven in the evening, two politicians, Andrija Mandić and Milan Knežević, leaders of the Montenegrin anti-NATO and pro-Russian Democratic Front, were to step up and trigger the crowds to start the riots and provoke them to assail the parliament. 
501
502
503
504
505
506
508
509
The Russian Federation has sought to keep the Balkan countries in its sphere of influence, expand its capacity in the region to direct the various state processes, and prevent
Western countries from expanding their influence into the region. The third group, proxies, comprises third-party agents whose interests align with the state sponsor's aims. They can be ideologically supportive of the sponsoring state, but the main reason for their involvement in the conflict is their own interests, like grievances against another group in the target state. Russia's long-standing influencing plan before the coup d'état did not directly aim at Montenegro but the Balkan region in general. 
514
In an attempt to renew and demonstrate the Russian empire's historical role in protecting the Slavic world, and continuously opposing it with the West, Russia sought to demonstrate its role as a defender of the region from Western expansion and the West's so-called harmful influence. 
515
516
517
544
As with the 2006 independence referendum, Montenegro's population and politicians split in two on the question of joining NATO. 
545
546
In the period leading to Montenegro's referendum, regional pro-Russian or Kremlin-supported media actively highlighted local suspicion the West and pro-Western Balkan politicians. 
548
549
The pro-Kremlin media used previously proven and successful propaganda tactics to influence Montenegrins to tilt in an anti-NATO direction, beneficial to Russia. 
550
551
552
577
The cyber-attacks were the only activities that actually took place in the planned coup attempt. Despite the fact that the remaining planned activities were stopped due to the would-be implementers' arrest, the attacks that did occur suggest that the cyber- attackers were not in Montenegro and were not in direct contact with the coup planners.
The absence of coordination suggests that the GRU lacked central command and control in the Montenegrin coup attempt. It seems that the GRU had an initial plan for a coup d'état, the role and tasks of non-state actors in that plan, and the desired end goal. However, the elements implementing the plan, cyber-attackers and armed actors, pursued an overall aim independently during the once-initiated activities and did not coordinate their actions operationally. This, in turn, highlights that once the GRU launched the seemingly combined series of indirect means to overthrow the Montenegrin government, it actually had no control over the non-state actors it exploited.
Russia has extensively used individuals associated with Russian government agencies. This section details the activities of these individuals in Montenegro.
One of the leading planners of the coup attempt was an experienced GRU officer, Eduard Shishmakov. Shishmakov used the alias Eduard Shirokov as a cover identity, and the Russian Federation had also issued him an authentic passport with that name. 
578
611
Wolves is a group inspired by Serbian extremist nationalism, amplified by Russian-prominent part of the Cossacks has been the patriotic and Orthodox tutoring of young people in Russia. 
619
620
621
622
623
624
625
Sindjelic hired another member of the BCA, former Serbian special police chief Bratislav Dikic, to lead and organize the Montenegrin coup's armed activities. 626 Dikic's job was to lead agents disguised as police officers to infiltrate the parliament building, shoot the protesters, assassinate the Montenegrin prime minister, and keep the building under control for forty-eight hours. 
627
dollars) from the GRU through Sindjelic to participate in the coup. 
628
Intelligence Agency that fifty GRU Spetsnaz operators had entered Montenegro's mountainous Zlatibor region from Serbia. 
629
630
631
632
633
634
635
Through Velimirovic, the main organizers and leaders of the coup's armed activity, Sindjelic and Dikic, were captured and arrested, which prevented the plot from materializing. 636
As noted previously, Russia considers the Balkan region to be its sphere of influence.  The GRU's planned coup in Montenegro failed because there was one weak link in the plan and preparations, which was Velimirovic. Therefore, the whole Russian NTW campaign in Montenegro was a failure, and Montenegro joined NATO in 2017. The author does not know whether Velimirovic became a police informant during the coup's preparations or whether he was a police collaborator from the beginning and the coup was compromised from the start. Had the Montenegrin police not been aware of the coup plan through Velimirovic in time, however, the coup could have succeeded.
It seems to the author that sufficient preparations had been made for a possible successful coup because the activities among the various armed auxiliary, affiliate, and proxy groups to conduct the operations and stabilize the post-coup situation were coordinated.
The Montenegrin coup was also to be supported by cyber-attacks, probably carried out by the GRU affiliated APT28. The cyber-attacks were likely intended to cause additional confusion, encourage more people to participate in the protests, exhaust Montenegro's resilience, and thus, support the coup. It seems to the author that there was a lack of cooperation and coordination between cyber-attackers and violent groups responsible for attacking the parliament house. The lack of collaboration is indicated by the fact that, despite the arrest of coup plotters and the failure of the coup attempt, cyberattacks nevertheless took place. This, in turn, suggests that the GRU had no control over the various elements intended to carry out the coup as a whole.
Based on Montenegro's example, the author concludes that once the GRU has a plan and a goal in place, the various non-state actors follow the general objective, and they are autonomous in their activities.
The thesis examined two in-depth case studies to map Russia's use of non-state actors to achieve its foreign policy goals in its "near abroad" and in a region that Russia considers its sphere of influence, and to assess Russia's success in using these non-state actors. More precisely, the research examined the central proposition of the thesis that Russia's activities using non-state actors are more efficient and effective in an environment close to Russia geographically, with historical ties and cultural similarities and convenient preconditions for action. The research examined this proposition in terms of one case of geographical proximity (Estonia) and one case of cultural and religious proximity (Montenegro) to Russia. In both cases, the research revealed that, contrary to the proposition that assumed success, Russia's strategy of using non-state actors to achieve its foreign policy goals failed. This outcome partially refutes the central proposal.
Nonetheless, in both cases, Russia managed to provoke or instigate internal conflicts in the target countries through the use of influencing campaigns and non-state actors precisely for reasons suggested by the propositionhistorical ties, cultural similarities, and convenient preconditions for action.
The reasons for the failure of Russia's strategies in Estonia and Montenegro were different, and they were instead caused by insufficient or failed preparations and planning.
In the first case, it seems that Russia focused mainly on creating a conflict in Estonia, but there was no follow-up plan on how to proceed after its start. Therefore, it can be said that Russia used the favorable opportunity to test its ability to use non-state actors against the state in NATO and the EU. In addition, as Chapter II describes Russia's goals to use every possibility to weaken the West, there was a potential opportunity for Moscow to exhaust its opponent in Russia's "near abroad" and also fragment European unity. In the case of Montenegro, Russia managed to pave the way for a successful NTW campaign under the conditions set out in the central proposal of the thesis. Unlike the case in Estonia, there was also a follow-up plan to achieve the goal with non-state actors and prevent Montenegro from joining NATO or at least postponing the process. The failure was caused by a weak link in the plan, without which it is possible that the coup attempt in Montenegro could have succeeded.
As this thesis has shown, the prerequisite for starting a Russian NTW campaign is the psychological influencing of the target country's population and government to create, maintain, and amplify divisions in the target state's society.
One essential channel of influence in the Russian NTW to divide and manipulate the target country's society is the media. The Russian media is mainly state-controlled, and it played an essential role in both case studies. In Estonia's case, the vast majority of Estonian Russians consume either Russian media channels directly or media created and directed from Russia to the Baltic Russians. A similar situation exists in the Balkans, where many Montenegro and Serbia media outlets and websites are taking information directly from Russian media sources. 
638
To obstruct the integration of the target country's society. To this end, the Russian-linked media attempts to contrast, differentiate, and create contradictions among the various nationalities living in the target country.
In Estonia's case, the biased media portrays Estonian Russians as being subjected to ethnic inequality, harassment, and humiliation. In the case of Montenegro, the directional media emphasizes pan-Slavism, Slavic pride and independence, and Slavic opposition to the demoralized West. This Despite these similarities, the case studies revealed a difference in the location of the body that manages and coordinates influencing activities. In Estonia's case, since the DIRCCFC covers former Soviet member states in Russia's vicinity or its "near abroad," the central body is located in the Russian Federation. In the case of geographically remote regions that Russia considers to be in its sphere of influence or wishes to control, this central body, according to Montenegro's case, is located in the region of interest.
In Estonia's case, the study revealed that the DIRCCFC manages and coordinates various NGOs' activities through covert direct links. NGOs, in turn, can be led by individuals associated with Russian special services or their former officers. The HMF (Historical Memory Foundation), brought as an example in the study, is headed by an individual related to the FSB.
NGOs present themselves as credible organizations that carry out seemingly serious research and base their analyses on scientific or academic foundations. By manipulating information, they aim to prove to the international community and the Russian target group, both in the target country and at home, that the target country violates not only human rights but the law and does not fit into the international community. To carry out their tasks, these NGOs work with various journalists, historians, academics, and politicians and, in turn, use smaller non-profit organizations.
Secondly, these central bodies direct and coordinate influence agents in the region and the target country (Estonia and the Baltics, and Montenegro and the Balkans). In the is to support and obey the leadership of the Russian state. In the target country, therefore, wealthy Russian civilians, seemingly not connected to the Russian state, stand for their business interests and beliefs, but they also clandestinely serve Russia's foreign policy goals. In Malofeev's example, he communicated with the Russian leadership through RISS and his role seemed to be to support, coordinate, and possibly fund local influence agents and other actors who supported Russia's aims.
Based on the case studies, it seems essential for Russia to create a political influence agent supporting Russian policies in the target country or region, who could, at least ostensibly, intervene in the local political landscape to confront and create confusion and contradictions. It also seems important for Russia to recruit an agent in an area that plays an essential and influential role in the target state's society and can emotionally affect the members of the community; such an area is religion. These influence agents are either run directly from Russia, which often leads to the agent traveling to Russia or meeting with Russian representatives in third countries, for example, at various conferences and events.
While in the target state, the Russian embassy or intelligence agencies' staff coordinates the agents' activities.
In the case of Estonia, the leading political influence agent was Andrei Zarenkov. Watch and the role of auxiliary organizations in NTW in more detail in this chapter's next section.
However, Linter and Klenskiy are further examples of how influence agents can play additional roles or how their role can be enhanced as events unfold. Of the two, Linter often traveled to Russia and met with embassy staff in Estonia. 
642
643
Religion does not play a primary role in Estonian society and cultural space, and probably, therefore, there was no leading religious influence agent in Estonia. In Therefore, the study shows that there was more room for influence and action for Slavophile Russian non-state organizations in Montenegro to have a role than in Estonia, where roughly 80 percent of the population is not Orthodox Christian. 
644
The Montenegrin case study shows that the GRU recruited a Serb nationalist, Aleksandar Sindjelic, to organize the coup. Sindjelic formed the violent local pro-Kremlin organization the Serb Wolves after returning from hostilities in Ukraine, where he had come into contact with both the GRU and the Russian organized crime group NWMC.
Therefore, the author assesses that it is probable that Sindjelic was, in fact, recruited by the GRU to carry out possible future NTW operations in the Balkans, not just before the Montenegrin coup, but already in Ukraine. Returning from Ukraine, he formed a branch of the NWMC in Serbia, to which he recruited local Balkans, mostly Serbs, who also had taken part in hostilities in Ukraine.
A Russian equivalent, the NWMC directly supported the activities of Sindjelic and the Serb Wolves in Montenegro and Serbia. In addition to backing the Serb Wolves, the NWMC assisted and participated in establishing another violent organization in Montenegro, the BCA (the Balkan Cossack Army). The creation of the BCA seems to have been Russia's preparations for the post-coup era in Montenegro. Thus, it seems that the BCA's main task was to become one of the actors to stabilize the post-coup environment and to shape it in line with Russia's goals.
The BCA is still led by two former Russian military personnel who were also involved as "volunteers" in conflicts such as in eastern Ukraine, in Transnistria in Moldova, and in Abkhazia in Georgia. 
645
646
646 Obrenovic, "Under Cossack Banner, Russian Ties with Balkan Fighters Strengthened."
the events in Ukraine after 2014. If the coup in Montenegro had been successful, the alleged protection and preservation of the Slavs' rights would probably have become even more of a priority. Consequently, a "guarding and protective" organization, such as the BCA, led by former Russian military personnel and composed of Russian volunteers and "brothers in arms" to support the fraternal peoples, other Slavs in defending their rights and values, would have been pertinent.
Thus, the author estimates that the Serb Wolves, the NWMC, and the BCA formed a system of violent auxiliary and proxy organizations in Montenegro. Armed groups, probably composed mainly of the Serb Wolves members, were tasked with carrying out the coup. In the ensuing period, Sindjelic and the Serb Wolves would have been joined by BCA. The preparations and activities of both organizations were supported, coordinated, and possibly controlled by the NWMC, which in turn is coordinated by the GRU.
The location of various influence agents and organizations and other non-state actors in the network of the NTW campaign build-up, their contacts with Russian authorities and entities, and their cooperation are illustrated in Figure 
2
Russia is the main security threat to Western democracies in cyberspace. cyber-attacks as a tool to complement other NTW activities, but they are started and used as separate tools of NTW. The author assesses that, if Russia sees that as a result of general anti-Western subversion, there is an opportunity to use NTW to directly weaken some member state, such as Estonia, or the need to launch a targeted anti-state campaign, such as in Montenegro, the cyber sector, which is carrying out broader and comprehensive NTW activities against the West anyway, will be involved in supporting these campaigns.
Based on the examples of Estonia and Montenegro, the author assesses that the cyber-attacks seem to be a separate part of both NTW campaigns, which were implemented or planned to be implemented simultaneously with other NTW activities, such as street riots or an attack on the parliament building, but were not coordinated with other actions.
Cyber-attacks began almost simultaneously with the street riots in Estonia but continued in various waves for nearly three weeks after the street riots were suppressed.
As this was the first time that combined cyber-attacks were used against a state, the aim likely was to test a so-called new method to find out how cyber-attacks can be used, what damage they cause, and what can be achieved in its entirety by cyber-attacks in this massive form. In Montenegro's case, the cyber-attacks were the only NTW activities that actually happened. This activity suggests a lack of communication and coordination, which, in turn, indicates that the cyber-attacks were an independent part of the NTW and that the GRU probably lacked control over the elements of the NTW. Still, as the cyber-attacks were probably intended as a supporting element to the canceled primary action, as separately conducted attacks, they did not have a significant impact on Montenegro's security.
In support of the conclusions drawn from the case studies, the author presents in brief two additional examples of how Russia uses media, influence agents, and organizations as the basis of its NTW build-up. The first example is the Catalan independence referendum in Spain in 2017, when, like in Estonia in 2007, Russia interfered in the internal matters of a NATO and the EU member-state. The second example, which example, RT "[was] using its Spanish-language portal to spread stories on the Catalan crisis with a bias against constitutional legality." 656 Also, it seems that Julian Assange, the founder of Wikileaks, acted as Russia's influence agent because he "[became] the principal international agitator in the Catalan crisis, sharing opinions and half-truths as if they were news." 657 In addition, "automated "bots," including Russian propaganda ones, amplified tweets by Assange and former United States National Security Agency (NSA) contractor-turned-leaker Edward Snowden," 658 and "pro-Kremlin websites including Disobedient Media, News-Front, and Russia News Now spread fake or biased news about the situation in Catalonia." 
659
660
661
662
678
679
680
Based on the framing provided by Chapter II and the studied cases, it can be said that Russian NTW campaigns require that there be no cohesive society in the target country. Contradictions and a divided society in the target country are the basis on which Russia can build an NTW campaign and choose the elements of NTW, non-state actors, to carry out the campaign. Thus, the most crucial aspect of launching and conducting an NTW campaign is the psychological influencing and so-called unbalancing of the target country's society and government. It is easier to run an NTW campaign where the public is already not homogeneous. In such environments, Russia seeks to preserve and amplify the target country's social contradictions. The author assesses that Russia's goal is not necessarily to make the society or government of the target country pro-Russian; the goal would also be fulfilled if the target groups' mentality coincides with Russia's interests, like the growing distrust of democracy, Western organizations, and Western unity. 688 Vuk Velebit, "Russian Influence in Macedonia: A Credible Threat?" European Western Balkans, November 14, 2017, https://europeanwesternbalkans.com/2017/11/14/russian-influence-macedoniacredible-threat/.
The psychological influencing of opponents, which includes propaganda and information operations in the media and cybersphere, as well as influence agents among the society of the target country, is the basis of the NTW concept. Russia primarily focuses on influencing in its preparations for an NTW because a successful influence campaign lays the foundation for creating and using the remaining NTW elements, for example, violent actors, once the campaign starts to develop. Russia uses pro-Russian auxiliary (ideological), proxy (overlapping objectives), and affiliate (acting for profit) violent nonstate actors to hide its involvement in the conflict or to ostensibly distance itself from the struggle.
Nevertheless, it is challenging to distinguish which actors act in favor of Russia for what motives. The boundaries between the motives of violent non-state actors exploited by Russia are blurred and may change over time or in different situations. For example, the ideological pro-Kremlin Nashi members' primary motivation to support the local pro-Kremlin Night Watch in Estonia in the Bronze Soldier case was the financial bonus received for it. According to this example, by definition, auxiliary actors acted in this specific situation instead of as proxies or even as affiliates. As a reminder, auxiliaries are non-state actors who are ideologically motivated, proxies act primarily for their own interest and benefit that aligns with Russian interests, and affiliates operate mainly for profit. Therefore, it is probable that Russia is not paying particular attention to differentiate these subtypes of non-state actors, except that Russia's special services know what tools or techniques they can use to activate and exploit the different subtypes and apply these tools and techniques to different situations accordingly.
Organized crime cannot be categorized precisely into a particular violent non-state actor's subtype, and Russia seems to exploit organized crime throughout its NTW concept.
As described in Chapter II, Russian special services use organized crime to carry out a wide range of assignments abroad. 
689
services use organized crime abroad, from influencing and cyber-attacks to armed attacks in a coup attempt, and to support, amplify, and mediate other non-state actors' activities.
Even though there was almost a ten-year gap between Estonia and Montenegro's events, a similar pattern emerged from the study of how Russia is likely to prepare for an NTW campaign and use non-state actors against the target country. The possible pattern found in the case studies, the non-state actors' links with Russia and the between non-state actors, are explained in this chapter's following sections. The sections are based on Russia's objectives and separate actors. At the end of these sections, the author has compiled a scheme that visualizes what has been described and helps the reader understand Russia's use of non-state actors and their cooperation more easily.
Krieg and Jean-Marc Rickli emphasize that "the entire socio-political and geo-strategic context in which warfare in the twenty-first century is conducted, is fundamentally different from the purely Westphalian, Clausewitzian ideas of warfare that were prevalent in the late 29 National armies are not a key element in influencing outcomes because "the state in the twenty-first century is frequently seeking to externalize the weight of warfare to human and technological surrogates." 30 Along these lines, in 1999, Chinese People's Liberation Army Colonels Qiao Ling and Wang Xiangsui introduced the Combination Warfare concept.
Krieg and Jean-Marc Rickli emphasize that "the entire socio-political and geo-strategic context in which warfare in the twenty-first century is conducted, is fundamentally different from the purely Westphalian, Clausewitzian ideas of warfare that were prevalent in the late 29 National armies are not a key element in influencing outcomes because "the state in the twenty-first century is frequently seeking to externalize the weight of warfare to human and technological surrogates." 30 Along these lines, in 1999, Chinese People's Liberation Army Colonels Qiao Ling and Wang Xiangsui introduced the Combination Warfare concept.
against its neighbors have been accompanied by cyber-attacks, information operations, psychological pressure, manipulation of the press, economic threats, acting through proxies, crafty propaganda, exploiting ethnic contradictions, and favoring influence agents, both conscious and occasional, in foreign countries through the use of influence tools and placing blame in ways that could attract a sympathetic audience."
against its neighbors have been accompanied by cyber-attacks, information operations, psychological pressure, manipulation of the press, economic threats, acting through proxies, crafty propaganda, exploiting ethnic contradictions, and favoring influence agents, both conscious and occasional, in foreign countries through the use of influence tools and placing blame in ways that could attract a sympathetic audience."
53  
53  
64 Gordon Corera, Russians Among Us: Sleeper Cells, Ghost Stories, and the Hunt for Putin's Spies (New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers Inc, 2020), 5.
64 Gordon Corera, Russians Among Us: Sleeper Cells, Ghost Stories, and the Hunt for Putin's Spies (New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers Inc, 2020), 5.
78    
78    
These indirect 162 Global Engagement Center, Pillars of Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem, 3. 169 Global Engagement Center, 8. 170 Rauta, "Towards a Typology of Non-State Actors in 'Hybrid Warfare,'" 1.
These indirect 162 Global Engagement Center, Pillars of Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem, 3. 169 Global Engagement Center, 8. 170 Rauta, "Towards a Typology of Non-State Actors in 'Hybrid Warfare,'" 1.
army-wagner-syrian-civil-war/. 178 Andrew S. Bowen, Russian Private Military Companies (PMCs), CRS Report No. IF11650 (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2020), https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/IF11650.pdf.
179 Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Russian Private Military Companies, IX. 180 Bowen, Russian Private Military Companies (PMCs). 181 Nils Dahlqvist, Russia's (Not So) Private Military Companies, 183 Rauta, "Towards a Typology of Non-State Actors in 'Hybrid Warfare,'" 10. 184 Rauta, 10. 185 Rauta, 10. 186 Rauta, 10; Galeotti, "Hybrid, Ambiguous, and Non-Linear?" 284295.
179 Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Russian Private Military Companies, IX. 180 Bowen, Russian Private Military Companies (PMCs). 181 Nils Dahlqvist, Russia's (Not So) Private Military Companies, 183 Rauta, "Towards a Typology of Non-State Actors in 'Hybrid Warfare,'" 10. 184 Rauta, 10. 185 Rauta, 10. 186 Rauta, 10; Galeotti, "Hybrid, Ambiguous, and Non-Linear?" 284295.
187
187
194
194
205 Hoffman, "Examining Complex Forms of Conflict: Gray Zone and Hybrid Challenges," 40. 206 Mark Galeotti, The Vory. Russia's Super Mafia (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2018), 243.
Court of Human Rights stated in 2006 that, "After the German occupation in 194144, Estonia remained occupied by the Soviet Union until the restoration of its independence in 1991." 246 "Soviet rule brought with it three important things that are still vividly remembered in Estonia: mass repressions, poverty and changes in the country's ethnic 246 Kolk and Kislyiy v. Estonia, Application no. 23052/04 and 24018/04, http://www.derechos.org/ nizkor/impu/kolk.html.
Court of Human Rights stated in 2006 that, "After the German occupation in 194144, Estonia remained occupied by the Soviet Union until the restoration of its independence in 1991." 246 "Soviet rule brought with it three important things that are still vividly remembered in Estonia: mass repressions, poverty and changes in the country's ethnic 246 Kolk and Kislyiy v. Estonia, Application no. 23052/04 and 24018/04, http://www.derechos.org/ nizkor/impu/kolk.html.
Juurvee and Mattiisen conclude that, "the use of hybrid means was almost absent from Russia's public doctrinal and policy documents until 2007 when the Bronze Soldier crisis occurred in Estonia." to the Estonian Internal Security Service (EISS), in 2004, Russia's special services prepared an analytical report that provided a review of several of Russia's 260 Siiri Ottender-Paasma, "'AK. Nädal' Uuris,
269    
269    
war
309 Värk, 149
309 Värk, 149
the "Lisa case," a disinformation campaign about a Russian-German girl allegedly raped by immigrants, in 2016; the murder of Georgian national Zelimkhan Khangoshvili in Tiergarten in 2019; and the poisoning of Alexey Navalny, hospitalized in Germany in 2021.
the "Lisa case," a disinformation campaign about a Russian-German girl allegedly raped by immigrants, in 2016; the murder of Georgian national Zelimkhan Khangoshvili in Tiergarten in 2019; and the poisoning of Alexey Navalny, hospitalized in Germany in 2021.
owned RTR-Planeta, which broadcasts globally; NTV, which is owned by Gazprom; and the Russian government-controlled RT, formerly Russia Today, whose multilingual broadcasting has been the target of propaganda accusations in several countries, including the United States." 330 According to the authors, "The majority of Russian media in both Russia and Estonia has toed the Russian government's official line arguing that Estonia misrepresented history in service of its goals, was experiencing a fascist revival, and put Russian speakers in Estonia at risk of persecution, repression, and discrimination." 331 Russia's attempts to divide and influence Estonian society through information operations and propaganda did not end in 2007. Russia's influence activities continue according to a similar pattern that led to the Bronze Soldier conflict.
owned RTR-Planeta, which broadcasts globally; NTV, which is owned by Gazprom; and the Russian government-controlled RT, formerly Russia Today, whose multilingual broadcasting has been the target of propaganda accusations in several countries, including the United States." 330 According to the authors, "The majority of Russian media in both Russia and Estonia has toed the Russian government's official line arguing that Estonia misrepresented history in service of its goals, was experiencing a fascist revival, and put Russian speakers in Estonia at risk of persecution, repression, and discrimination." 331 Russia's attempts to divide and influence Estonian society through information operations and propaganda did not end in 2007. Russia's influence activities continue according to a similar pattern that led to the Bronze Soldier conflict.
342 "Эстония митингует против приема мигрантов" [Estonia Protests against Admitting Migrants], October 14, 2015,
hybrid
391 Kozlowski, "
391 Kozlowski, "
The Constitutional Party claimed publicly that it represented the Russian-speaking population in Estonia, but its central financial and ideological supporters were diplomats from the Russian embassy in Tallinn, various Moscow city government agencies, the Russian media, and different contact persons in the Russian special services. 398 Andrei Zarenkov, the Constitutional Party leader in Estonia, became one of the main agitators of pro-Russian propaganda dissemination and compatriot 397 Estonian Internal Security Service, Estonian Internal Security Service's Annual Review 2006, 11. 398 Estonian Internal Security Service.
The Constitutional Party claimed publicly that it represented the Russian-speaking population in Estonia, but its central financial and ideological supporters were diplomats from the Russian embassy in Tallinn, various Moscow city government agencies, the Russian media, and different contact persons in the Russian special services. 398 Andrei Zarenkov, the Constitutional Party leader in Estonia, became one of the main agitators of pro-Russian propaganda dissemination and compatriot 397 Estonian Internal Security Service, Estonian Internal Security Service's Annual Review 2006, 11. 398 Estonian Internal Security Service.
407 Värk, The Siege of the Estonian Embassy in
407 Värk, The Siege of the Estonian Embassy in
411 International Centre for Defence and Security, "Moscow's Hand in Tallinn's Riots." 412 Postimees, "Moscow's Hand in Tallinn's Riots"; International Centre for Defence and Security.
411 International Centre for Defence and Security, "Moscow's Hand in Tallinn's Riots." 412 Postimees, "Moscow's Hand in Tallinn's Riots"; International Centre for Defence and Security.
430
430
the
638 Stronski and Himes, Russia's Game in the Balkans, 8.
638 Stronski and Himes, Russia's Game in the Balkans, 8.
641 Estonian Internal Security Service, Estonian Internal Security Service's Annual Review 2005, 16; Raun, "The Night Watch Leaders Were Acquitted in Court Again."
Guy Faulconbridge, "What is Russia's GRU Military Intelligence Agency?" Reuters, October 5, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-russia-gru-factbox/what-is-russias-gru-militaryintelligence-agency-idUSKCN1MF1VK.
  105 Galeotti, Putin's Hydra, 3.   
Estonian Foreign Intelligence Service, Eesti Rahvusvahelises Julgeolekukeskkonnas 2018 [International Security and Estonia 2018] (Tallinn, Estonia: EFIS, 2018): 57, https://www.valisluureamet.ee/pdf/raport-2018-EST-web.pdf.
Radin et al., 215.   
"The World Factbook. Europe: Estonia," Central Intelligence Agency, November 18, 2020, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/en.html.
"Rahvastik: Demograafia, Rahvastik, Inimesed, Inimene, Iive" [Population: Demography, Population, People, Person, Birth Rate], Statistikaamet [Statistics Estonia], accessed November 23, 2020, https://www.stat.ee/et/avasta-statistikat/valdkonnad/rahvastik.
Riigikogu Kantselei [Chancellery of the Riigikogu], "Riigikogu" [Parliament], Eesti riigiportaal [State portal], last modified November 23, 2020, https://www.eesti.ee/et/eesti-vabariik/riigikogu/.
European Union, "Estonia."
European Union.
European Union.
European Union.
Central Intelligence Agency, "The World Factbook. Europe: Estonia."
Central Intelligence Agency, "The World Factbook. Europe: Estonia."
Aivar Pau, "11  Aastat Pronksiööde Küberrünnakutest -Meenutame, Mis Juhtus" [11 Years since Bronze Nights Cyber-attacks -Let Us Remember What Happened], PostimeesTEHNIKA, May 8, 2018, https://tehnika.postimees.ee/4482747/11-aastat-pronksioode-kuberrunnakutest-meenutame-mis-juhtus.
Pau, "11  Years since Bronze Nights Cyber-attacks."
Juurvee and Mattiisen, The Bronze Soldier Crisis of 2007, 4.   
Juurvee and Mattiisen, The Bronze Soldier Crisis of 2007, 22.    
Alo Raun, "Öise Vahtkonna Liidrid Jäid Kohtus Taas Õigeks" [The Night Watch Leaders Were Acquitted in Court Again], Postimees, May 12, 2009, https://www.postimees.ee/118044/oise-vahtkonnaliidrid-jaid-kohtus-taas-oigeks.
293 Kertu Ruus, "Cyber War I: Estonia Attacked from Russia," European Affairs 9, no.1-2 (2008), https://www.europeaninstitute.org/index.php/42-european-affairs/winterspring-2008/67-cyber-war-i-
 "The Russian Hybrid Warfare Strategy," 320; Tikk, Kaska, and Vihul, International Cyber
Incidents, 33
.295 Fabian, 320.   296 Fabian, 320; Tikk
,Kaska, and Vihul, 33.   297 Tikk, Kaska, and Vihul, 19, 33.   
Juurvee and Mattiisen, The Bronze Soldier Crisis of 2007, 1924.   
Pezard, Migacheva, and Allen, 54.   
Ilmar Raag and Aleksei Günter, Eesti Strateegilise Kommunikatsiooni Kilde 2015-2016  [Fragments of Estonian Strategic Communication 2015-2016]  (Tallinn, Estonia: Propastop, 2016), 6, https://www.propastop.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Eesti-strateegilise-kommunikatsiooni-kilde-2015-2016-2.-osa.pdf.
Ruus, "Cyber War I."   
Juurvee and Mattiisen, The Bronze Soldier Crisis of 2007, 3031; "The EU Promises to Help in Solving the Situation at the Estonian Embassy in Moscow," Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, May 1, 2007, https://vm.ee/en/news/eu-promises-help-solving-situation-estonian-embassy-moscow.
John B. Allcock, "Montenegro," Britannica, last modified October 7, 2019, https://www.britannica.com/place/Montenegro.
"The World Factbook. Europe: Montenegro," Central Intelligence Agency, November 6, 2020, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/mj.html.
Prothero, "A Secret Russian Assassination Squad Has Proved "They Can Get to Anyone" in Europe, But There's One Problem. They Are Really Sloppy."
Lyubin advertises himself as "a reserve officer of the special forces unit of the FSB of Russia, President of the Russian Knife Fighting Federation." 
418
419
420
421
531
532
533
Reshetnikov's close Russian-linked contact with whom he cooperated in the Balkans and likely developed the coup's idea was the oligarch Konstantin Malofeev, an infamous Russian affiliate from the Ukraine conflict. 
534
536
Based on a study on Montenegro, RISS coordinated and supported the main anti-NATO and anti-Western agents in the region. These agents included Amfilohije Radović, the archbishop of the influential Serbian Orthodox Church in the region, Andrija Mandić and Milan Knežević, leaders of the Montenegrin political opposition, and Konstantin Malofeev, a Russian oligarch in direct contact with RISS. Mandić, Knežević, and Radović, in turn, were divided into separate, political and religious influence agents, which the author describes in more detail in the next section of this chapter.
Influence agents may also have additional roles to play. In addition to influencing, agents can also act as so-called talent seekers looking for people in the target country or region who could be recruited as influence agents or whose recruitment or cooperation could otherwise benefit Russia in fulfilling its goals. In Estonia's example, journalist Sapozhnikova forwarded the DIRCCFC a list of "Promising Estonian People" that included Estonian politicians' and journalists' names. The Montenegrin case study showed that RISS director Reshetnikov and Malofeev suggested, probably to the GRU, the individuals in the Balkans, whom they recommended to recruit in carrying out the coup. In Malofeev's example, the agent of influence may be a wealthy Russian businessman or an oligarch with seemingly personal business interests in the target country or region. The Russian oligarchs have gained their wealth thanks to the fact that the Russian leadership, led by President Putin, has made it possible for them. The price of this wealth Russia has additional assets compared to countries where they do not exist, are in a significant minority, or have minimal influence.
The study also shows that all these influence agents in the Balkans had a direct link with Russia, but the so-called daily activities in the region were probably coordinated and mediated by RISS director Reshetnikov and Malofeev.
After preparing the ground through influencing activities, Russia's NTW strategy seems to focus on the existence of a local pro-Kremlin or at least anti-governmental group operating in the target country, and such a group should have overlapping goals with those of Russia. The purpose of a violent local group or groups is to directly oppose the government of the target state and participate in culminating events such as the Bronze Soldier street riots and the coup in Montenegro, which require some form of violent or armed action. The author assesses that the local violent groups are necessary to publicly portray the confrontation as a local problem and distance Russia's direct involvement in the conflict.
Based on the examples in Estonia and Montenegro, it seems that Russian entities are recruiting a key person locally who will have direct contact with the Russian authorities and whose task is to form that local violent organization that supports Russia's goals.
Estonia's and Montenegro's cases also show that the local pro-Russian auxiliary or proxy organization will be supported by a similar organization from Russia.
The author assesses that the Estonian pro-Kremlin auxiliary group, the Night Watch, did not become a violent group that could directly threaten Estonia's security because the political influence agent Linter, who formed it, could not recruit or involve enough dedicated members. Nonetheless, the Night Watch contributed to provoking the Bronze Soldier riots. Thus, in Estonia's case, as a result, the Night Watch did not become a violent group, but, like their leader Linter, instead became an influence group.
As influencers, Linter and the Night Watch collaborated with a similar organization in Russia, the pro-Kremlin youth organization Nashi. Nashi's leader in Estonia, Mark focuses on North Macedonia, shows how Russia tried to obstruct another Balkan state like Montenegro from moving towards the West and joining NATO.
Catalonia's independence referendum in 2017, by which the Spanish autonomous region of Catalonia wanted to secede from the rest of Spain, is another example of how the Russian Federation took a favorable opportunity to amplify an internal conflict in a NATO and EU member-state. In doing so, Russia's main goal was probably to weaken and divide the West and its organizations. 
653
654
655
Successful influencing, after which the population of the target country is divided and conflicted, is the basis and creates the preconditions for the use of other elements of NTW, such as violent auxiliary and proxy non-state actors. Thus, Russia's NTW concept used in Spain was similar its approach in Estonia and Montenegro.
Russia's influencing strategy in support of the Catalan referendum was mainly divided into twothe use of the media and activities supporting it on social media.
Russia's state-controlled media outlets, such as RT (Russia Today) and its sister service Sputnik, massively spread the news with manipulated content or outright fake news. For 653 Ellis Palmer, "Spain Catalonia: Did Russian "Fake News" Stir Things Up?" BBC News, last modified November 18, 2017, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-41981539.
654 Palmer, "Spain Catalonia: Did Russian "Fake News" Stir Things Up?" 655 Palmer; Graham Keeley, "Russia Meddled in Catalonia Independence Referendum, Says German Intelligence Boss," Sunday Times, May 15, 2018, https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/russia-meddled-incatalonia-vote-p6g5nttpm.