# ID: 87306fcdd337493db5dcc858229e70d5
# Title: Drew
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
This study examines how cognitive forces shape grand wartime strategy across successive presidential administrations. By analyzing Vietnam through the lens of image and cognitive theory, the author attempts to answer the question, How did presidential image affect agendas and outcomes during the Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon administrations? Specifically, the author examines the presidencies of Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon through key decision points and policy shifts during the Vietnam War in an effort to unveil the substantial cognitive forces with which presidents must contend, and often counter, when they inherit war. It is the author?s hope that revealing the confluence of images, agendas, and outcomes during the Vietnam War will make current and future decision makers more aware of the impact that cognitive forces have in shaping war?s trajectory. Moreover, he hopes that by examining Vietnam through the lens of presidential image, a broader conceptualization of ?war as inheritance? will emerge. Ultimately, this study may help minimize current and future cognitive pitfalls in the development and execution of grand strategy, particularly when policy makers face the daunting challenge of inherited war. It also establishes the foundation for a larger project that not only examines Vietnam more broadly but also analyzes how image and inheritance influenced grand strategy in Afghanistan.
After the brilliantly successful air campaign in Operation Desert Storm, Pres. George H. W. Bush exclaimed, "By God, we've kicked the Vietnam Syndrome once and for all. " 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
To that end, we examine primary and secondary sources, drawing out each president's image of the war, his agenda, and the outcomes of his approach. In the parlance of political science, we attempt to treat the Vietnam War as the dependent variable while presidential images and agendas serve as the independent variables. Though we draw on documents, literature, perspectives, and correspondences involving various actors, institutions, principals, and advisers, our units of analysis are the presidents themselves, who represent the aggregate of the foreign policy establishment. The presidents provide the lens through which we seek to ascertain the relationship among image, agenda, and outcomes in national decision making and the degree to which this relationship affects subsequent administrations. Today's battlespace may in fact swell with ever-increasing networks of machines, weaponry, and information and communication technologies, yet war remains a distinctly human affair. As such, the study of war not only leads to but also demands sober consideration of the cognitive forces that drive and shape it. By examining the relationship among image, agendas, and outcomes, current and future decision makers might better anticipate predispositions and minimize the degree to which predilections subvert policy and dissuade effective representation of problems. "We must be clear-sighted in beginnings, " wrote Montaigne, "for, as in their budding we discern not the danger, so in their full growth we perceive not the remedy. " 
17
Chapter 2 establishes an overview of image theory. While it is not the purpose of this study to establish and subsequently prove a theoretical model for explaining presidential behavior and policy, it warrants a review of cognitive theory. Neither this study nor the theories it reviews purport to offer a comprehensive explanatory model for political behavior in war or in peace. However, since it is a purpose to inspire a keener awareness of the influences that cognitive forces have on decision making, some foundational concepts will prove useful. To that end, we explore Stephen Hawking's theory of modeldependent realism; cognitive theories from Robert Jervis, Yuen Foong Khong, and others; as well as Kenneth E. Boulding's image theory. Cognitive processes in international decision making afford a wide body of literature. We review some of the more salient aspects as a way to present the Vietnam War as a "problem" both defined and "solved" through the belief structures of the presidents.
Though the United States had been involved in Vietnam throughout the Eisenhower administration, chapter 3 begins with an analysis of John F. Kennedy's administration. While Kennedy refrained from the overt commitment of US combat troops to Vietnam, he did greatly increase America's commitments there as he simultaneously pursued a grander vision. Kennedy pushed for broader, unconventional military capabilities, interpreting the new fronts of the Cold War as aligning with "wars of national liberation. " Kennedy's approach to Vietnam, like that of all presidents of the era, was also very much informed by Cold War containment theory. Kennedy broached a new dimension, however, by departing from Eisenhower's policies of massive retaliation and sought a nimbler position through what became known as flexible response. Despite Kennedy's "triumph" in 1961, when he resisted pressures from the joint chiefs for combat troops, the young president did increase the number of US advisers from 400 to over 16,000. Additionally, his correspondence with South Vietnamese president Ngo Dinh Diem, speeches, and policy papers reveal his increasing concerns over Vietnam and his sense of the growing importance of the country to US security interests. These facts, combined with the somewhat complicit nature of the United States' role in the coups and ultimate assassination of Diem in 1963, transformed US commitment from a toehold to a foothold. Vietnam became a "laboratory" not only for new theories on limited war and counterinsurgency but also for the emerging ideals of Kennedy's generation on governance and for the United States' role in the world. Ultimately, Kennedy's zeal set the United States on a course from which there was "no turning back. " 
18
Chapter 2
It is an illusion to believe that leaders gain in profundity while they gain experience. . . . The convictions that leaders have formed before reaching high office are the intellectual capital they will consume as long as they continue in office.
-Henry Kissinger, 1979   Wars are by nature inflective political, social, and psychological events and tend to hyperexcite both the polity and public. They exacerbate individual and organizational behaviors, processes, and predilections and the fissures and bonds within and among the various bodies of the democratic decisionmaking processes. This contention assumes that if war truly is "policy by other means, " then war is waged not just to solve policy problems. How it is conceived and conducted reflect a particular perception of the world. Subsequent chapters examine the administrations of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon not only to identify how each man's image influenced his war poliicies but also to trace in part the lineage and effects of presidential image across administrations. Once in office each president faces a fundamental tension between institutional and policy inertia (what Stephen Randolph and others describe as the "state of play") and his own agenda. 
1
There are two general schools of thought, or "lumps" as John Gaddis terms them, about the interplay between the individual and the institution in the formation of grand policy. 
2
In their book The Grand Design, Hawking (theoretical physicist and cosmologist) and Mlodinow (physicist) draw on theoretical and proven concepts from quantum theory to establish what they describe as a theory of modeldependent realism. Quantum theory emerged in the 1920s as a reaction to the inability of classical Newtonian science to accurately explain and predict the behavior of atomic and subatomic particles. 
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Whether intended or not, Hawking and Mlodinow provide a bridge between the physical sciences and psychology and illustrate how theories in physical sciences have recognized the important influences of perceptions on individual realities and their effects on the physical world. Revolutions in quantum theory and the experiments they cite as proof of its efficacy not only demonstrate how perceptions and cognitive processes create individual realities but also illuminate how the application of perceptions (through observation) can affect the physical world. The relationship the authors establish between observer and reality provides a useful backdrop to the following discussion on cognitive theory because it demonstrates the quantifiable tie between the conceptual and the existential world. If through observation human beings can affect particle behavior, and if quantum theory reliably proves the existence of an infinite number of past and future universes limited only by the imaginings of the human mind, then turning to the perceptions of some of the world's most powerful leaders as a way to understand a war is not only justifiable . . . but essential.
Much has been written on the influence of cognitive forces on decision makers. Both Jervis and Khong have contributed tremendously to the literature and to the understanding of the role cognitive forces play in foreign policy. Khong's analogical explanation framework draws extensively on schema theory and brilliantly delineates how analogies influence policy decisions and provide critical cognitive devices to help policy makers perform six central decisionmaking tasks. 
17
18
19
20
21
The significance of schemas as a departure point for decision makers should not be underestimated. When assumptions and predilections are effectively entrenched in the minds of leaders, the process of deciding how to deal with particular policy issues starts downstream of the assumptions embedded within the schema. Jervis describes how schemas are built around preconceived notions of "self " and "other" that lead decision makers to interpret events and behaviors as those preconceived notions would dictate. 
22
23
24
The Cold War era has many such examples. Graham Allison describes the Soviets' decision to deploy SS-20 intermediate-range missiles that targeted Europe in the late 1970s as "the most fateful force posture decision of the Soviet government before its collapse. " 
25
26
27
Another way that policy makers build realities and fill in the gaps when confronted with major policy questions is by drawing on historical analogies. Khong examines how Johnson's use of historical analogies (Munich, Dien Bien Phu, and Korea) influenced his 1965 decision to commit combat troops in Vietnam. He targets policy makers' "use and misuse of history" through their cognitive processes. 
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37 Between 1948 and
1975
38
Gaddis divides each containment strategy into distinct eras that stretch from Truman to Carter. The first era, 1947-49, is characterized by George Kennan's original strategy of containment that he describes in the Charles R. Walgreen Foundation Lectures and in his two essays "The Sources of Soviet Conduct" and "America and the Russian Future. " 
39
40
41
The New Look under Eisenhower describes Gaddis's third era of containment, between 1953 and 1961. Truman had been unable to develop a "clear strategy for deriving political benefits from . . . nuclear weapons, " and Eisenhower wanted to "regain the initiative. " 
42
43
44
The United States and the West, from Eisenhower's perspective, would develop asymmetric technological advantages and blend "nuclear deterrence, alliances, psychological warfare, covert action, and negotiations" that could in aggregate minimize costs and provide the security and time necessary for freedom to blossom in Communism's stead. Despite Eisenhower's metered economic policies, the New Look was certainly ambitious. In a letter to Winston Churchill, Eisenhower describes how every Communist advance was a threefold loss for the West: where the West lost an ally, the Communists gained an ally, and Western prestige was compromised. That Eisenhower held such a broad, zero-sum view of the contest between East and West reveals the amount of faith he placed in the New Look's umbrella. The New Look departed from NSC-68 in that it intimately tied the defense of US interests to security policy instead of focusing just on "the repulsion of transitory threats. " 
45
46
47
48
49
50
The flexible-response era, 1961 to 1969, manifested itself in both the Kennedy and Johnson administrations. Though Kennedy and Johnson distinctly differed in how they pursued flexible-response strategies, the overarching assumptions of the policy were the same. In contrast to World War II paradigms, in which the military served as the "final arbiter of kings, " flexible response required that military force be woven into negotiations. Instead of seeking the adversary's blanket capitulation, flexible response and limited war introduced an ebb and flow of military and nonmilitary actions whereby nonmilitary instruments of containment became "at least as important as their military counterparts. " 
51
52
53
54
55
Where Kennedy and Johnson had prosecuted a flexible strategy based on means that could face down Communism on all fronts, Nixon made the interests themselves more flexible. His overtures to China and Russia were possible in large part because he was so well known as a Republican crusader against Communism, and he used this reputation as a bulwark against attacks from American hawks. At the same time, his more reasonable approach to relations with American adversaries appeased the more dovish coalitions. Kennedy had reacted to the perceived rigidity of Eisenhower's policies, which he believed were too dependent on nuclear weapons, and Nixon reacted to the rigidity of Kennedy's policies, which he believed were too dependent on the transformation of America's adversaries. "No country, " writes Kissinger, "can act wisely simultaneously in every part of the globe at every moment of time. " 
56
57
Containment formed the basic security schema for each of the Vietnam-era presidents, yet the nuances and delineations between each substrategy (operational code) reflect the distinctive way in which each president pursued the same ends. Eisenhower was committed to reducing the costs of containment through technology yet broadened US commitments. Kennedy and Johnson sought to temper military means within specific political objectives, yet they both expanded the means by which the United States would pursue those objectives. Flexible-response strategies and the theory of limited war manifested themselves throughout the 1960s in the Dominican Republic, the Bay of Pigs, and elsewhere. 
58
For each administration during Gaddis's five geopolitical eras of containment, the primary objective remained combating Communism and transforming Communist behavior on the macroscale. Containment was the overarching schema, yet each Vietnam-era president perceived how to best effect containment differently and brought to Vietnam his respective image of means and strategies. These contrasting images are reflected not only in shifts within containment strategy but also in how presidents viewed the adversary and allies and pursued their particular agendas in Vietnam. With a basic understanding of schema and some of the larger belief structures and strategic context of the Vietnam era, we turn now to the theory of image invoked in this paper.
The Cold War was certainly dominated by powerful images and schemata. Perhaps due to the stakes of potential nuclear conflict and the sheer breadth and number of actors involved in the precarious balance between East and West, the Cold War was first and foremost a cognitive war. 
59
60
61
62
As such, psychological theory affords a more predominant role concerning the influence of individual images on how policy makers interpret, define, and behave in response to policy problems. Based on psychological theory, problems are defined through cognitive constructs and processes that determine a discrepancy between "the preferred state and the perceived current state. " 
63
64
65
In 1957 Kenneth Boulding developed a theory of behavior based on an individual's image of the world. According to Boulding, image is created through an individual's accumulation of subjective knowledge. Individuals perceive themselves as located in a particular space and time; in a network of human relationships, organizations, and emotions; and in a "natural world" that operates according to a set of assumed and "reasonably" reliable operational laws. 
66
People reflect upon a past as they remember it, project onto a future as they conceive it, and live in a present as they perceive it. The temporal aspect of image blends with one's identity within and one's perception of organizations and human networks. A doctor with children might concurrently consider herself a mother, a brain surgeon, a hospital employee, the member of a profession, and a wife. Comingled with the doctor's image are a litany of past experiences and affiliations as well as anticipations for the future, based on the different ways she identifies herself, the organizations she works for, and those she competes with and for. How individuals locate themselves and perceive the various human networks of which they are a part is exceptionally complex. Human interactions swirl around a continuously evolving image of self and other. Bounding conceptions of time, space, self, and human networks are sets of natural laws. These laws, either overt or tacit, provide boundaries and define sets of assumptions that build an architecture within which human beings are reasonably able to adapt behaviors and expectations. Gravity, thermodynamics, the progression of time, and the combustion engine all characterize natural laws upon which people generally rely to frame their reality and to conduct their everyday lives. Individuals' understanding of natural laws and the interpretative conclusions they draw from knowledge of their location in space, time, and human networks create a set of expectations. Individuals use these expectations to formulate a calculus of behavior that seeks to apply the aggregated knowledge set to their best advantage. 
67
68
69
70
71
The second way that new information may interact with image is by adding to it: "New information may change the image in some rather regular and well-defined way that might be described as simple addition. " 
72
Transformation is a "revolutionary change" to image whereby "a message hits some sort of nucleus or supporting structure . . . and the whole thing changes in a quite radical way. " 
73
74
Boulding notes that "when [an image] receives messages that conflict with it, its first impulse is to reject them as in some sense untrue. " 
75
76
77
78
79
Context-dependent and dynamic value systems imply that "there are no such things as facts" for individuals or organizations; instead, perceived realities are adjusted to match individual valuation scales. 
80
81
82
Boulding describes political decision making as "a process of mutual modification of images through the processes of feedback and communication. " Political leaders, such as presidents, retain a powerful role in the political process because of the "number of people affected and the magnitude of the effect when decisions are made. " Like any other individual, a president's worldview is woven from his accumulated experiences and subjective perceptions. Images of self, others, values, time, space, society, and the organizations he presides over all formulate a presidential world image, which he then invokes when setting agendas and making decisions. In democracies, presidential authority comes from below, so while presidents decide, they can do so only after an iterative discussion process that theoretically includes everyone from the woman on the street to the man in the White House. Successful decision making in democracies, therefore, "must exhibit a degree of convergence toward common images of the whole organization, " where the organization includes governmental institutions and the society they represent. 
83
The interaction of two key processes affects the dynamics between presidents and the societies they symbolize: "The first is the process whereby political images are created and distributed [and the] second is the process whereby specialized skills and knowledge are distributed among the people of the society, " according to Boulding. Individuals within a society form political images of leaders, policies, and world events based in large part upon the source of their information. This does not mean, as some more contemporary information theories posit, that political images are simple reflections of different media outlets. Individual experiences, backgrounds, histories, skill sets, and relationships all affect political image. That politicians can "get the message out" and distribute their brand is true, but political images are a subset of the larger world image, which "is the great interleaving variable between incoming and outgoing information. " 
84
In large part, Americans view the president as serving a particular role. Images of the role of the president derive partly from the Constitution, partly from history, and partly from the performance and perceptions of those who occupied the office. The role of president is "the center of a complex network of communications both in and out, part of which each occupant . . . inherits and a part of which he creates for himself, " states Boulding. Just as the organization assumes an image of the presidential office and of the man who inhabits it, each president has brought to his station his own images of the office, of himself, and of what he might accomplish through his office, based on a particular view of the world. Symbolic images permeate the political world, and the presidency has been as much an American symbol as it has been a protector and purveyor of symbols. Acting on their individual images, presidents have sought to bridge the gap between the world they preferred and the world they perceived. If, under presidential direction, the Eagle has not flown in search of monsters to destroy, it certainly has sought out its share of Bears and Dragons. By viewing presidential pursuits in war through the lens of image, not only may understanding of the Vietnam War sharpen but also America's perceptions of itself and of the world. Although there is some truth to the notion that nations are "the creation of their historians . . . who give rise both to the image of the present and the future, " it is perhaps truer that the "shared experience of danger [has] more than anything else created the national spirit. " Nations, then, are not the creation of their historians "but of their enemies. " 
85
This chapter discussed the correlation between physical sciences and cognitive theory and explored how schemata and belief structure influence decisionmaking processes. It examined containment theory as an overarching security schema that pervaded the Vietnam era, yet the chapter also revealed that each president effected that strategy differently, as described by Gaddis's five eras of geopolitical codes. Boulding's image theory was elucidated to demonstrate how image applies in the political process. According to Boulding, image is a summation of subjective perceptions that attempt to locate self, others, beliefs, and organizations along a dynamic value scale punctuated by temporal and geographic factors and in accordance with "reliable" natural laws. Such laws themselves may be subjective and unpredictable. Image is determined through an iterative information process in which the history of the image interacts with incoming messages and reconciles them with the existing image. Information has meaning only to the degree that it results in a change to the image. Information may be discarded, additive, or transformative, but images are resistant to change and often discard or dampen disconfirming information. Through this iterative process, image builds upon itself and continuously recreates "reality, " constantly balancing between forcing information to fit into the image and adjusting the image to fit and adapt to external conditions.
Limitations in the processing capacity and physiology of the human brain lend to individuals developing analogies and belief structures. Invoking such strategies allows decision makers to make sense of a complex world. The brain naturally and necessarily patterns information and fills in the gaps. This occurrence is illustrated by the sensory processes that Hawking and Mlodinow as well as Boulding describe and in the cognitive processes that Khong, Jervis, and others portray. The strong correlation between the physical sciences and cognitive theory, using elements from quantum physics as well as from Kuhn's theory of scientific revolutions, lends credence to the idea that perceptions have tangible effects on the physical world. Schema and existing physiological and psychological patterns are significant because they often act as departure points in decision making. When presidents inherit war, they not only pick up fighting the war at a point downstream of their predecessors but also must contend with policies and organizational momentum spawned from the schematic premises of their predecessors. How far back presidential heirs reach to evaluate their predecessors' assumptions affects how the new president represents the war and how he develops solutions to it. Additionally, each president has his own set of assumptions that affects how he defines and represents the war. The confluence of both the momentum spurred by his predecessor and his own subjective starting point based on his own presidential image dictates the architecture upon which he builds his own war policies. Presidential image, then, is both sire and heir to war policy in Vietnam.
Arthur Schlesinger asserts that the "American system of self-governance . . . comes to focus in the presidency" and that "the turmoil perennially swirling around the White House illuminates the heart of the American democracy. " Woodrow Wilson called the presidency the "vital place of action in the system, " and Schlesinger posits that the "executive branch alone is capable" of taking the initiative required to break the tendency of the American system toward "inertia and stalemate. " 
86
3. Hawking and Mlodinow, Grand Design, 50-60. Quantum physics-also referred to as quantum mechanics or quantum theory-emerged in the 1920s coincident with the scientific exploration, observation, and manipulation of atomic and subatomic particles. Traditional Newtonian science was unable to dependably explain or predict the behavior of subatomic particles. Two discoveries of particle behavior were of central significance. First, observation influenced particle behavior. Second, particles existed in multiple states simultaneously. In concert, they defied the objective reality and prescriptions of Newtonian science. Major contributors to the field include Erwin Schrödinger, Niels Bohr, Max Planck, and Richard Feynman. For more reading on quantum physics, see Alastair I. M. Rae, Quantum Mechanics (New York: Taylor Francis Group, 2002); Kenneth W. Ford, The Quantum World: Quantum Physics for Everyone (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004); and James Gleick, Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman (New York: Pantheon Books, 1992).
4. Hawking and Mlodinow, Grand Design, 622-24.  5. Ibid., 585-602. Austrian physicists in 1999 demonstrated how alternately firing molecules at two slits in a barrier proved that matter behaved differently depending on whether one or both slits were open. (This "two-slit experiment" was originally performed with light waves in the 1930s.) Newtonian physics would dictate that the same number of molecules would flow through each slit whether or not the other slit was open or blocked. However, scientists found that the number of molecules flowing through each slit would change when the other slit was open. It appeared as if the molecules were "choosing" an alternate path, contradicting Newtonian assumptions that matter behaves in accordance with natural mandates. 6. Ibid., 625-29.  7. Ibid., 665-72. The uncertainty principle was first formulated by Werner Heisenberg in 1926. Heisenberg tells us that "there are limits to our ability to simultaneously measure certain data, such as position and velocity" (ibid., 666). 8. Ibid., 806-15.  9. Ibid., 56-62.  1961-69; and (5) the Nixon-Kissinger strategy of détente, 1970-79 (ibid). Gaddis compares the five geopolitical codes to delineate patterns in US grand strategy. This paper draws on Gaddis's structural divisions of US grand strategy into eras of containment to help define the larger Cold War context within which each Vietnam-era president imagined and tried to solve the Vietnam War. 39. Ibid., ix, 24-27, 54, 64, 69. Kennan coined the term containment and postulated two fundamental objectives in foreign policy: (1) "to protect the security of the nation, by which is meant the continued ability of this country to pursue the development of its internal life without serious interference, or threat of interference, from foreign powers"; and (2) "to advance the welfare of its people, by promoting a world order in which this nation can make the maximum contribution to the peaceful and orderly development of other nations and derive maximum benefit from their experiences and abilities" (ibid., 26). Kennan was adamant that "complete security or perfection of international environment will never be achieved" and that the best policies indicated "direction" as opposed to final "destinations" (ibid.). For the Kennan lectures and essays, see Kennan, American Diplomacy. Gaddis summarizes the three stages of Kennan's containment strategy as (1) "restore the balance of power left unstable by the defeats of Germany and Japan and by the simultaneous expansion of Soviet influence in Europe and Asia"; (2) discover and exploit the schisms between different Communist regimes and fragment "the international Communist movement"; and (3) change the Soviet Union over time by promoting a new conceptualization of international relations, convincing "Russian leaders that their interests could better be served by learning to live with a diverse world than by trying to remake it in their image. " See Gaddis, Strategies  of Containment, 54-69.  40. Ibid., ix, 88-92, 115. NSC-68 departed from Kennan's version of containment by expanding US commitment from the defending of strategic "strong points" to a wider perimeter defense. NSC-68 more intimately coupled prestige, credibility, economics, and perceptions of national strength to balance of power theory, thus moving containment into nonmilitary domains. This policy document assumed "Western weakness"-that the West could not tolerate even shortterm advances by Communists, that alliances were key in preemptively combating Communist advances, and that Soviet behavior could actually help the Western image. It pivoted on the idea of collective security and expanded the aims of US containment strategy. Despite the expansion of containment strategy into nonmilitary domains, however, NSC-68 was still much more militarycentric than the containment strategy developed under Eisenhower. For more detail, see NSC-68,  14 April 1950, in Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS), 1950, vol. 1, 240.  41. Gaddis, Strategies of Containment, 124, adapted from John Paton Davies, memorandum,  22 September 1950, FRUS, vol. 7, 754; and Dean Acheson (address, National War College, 27  August 1951)  See Sheehan, Pentagon Papers, 80-81, 231-33. President Johnson originally limited Marine and Army actions to within 50 miles of their bases in Vietnam and was extremely restrictive on target selection and prosecution during Operation Rolling Thunder.
54. According to Gaddis in Strategies of Containment, détente translates from French to mean "calm, relaxation, easing, but it can also mean the trigger of a gun. " In Russian, the closest term to détente is razriadka, which means "lessening" or "reduction and relaxation. " Razriadka can also mean "discharging" or "unloading. " Détente implies a releasing of tension (287). The "trigger" that was to release tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States under Nixon was a shift away from policies of "absolute security" toward policies that promoted "relative security. " In A World Restored, Kissinger wrote in 1957 that absolute security was not possible because for one state to be "totally satisfied, " all other states had to be "totally dissatisfied. " Therefore, Nixon's containment strategy incorporated a shared "relative insecurity" among the United States, China, and the Soviet Union (144-46) 61. Goldstein and Freeman, Three-Way Street, 6.  62. Ibid.  63. Billings and Hermann, "Problem Identification, " 54-56.  64. Ibid., 55. Problem representation consists of two key stages: the first stage, location, involves detecting the gap between goals and the perceived current state and then placing the problem into cognitive categories (threat, opportunity, etc.). The second stage, diagnosis, involves a more thorough assessment of the causes and consequences of the problem. Location and diagnosis in aggregate recognize a problem, categorize it, and then embed it in a more or less well-developed causal network. Since most policy problems and especially inherited wars are long term, policy makers are forced to revisit and reevaluate and possibly redefine the problem and solutions continuously. 65. Ibid., 57.  66. Boulding, Image, 3-5.  67. "Advantage" is not meant to imply rote rationality or the blind pursuit of self-interest. Rather, individuals will seek behaviors that they perceive as most likely to preserve or attain what is believed to be most valuable. What individuals value most shifts and is context dependent. Value scales and their influence on image and behavior are discussed later in this section.
Chapter 3
Let every nation know . . . we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival and the success of liberty . . . knowing that here on earth God's work must truly be our own.
There'll be great Presidents again . . . but there'll never be another Camelot.
-Jackie Kennedy, November 1963   During a 1963 interview with Life magazine writer Theodore H. White, Jackie Kennedy revealed that she and her late husband had been particularly enamored with the popular Broadway musical Camelot, written by Alan Jay Lerner. "Jack had this hero idea of history, " the former First Lady said, "the idealistic view. " 
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
Kennedy's vision for the world was perhaps both noble and inspirational, but what were the consequences of the image he held of his own presidency and of Vietnam? How did Kennedy's image of the United States' role in the world and of Vietnam's place in the security environment drive agendas, and what were the outcomes of those agendas? In the Arthurian legend, Arthur is betrayed by his half-sister Morgan le Fay, who drugs Arthur so that he unwittingly couples with his other half-sister, Morgause. The child conceived through this betrayal was prophesied to destroy Arthur's kingdom. Were Kennedy's image and agenda themselves betrayed so that now in retrospect the ill-conceived offspring of Vietnam returns to destroy Camelot? If so, who or what were the betrayers? Who or what were the betrayed? To address these questions, we now examine Kennedy's own presidential image of the war in Vietnam and how that image tied to agendas and outcomes.
For the purposes of this study, presidential image encompasses images of self, public perceptions, the office of the president and the institutions it commands, presidential values and agendas, perceptions of threats, and the means and methods the president perceives as necessary to overcome those threats. The terms presidential image and image are used interchangeably. Additionally, Vietnam was by no means the only threat President Kennedy faced, but since it is the subject of this paper, analysis is rooted in how Vietnam was perceived within the larger security environment. Even in the context of Vietnam, there are an infinite number of possible images to draw from, so we purposely limit the scope to those that best correlate to agendas and decisions discovered in primary and secondary sources. For ease of analysis and explanation, we also attempt to separate different images, but the iterative nature of cognitive processes and the overlap among various images make this difficult. An approach that is too linear might artificially imply direct causality between particular images and outcomes. The same is true for our division among image, agenda, and outcomes. Decision making in politics is messy: agendas and results flow from an extremely convoluted "sausage making" process. Any one decision or outcome may be the result of multiple factors. However, by parceling out some of the more pronounced images, one can better identify a few of the most influential ingredients that pervaded one, if not several, presidencies during Vietnam.
In January 1963, Specialist James McAndrew was killed in a helicopter crash in Vietnam. In February McAndrew's sister, Bobbie Pendergrass, wrote a letter asking President Kennedy for an explanation. "I can't help but feel that giving one's life for one's country is one thing, " Pendergrass wrote, "but being sent to a country [that] half our country never even heard of and being shot at without even a chance to shoot back is another thing altogether!" 
9
The questions which you posed in your letter can . . . best be answered by realizing why your brother-and other American men-went to Viet Nam [sic]  people is, in the long run, a threat to the Free World community. . . . For when freedom is destroyed in one country, it is threatened throughout the world. 
10
11
12
13
14
In May 1961, Kennedy described to a joint session of Congress the new and exceptional threats to freedom and the responsibility the United States had in meeting those threats: "The great battlefield for the defense and expansion of freedom today is the whole southern half of the globe-Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East-the lands of the rising peoples. . . . The adversaries of freedom did not create the revolution[,] . . . but they are seeking to ride the crest of its wave-to capture it for themselves. " Kennedy referenced Vietnam and described its struggle for freedom as a "contest of will and purpose as well as force and violence-a battle for minds and souls as well as lives and territory. " He continued to say, "We are engaged in a world-wide struggle in which we bear a heavy burden to preserve and promote the ideals that we share with all mankind. . . . The United States must give all necessary aid to local forces with the will and capacity to cope with attack, subversion, insurrection, or guerilla warfare. " The United States, Kennedy said, must "foster global progress. " 
15
16
17
18
19
In his 1954 speech "The Truth about Indochina, " Kennedy railed against what he saw as a stale and impotent US policy for Indochina. He condemned the platitudes and overused "prophecies" that had repeatedly failed to bring either political independence or a French military victory, noting that prophetic failures had "in no way diminished the frequency of their reiteration. " Kennedy saw the Eisenhower administration as overly passive and imprecise, inclined to ignore unpleasant confrontations with facts surrounding potentially unpleasant foreign policy options. Eisenhower's massive-retaliation policy and undulating debates concerning Indochina were overly blunt and increasingly obsolescent "in an era of supersonic attack and atomic retaliation. " 
20
Commenting on calls to further aid the French, Kennedy stated that "frankly, . . . no amount of American military assistance in Indochina can conquer an enemy which is everywhere and at the same time nowhere, 'an enemy of the people' which has the sympathy and covert support of the people. " Kennedy cautioned against US involvement and an overreliance on military means in a political struggle: "There is no broad, general support of the native Vietnam government among the people. . . . To check the southern drive of communism makes sense but not only through reliance on the force of arms. The task is rather to build strong native non-Communist sentiment within these areas and rely on that as a spearhead of defense rather than upon the legions of General de Lattre. To do this apart from and in defiance of innately nationalistic aims spells foredoomed failure. " 
21
Addressing the conference in Washington, DC, Kennedy lamented that too often US involvement is like that of the world's "fireman, " rushing in when a fire breaks out with the "heavy equipment" to loud applause, only to leave when the blaze is extinguished. The United States required a long-term vision for Vietnam and an honest recognition for how vital the country's fate was to US security. In an allusion to Eisenhower's domino theory, Kennedy called Vietnam the "keystone to the arch, the finger in the dike [,] . . . the cornerstone of the Free World in Southeast Asia. " 
22
23
A Pentagon study describes Eisenhower's approach to the Vietnam problem as a "limited-risk gamble. " 
24
25
26
Kennedy's more expansive image of US stakes and responsibilities in Vietnam is the backstory to what James McDougall describes as the salient psychological shift that occurs in the transition between Eisenhower and Kennedy.
The "new generation" ushered in a "technocracy of politicians, arrogating to government the right to fix a national agenda and order fabrication of techniques, both hardware and management, for its fulfillment. " 
27
28
29
30
An industrialized country armed with the latest technology might be capable, but such a country could become transcendent only through the full expression of democracy's ideals. Infused with new blood and fresh outlooks, America could lead the fight that would conquer not only the Communist monster but also the collective woes of humanity: "For what Pericles said to the Athenians has long been true of this commonwealth: 'We do not imitatefor we are a model to others. ' " 
31
32
One pervasive assumption of the Kennedy administration was that "the Diem regime's own evident weakness-from the 'famous problem of Diem as administrator' to the [South Vietnamese] Army's lack of offensive spiritcould be cured if enough dedicated Americans, civilians and military, became involved in South Vietnam to show the South Vietnamese, at all levels, how to get on and win the war. " 
33
34
The United States issued a separate "American Statement" at the conclusion of the July 1954 Geneva Accords, which divided Vietnam along the 17th parallel and stipulated cessation of hostilities. Although the United States endorsed the "spirit" of the accords, Eisenhower reserved the right to act if South Vietnam were threatened and held out hope for a united and democratic Vietnam. Officially, the United States called for free elections and democratic unity in Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam so that the people of Indochina could achieve "full independence [and] . . . determine their own future. " Unofficially, Eisenhower viewed the accords as a disastrous accommodation of the Communists. A cable from Secretary of State John Foster Dulles to the Saigon Embassy in December 1955 reveals the Eisenhower administration's disillusionment with the Geneva Agreements: "While we should certainly take no positive steps to speed up [the] present process of decay of [the] Geneva Accords, neither should we make the slightest effort to infuse life into them. " 
35
36
37
38
39
In his farewell address, Eisenhower described America as "the strongest, most influential, and most productive nation in the world, " but he also warned that the nation's "preeminence" depended as much upon how America used its power as upon its military and material strength. Eisenhower described America's responsibility and challenge to "keep the peace[,] . . . enhance liberty[,]" and foster human progress in the face of Communism's hostile, ruthless, and global threat. Eisenhower's farewell address and Kennedy's inaugural address certainly have thematic consistencies. Communism was a global threat to the Free World's progress, and America's unique position and values left the United States with not only the challenge but also the responsibility of leading the fight against it. However, while Eisenhower characterizes the fight against Communism as the "crisis" that "absorbs our very beings, " he also quite clearly admonishes policy makers over their tendency to believe that "some spectacular and costly action could become the miraculous solution to all current difficulties. " For Eisenhower, the military-industrial complex and the absorption of private-sector institutions into the bourgeoning federal government could potentially combine with arrogant ambitions, causing not just an imbalance but a squandering of American power, prestige, resources, and future. 
40
The question is whether free government can continue to exist in the world, in view of the demands made by government and peoples on free economies, while simultaneously facing the continuing threat posed by a centrally controlled, hostile, atheistic, and growing economy. . . . We have got to meet the [Soviets] by keeping our economy absolutely healthy. . . . We must get the Federal Government out of every unnecessary activity. We can refuse to do things too rapidly. Humanity has existed for a long time. Suddenly we seem to have an hysterical approach, in health and welfare programs, in grants to the states. . . . We want to cure every ill in two years, in five years. . . . To my mind, this is the wrong attack. 
41
42
43
McNamara describes how the "intensification of relations between Cuba and the Soviets [and] a new wave of Soviet provocations in Berlin" created a context within which it was "reasonable to consider expanding U.S. effort in Vietnam" in light of the domino theory. 
44
45
46
Pres. Ngo Dinh Diem had spent several years in exile in the United States, where he attended a New Jersey seminary. Coming from a long line of Christian Vietnamese, Diem himself was a devoted Catholic and a staunch anti-Communist. 
47
48
49
50
As Kennedy assumed office, he confronted not only assessments pointing out the weaknesses and corruption of Diem's government but also the sentimental possibility for what Diem might be able to do if properly fortified and supported through a more proactive US government. A 1959 Newsweek article describes Diem as "one of the ablest free Asian leaders. " 
51
53
54
55
Image affects interpretation, institutes biases, and discriminates between confirming and disconfirming information. Evidence that is contrary to established perceptions is often overlooked or discarded so that individuals can maintain a consistency in their worldviews. 
56
57
58
59
Kennedy recognized the political nature of the struggle in Vietnam and was arguably correct in identifying Diem's regime as the fulcrum in the struggle, at least to the extent that lack of strong governance in the South favored Hanoi's cause. During a conversation with his NSC in November 1961, Kennedy revealed his misgivings over a strong US military response in Vietnam and pointed out "how starkly the situation in Vietnam contrasted with the Korean War. " Kennedy identified several compelling reasons for not intervening "10,000 miles away to help a native army of 200,000 fight 16,000 guerillas. " 60 Yet Kennedy's hesitance over full-blown military intervention did not equate to tentativeness over a more robust political intervention. As discussed above, Kennedy intimately tied US prestige, interests, and global objectives to outcomes in Vietnam. After the United States suffered its first casualties in Vietnam, Kennedy said during an interview that "we are attempting to help Vietnam maintain its independence and not fall under domination of the Communists. . . . We cannot desist in Vietnam. " 
61
Kennedy's emphasis on political aspects and his belief in what the US government could accomplish perhaps prolonged the administration's patience with Diem. Conversations, cables, and internal documents concerning Diem's weakness in 1963 closely resembled intelligence and assessment reports from 1961 (which, in turn, reflected those of the Eisenhower administration). Kennedy was partially blind to Diem's obvious shortcomings because the US president's objective-driven images and the importance he placed on success in Vietnam placed Diem on a pedestal-not because Diem was particularly enamoring or capable but because what a successful Diem signified in terms of Kennedy's vision was too enchanting to resist. Diem's pedestal was underpinned not so much by what he could potentially do himself (though his apparent early accomplishments certainly bolstered hopes) but by the promise of what a new generation of US government could do if it were properly organized and mobilized. Diem and Vietnam were both absorbed into and defined through Kennedy's presidential image.
Clausewitz tells us that war is policy by other means, and it is a common lament when wars go afoul to decry the failures of policies that undermine, misalign, and/or blur military objectives and capabilities. H. R. McMaster unequivocally states that "the war in Vietnam was not lost in the field, nor was it lost on the front pages of the New York Times or on the college campuses. It was lost in Washington, D.C., even before Americans assumed sole responsibility for the fighting in 1965. " 
62
63
64
From Inheritance to Legacy: Kennedy's New Table "The United States needs a Grand Objective, " wrote a Kennedy appointee in a memo shortly after the administration took office: "We behave as if . . . our real objective is to sit by our pools. . . . The key consideration is not that the Grand Objective be exactly right, it is that we have one and that we start moving toward it. " 
65
66
67
68
69
Shortly before taking office, Kennedy and his staff met with Eisenhower and his advisers. Though the records vary as to whether Eisenhower actually recommended direct US military involvement, Eisenhower did emphasize the importance of Laos and Vietnam in stopping the Communists' advance in Asia. 
70
72
As Truman's secretary of state, George C. Marshall described the difficulties of discerning a satisfactory policy during France's involvement in Vietnam:
We have fully recognized France's sovereign position. . . . At the same time we cannot shut our eyes to the fact there are two sides to this problem and that our reports indicate lack of French understanding [of the] other side and [the] continued existence [of France's] dangerously outmoded colonial outlook and method. . . . On the other hand we do not lose sight [of the] fact that Ho Chi Minh has direct Communist connections [,] and it should be obvious that we are not interested in seeing colonial empire administrations supplanted by [a] philosophy of political organization directed from and controlled by [the] Kremlin. 
73
74
75
76
Prior to Kennedy taking office in 1961, Hanoi had established the National Liberation Front, a guerilla group designed to undermine Pres. Ngo Dinh Diem's government in Saigon. Russian premier Khrushchev had also pledged Soviet support for wars of national liberation. The fall of China in 1949, Khrushchev's stated ambitions, Soviet expansion, and the promulgation of Mao's guerilla doctrine throughout the 1950s created an atmosphere where a succession of Communist takeovers seemed "likely . . . wherever lack of national cohesion made states vulnerable . . . to guerilla attack. " 
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
The U.S. objective and concept of operations stated in the Report are approved: to prevent Communist domination of South Vietnam; to create in that country a visible and increasingly democratic society; and to initiate, on an accelerated basis, a series of mutually supporting actions of a military, political, economic, psychological and covert character designed to achieve this objective. . . . Additional actions . . . [include] the objective of meeting the increased security threat . . . along the frontier between Laos and Vietnam. . . . The President directs an assessment of the military utility of a further increase in G.V.N. forces from 170,000 to 200,000, together with an assessment of the parallel political and fiscal implications. 
85
86
87
88
89
When Kennedy abolished the rigid NSC structure that existed under Eisenhower, he replaced it with a more "collegial style of decision making" and met irregularly with his "inner club" of trusted advisers. 
90
Taylor, the consummate Soldier-statesman, had a "reputation as both a warrior and a scholar" that appealed to Kennedy. 
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
The new defense secretary's approach attempted to quantify force structures according to national security needs and establish systems-analysis procedures that could reconcile desired "outputs" with the costs of "inputs. " The PPBS attempted to eliminate redundancies and nonessential variables, such as inter-or intraservice compromises. 
100
5
101
Perhaps one of the more subtle but dramatic effects of the individuals whom Kennedy placed and what they believed was that ideological congruency and generational affinities insulated the inner circle not only from their own doubts but also from the doubts of others. From the outset, Kennedy received continuous-albeit often contradictory and inconclusive-reports on the situation in Vietnam. JCS memos both called for and warned against military involvement. State Department cables were on one day optimistic over what could be accomplished with Diem and on another day convincingly certain of his imminent demise. Among all the noise, if Kennedy's inner circle did not determine presidential decisions, the relationships the president had with his confidants certainly influenced those decisions. In 1961, for example, despite warnings from various military and State Department officials, Kennedy accepted Taylor's assurance that increased operational roles for US equipment and advisory teams would not result in the United States' inevitable involvement in a ground war. 
102
Diem. 103
5
6
104
105
Many in the military questioned Kennedy's assumptions, criticizing McNamara's programs and Taylor's actions. In aggregate, critics believed that the two men overly diminished the influence of the JCS and that they also ripped the ceiling off budgets and missions. 
108
109
110
111
than 3 percent, which occurred between 1958 and 1960. 112
113
114
115
116
118
Now the time has come to make the most of our gains. . . . But recovery is not enough. . . . We have undertaken the most far reaching defense improvements in the . . . history of this country. And we have maintained the frontiers of freedom from Vietnam to West Berlin. But complacency or self-congratulation can imperil our security as much as the weapons of our adversary. A moment of pause is not a moment of peace. . . . Free world development will still be an uphill struggle. . . . In the end, the crucial effort is one of purpose-requiring not only the fuel of finance but the torch of idealism. . . . For we seek not the worldwide victory of one nation . . . but a worldwide victory of men. . . . To achieve this end, the United States will continue to spend a greater portion of its national production than any other people in the free world. 
119
120
122
123
In May 1961, Kennedy lobbied Congress for the funding and support required for extraordinary times. He described 1961 as a "great opportunity" to fund and effect the transformations required to stem the tides of Communist revolutions. 
124
125
126
127
128
129
131
132
133
"Please, " Pendergrass tells the president, "I'm only a housewife who doesn't claim to know all about the international situation-but . . . can the small number of our boys over in Viet Nam [sic] possibly be doing enough good to justify the awful number of casualties? It seems to me that . . . we should send enough to have a chance-or else stay home. Those fellows are just sitting ducks. . . . If a war is worth fighting-isn't it worth fighting to win?" (emphasis in original). 
134
135
136
Diem. 137
138
During Kennedy's 34 months in office, the number of US advisers in Vietnam grew from fewer than 400 to over 16,000. He expanded the means and the missions of those advisers, resulting in a tenfold increase in US casualties. Kennedy injected the United States into the political processes and maneuverings of South Vietnam, which eventually led to the toppled Diem regime and dramatically increased the US charge to assist South Vietnam. Transformation of America's government moved the US economy from policies of solvency to policies of expansion. It created a Pentagon and national security architecture convinced of their own ability to solve almost any problem through systems analysis and calibrated efficiencies. On one occasion, an aide told McNamara that US efforts in Vietnam were doomed to fail, to which the secretary responded, "Where is your data? Give me something I can put in the computer. Don't give me your poetry!" 
139
140
142
143
History and the events that comprise it evolve. One of the advantages of this phenomenon is that as contemporary lives and challenges unfold, the past can be rediscovered as a rich well from which policy makers and strategists might draw fertile lessons and insights. One of the disadvantages of a "living history" is that attempts to fix inflective events in a box of absolutes can prove futile, misleading, and even dangerous. However, review of the evidence and our current vantage point lead to the conclusion that neither Vietnam nor Kennedy's heirs betrayed Camelot but that Kennedy was betrayed by his own image. Kennedy's faith in government and the ambitions he sought through it resulted in large, overextended promises. Moreover, Kennedy tied these promises to results and embedded American prestige and interests in the outcomes for Vietnam-making it such that American retraction from the war could be seen as too costly not only for his own administration but also for subsequent ones. When policy is imbued with the sense that the United States must make good on its promises, regardless of feasibility or changing circumstances, then the value of commitment comes to equal or even exceed the tangible objectives that inspired the promises in the first place. America's promises and subsequent policies in Vietnam were underwritten by the blood and treasure of the nation. So while it is noble to strive for great societies and grand international designs, it is also dangerous-for even governments have limits. And, if anything, Vietnam defined them for the United States. Notes 1. White, "For President Kennedy: An Epilogue, " 159. According to Jackie Kennedy, the late president's favorite lyrics from the musical were "Don't let it be forgot; That once there was a spot; For one brief, shining moment that was known as Camelot. " is revealed that the United States suspects Diem and Nhu might be secretly working to reconcile with Hanoi. A CIA memo in October described Diem's increasingly harsh policies, the growing disillusionment of the Vietnamese people, and Diem's denial of American control and his standing in the way, both of which frustrated the US counterinsurgency supply system.
139. Thus the White House machinery became the President's psyche writ large, transmitting his wishes throughout the Executive Office with a terrifying force.
-Doris Kearns Goodwin, 1976   Once on the tiger's back, we cannot be sure of picking the place to dismount.
-George Ball, 1964   I was bound to be crucified either way I moved. If I left the woman I really loved-the Great Society-in order to get involved with that bitch of a war on the other side of the world, then I would lose everything at home. . . . But if I left that war and let the Communists take over South Vietnam, then I would be seen as an appeaser and we would find it impossible to accomplish anything . . . anywhere on the entire globe.
-Lyndon B. Johnson, 1970
McNamara said of Johnson that he "possessed a kaleidoscopic personality" and was "by turns open and devious, loving and mean, compassionate and tough, gentle and cruel-he was a towering, powerful, paradoxical figure. " 
1
Johnson's "posse of lies" is not meant in the insidious sense. This study is not attempting to maliciously paint the president as immoral. It is concerned with determining what perhaps inspired Johnson to lie and, more significantly, the consequences of those lies rather than with judging either the man or the act. Furthermore, lies are neither always bad nor always avoidable. Fundamentally, lies are gap fillers used to force together "what is" with "what is desired" and in this way are little different from the myths, beliefs, and perceptions that frame problems and define our realities every day. Recall that reality, as Boulding describes, is not "truth" but what one "believes to be true. " In that sense, to varying degrees, every image is a lie. This study previously defined problems as the gap between "what is" and "what could and should be. " Understood in this way, lies are also ways to solve problems. It is in their implementation, however, that lies present themselves as particularly precarious solutions to problems. An image depends on its ability to translate experience and feedback. When an image encounters disconfirming information, either the image transforms the information or the information transforms the image. Lies can delay-but cannot prevent-one of these two outcomes. The disparity between the existential world and the world as it is perceived eventually widens to the point where the cognitive bridge lacks foundation, and the image collapses. Lies provide a temporary and an especially false bridge.
When Kennedy is assassinated, Johnson sees a Communist plot and starts drawing lines in the sand, turning his attention not just to vengeance but to vindication of the American ideal. He sets about a course that in his mind not only will bring strength to bear against the Communists but also will eradicate the villains of the human condition. When he takes the reins of the presidency, Johnson essentially mounts a posse to carry out his cause. Posses from the American West were often an eclectic mix of armed men deputized in the name of justice. When Johnson rides out, he takes his men, but he also takes with him an assortment of beliefs. Furthermore, the men surrounding Johnson were victims of their own beliefs and often muddied the waters on the situation in Vietnam, making it easier for the president to believe his master narrative. Almost to a man, members of Johnson's administration never considered it possible that a small country like North Vietnam could stand up to and thwart American power. To them, it seemed perfectly reasonable that America's immense capabilities would readily overwhelm North Vietnam and could do so for relatively little cost. Such optimism reflected perhaps a misunderstanding of the kind of war North Vietnam was fighting and was anchored by an overwhelming faith in American exceptionalism. Johnson was both a perpetuator of and a victim to the sentiments of his time. Presidents are "simultaneously the strongest and the weakest of all national leaders, " and none completely escape the shackles placed on them by their advisers, their agents, or the institutions they command. 
2
3
4
Johnson's lies begin with the myths he armed himself with but eventually grow as the realities of Vietnam and international and domestic politics frustrate his cause. Johnson's ultimate quarry is elusive, but his dedication is ironclad; Johnson is spurred by that commitment to at first simply malign the truth in dedication to his higher cause. Eventually, however, those small halftruths morph into a destructive posse of lies; where at first Johnson rode and carried those lies into Vietnam, eventually they rode him-saddling and whipping the country and the war until the end of Johnson's presidency.
Lyndon Johnson would often boast that his "ancestors were teachers and lawyers and college presidents and governors when the Kennedys in this country were still tending bar. " 
5
6
7
8
9
The problems confronting [America] were hardly new. The lack of specific training, the denial of civil rights to black Americans, the neglect of the educational needs of our young, the inadequacy of health care, the invisible barriers around our ghettos-all these had been with us for generations. . . . My entire life, from boyhood on, had helped me recognize the work that needed to be done in America. My view of leadership had always been an activist one. . . . Harry Truman used to say that 13 or 14 million Americans had their interests represented in Washington, but that the rest of the people had to depend on the president of the United States. That is how I felt about the 35 million American poor. They had no voice and no champion. Whatever the cost, I was determined to represent them. 
10
11
12
Describing the role of the president, Johnson said that "no one can experience with the President of the United States the glory and agony of his office. No one can share the majestic view from his pinnacle of power. No one can share the burden of his decisions or the scope of his duties. " 
13
America's heroes of the western frontier were self-reliant and faced daunting odds as they fought for their just cause on the knife's edge that separates justice and law. Patrick Porter observes that the American identity-indeed, the mythology and history of America's wars-is replete with examples of the archetypal frontiersman. 
14
15
16
17
Johnson imagined a government that, with him at its behest, could ride in to tame the frontier, free the individual, and then move on. Johnson declares wars on poverty, ignorance, and corruptive ideologies and tilts into the breach in full regalia. 
18
19
20
"The first president I really loved was Jackson, " Johnson revealed. "I had great respect of Jefferson because he believed in the land. . . . Then I loved Jackson because he was a guy that didn't let ' em tread on him. . . . And Wilson. I devoured him . . . everything he wrote or said I memorized. " 
21
Johnson's multifaceted sense of purpose drove him to attempt reconciling very different worlds. His worldviews embraced the tensions created by the intersection of a complex assortment of domestic and international challenges. On the domestic front, he not only believed in the purposes and aspirations initiated by Kennedy but also thought they didn't go far enough. Building a Great Society would fulfill Johnson's own vision and serve as a fitting eulogy to his fallen predecessor: "Everything I had ever learned in the history books taught me that martyrs have to die for causes. John Kennedy had died. But his 'cause' was not really clear. That was my job. I had to take the dead man's program and turn it into a martyr's cause" (emphasis added). 
22
23
24
The intersection and tension between Johnson's domestic and international policies were just one of the lines between disparate worlds that he had to straddle as he wire-walked Kennedy's administration. "We were moving into unchartered territory, " Johnson wrote of his ambitious domestic agenda, " [and] powerful forces of opposition would be stirred. . . . But the powerful conviction that an attack on poverty was right and necessary blotted out any fears. " 
25
26
27
28
29
30
Every President has to establish with the various sectors of the country what I call "the right to govern. " Just being elected to office does not guarantee him that right. . . . Every President has to inspire the confidence of the people [,] . . . become a leader[, and] . . . develop a moral underpinning to his power. . . . For me, that presented special problems. In spite of more than three decades of public service, I knew I was an unknown quantity to many of my countrymen and to much of the world. . . . I suffered another handicap, since I had come to the Presidency not through the collective will of the people but in the wake of tragedy. I had no mandate from the voters. 
31
Internally, a war raged between Johnson's "proud pioneer" and his insecurities about being on the world stage. Johnson was caught between the world he came from and the world he now sought to lead. He faced a quandary between the inheritance he wanted to fulfill-completing Roosevelt's New Deal (which would also pay homage to Kennedy)-and the inheritance of Vietnam forced upon him by Kennedy. To carry out his fight for the Great Society, Johnson found himself in the crossfire between hawks and doves, driving him to seek out ways to be tough on Communism without sacrificing the resources and domestic support for his social programs. Johnson also faced a war of perceptions; that is, the manner of his ascendance to office left him compelled not only to validate Kennedy's policies but also to prove himself by leaving his own mark upon them. Chapter 3 suggested that Kennedy pushed Vietnam to the front lines of the Cold War. Johnson continued to contextualize Vietnam as an important part of the Cold War, but he folded both the Cold War and Vietnam into the interior lines of his domestic agenda and war on poverty. The front lines of Johnson's fight for the Great Society were the perceptions of Congress (and, more importantly, the public), and he poured into that breach all the energy and resources he could muster. Johnson calculated and manipulated perceptions with the exceptional fervor of a man who believed, much as Hawking suggested, that "individual will" could create reality. The war of perceptions thus became Johnson's primary line of operations.
Only by proving himself, reconciling his inheritance, and convincing the coalitions of the disparate worlds he sought to unify of the efficacy and merit of his programs could he realize his vision. Johnson's fellow students and his teachers, coworkers, and subordinates described him as driven and domineering throughout his life. He would often interrupt conversations and strove to project and create an image of himself in the minds of those around him. 
32
Goodwin describes how Johnson's nature and worldview not only shaped his White House but also exacerbated the tendency for staffers, advisers, and principals to become overly dependent on the president. 
33
34
35
In this strange atmosphere, the men surrounding the President [became] sycophants. . . .
[This] structure proved disastrous for Lyndon Johnson and the nation. He had always functioned best in relationships where the other person had independent power. Then Johnson had to pay attention to the necessities of bargaining, moderating his drive to dominate by a realistic perception of the limitations of his own resources. But when the structure reduced the external limitations, Johnson fell back on his need to dominate. . . . Thus the White House machinery became the President's psyche writ large, transmitting his wishes throughout the Executive Office with a terrifying force. 
36
The following section examines Johnson's presidential image, particularly focusing on how his obsession for controlling perceptions not only reflected his view of the world but also shaped agendas and outcomes in Vietnam. This study analyzes Johnson's initial impressions and approaches to the Vietnam War, looking at how he contended with and perceived the transition from Kennedy's presidency to his own. As American pioneers braved the hazards of the country's wild landscapes to forge the destiny of a nation, they mollified the frontier with a fierce will and often called upon the harsher angels to reconcile the nation they sought with the obstacles that threatened it. Men of justice were called upon to ride forth and press their sacred cause as they renegotiated the lines of a savage and unforgiving landscape. Johnson believed that his iron will could both create and negotiate not only the lines that separated Vietnam and fractured his domestic agenda but also the divides within himself and his nation. In doing so, Johnson formed his own posse that could ride herd on America's perceptions and harness the reality he needed to prosecute his agenda. Once invested, he could no sooner accept defeat than George Armstrong Custer could have withdrawn or Daniel Boone surrendered. The mythology of the American West, conveyed through history, stories, and film, shows us archetypal heroes who are at once cowboys, pioneers, saviors, villains, and martyrs. Johnson's turn at the presidency and his policies in Vietnam are an expression of these American motifs. Common Western images include glorious last stands or show the flawed hero ambling off into the sunset, the people he saved at his back-their calls for his return echoing off the hillsides.
As Johnson picked up the mantle from Kennedy, he described his duty to continue and expand the fallen president's policies as "the martyr's cause. " After Johnson moves the nation through the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and the 1965 troop decision and toward the war's peak in 1968, what did the country shout into the hills when he rode away? What villains and obstacles were vanquished, and which ones remained? Who was surrounded, and what challenges faced the next presidential heir? How successful was the martyr's cause, and who or what was martyred?
A New Seat, a New President, and a New War Within hours of assuming the presidency, Johnson declared, "I am not going to lose Vietnam. I am not going to be the President who saw Southeast Asia go the way China went. " 
37
The greatest leader of our time has been struck down by the foulest deed. . . . And now the ideas and the ideals which he so nobly represented must and will be translated into . . . action. . . . This Nation has demonstrated that it has the courage to seek peace, and it has the fortitude to risk war. . . . This Nation will keep its commitments from South Viet-Nam [sic] to West Berlin. We will be unceasing in the search for peace. . . . And let all know we will extend no special privilege. . . . We will carry on the fight against poverty and misery, and disease and ignorance, in other lands and in our own. . . . For 32 years Capitol Hill has been my home. . . . An assassin's bullet has thrust upon me the awesome burden of the Presidency. . . . Let all the world know [that] . . . I rededicate this government to the unswerving support [of its commitments]. . . . This is our challenge-not to hesitate, not to pause, not to turn about and linger . . . but to continue on our course. . . . It is a time for action . . . [so] that John Fitzgerald Kennedy did not live-or die-in vain. 
38
39
40
For Johnson, the intimacy between Vietnam and domestic politics was driven by more than just what he considered necessary to facilitate his Great Society. There was also a consistency between what he believed was required to build the Great Society and how he thought he could solve Vietnam. Louis Hartz writes in The Founding of New Societies that "from the time of Wilson . . .
[America] has actually sought to project its ethos abroad, " and Goodwin observes that this "American tendency . . . was dramatized" by decision makers in Vietnam and led to viewing the "Vietnamese conflict [as] a battle between two fixed groups of people with different but negotiable interests" (emphasis added). 
41
42
43
44
In a speech at Johns Hopkins University in 1965, Johnson called for a "billion-dollar American investment" to develop the Mekong River that could bring electricity, jobs, schools, and "the wonders of modern medicine" to Vietnam. 
45
46
47
When Johnson took the presidential oath, behind him was a century of American involvement and concern with Asia, three Pacific wars, two decades of Cold War accompanied by the feared possibility of a nuclear apocalypse, and a widely held belief-almost a dogma-that the arena of confrontation was shifting to the "third world. " But perhaps most significant of all was the fact that an entire generation, many of its members now come to leadership, viewed these events . . . from the perspective of their experience of World War II-that shattering transformation of historical conditions which created an America, not only powerful but supreme [but that had also allowed the forces of darkness to] come perilously close to a decisive conquest. 
48
"I eventually developed my own programs and policies, " Johnson said of his initial years as president, "but I never lost sight of the fact that I was the trustee and custodian of the Kennedy administration." 
49
50
In 1961 Johnson prepared a report for Kennedy from his fact-finding mission to Asia. In it, Johnson assured Kennedy that the mission had "arrested the decline of confidence in the United States, " but he also emphasized that such missions would not "restore any confidence already lost. " "We didn't buy time, but were given it, " Johnson tells the president and advises Kennedy that he should proceed with the expansion of his Vietnam policies. 
51
52
54
55
56
57
On 23 July 1964, Johnson speaks with Texas governor John Connally about his concerns over the Kennedy camp, particularly Bobby Kennedy, and the potential impact on the upcoming election. The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party was demanding that the all-white Mississippi delegation be expelled and replaced with its own delegation of "64 blacks and four whites. " 
58
59
You really need somebody that's a good debater and a good TV performer and can take ' em on because you're tied down so damned hard in this job. . . . You got problems with Khrushchev and Castro. Say they're gonna shoot down your planes the minute the election's over. . . . You've got more damned problems than I can handle. I've got old enough and flabby enough that I can't surmount all the obstacles. And I don't have the help and the advice and the counselors and the loved ones around . . . to do it. Every man in my Cabinet's a Kennedy man. . . . I haven't been able to change ' em and I don't have the personnel if I could change em. They didn't go to San Marcos Teachers College. . . . It's just agony (emphasis in original). 
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
Johnson's decision to escalate in Vietnam was greatly influenced by his reliance on a closed circle of advisers and by his passion not to let Vietnam interfere with the Great Society. In 1964 the effectiveness of Kennedy's covert military operations as well as the fallen president's social and diplomatic programs in Vietnam remained unclear. Fearful that Vietnam might inconveniently go awry while he was pressing his social agenda, Johnson was inclined to succumb to suggestions for greater military action. With outcomes indeterminate, Johnson was convinced that if he could rein in perceptions and control the script, then he could orchestrate support for his domestic agenda while still solving the Vietnam problem: "The most important foreign policy problem I faced was that of signaling to the world what kind of man I was and what sort of policies I intended to carry out. It was important that there be no hesitancy on my part-nothing to indicate that the US government had faltered. It was equally important for the world to understand that I intended to continue the established foreign policies of . . . Harry S. Truman, Dwight D. Eisenhower, and John F. 
Kennedy. " 70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
LBJ: I want you to dictate to me a memorandum-a couple of pages . . . so I can read it and study it and commit it to memory . . . on the situation in Vietnam. . . . I' d like for you to say that there are several courses that could be followed. . . . We could send our own divisions . . . and they could start attacking the Vietcong. . . . We could come out of there . . . and let ' em neutralize South Vietnam and let the Communists take North Vietnam. . . . And as soon as we get out, they could swallow up South Vietnam. . . . Or we could pull out and say, "To hell with you, we're going to have Fortress America[,]" . . . and here's what would happen in Thailand, and here's what would happen in the Philippines. . . . Or we can say this is the Vietnamese's war . . . and we've got to bring their morale up. . . . We can put in socially conscious people and try to get them to improve their own government . . . and we can train them how to fight . . . And [we can say] that, after considering all of these, it seems that the latter offers the best alternative for America to follow. . . . I would like to have for this period, when everybody is asking me, something in my own words. I can say, why, here are the alternatives and here's our theory . . . [, but] we don't say that we'll win. LBJ: Why don't we take some pretty offensive steps pretty quickly then? Why don't we . . . do some of these things that are inclined to bolster them.
LBJ: And then you get me this other paper on Vietnam, so that when people ask me questions, I have a smattering of information. 
81
82
With a more robust, albeit covert, strategy in place through OPLAN 34A and the Desoto patrols, and with his mind constantly on the 1964 election and the Vietnam narrative's effects on it, Johnson continued to beef up US missions and potential missions in Vietnam while downplaying them in the press. As reports of imminent disaster roll in from the embassy in Saigon and from the military leadership, Johnson sends Secretary of State Rusk and the defense secretary to Honolulu in June for "a hastily called meeting" with Ambassador Lodge, Maxwell Taylor, and the new American commander in South Vietnam, Gen William Westmoreland. 
83
84
85
[JAMES] ROWE: Is he talking again? [Rowe was LBJ's longtime friend and a prominent Washington attorney.] LBJ: Yeah, all the time. . . . Every responsible person gets frightened when they see him. . . . He went on TV and . . . just blabbed everything. . . . [When Humphrey was asked by reporters,] "How would you account for these PT boat attacks on our destroyers when we are innocently out there in a gulf, sixty miles from shore?" . . . Humphrey said, "Well, we have been carrying on some operations in that area . . . where we have been going in and knocking out roads and petroleum. " . . . And that is exactly what we have been doing! ROWE: Good Lord! LBJ: The damn fool . . . just ought to keep his [---]damned big mouth shut on foreign affairs, at least until the election is over. . . . They don't pay him to do this. . . . He is just doing this free and he's hurting his government. And he's hurting us (emphasis in original)! 
86
Because of his efforts to satiate hawks and doves, his own push for reelection, and the needs of a war that wouldn't stay quiet, Johnson made a series of fateful decisions and directed a sequence of events to manipulate perceptions during the Gulf of Tonkin crisis that arguably set the tenor of his own Vietnam policy and the arc of the war itself. Though the full record and exact nature and timing of information that Johnson had remains incomplete, declassified tapes and documents nevertheless demonstrate Johnson's tacit and deliberate misleading of the public. Even if one concludes that Johnson acted as best he could, given the facts he had at the time, and misrepresented them to protect sensitive operations, his hurried decision making and eagerness to act reflect a particular policy momentum and linkage to domestic political calculations.
Three months prior to the incident involving US warships and North Vietnamese patrol boats in the Gulf of Tonkin, Johnson told McNamara that he saw "a glimmer of hope on Vietnam" and wanted policies that got more tangible results. 
87
88
89
90
In May, Johnson and his NSC debated a draft resolution for Congress that would "endorse all measures, including the commitment of force" in Laos and Vietnam. 91 However, both McNamara and Bundy argued against going to Congress in May, Bundy saying that "the Administration should seek a Congressional resolution giving general authority for action . . . if and only if we decide that a substantial increase of national attention . . . is a necessary part of the defense of Southeast Asia in the coming summer. " 
92
93
LBJ: We went in there last night to take out this battery that had shot down these two planes and we destroyed some buildings. . . . If we didn't [respond], why, we' d just destroy ourselves. Now we can't say anything about it. . . . I don't know who we ought to discuss this with, if anyone. . . . But we have . . . shown that we mean business. . . . Would it be your thought we ought to talk to [Charles] Hallek [House Minority Leader]and any of the Republicans about it?
McCORMACK: It's bound to come out. I would think so. LBJ: I had the feeling I ought to send McNamara to see the armed services people and I ought to send Rusk to see the foreign affairs people. . . . But we've got to keep it to a very limited group. If we don't, it would greatly injure our interests by their talking about it.
McCORMACK: Yeah, the worst of that is when you get a group like that, you know what democracies are. LBJ: They ought to be sworn to secrecy. . . . Don't discuss it with anyone. I'm gonna discuss it with you and [Governor] Carl [Sanders (D-GA)], [Senator Mike] Mansfield and [Hubert] Humphrey, and we'll try to keep it to that.
LBJ: I've submitted all the things you've suggested to me and I've got [Adlai] Stevenson down here. . . . We can't go in there with ground troops. The air forces don't get the job done and can't get it done. We are trying every way we know how to appeal to Hanoi and [China]. We've told de Gaulle that we are very anxious to follow any conference route. . . . But we've got to keep our strength here and show that we will react . . . [so the North Vietnamese] will talk to us at all. . . . We don't want to dominate anybody. If they'll just quit advancing, why, then we can get out. . . . I don't want to get in a land war in Asia. MANSFIELD: I think the best thing to do would be if you would talk to them all together. 91 LBJ: It always gets out . . . and we don't want to blow it up. 'Cause we sure don't want to give any indications that we're getting involved in a war. . . . I've been playing it down. . . . You-all are voting [on civil rights] this afternoon, aren't you? 
94
[Johnson then speaks with McNamara after the defense secretary had briefed a small group of congressmen on the Laos air strikes. McNamara reports to the president the sentiments of some of the congressmen, particularly the more hesitant and skeptical.] LBJ: We haven't taken any serious losses and we can't put our finger on anything that really justifies this acceleration and escalation of public sentiment that it's going to hell in a hack. . . . Is that a buildup of our critics largely? Have we fed that? Where does it come from that we're losing?
McNAMARA: If you went to . . . the estimators in CIA and said how's the situation . . . I think they' d say it's worse.
LBJ: That's not what Lodge and Khanh think, is it? They think it's a little better, don't they?
McNAMARA: I don't think they really believe that. . . . I think that they both would indicate it's a very weak situation. . . . The CIA estimators, Lodge, many of the rest of us in private would say that things are not good. . . . While we say this in private and not in public, there are facts available in the public domain over there that find their way in the press. LBJ: While I was talking to you, I have a note from Mansfield, which is interesting: [Johnson reads Mansfield's note.] "I do not conclude that our national interests are served by deep military involvement in Southeast Asia. . . . [If the United States is to get more deeply involved] I . . . suggest that the basis for these decisions must be made much clearer and more persuasive to the people of this nation. "
McNAMARA: I think he's absolutely right. If we're going to stay in there, if we're going to go strictly up the escalating chain, we're going to have to educate the people, Mr. President. LBJ: Now, and I think if you start doing it, they're going to be hollering, "You're a warmonger.". . . I think that's the horn the Republicans would like to get us on. 
95
North Vietnamese patrol boats attacked the Maddox while the US warship was performing intelligence-gathering missions off the coast of North Vietnam. During the sea battle, the USS Ticonderoga launched jet aircraft, three North Vietnamese patrol boats were destroyed, and the Maddox was slightly damaged. The North Vietnamese attack came on the heels of joint US and South Vietnamese commando raids against military installations along their coast. Retired admiral Cathal Flynn, in charge of training the South Vietnamese commandos, revealed that Americans did in fact participate in the raids using American ships that would stow their flags once in Vietnamese waters. 
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
112
113
115
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
Throughout the war, all of the variants of bombing campaigns, covert operations, proposed and executed social and economic programs for Vietnam, the introduction of ground troops, and his pressures on both the North and South Vietnamese regimes were mile markers in his search for "the right price" that could bring the conflict to an acceptable end. Johnson sought to add Vietnam to the ever-expanding homestead of his master social agenda. However, Johnson's perceived presidential mandate after the 1964 election, just like his justification for the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and his escalation of the war in Vietnam, was based on false pretenses. That he believed that he could control perceptions and was committed to the idea that Hanoi could be coaxed into bargaining demonstrates just how much Johnson's own image obscured his interpretation of both the war and his adversary. The unfolding of decisions leading up to the Gulf of Tonkin also reveals just how intertwined Johnson's image was with the character of his agenda and the manner of its execution.
By the end of 1964, Johnson had secured a seat at the table, but the president he was to the electorate was not the same president who was making the decisions. While he had temporarily reconciled some of his disparate worlds, the glue that held them together was at best a series of expedients and at worst a collection of outright lies. Johnson's manufactured reality was thus tenuous, and his early manipulations opened up a new breach in a "different kind of war" that ultimately reverberated and came to define not only the United States' war effort but also his presidency-and, in many ways, the nation he led.
In 1965 Johnson comes to another crossroads in Vietnam and, like his handling of the Gulf of Tonkin incident, he again manipulates perceptions and misrepresents both the situation in Vietnam and US actions there. As Herring observes, Johnson metered and shaped the delivery of his "war message" so that the media received it "in much the same spirit it was delivered, seriously, but without any sense of urgency. " 
125
127
128
129
131
132
Our strategy must be based upon a patient and steady increase of pressure following an escalating pattern while making maximum effort to turn the tide here in the South. This does not mean that we must "win" in the South to bring about change in [North Vietnam's]  attitudes, but rather that the DRV [Democratic Republic of Vietnam) must perceive that the tide has turned or is likely to turn. Hopefully at this point the [North] will seek to find some way out, and if and when it does, there could be a "bandwagon" effect that would so lower [Vietcong] morale and so raise that of South Vietnam as to permit bringing major hostilities to a reasonably early conclusion. 
133
134
135
Hanoi was fighting a "total war" while the United States struggled to fight a limited war. Gideon Rose summarizes Johnson's limited-war strategy as having three key components: "limited bombing in the North (and enemyheld areas in the South); defeating Communist forces in pitched battles in the South's hinterlands; and 'nation-building' in the South's core. " 
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
Characterizing the situation in this way, Johnson readily interpreted Vietnam as a case of naked Communist aggression. Not only was he obligated to take a stand to preserve the integrity of his office but also the bourgeoning conflict threatened to obstruct his larger domestic agenda. If he could reconcile these competing demands with a massive yet short-term influx of American troops, then he could both demonstrate his resolve and remove Vietnam from the main table of political discourse. These motivations muted George Ball's prescient cautions and perhaps explain in large part why Johnson "failed to take the American people into his confidence" and why the military strategy, together with its long-term implications, was not "exhaustively debated. " 
143
144
1. We were in South Korea under a clear UN [United Nations] mandate. Our presence in South Vietnam depends upon the continuing request of the GVN plus the SEATO [Southeast Asia Treaty Organization] protocol.
2. At their peak, UN forces in South Korea (other than ours and those of the ROK [Republic of Korea] included 53,000 infantrymen and 1,000 other troops provided by fifty-three nations. In Vietnam, we are going it alone with no substantial help from any other country.
3. In 1950 the Korean government under Syngman Rhee was stable. It had the general support of the principal elements in the country. There was little factional fighting and jockeying for power. In South Viet-Nam [sic] we face governmental chaos.
4. The Korean War started only two years after Korean independence. The Korean people were still excited by their newfound freedom; they were fresh for the war. In contrast, the people of Indochina have been fighting for almost twenty years-first the French, then for the last ten against the NVN [North Vietnamese].
5. Finally, the Korean War started with a massive land invasion by 100,000 troops. This was a classical type of invasion across an established border. . . . It gave us an unassailable political and legal base for counteraction. In South Viet-Nam, there has been no invasion-only a slow infiltration. Insurgency is by its nature ambiguous. The Viet Cong insurgency does have substantial indigenous support. . . . As the weakness of the Saigon Government becomes more and more evident, an increasing number of governments will be inclined to believe that the Viet Cong insurgency is, in fact, an internal rebellion. 
145
146
By the end of 1965, more than 180,000 US troops were in Vietnam. However, Johnson refuted Ball's warnings about the true character of the Vietnam War and ignored his advice that the administration had better be "damn serious with the American people. " 147 Brian VanDeMark observes that Johnson "minimized political dangers by minimizing public awareness and debate" so that he could escalate his efforts against North Vietnam without "escalating the war. " 148 Each additional step up the escalation ladder was coupled with an equally deliberate move to dampen and/or obscure the reality of that escalation. For instance, Johnson had authorized the deployment of 100,000 servicemen to Vietnam in 1965 as well as an additional 100,000 in 1966, but he revealed publicly that he was sending only 50,000 troops. How Johnson carried out his agenda in Vietnam contrasted sharply with the "parades and fanfare" of previous wars, and "in no real sense did the nation appear to be going to war. " 
149
So Johnson proceeded to wage an "all-out limited war" that quickly turned a tertiary guerilla war into a conventional enterprise that created a "huge, sprawling, many-faceted, military-civilian effort" lacking coordination, cooperation, and clarity of purpose. 
150
When Johnson opened the seal in July 1965 and authorized the large deployment of ground troops, public opinion polls showed that 62 percent of the public approved of Vietnam policies while 79 percent were convinced that South Vietnam would fall without US intervention. 
151
152
153
The power structure of a government is not made of one piece-even in dictatorships. Political factions contend for influence, government agencies and military services maintain their own separate loyalties and pursue partisan objectives, and the basis of popular support keeps shifting. During a war, different parts of this power structure become differently committed to the military effort. The more important a group's role in this effort, the greater the share of the nation's resources on which it can exert claim. 
154
155
156
Johnson believed he could invent the future. As long as he could weave the tendrils of his vision through the multitude of congressional and public interests, he could tie together seemingly disparate worlds. Walter McDougall remarks that to LBJ, the space program was a model of the role government should play in society . . . an expression of limitless power. . . . For the War on Poverty and Great Society, as much as Apollo or Vietnam, were Cold War phenomena, but they were not only that. . . . They were born of a moral vision in which men of power and charity sought to use their gifts for the less gifted. It was possible to eradicate poverty, crime, [and] ignorance[;] whip the Communists[;] and develop the Third World. . . . The power existed and needed only to be grasped. 
157
In 1967 the combined efforts of the United States Air Force and Navy totaled more than 108,000 sorties and 226,000 tons of bombs. South Vietnam received more than $625 million, which comprised more than "25 percent of the American foreign aid programs for the entire world. " 159 Journalists, members of Congress, and even the casual observer started to seriously question Johnson's depiction of the war. Public sentiment was confused. "I want to get out, " one subject said during a study on public opinion, "but I don't want to give up. " 160 Right-wing Republicans and conservative Democrats resented what they saw as Johnson's undue restraints on the military in what was a "global struggle with Communism" and urged Johnson to "win or get out. " 
161
162
163
165
166
167
168
Herring reveals that the antiwar movement did not, in and of itself, dictate outcomes in Vietnam and that many Americans were just as ambiguous in their attitudes toward "the movement" as they were to the war. 
169
180
182
184
185
186
187
On 31 January 1968, close to 70,000 North Vietnamese Communist troops launched a surprise offensive that stretched from the demilitarized zone along the 20th parallel down to the Ca Mau Peninsula on the southern tip of Vietnam. Immediately prior to attacks with conventional forces, Vietcong sappers blasted their way into the American Embassy in Saigon; a six-hour standoff ensued between the guerrila forces and embassy security forces. By the end of the first day's volleys, North Vietnamese forces had attacked nearly all 44 provincial capitals, five of the six major cities, 64 district capitals, and close to 50 hamlets. Though certainly not militarily successful, the offensive surprised American forces; its sheer expansiveness and coordination set the US military and political leaders on their heels. Westmoreland's memoirs quoted the general's intelligence officer as saying that "even had I known exactly what was to take place, it was so preposterous that I probably would have been unable to sell it to anybody. " 
188
190
191
Tran Do, deputy commander of Communist forces in South Vietnam, said of the Tet Offensive, "In all honesty, we didn't achieve our main objective, which was to spur uprisings throughout the south. Still, we inflicted heavy casualties on the Americans and their puppets, and this was a big gain for us. As for making an impact in the United States, it had not been our intentionbut it turned out to be a fortunate result. " 192 The politburo's own evaluation of the offensive was even more optimistic:
The protracted offensive and siege campaign . . . together with the simultaneous surprise attacks against the cities . . . threw the Americans and their puppets into a state of great confusion. . . . The Tet General Offensive and Uprising conducted by our soldiers and civilians secured a great strategic victory. . . . We had killed or dispersed 150,000 enemy soldiers, including 43,000 Americans . . . and liberated 1.4 million people. We had struck a decisive blow that bankrupted the "limited war" strategy of the American imperialists. 
193
194
195
In perhaps an ironic twist to Johnson's initial subterfuge during the Gulf of Tonkin incident-characterized by his manufacture of an overestimation of the North's aggression, capability, and threat to American interests-Tet contorted the reality of American military achievements to a false perception of North Vietnamese victory. What mattered was not the reality of Tet in the military sense but what the public perceived to be true. Johnson's manipulations and his struggle to control the narrative boomeranged. He had both unwittingly and purposefully created the conditions for a public opinion backlash from which neither his administration nor its policies could recover. 
196
In a national address exactly two months following the Tet Offensive, Johnson spoke on Vietnam and his policies, revealing that he would not seek another term as president. In his opening, Johnson characterizes the importance of peace in Vietnam and Southeast Asia: "No other question so preoccupies our people. No other dream so absorbs the 250 million human beings who live in that part of the world. No other goal motivates American policy in Southeast Asia. " 197 Ironically, the war had become all encompassing. In the speech, Johnson conveyed what he believed to be critical US interests in Vietnam and the signs of American success in the war, attempting to convey the truth of the Tet Offensive. In some ways, Johnson came clean with the public, revealing that his administration had authorized an increase to 525,000 men and that the United States would continue in its commitment to 
Vietnam. 198
There is a division in the American house now. There is divisiveness among us all tonight. And holding the trust that is mine, as President . . . I cannot disregard the peril. . . . With America's sons in the fields far away, with America's future under challenge right here at home, with our hopes and the world's hopes for peace in the balance . . . , I do not believe that I should devote an hour or a day . . . to any personal partisan causes. . . . Accordingly, I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your President. 
200
201
Driven by his deep-seated presidential image and desire to validate that image, Johnson took to forging and manning the new outposts of freedom and to fulfilling the visions of his predecessor as well as his own. Johnson believed that he could hammer out a reality of his choosing. If Kennedy rode the wave of a new generation and in his noble cause overreached in the expectations of what the American government could do, Johnson arrived as if he were leading a posse mounted atop the most powerful nation in the world. Convinced of the efficacy of his iron will that had been proved during so many years in Congress and as vice president-a will seeded and fortified in his rise from an impoverished background all the way to the presidency-Johnson overreached in his belief of what one man could do. Vietnam was subsumed by this belief and suffered the consequences. The arc of the Vietnam War and of the country between 1963 and 1969 is very much the arc of the man who was president. Johnson took up an inheritance stark with wars, poverty, and strife yet colorful and rich in possibilities. Johnson and the nation were buoyed as if they were in fact on a crest of a wave in 1963. Despite Kennedy's tragic death, he had left Johnson and the country invigorated and determined to meet and rise above the challenges not just of that age but of all ages. Racism, ignorance, hatred, and poverty remained Johnson's targets and were for him even more the root cause of Communism than they were for Kennedy.
But in his fervor, in his absolute dedication to slay the demons of the human condition and uproot the fodder upon which the armies of Communism fed, he sacrificed the masonry stone upon which healthy democracies are builttruth. His own predilections left him vulnerable to obscured representations of the Vietnam War. Additionally, he toiled endlessly to shape the reality surrounding Vietnam and misled the public from the Gulf of Tonkin through the Tet Offensive. He even loosed on journalists the mechanisms of their own government, inciting the CIA and FBI in an effort to discredit and destroy the messengers after he had lost control of the message. His effort and its ultimate failure destroyed him; in his fall, so too fell much of what Americans had clung to at the start of the decade. Despite the passage of so much critical and successful legislation (Medicare, the Civil Rights Act, etc.), race riots and student protests erupted. In 1968 America was on fire, and the streets echoed the cries of the marching disenchanted. The Democratic convention erupted in violence. Bobby Kennedy and Martin Luther King were shot dead. The veneer of victory in Vietnam that Johnson had so achingly struggled to maintain for over five years was ripped away as images poured across television screens. It wasn't just that it appeared as if America were losing, but the television showed war-real war, not the academic theories or no-impact, limited-war notions or abstract rallying calls but the full color of blood and death. That the costs can remain hidden on paper according to Robert Osgood's theories may be true, but that does not mean that the costs of war were not there. Vietnam in 1968 demonstrated graphically that America was in fact in a war-and that she was neither invincible in that war nor above incurring the costs for waging it.
The frontier Johnson sought to conquer was wicked. Johnson's frontier was more than the international and domestic battle lines, stretching beyond the existential world of body counts, bombs, and dollars. What Johnson most needed to conquer was the territory of perception, both in the minds of his adversaries and of the nation that he led. Controlling perceptions, however, and the reconciliation he sought by doing so ultimately proved a bridge too far-perhaps demonstrating that the human mind is the most wicked frontier of all. Lady Bird described Johnson's torture and, in perhaps one of the wisest assessments of America's Vietnam War, said that the real lesson was never to take on "somebody else's insoluble burdens. " 
202
3. Goldstein, Lessons in Disaster, 27-68, 229-48.  4. Waltz, Theory of International Politics, 45-47. Waltz compares great powers to Gulliver, pointing out that even the strongest nations cannot escape the structural influences that dictate to varying degrees state behaviors. Much power resides in the executive branch, but presidents are subjected to structural influences that often "select" for them. Still, presidents, like great powers, must decide what to do and how to do it. 5. Peters, Schlesinger, and Wilentz, Lyndon B. Johnson, 2.  6. Dallek, Lyndon B. Johnson, 12. Johnson's fellow San Marcos students said that "Lyndon would have you believe . . . that there wasn't anybody in the Alamo except Johnsons and Baineses" (ibid.). See also Peters, Schlesinger, and Wilentz, Lyndon B. Johnson, 2.  114 26. Often associated with the "New Frontier, " Kennedy repeatedly defined the "new frontiers of freedom" and the "exceptional challenges to freedom" as represented by the ever-expanding Communist threat into the third world. Chap. 3 of this paper cites several examples of Kennedy's speeches that illustrate this fact and shows how Kennedy sought to reorganize and mobilize the government (his knights) to meet these challenges. Not just heir to these policies, Johnson now had to fill in and fortify Kennedy's commitments. Additionally, he would take his domestic agenda and Vietnam policy well past where Kennedy had left them. The New Frontier is also associated with the space program. While it was Kennedy's charge to go to the moon, it was Johnson who was put in charge of standing up NASA. Johnson was an avid developer of and believer in the space program and its policies. He also led passage of the Space Act of 1958, campaigned adamantly against Eisenhower's neglect of space after Sputnik, and chaired the Johnson hearings that dealt with the United States falling behind the USSR in space. See ibid., 110, 126, 132-33, 363;  and McDougall, Heavens and the Earth, 142, 151-55, 162, 166, 172-76, 417-20.  27. "Presidency: Mr. President, You're Fun, " 41. According to this article, the president loaded the press corps into his Cadillac for a tour of his ranch, during which he swilled beer from a paper cup and drove upwards of 90 miles an hour, routinely screeching to a halt for crossing pigs or to point out sites. Johnson talked incessantly and had the press corps laughing. At one point, after a correspondent commented on Johnson's excessive speed, he took off his 10-gallon cowboy hat and used it to cover up the speedometer.
28. Though Johnson's treatment of the Kennedys was often a source of much contention, especially between RFK and Johnson, Jacqueline Kennedy, through personal letters and statements, made it clear that she both admired and respected Johnson's consideration for her. 29. Peters, Schlesinger, and Wilentz, Lyndon B. Johnson, 26-28, 44-45. Even though he was an acting senator, Johnson had enlisted in the Naval Reserve during World War II. Anxious to prove himself "combat worthy, " Johnson convinced Roosevelt to send him on a "fact-finding" mission in the Pacific, where he was essentially a spy for FDR. MacArthur, recognizing that Johnson had the ear of the president, allowed Johnson to observe on a combat mission in a B-26. During the course of the mission, the B-26 took fire, and MacArthur awarded Johnson the Silver Star (none of the other crewmen received a medal). Johnson had charmed and built a rapport with MacArthur. Years later, however, during the Korean War, Johnson grilled MacArthur but did so in such a way that he was able to preserve their relationship while basically hanging the general out to dry during the hearings. 30. Johnson, Vantage Point, 12.  31. Ibid., 18.  32. Johnson's boastful stories of his family's lineage, discussed earlier in the chapter, certainly testify to this fact. Johnson's mother would also tell anyone who' d listen just how prestigious her family was. Those around Johnson respected his ambition and abilities but were also put off by instances of his sometimes blatant brownnosing. Many in Johnson's life had the impression that Johnson "wasn't just doing good; he was taking care of Lyndon. " See Peters,  Schlesinger, and Wilentz, Lyndon B. Johnson, 17. One of Johnson's close associates described him as a "son-of-a-bitch, but a colossal son-of-a-bitch, " capturing the immensity of Johnson's personality and his ability to win others over to his side. Dallek, Lyndon B. Johnson.  33. Goodwin, Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream, 323-24.  34. Ibid., 322, as adapted from Friedrich and Brzezinski, Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy. Dissent, contradictory information, and alternative perspectives were subsumed by the vacuum of Johnson's strong personality and ideology-driven agenda.
35. Reedy, Twilight of the Presidency, 18.
119 113. Ibid., min. 36-37.  114. Beschloss, Taking Charge, 508-10, transcript of recorded conversation, 8 August 1964 at 8:24 a.m., Johnson Tapes. As with the press conference with McNamara on 4 August, reporters were questioning whether or not the second attack actually happened and/or whether the United States had been participating in covert operations that may have provoked the North Vietnamese attack. Washington Post staff writer Murray Marder's article "Maddox Incident Reexamined-Miscalculation Theory Weighted in Viet Crisis" was particularly probing. McNamara also told the president that he should "disassociate [himself] from and certainly not admit that any" covert action had taken place. In a portion of the conversation not part of the transcript in the Beschloss text but recounted in the Wheeler documentary, "Into Vietnam, " McNamara told Johnson to say specifically that US forces did not "even enter the area until two days" after the incident.
115. Secretary of Defense McNamara, Dean Rusk, and Gen Earle Wheeler testified before a joint session of Congress concerning the 2 and 4 August attacks on US forces and the American response. McNamara's purpose was to convince Congress to concede war powers to the president. See Wheeler, "Into Vietnam, " VHS, min. 44. For the record of the official hearing and testimony, see Senate, Southeast Asia Resolution: Joint Hearing before the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Armed Services, 88th Cong., 2d sess. (Washington, DC: US  Government Printing Office, 1966). In summary, the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution states that "the Congress approves and supports the determination of the president, as Commander in Chief, to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression. " [Sec. 2:] "The United States regards as vital to its national interest and to world peace the maintenance of international peace and security in Southeast Asia. Consonant with the Constitution of the United States and the Charter of the United Nations, and in accordance with its obligations under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, the United States is, therefore, prepared as the president determines, to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed force. " [Sec. 3:] "This resolution shall expire when the president shall determine that the peace and security of the area is [sic] reasonably assured by international conditions created by action of the United Nations or otherwise, except that it may be terminated earlier by concurrent resolution of the Congress. " Tonkin Gulf Resolution, Public Law 88-408, 88th Cong.,  2d sess., 7 August 1964. See also Joseph C. Goulden, Truth Is the First Casualty; The Gulf of  Tonkin Affair: Illusion and Reality (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1969).
116. Wheeler, "Into Vietnam, " VHS, min. 43. McNamara was responding to questions concerning possible US covert operations and whether or not the United States had participated in operations that may have provoked the North Vietnamese attacks. Though some of the record of the conversation is lost and McNamara himself asserts in his memoirs that he "learned later" that he was incorrect in his assertion, intelligence operations scholar Dr. William Bader observes that McNamara replied at least four times under direct questioning that no US forces were involved in commando raids. "There was no disclosure, " Dr. Bader said (ibid., min. 44)  From San Clemente to Saigon: Nixon's Five O'Clock Shadow
We will not make the same old mistakes, we will make our own.
-Henry Kissinger, 1969   The China initiative also restored perspective to our national policy. It reduced Indochina to its proper scale-a small peninsula on a major continent.
-Henry Kissinger
We're playing a much bigger game-we're playing a Russia game, a China game, and an election game, and we're not gonna have [South  Vietnam] collapse.
-Richard Nixon, 1972   Between the conception And the creation Between the emotion And the response Falls the Shadow. . . . This is the way the world ends This is the way the world ends This is the way the world ends Not with a bang but a whimper.
-T. S. Eliot, The Hollow Men, 1925
In 1960 John F. Kennedy challenged Richard M. Nixon to a series of televised debates. Nixon accepted eagerly, confident that he could school the relatively inexperienced senator from Massachusetts. After all, Nixon had been a House member, a senator, and a vice president who not only ran the country while Eisenhower was ill but also had accumulated a long record both domestically and internationally. 
1
2
Kennedy had charmed both the press and the public while Nixon's countenance proved a liability. Consistent with his political history, Nixon waged a vigorous campaign, attacking Kennedy for his youth and pointing out that the White House could not be a "training ground. " 
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Not everyone bought into it, however. Democratic presidential candidate Hubert Humphrey scathingly criticized the notion of a reformed Nixon. During a campaign speech, Humphrey reminded everyone that Nixon had undergone numerous "renovations, " claiming that the Republican candidate had had his "political face lifted so many times" that there couldn't possibly be anything new. 
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
One reason why it is frequently so difficult to sort out myth from reality in reading about political leaders is that part of political leadership is the creation of myths. . . . The politician, no less than the actor or filmmaker, knows that to bore his audience is to lose his audience. . . . [Politicians] must appeal to the heart. . . . We cannot find the stuff of leadership in the dry pages of history. . . . We have to look to the spirit of the man [and] . . . to legends. Legends are often an artful intertwining of fact and myth, designed to beguile, to impress, to inspire, or sometimes simply to attract attention. But legend is an essential ingredient of leadership. 
28
29
Ehrlichman said of Nixon that "we all knew him differently" and that even Nixon's wife could not have "told you who the real Richard Nixon was. " Nixon biographer Ralph de Toledano describes Nixon as a man "with no set ideology" while historian Garry Wills characterizes him as the "plastic man. " Nixon's many layers reflected a penchant for political expediency, and critics wondered if in fact there was anything solid at his core. In his memoirs, Nixon reveals at least one enduring element of his views on foreign policy:
As I looked at America's position in the world and examined our relations with other nations, I could see that the central factor in 1968 on the eve of my presidency was the same as it had been in 1947. . . . America now, as then, was the main defender of the free world against the encroachment and aggression of the Communist world. For twentyfive years, I had watched the changing face of communism. . . . Never once in my career have I doubted that the Communists mean it when they say that their goal is to bring the world under Communist control. . . . But unlike some anticommunists . . . I have always believed that we can and must communicate and . . . negotiate. . . . They are too powerful to ignore. 
33
34
Nixon promised to free South Vietnam from the Communist threat in a way that would also free the United States from its war there. Furthermore, he suggested that he could do all of this while transforming Cold War relationships among the great powers and overcoming the inertia of stagnating American power. Though perhaps politically expedient, the promise had great appeal to the American people, and Nixon banked on his new mystique and the promises that came with it as a strategy to win the presidency. Once in office, he would invoke his own myth as a mechanism to win in Vietnam and to reshape the Cold War. For Nixon, presidential power derived from the mythology surrounding the man who held the office. To that end, he wanted to differentiate himself from Kennedy, "who did nothing but appeared great, " and from Johnson, "who did everything but appeared terrible. " 
35
36
38
The mythology he cultivated served his commitment to winning. He believed his mystique would help him win the power of the presidency, the war in Vietnam, peace abroad and at home, and a heroic ruling from history that would allow him to restructure great-power politics. Such grand victories, however, required more than fables, and Nixon prepared for and exercised his power both brilliantly and ruthlessly. With Kissinger at his side, Nixon "organized government to concentrate power . . . in the White House" and purposely appointed "weak" individuals to the Departments of State and Defense. 
39
The following sections examine how Nixon sought to reframe himself and the Vietnam War, analyzing the role that his mythology played in shaping agendas and outcomes. Did the New Nixon effectively shave off the old, and was he truly a peacemaker? If so, what kind of peace did he make and at what cost? America's ground war officially ends in 1973, Nixon resigns in 1974, and  Saigon falls in 1975. Was this a decent interval? An honorable peace? A necessary iteration in a larger game? Or something else? Finally, what does the war's ending tell us of its beginning, and what might this reveal about inherited war?
Nixon was once asked, "How is it that you can deal with evil forces, an evil empire, like the Soviet Union?, " to which the president responded, "Because I'm evil. " Nixon also later stated that "you've got to be a little evil to understand the people out there. You have to have known the dark side of life. " 
40
Nixon rose to notoriety as a congressman during the Alger Hiss hearings in 1948. 
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
Given his political roots and often cantankerous public displays and ruthlessness, it is understandable why so many doubted the new, softer, middleof-the road Nixon who hit the campaign trail in 1968. But the country was hungry for leadership. The polity was triangulated by the context of Vietnam, Johnson's withdrawal from the presidential race, and the sense that America was spiraling out of control domestically. Nixon's resurgence toward the nation's highest office was facilitated by the breach in the political lines that these three factors created. Remove any single factor, and arguably there is no new Nixon, no Kissinger, and no Woodward and Bernstein. But in reality, those breaches existed. The great man "acts" and does so by "being in the right place at the right time, " and Nixon once again positioned himself for a rendezvous with destiny. 
50
For the new president, the war in Vietnam was both old and new. As a congressman and as vice president, Nixon had journeyed "the labyrinth of Indochina" and had formed distinct impressions concerning the conflicts there. 
51
52
Nixon had prepared his own version of containment and ushered in the era of détente. 
54
55
56
57
58
The United States had limits, Kissinger argued, and overinvestment in trying to "win" the bipolar competition between America and the Soviet Union wasted resources and misread the "reality" of international life. 
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
In an attempt to delineate not only objectives but also the methods required, the RAND study posited several alternative outcomes and strategies. Outcomes proposed included assured GVN control of all of South Vietnam (aka "victory"), mutual withdrawal without political accommodation, political accommodation (with mutual troop withdrawal), and territorial accommodation. 
70
71
72
73
Both Nixon and Kissinger wanted to reorient American policy but were unwilling to give in on Vietnam. 
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
5
82
We know that we are progressing, that the other side is growing weaker. Therefore, if the enemy gives no indication of wanting to negotiate seriously . . . we should review the evidence. The long road is risky; there are too many backseat drivers. . . . We should . . . adopt a flexible and reasonable posture to keep public opinion in support of us.
[Thieu then raised concerns about a possible offensive by the North once American troops were withdrawn. Nixon replied that he had a plan, referencing earlier discussions on the use of American military ground power and airpower. Nixon then urged Thieu toward secrecy.]
We should not disclose to the enemy what we propose to do. . . . Another disadvantage in making public disclosures . . . is the fact that critics at home will not be satisfied. . . . Consequently, let us have a plan, but let us keep it secret among ourselves. 
83
84
85
A key aspect of Nixon's strategy relied not just on the use of force but the threat of force, which he believed was made all the more real by his reputation as a hard-liner. So while he marched his "better angels" publicly through ostensibly moderate policies aimed at ending the war, he also drew upon his dark side to effect those policies. Reflecting on his own "Nixonness, " he wrote in his memoirs, I was sure that [Leonid] Brezhnev and [Alexei] Kosygin had been no more anxious for me to win in 1968 than [Nikita] Khrushchev had been in 1960. The prospect of having to deal with a Republican administration-and a Nixon administration at that-undoubtedly caused anxiety in Moscow. In fact, I suspected that the Soviets might have counseled the North Vietnamese to offer to begin the Paris talks in the hope that the bombing halt would tip the balance to Humphrey in the election-and if that was their strategy, it had almost worked. 
86
No one in the Soviet leadership, including the most zealous supporters of communism, ever talked seriously about any concrete prospects for communism in the United States. . . . In my boldest thoughts I never looked beyond the idea of our two systems peacefully converging somehow. . . . But did Richard Nixon really believe in the communist threat in the United States, or was it just a convenient means to climb the political ladder? To my mind, the latter was more likely. 
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
In a last gasp at peace (and arguably at a Democratic presidential victory), Johnson halted bombing of the North as the election approached in 1968. During that time, Nixon conducted his own political manipulations behind the scenes. Between 1967 and 1968, Anna Chennault acted as the administration's special liaison to South Vietnamese president Thieu. Though she played a distinctly different role than that of Madame Nhu during the Kennedy administration, Nixon thus found himself involving his own "Dragon Lady" in his Vietnam policies. Chennault was connected both in DC and in Saigon, and she would visit Saigon to inform Thieu that "Nixon would be a strong supporter of Vietnam, " hinting that Thieu should "hold back" from any agreements arranged by Johnson. 
97
98
99
100
In an address to the nation on 3 November 1969, Nixon rerepresented himself, the war, and the nation's agenda in Vietnam:
Tonight I want to talk to you on a subject of deep concern to all Americans and to many people in all parts of the world-the war in Vietnam. I believe that one of the reasons for the deep division about Vietnam is that many Americans have lost confidence in what their Government has told them about our policy. The American people cannot and should not be asked to support a policy which involves the overriding issues of war and peace unless they know the truth about that policy.
[Nixon thus contrasts himself with his predecessor and cages his approach to Vietnam as rooted in "truth. " He at once attempts to solidify his own image while convincing the nation that "this time, it's going to be different" and that the country can trust him. He then goes on to "clarify" why the United States is involved in the first place and the situation that he inherited.]
[When I took office] the war had been going on for four years. 31,000 Americans had been killed in action. The training program for the South Vietnamese was behind schedule. 540,000 Americans were in Vietnam with no plans to reduce the number. No progress had been made at the negotiations in Paris. . . . The war was causing deep division at home [and abroad].
[Nixon then discusses that the "easy course" would be to quit the war and to lay it at the feet of his predecessors. He is bound, however, by a greater duty.] But I had a greater obligation than to think only of the years of my administration and of the next election. I had to think of the effect of my decision on the next generation and on the future of peace and freedom in America and in the world. . . . The great question is: How can we win America's peace?
[Nixon then summarizes some of the broader history of conflict in Indochina and Vietnam and emphasizes the many atrocities committed by the Communists. After effectively painting the "ugly Communists, " Nixon then highlights the importance of US prestige and invokes images of Kennedy and Eisenhower's visions-raising both the specter of the Communist threat and contrasting it with the "hope" of America. Nixon then ties America's hope to the proposals he put forth on Guam and at the United Nations.] I initiated a pursuit for peace on many fronts. . . . We have offered the complete withdrawal of all outside forces within 1 year. We have proposed a cease-fire under international supervision. We have offered free elections under international supervision with the Communists participating. . . . And the Saigon Government has pledged to accept the result[s]. . . . We have not put forth our proposals on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. . . . We have declared that anything is negotiable except the right of the people of South Vietnam to determine their own future.
[Nixon's "plan" appears overwhelmingly reasonable and sophisticated, effectively contrasting the "peacemaker" with the stubborn and uncooperative Communists. It was a somewhat gross mischaracterization, however. Everything was "not negotiable. " Hanoi and Nixon were operating from two distinct, mutually exclusive premises. Despite his overtures for "peace and negotiation, " Nixon's plan rested on the premise that he could, through greater force and diplomatic maneuvering, pressure Hanoi to capitulate with the very same terms that Johnson pursued. Hanoi, for its part, would not negotiate "under duress, " and therefore bombing them to the negotiating table remained a nonstarter. Nixon then details his extensive efforts that started even before his inauguration and highlights the role of the Soviets and China. He then punctuates Hanoi's stubbornness by relaying his interchange with Ho Chi Minh, giving himself credit for making extensive efforts for peace and stating that Ho Chi Minh "flatly rejected my initiative. " Nixon proceeds to outline his strategy.] I laid down in Guam three principles. . . . First, the United States will keep all of its treaty commitments. Second, we shall provide a shield if a nuclear power threatens the freedom of a nation allied with us. . . . Third, in cases involving other types of aggression, we shall furnish military and economic assistance.
[Nixon explains his principles of de-Americanization and Vietnamization, purporting that both are already yielding results.]
The policy of the previous administration not only resulted in our assuming the primary responsibility for fighting the war, but even more significantly did not adequately stress the goal of strengthening the South Vietnamese. . . . In July . . . I changed General [Creighton] Abrams's orders so that they were consistent with the objectives of our new policies. . . . Our air operations have been reduced by 20 percent[, and] . . . we are finally bringing American men home. . . . The South Vietnamese have continued to gain in strength. . . . Enemy infiltration . . . is less than 20 percent of what it was over the same period last year . . . [, and] United States casualties have declined . . . to the lowest point in 3 years.
[Nixon's estimations greatly oversimplified and exaggerated the progress being made on the ground and gave the nation the false impression that, under his leadership, the war was just about won. That the United States would suffer an additional 30,000 casualties before the end is a stark testament to the extent of Nixon's misrepresentation of the direction the war was taking. Though he cautions that some "flexibility" may be required going forward, he hammers home the notion that he is taking the strong but "peaceful" route.] Fifty years ago, in this room and at this very desk, President Woodrow Wilson spoke words which caught the imagination of a war-weary world. He said: "This is the war to end war. " His dream for peace after World War I was shattered. . . . Tonight I do not tell you that the war in Vietnam is the war to end wars. But I do say this: I have initiated a plan which will end this war in a way that will bring us closer to that great goal . . . the goal of a just and lasting peace. 
101
102
The situation Nixon faced in Vietnam was not too dissimilar from that which the French confronted nearly two decades before. 
103
105
107
108
Ironically, Nixon was actually often excruciatingly rational and calculating. According to former members of the JCS and his staff, Nixon ran the security council like a board meeting and never "made a decision on the spot. " 
109
For over 15 years, "Nixon had consistently taken belligerent positions on the war in Vietnam, usually advocating more militant strategies than Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson. " 112 His concentration of power in the executive branch, penchant for action, and determination to win meant that his darker side would not remain long subdued. Kissinger wrote in Diplomacy that Nixon had "exceeded" the tolerances of the Democrats' "dove platform" within nine months of taking office. 
113
In the summer of 1970, Nixon demonstrated his and his nation's resolve in an act that marked a departure from his predecessor's policies and the "new Vietnam War" he had described in the spring. Nixon had been secretly bombing supply routes in Cambodia since 1969. By 1970 his frustration with the war led him to openly send waves of B-52s against suspected sanctuaries in Cambodia. The air raids were followed by American and South Vietnamese ground teams. The decision to "invade" Cambodia was made in private. He told only Kissinger of the decision beforehand, revealing what was dubbed Operation Menu to the State and Defense Departments only after the forces were already en route. 
115
116
117
118
119
The president reminded his audience that he had reserved the right to remain flexible in ending the Vietnam War and had stated unequivocally that he "would not hesitate to take strong and effective measures" if the Communists remained obstinate. 
120
121
122
124
125
126
America had little tolerance for any more dissonance over Vietnam policies, and the administration's honeymoon was over. The ugly king stood revealed, and the nation went looking for razors to shave the darkness from Nixon's face. Nixon said in his 30 April speech that he would "rather be a one-term President and do what I believe is right than to be a two-term President at the cost of seeing America become a second-rate power. " 128 Whether Nixon truly would have martyred himself for a policy is debatable, but his presidency was at risk from the firestorm that ensued following his actions in Cambodia. He only added fuel to the fire when during a press conference he offhandedly comforted a veteran's wife by calling her husband a "hero" and the antiwar protestors "bums. " 129 Vietnam was now "Nixon's War, " and his America was cleanly divided, from his perspective, into heroes and bums. Sixteen months into his presidency, he still enjoyed support for his war effort, but he had very effectively exacerbated divisions at home. The tragic and violent protests at Kent State and Jackson State were two of more than 800 sit-ins and demonstrations that rocked the country in the spring and summer of 1970. Nixon was butting up against the new "new generation" that perceived things quite differently than did the president.
When Nixon talked of "peace, " "success, " and American "values, " those words held dissimilar connotations for those who were against the war than they did for him. Internal memorandums meant to explain the riots of 1970 mentioned several key factors. First, whereas Nixon imagined a peace that involved a self-determinant and American-friendly Vietnam, students imagined peace to mean the immediate end to killing. 
130
132
133
134
135
143
144
145
146
147
149
151
152
155
156
158
159
160
161
162
163
165
Perhaps recognizing Nixon's tenuous position at home, the North calculated that continued direct confrontation with the United States would be both costly and unnecessary. Nixon won reelection decisively in 1972, but the Watergate scandal was percolating, and he faced growing opposition from Congress and the public. Just as he had arranged every means at his disposal to throw at Hanoi, so had Nixon gone "all in" during his reelection campaign. Besides the now notorious break-ins of 1972 and the subsequent cover-up, Nixon had undermined the Republican Party by selfishly hoarding the war chest for his reelection. 
166
The 1973 Paris Accords proceeded under several preliminary conditions. First, the Thieu government, southern neutralists, and the Vietcong would form a "tripartite electoral commission. " 167 Hanoi agreed to let Thieu remain in office so long as the Communist Party was afforded representation. A cease-fire would also be in place on all sides. The process leading up to the accords actually started in 1972. Haldeman describes the plan worked out by Kissinger and the North Vietnamese:
Henry started to outline the agreement from his secret red folder [and] made the point that we got a much better deal by far than we had expected. The net effect is that it leaves Thieu in office. We get a stand-in-place cease-fire on October 30 or 31. They have to agree to work together to set up a Council of National Concord and Reconciliation, but any action by this council has to be by unanimous vote, so it can't effectively hurt Thieu. . . . The cease-fire would be followed by a complete withdrawal of troops within 60 days and a return of the POWs within 60 days. We' d have everything done by the end of the year. 
168
169
171
It wasn't the hoary elf who visited Christmas cheer upon Hanoi in 1972 but the dark-bearded and glowering American president wielding a B-52. Between 18 and 28 December, the big bombers rained steel down on North Vietnam. For all the fury, there was little significance, and when talks between Le Duc Tho and Kissinger resumed in January, the parties arrived at essentially the same conditions established in October. A shift occurred regarding President Thieu, however. In a 17 December letter, Nixon cordially yet firmly let Thieu know exactly where he stood:
Over the last two months . . . I have kept you scrupulously informed of the progress of the negotiations. I have sought to convey to you my best judgment of what is in our mutual interest. I have given you every opportunity to join with me in bringing peace with honor to the people of South Vietnam. General Haig's mission now represents my final effort to point out to you the necessity for joint action and to convey my irrevocable intention to proceed, preferably with your cooperation, but, if necessary, alone. . . . Let me emphasize . . . that General Haig is not coming to Saigon . . . [to negotiate] with you. The time has come for us to present a united front . . . and you must decide now whether you desire to continue to work together or whether you want me to seek a settlement with the enemy which serves U.S. interests alone. 
172
The Peace Accords were signed in Paris on 27 January 1973. The military arrangement left large portions of North Vietnamese forces in place throughout Vietnam, which meant that combat after the cease-fire was "inevitable. " 
173
174
175
Whether it was hiring men with his own money to rifle through psychiatrist's files, bugging the Democratic headquarters, breaching the borders of sovereign nations out of his own frustration, or bombing his adversaries into oblivion, Nixon was willing to do whatever it took to win. Furthermore, the peace he wrought in Vietnam was an illusion, conjured just as much as the New Nixon was conjured-from an amalgam of manipulated perceptions, strong-arming, selfishness, misrepresentations, and lies. Nixon accomplished both great and terrible things. Vietnam may very well fade in the grand annals of history as a subtext to a larger Cold War victory, but that is for others to determine. What we can know is that within the boundaries of Vietnam, the American victory Nixon brought came with empty promises. Americans' faith in their government, the US economy, and the stature and confidence of America's military was tarnished. Nixon's victory and his presidency hung like a guillotine over the nation of Vietnam and over his own country.
South Vietnamese forces and Saigon fell to a major Communist offensive in 1975. Called to testify after he and Pres. Gerald Ford had asked Congress for $722 million in US aid for South Vietnam, Kissinger was asked if America could do anything to prevent a Communist takeover. "There is no certain answer to that question, " Kissinger said. "I wish there were. " 176 Commenting on Nixon's achievements through détente, John Lewis Gaddis writes, "It is difficult to think of anything [he] could have done that would have produced a more dramatic shift in world power relationships of greater benefit to the United States. . . . For the first time since the Korean War, it was Russians, and not Americans, who faced rivals more determined to contain them than to contain each other. " 177 Yet Nixon ran the country as if it were "his own preserve, " and despite his accomplishments, the shadowy aspects of his nature incurred costs. 
178
The next chapter presents broader conclusions, but since Nixon rounds out the slice of Vietnam examined by this study, it is appropriate to hint at some of our findings. Nixon effectively redefined the Vietnam problem for the United States, but in reframing it, he only delayed the outcomes seeded by Kennedy and Johnson. Nixon's presidency makes an interesting case for the study of images, agendas, and outcomes because Nixon vehemently believed in the power of myth and dedicated so much time developing and exploiting his own. Ultimately, however, even a president is somewhat bound by structural forces, and while myth is indeed powerful, it is often only temporarily so. This is particularly true in the case of Nixon because not only was his own self-image swirling with competing shades and contradictions but also his emphasis on winning meant that his presidential image sought expediency over substance. Commenting on Kissinger and Nixon, Kimball states that "neither was a hollow man in the sense of lacking convictions about society, politics, economics, or diplomacy, but both were pragmatically flexible in response to circumstances. They also seemed to lack moral compunctions about using unethical means to achieve their ends and were ruthless players in the arena of power and politics. " 
179
The totality of the Vietnam War cannot be laid at Nixon's feet. But his policies there, as well as the direction in which he took the war and his country, do reflect his presidential image. Whether we believe Nixon's center was hollow, shaded, or both, how he ended Vietnam is at once an expression of the man and of the Vietnam War. For all the sound and fury leading up to the 1973 Peace Accords, the ending for the United States was more whisper and whimper than bang. Vietnam started and ended ambiguously. From Eisenhower's inchoate policies to Kennedy's covert investment with broad commitments to Johnson's quiet slide, Nixon's turn to the "decent interval" merely continued the confusion that surrounded America's longest war. How wars begin may very well determine how they end. Wars that start muddled will most likely end so. Such wars make for a sticky inheritance and can taper in their endings as surreptitiously and insidiously as they snowball in their beginnings, lingering and haunting the halls of power long after the reports of rifles have ceased and the helicopters have left. 2. Espar, "Quest, " DVD, min. 42-45. Nixon's television adviser had tried to tell the vice president that his skin had a "translucent quality, " but Nixon was adamantly against wearing makeup.
3. Ibid., transcript, quoted from a Nixon 1968 campaign speech. 4. Ibid. 5. Ibid., DVD, min. 44. 6. Ibid., quoted from a 7 November 1962 press conference. 7. Nixon made clear he had no intention of running in 1964 prior to his run for governor of California and reiterated that assertion after Kennedy was assassinated. He believed that Kennedy would easily hold the White House for eight years; after JFK was assassinated, Nixon also believed that the mood of the country was such that Johnson would easily win reelection.
8. Espar, "Quest, " transcript. 9. Multiple press releases, biographies, and scholarly works use the term New Nixon to describe him at multiple points in his political career.
10. The Nixon mythology/myth is explained throughout this chapter. Summarized, it consists of a blended story line that marries romantic American and classic European motifs but that also infuses the heroic archetypes with distinctive leadership values deriving from Nixon's own perception of what makes leaders great. Nixon romanticized his heritage and deemed himself as possessing the same qualities that distinguished men like Winston Churchill, Charles de Gaulle, and Joseph Stalin.
11. Espar, "Quest, " transcript. 12. Nixon, "Asia after Vietnam, " 111-25. 13. Ibid., 123-24. Nixon urges "containment without isolation" with regard to China and states that "there is no room for heavy-handed American pressures" in Asia's future. Nixon illuminates the "failed" policies in Vietnam as well as the cold realities of a surging Russia and China but does so in a tempered manner, thereby promoting himself as a "middle of the road" realist with vision and answers (ibid.).
14. Espar, "Quest, " DVD, min. 63-64. Humphrey referenced Nixon's political campaigns for the House and Senate as well as his makeovers in the 1952 and 1960 elections. Humphrey also reminded everyone that Nixon had reinvented himself in 1962 and 1964.  15. After Nixon was selected as vice president, accusations arose that he had received illegal contributions from a group of wealthy businessmen. Though the allegations ultimately proved false, the scandal threatened Nixon's remaining on Eisenhower's ticket. In response, Nixon Chapter 6
Vietnam is still with us. It has created doubts about American judgment, about American credibility, about American power-not only at home, but throughout the world. It has poisoned our domestic debate. So we paid an exorbitant price for the decisions that were made in good faith and for good purpose.
-Henry Kissinger
This study examined three presidents in Vietnam and the effects their image had on the agenda and outcomes of America's longest war. In seeking to convey the more salient points and aspects of the Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon administrations, we invoked the often useful but infinitely limited literary device of metaphor. No matter how consistent are the images of Camelot's mythical king, America's frontiersman, or the shadow with Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon, respectively, the caricatures inevitably fall short. Each president is an amalgam and could be described 100 different ways, and none would be wrong. Neither would any one description be wholly correct. Presidents, like their policies, are an iterative accumulation of experiences and interactions. In the full refraction of history's prism, they are at once revealed to be stunningly similar to the way we elect to perceive and portray them while still defying encapsulation. Like T. S. Eliot's J. Alfred Prufrock, presidents are not so easily "formulated, " no matter how intently we pin them to the wall. 
1
First and foremost, analysis of the three presidents confirms Kenneth Boulding's contention that images evolve through an iterative process of interaction. Though predilections are stubborn-and the many examples throughout the study demonstrate Kennedy's, Johnson's, and Nixon's enduring commitment to existing beliefs-often the most salient examples of the influence of images came from their interactions with the "real world. " Presidential image involves not only the personal worldview projected by each of the presidents but also their integration of both confirming and disconfirming information. Domestic pressures, public perceptions, and opinions of the presidents and their policies, as well as the interactions of particular policies with the war on the international stage, all congealed to form each man's presidential image. Also influential were political equities in that domestic political gains or losses sometimes drove presidential agendas even more than the worldviews that spawned them. At a minimum, however, each man's existing belief structure influenced how he dealt with externalities (such as an uncooperative press or domestic dissent). These interrelationships not only heighten the need for leaders to be cognizant of their proclivities but also illuminate the integral role the public plays in shaping presidential image.
The study also reveals that even though each Vietnam-era president adhered to the same containment metastructure, each man individually perceived the means best suited to achieve its prescriptions. Even Johnson and Kennedy, who were from the same political party and shared numerous overlapping assumptions about the role of government, differed in how they levied their agendas to push back Communism, transform American society, and win in Vietnam. While dynamic circumstances and changes on the ground certainly played a role between Kennedy's demise and Nixon's rise, the respective contrasts between each man are attributable in large part to the individual images of each president. This seems consistent with the assertions of both Stephen Hawking and Boulding, where beliefs or models effectively create reality through perceptions. Each man helped shape, if not create, many of the circumstances surrounding his Vietnam policies and forced onto his successor the ramifications wrought through his presidential image.
Current decision makers should pay heed to the role that image played in each Vietnam-era president's policies and their outcomes and be especially mindful of the effects presidential image had on the successor's state of play. Kennedy's inheritance and subsequent policies demonstrate the importance of transitions. When presidential transitions include a war or another problem deemed paramount to national security, it must be effectively handed off. When both the problem and the solutions are ill defined, preconceptions and presidential image have more room to "fill in the white space. " Eisenhower's handoff of Vietnam to Kennedy amounted to little more than "it's important, complicated, and difficult. " The consequence was Kennedy's almost blanket departure from past policies. Such departures are not always bad, but the danger lies in the premature dismissal of context and circumstances that at the very least might better inform the new president on the way ahead. Marked departures from past policy stances in the absence of deliberate collusion between the incoming and outgoing administrations amplify the tendency to dismiss or overlook previous rationales. Wicked problems are inherently inchoate, providing ample opportunity for decision makers to define them through their own image. If the new administration is already inclined to rebel against its predecessor, then this tendency is exacerbated. Furthermore, if the heir's image is rooted in the same assumptions that his predecessor held, as was the case with Johnson, disconfirming information can be readily dismissed. The result with Johnson was a doubling down on previous policies, with little to no inquiry into the validity of their assumptions.
Henry Kissinger said that "it is an illusion to believe that leaders gain in profundity while they gain experience. . . . The convictions that leaders have formed before reaching high office are the intellectual capital they will consume as long as they continue in office. " 
2
Chapter 2 elucidated how the human brain fills in patterns, drawing on theories from Boulding, Hawking, Robert Jervis, and Yuen Foong Khong. Both the social and the physical sciences postulate how what "we believe" becomes "what is" and how beliefs may even redefine "what was. " Objective "facts" do remain. Vietnam happened. The question is the degree of influence that presidential image exhibited on the war. When Kennedy looked to Vietnam, he saw the "new frontiers of freedom" and staked out America's claim and commitment there. He reorganized the government and rallied it to Vietnam, which became the new front line of the Cold War. Johnson subsequently labored to fortify America's position there, but he did so by folding Vietnam into the interior lines of his larger quest for a Great Society. In so doing, Johnson found that the Vietnam War acted as a sinkhole both to his cause and his presidency. Nixon reached into that dark hole and attempted to place Vietnam back on the map as a small peninsula among much larger continents. Perceptions influenced-and sometimes dictated-the agendas and subsequent outcomes for both Johnson and Nixon.
Johnson obsessed over controlling perceptions. His manipulations were driven by a need to overcome his own insecurities as well as buy time in Vietnam to prosecute his social agendas. In "Theory of Victory, " J. Boone Bartholomees asserts that victory is ultimately a matter of "opinion" and that in America domestic opinion matters the most. 
3
4
5
6
Presidential image played out across three administrations in Vietnam. Despite the fundamental metastructure of containment and the Cold War, each president pursued common ends in distinctive ways. How each perceived himself, the government and its institutions, and the security environment influenced the nature and character of his policies and their outcomes. Kennedy and Nixon both summoned the country to greatness during their inaugural addresses, but each man had his own understanding of what "greatness" meant and how to get there. 
7
8
In foreign policy we are faced with a choice of insisting on Democratic rule around the world or of accepting the existence of the non-democratic regimes that have arisen in cultures different from our own. At the philosophical level, we should endorse Locke's concept of natural rights. In practice, however, we must recognize that often nations lack the traditions and institutions to make democracy work. Democratic government does not automatically mean good government. . . . Our country developed its democratic political institutions over centuries, [and] we should not expect others to replicate them overnight. 
9
At the end of this study, we also might ask how the exploration of presidential image has shaped or reshaped our understanding of Vietnam and inherited war. I cannot say for certain that the world would be a better place had we not gone to Vietnam. Historians and scholars lament the missed opportunity to stop Hitler sooner, and the naïveté of British prime minister Neville Chamberlain is axiomatic. Hindsight affords a luxurious perch from which to judge. The "couch of reason" is not often available, however, in the frantic world of presidents. Johnson's quandary left him damned if he did and damned if he didn't. The Hippocratic oath demands that doctors first "do no harm. " In politics, finding an option that eliminates all harm is not always easy, and presidents are often challenged with determining what will do less harm. Francis Bacon said that more comes from failure than from success, and while we can assess the costs of Vietnam, it is much harder to determine the benefits. Without Vietnam, all of the political missteps and inefficacies of presidential leadership may have remained shadowed, and we would be without their benefit today. Similarly, American military reform may have taken a different pathor none at all.
Vietnam cost the United States nearly $200 billion, more than 58,000 lives, and over 300,000 wounded. 
10
11
12
Analysis of Kennedy's, Johnson's, and Nixon's presidential images does more than provide access to how their predilections and belief structures drove agendas and outcomes in Vietnam. It also offers an excellent lens through which to view our own understandings and beliefs about Vietnam, our presidents, our wars, and our country. Every new war receives unto its fields the ghosts of wars past, reincarnated through the incantations of presidential image. If we expect certain limits in presidential behavior and disapprove of either the wars they choose or how they fight them, then we must turn to our own expectations of government and understanding of war. It is easy to throw stones, especially through time, but it is much more difficult to consider, understand, and engage problems of national interest from the perspective of those who face such wickedness every day. While it may not be possible for each of us to share the view of the Oval Office, we can turn to history, self-reflection, and current affairs. Only when informed might we find the purchase required to see when presidents' judgments are clouded or when their rhetoric abuses history. If, however, we leave not just the decisions but the understanding of history solely to the decision makers, then certainly we have no right to feel abused when presidents drive us to places we would rather not go. Presidents are endowed with a sacred trust, but so too are those who elect them. Images, the wars they drive, and the inheritances they bequeath are not simply the business of presidents. Ultimately, the image, the war, and the inheritance are our own.
The connection between individual image and the inertial state of play is crucial in inherited wars. In the expanse of Vietnam this study examined, each president was presented within a particular metaphor that was then tied to his agendas and outcomes. Though the preceding study of image is satisfactory and attention was paid to the interaction between each image and the momentum inherited from the previous administration, it is that very nexus of those transitions that warrants further research. Preliminary findings derived from each president's image lead us to believe that Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon may signify three broad categories or types of presidents in inherited wars. Respectively, they are the visionary, the shepherd, and the reframer. 
13
Regardless of size and scope, wars are an automatic crisis that hyperexcites the polity. Further, the immediacy of crisis that inherited wars present means that each bias, predilection, and image from which presidents draw is immediately in play-analogies and other cognitive shortcuts are the first and sometimes only fallback position. At the same time, inherited wars have a momentum of their own, and the contest between the individual and the structure takes center stage. In the arc of Vietnam, the progression from visionary to reframer followed the course of each administration. This does not necessarily mean, however, that each president was inherently a visionary, shepherd, or reframer. The same president might very well oscillate among categories in his policies. We cannot draw conclusions as to whether party affiliation, the war's duration, or the point at which each president takes over affects the type of war president he becomes. Presidential image, however, proves a good place to start.
from Campbell R. McConnell and Stanley L. Brue, Economics: Principles, Problems, and  Policies, 15th ed., ed. Lucille Sutton (New York: McGraw-Hill Irwin, 2002)
from Campbell R. McConnell and Stanley L. Brue, Economics: Principles, Problems, and  Policies, 15th ed., ed. Lucille Sutton (New York: McGraw-Hill Irwin, 2002)
within are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official policy or position of the organizations with which they are
The Drew Papers are award-winning master's theses selected for publication by the 
School of Advanced Air and Space Studies (SAASS), Maxwell AFB, Alabama
Col Dennis "Denny" Drew, USAF
Air University
Colonel Drew
Staff College
Airpower Research Institute
Colonel Drew
Muir S. Fairchild Award
Air University
Queen Beatrix
Order of Orange-Nassau
Royal Netherlands Air Force
The Drew Papers are dedicated to promoting the understanding of air and space power theory and application. the 
US Air Force
Department of Defense
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
Consequently, he framed and approached both his critics at home and adversaries abroad in much the same way-he went at them.
Forced by 1967 to withdraw many of his efforts for the Great Society due to the circumstances in Vietnam, Johnson was not about to let "aggression at home" force him to lose in Vietnam. He was embittered and blamed both the North Vietnamese for complicating his war aims and the disgruntled factions at home who just couldn't seem to get on board with his policies. Feeling that his critics were undermining his domestic and international agenda, he became convinced that the "real enemy" was the "fools and knaves at home who gave encouragement to Hanoi. " 
172
173
174
175
176
179
137
138
The extent and range of Nixon's shadowy activities that led to Watergate and the subsequent cover-up are well known and fill volumes beyond their treatment here. Nixon attacked adversaries he faced in politics as ruthlessly as those he faced on the battlefield, and he was willing to use any means at his disposal to achieve victory. His ambivalence toward rivals and authority figures and the vehemence with which he attacked those who opposed him were manifested in the agendas and outcomes of his presidency and in Vietnam. 
139
Prior to the escapades with Ellsberg's psychiatrist and well before the 1972 election, Nixon turned his eye on Laos and viewed a potential operation there as a way to validate South Vietnam's forces while disrupting Hanoi's war effort. Code-named Lam Son 719, the bold, slashing attack would cut a swath into North Vietnam's critical logistics line along Route 9 west of Khe Sanh. 
140
141
142
100. Hung and Schecter, Palace File, 24; and Bui Diem, In the Jaws of History, 244. See  Nixon's Vietnam War, 59. Stanley Karnow also notes that "Thieu balked at sending diplomats to Paris until four days before Nixon's inauguration, " further indicating that Nixon's play directly impacted President Thieu's calculations during the peace talks of 1968 (Vietnam, 586).
101. Quoted from Nixon's "Address to the Nation, " 3 November 1969, 901-9.
102. The day following the speech, the New York Times described a "large and normally undemonstrative cross section of the country" flooding the White House with supportive telegrams and letters. There appeared to be a boost in public opinion and support for the war and for Nixon. See New York Times, 5 November 1969. Two weeks later, during the "moratorium" when 500,000 protestors flooded the capital, Nixon disregarded its significance, convinced that he had the majority of Americans on his side.
103. Kimball, Nixon's Vietnam War, 16. "The Vietnam predicament that Nixon faced as president paralleled that faced by French leaders in 1953. Their seven-year-old military effort to restore France's colonial grip . . . was in serious jeopardy. Military and political failure in Vietnam, the threat of greater Chinese involvement in support of the Vietminh, and war-weariness at home had driven France's leaders to consider withdrawal through a negotiated settlement. . . . Taking steps toward a diplomatic solution, the French believed that an honorable withdrawal required the stabilization or even improvement of their military position-a course Nixon would also follow as president" (ibid.).
104. Haldeman notes in his diaries that Nixon was extremely agitated and "really driving at Cambodia. " According to Haldeman, Nixon knew he was on thin ice legally when it came to any military push into Cambodia. Concerned about the apparent lack of progress in the war and waning public support for his policies, Nixon was determined to get results (Haldeman Diaries, 153-56) 