# ID: 87306fcdd337493db5dcc858229e70d5
# Title: Drew
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
4.
Hawking and Mlodinow, Grand Design, 622-24.
 5.
Ibid.,
585-602.
Austrian physicists in 1999 demonstrated how alternately firing molecules at two slits in a barrier proved that matter behaved differently depending on whether one or both slits were open. (
This "two-slit experiment" was originally performed with light waves in the 1930s.)
Newtonian physics would dictate that the same number of molecules would flow through each slit whether or not the other slit was open or blocked.
However, scientists found that the number of molecules flowing through each slit would change when the other slit was open.
It appeared as if the molecules were "choosing" an alternate path, contradicting Newtonian assumptions that matter behaves in accordance with natural mandates.
6.
Ibid.,
625-29.
 7.
Ibid.,
665-72.
The uncertainty principle was first formulated by Werner Heisenberg in 1926.
Heisenberg tells us that "there are limits to our ability to simultaneously measure certain data, such as position and velocity" (ibid.,
666).
8.
Ibid.,
806-15.
 9.
Ibid.,
56-62.
 1961-69; and (5) the Nixon-Kissinger strategy of détente, 1970-79 (ibid).
Gaddis compares the five geopolitical codes to delineate patterns in US grand strategy.
This paper draws on Gaddis's structural divisions of US grand strategy into eras of containment to help define the larger Cold War context within which each Vietnam-era president imagined and tried to solve the Vietnam War.
39.
Ibid.,
ix, 24-27, 54, 64, 69.
Kennan coined the term containment and postulated two fundamental objectives in foreign policy: (1) "to protect the security of the nation, by which is meant the continued ability of this country to pursue the development of its internal life without serious interference, or threat of interference, from foreign powers"; and (2) "to advance the welfare of its people, by promoting a world order in which this nation can make the maximum contribution to the peaceful and orderly development of other nations and derive maximum benefit from their experiences and abilities" (ibid.,
26).
Kennan was adamant that "complete security or perfection of international environment will never be achieved" and that the best policies indicated "direction" as opposed to final "destinations" (ibid.).
For the Kennan lectures and essays, see Kennan, American Diplomacy.
Gaddis summarizes the three stages of Kennan's containment strategy as (1) "restore the balance of power left unstable by the defeats of Germany and Japan and by the simultaneous expansion of Soviet influence in Europe and Asia"; (2) discover and exploit the schisms between different Communist regimes and fragment "the international Communist movement"; and (3) change the Soviet Union over time by promoting a new conceptualization of international relations, convincing "Russian leaders that their interests could better be served by learning to live with a diverse world than by trying to remake it in their image. "
See Gaddis, Strategies  of Containment, 54-69.
 40.
Ibid.,
ix, 88-92, 115.
NSC-68 departed from Kennan's version of containment by expanding US commitment from the defending of strategic "strong points" to a wider perimeter defense.
NSC-68 more intimately coupled prestige, credibility, economics, and perceptions of national strength to balance of power theory, thus moving containment into nonmilitary domains.
This policy document assumed "Western weakness"-that the West could not tolerate even shortterm advances by Communists, that alliances were key in preemptively combating Communist advances, and that Soviet behavior could actually help the Western image.
It pivoted on the idea of collective security and expanded the aims of US containment strategy.
Despite the expansion of containment strategy into nonmilitary domains, however, NSC-68 was still much more militarycentric than the containment strategy developed under Eisenhower.
For more detail, see NSC-68,  14 April 1950, in Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS), 1950, vol.
1, 240.
 41.
Gaddis, Strategies of Containment, 124, adapted from John Paton Davies, memorandum,  22 September 1950, FRUS, vol.
7, 754; and Dean Acheson (address, National War College, 27  August 1951)  See Sheehan, Pentagon Papers, 80-81, 231-33.
President Johnson originally limited Marine and Army actions to within 50 miles of their bases in Vietnam and was extremely restrictive on target selection and prosecution during Operation Rolling Thunder.