# ID: 88d732ab5a024df59661def2c63a42cc
# Title: Use of Shih in Chinese Operational Art
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
As China's influence on international affairs has continued to grow, more and more people have become concerned about the intentions behind Chinese actions. Several theories offer potential insights into the reasons behind Chinese actions in places like the South China Sea. Shih is one of those concepts. Shih is a holistic idea that refers to the advantage gained from manipulation of context. This study seeks to determine whether or not the concept of shih influenced the operational art conducted by political leaders in the People's Republic of China and commanders in the People's Liberation Army. Four characteristics help determine whether or not shih was a factor in a given conflict. These include leaders seeking to manipulate context, build troop morale through context, use an indirect approach, and exploit propensity within a given situation. This study examined two case studies including the Chinese winter offensives in the Korean War and the Sino Indian War and concludes that shih did influence Chinese leaders as they conducted operational art. Shih offers a lens through which to interpret future Chinese actions. Additionally, shih provides a contextual approach to operational design that would be a useful addition to US military doctrine and education.
He who exploits the strategic advantage (shih) sends his men into battle like rolling logs and boulders. It is the nature of logs and boulders that on flat ground, they are stationary, but on steep ground, they roll; the square in shape tends to stop but the round tends to roll.
The Chinese mind, it appears, has been taught by its philosophical and cultural base to first locate the disposition or setting of reality before focusing on a solution to an actual problem at hand.
-Timothy L. Thomas
The rise of China to the role of regional hegemon has created serious concern over their intentions. The challenge of interpreting Chinese actions, such as land reclamation in the South China Sea, has exacerbated these concerns and created a great deal of consternation among neighboring countries and in the United States. 
1
2
3
It is important to point out that this study does not attempt to determine whether or not the PLA conducted operations using the concept of shih exactly according to Sunzi or any other Chinese military theorist or philosopher. 
4
The concept of shih is difficult to explain in a western context because it combines a "cluster of meanings" into one idea. 
6
'aspect,' 'situation,' 'circumstances,' 'conditions,' 2. 'disposition,' 'configuration,' 'outward shape,' 3. 'force,' 'influence,' 'momentum,' 'authority,' 4. 'strategic advantage,' 'purchase.'" 7
8
9
11
12
13
14
The concept of shih is important for several reasons. First, it provides potential insight into the relationship between the United States and China as well as insight into China's strategic behavior. The National Security Strategy states, "We will closely monitor China's military modernization and expanding presence in Asia, while seeking ways to reduce the risk of misunderstanding or miscalculation." 
15
An understanding of the concept of shih also provides an explanation, albeit a partial one, of recent Chinese actions, specifically actions in cyberspace and in the South China Sea.
Understanding how the Chinese tend to think about strategy provides an interpretive lens through which to view Chinese policies and actions. The United States can use this lens to develop likely interpretations of Chinese actions and to rule out incorrect interpretations. Shih is one key component of this interpretive lens. While obviously not the only component to this interpretive lens, it is an important factor in Chinese decision making. If the United States is to understand the elusive "why" behind Chinese actions, it must comprehend the unique way that the Chinese view strategy, specifically how they view the world in relation to shih.
14 Ames, "Introduction," 81-82. 
15
Another reason for the need to understand shih is to enhance our own strategic and operational capability. According to Dima Adamsky, A national cognitive style is one element in the cultural mosaic that shapes a state's strategic behavior and constitutes the ideational foundation of its military innovation. Empirical evidence gives ground to assume that experts in the same profession from different cultures think differently about military innovation and produce various types of doctrinal outcomes from the same technological discontinuity. 
16
17
18
This study explains the concept of shih and applies that concept to two historical cases studies to determine whether or not shih influenced the way that Chinese political and military leaders conducted operational art. This study contains four parts: a literature review, methodology, analysis of two case studies, and conclusions and recommendations. The review of available literature provides an examination of the literature pertaining to the idea of shih in reference to the operational art. The literature review also provides a detailed description of the concept of shih and how it applies to the Chinese understanding of the operational art. The study then uses this insight into shih to construct a methodology for qualitatively analyzing Chinese operations. Using this methodology, this study selects and analyzes two case studies in order to determine the importance of shih in Chinese operational art. Finally, this study provides conclusions on the concept of shih, its importance in Chinese operational art, recommendations for interpreting current and future Chinese operational actions, and recommendations for incorporating aspects of shih into the US military.
This study focuses on literature in three categories. The first category of literature is writings, both ancient and more recent, that provide a definition and an understanding of the concept of shih from cultural, philosophical, and military perspectives. First, it is important to look at literature that helps define the concept of shih, specifically those that deal with the political and military uses of the concept. Sun Tzu's The Art of Warfare deals with the concept of shih in chapter five as well as in other places in the text. Sun Tzu uses several metaphors to convey the concept of shih including that the combination of musical notes, the release of a crossbow, rolling logs on steep ground, and boulders "rolling down a steep ravine." 
19
20
In his translation of The Art of Warfare, Ames use the term "strategic disposition" to translate the word shih. 21 However, in his introduction he points out that one word in English cannot bring out the depth of meaning encapsulated in the term shih. Of particular relevance to this study is Ames' use of a "cluster of meanings" to help readers understand the concept of shih. However, it is important to note that Ames is describing shih in broad terms for the purpose of understanding Sun Tzu's use of the term in The Art of Warfare. 
22
Many other authors and military leaders have sought to define shih. Commenting on Sun Tzu's explanation of shih, Dr. Gary Bjorge describes shih as, "the sense of potential energy in a situation and the existence of momentum and force." 23 General Tao Hanzhang explains the positional aspect of shih stating that it is "the strategically advantageous posture before a battle that enables it to have a flexible, mobile, and changeable position during a campaign."
24
25
26
22
23
Another important book is Franscois Jullien's The Propensity of Things: Toward a History of Efficacy in China. This book is critical to gaining a broad understanding of the concept of shih in Chinese thought. Jullien's work is particularly important because it synthesizes concepts from multiple Chinese thinkers and disciplines; he uses the concept of shih to develop an understanding of Chinese thought regarding the concepts of disposition and movement. Jullien does this from the perspectives of military strategy, politics, literature, painting, and philosophy.
Using these areas of study, he draws conclusions regarding a view of reality and way of thinking that is uniquely Chinese.
27
The main problem with using The Propensity of Things to interpret PLA operations is that the book deals almost exclusively with pre-nineteenth century sources. Much has occurred in China in the last century with the integration of communism into Chinese society, and Jullien's book does not discuss the impact of this integration on the Chinese way of thinking. Therefore, while Jullien's work is integral to understanding the cultural and philosophical roots of shih, it falls short of explaining the more recent Chinese inclusion of communism into their political system. Specifically related to this study, The Propensity of Things will provide a lens through which to view PLA actions during the last 70 years with respect to the concept of shih. However, it cannot be the only tool in analyzing the PLA's use of shih in its operational art. 
28
29
31
32
Chinese Warfighting: The PLA Experience since 1949 is a collection of essays edited by Mark A.
29 
Patrick Porter, Military Orientalism: Eastern War through Western Eyes, Critical War Studies Series (New York: Columbia University Press, 2009), 13. 30 Ibid., 19. 31 Ibid., 13-19, 191-198. 32 Porter, Military Orientalism, 18-19, 191-198. Ryan, David M. Finkelstein, and Michael McDevitt.
34
35
33
34
35
40
Mott and Kim,
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[215]
[216]
[217]
[218]
[219]
[220]
[221]
[222]
[223]
[224]
[225]
[226]
[227]
[228]
[229]
[230]
[231]
[232]
13. 38
39
Mott and Kim,
The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture,
39,
44. 40 Ibid.,
13,
39,
44.
This study focuses on specific characteristics of shih including its emphasis on context, the morale of troops, an indirect approach, and the use of propensity.
There are also several important articles that analyze Chinese strategic actions using the concept of shih. One of the most extensive of these articles is David Lai's "Learning from the Stones: A Go Approach to Mastering China's Strategic Concept, Shi." He uses the Chinese game of Go to demonstrate differences in the strategic thinking between the Chinese and westerners.
Lai provides analysis of Chinese strategic thought and the connection between the Chinese concept of shih and recent Chinese strategic behavior. 
41
From these three categories of literature, a broad view of shih and its relationship to Chinese operational art emerges. As the introduction mentioned, the hypothesis for this study is:
The concept of shih is an important factor that influences the PLA's operational art. This study defines shih using a synthesis of multiple sources. From this definition, this study presents a theory of the influence of shih on the operational art.
This study examines several key aspects of shih to develop a broad understanding of the concept and then uses those aspects to analyze the case studies. These aspects include an attempt understand and manipulate one's context holistically, the morale of troops, an indirect approach, and propensity. This study uses the terms aspects or characteristics to refer to the properties of shih and not the terms parts or components. Parts and components can usually be separated out, whereas characteristics and aspects are inseparably interwoven. Such is the nature of shih. The characteristics are all woven together. As Ames points out, shih means several things at the same time. 
42
43
44
46
43
44 Ames, "Introduction," 72-73. 
45
46
47
The third aspect of shih is the preference of the indirect over the direct approach. This is one of the major arguments that Mott and Kim put forth in their book on Chinese Military Culture, comparing the indirect approach (shih) with a direct approach (li). 
50
48
Mott and Kim,
The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture,
[10]
[11]
[12]
25,
26,
41;
Sunzi,
120. 49
50
51
52
53
55
56
53
54
55
56
57
influence the potential inherent in the forces at play to its own advantage, even before the actual engagement, so that the engagement would never constitute the decisive moment, which always involves risk." 58 Commanders and political leaders can use the "propensity" of situations and circumstances to derive victory. They can look at the way things tend to go, and then they manipulate this tendency or propensity to their own ends. Propensity has a momentum of its own, and leaders using shih will use this momentum within a given context to accomplish their purpose. US military doctrine states that "Momentum comes from seizing the initiative and executing high-tempo operations that overwhelm enemy resistance." 
59
Using the concept of shih, it is already there within the propensity of a situation. Even when General Tao states that the commander "should also be good at creating momentum," one could argue that the momentum he refers to is inherent in the context. 
60
61
62
59
60
61 ADRP 3-0, 4-5; Joint Publication 3-0, III-28; Jullien, The Propensity of Things, 17, 25-38; Tao, Sun Tzu's Art of War, 124-130.   62 Ames, "Introduction," 76-79; Jullien, The Propensity of Things, 11-13. 
63
64
65
This study attempts to determine whether or not the concept of shih was a determining factor in the political and military use of operational art. Because shih is a theoretical and intangible concept that individuals often use intuitively, this study will contain a degree of subjectivity. It is impossible to measure the exact amount of influence that a concept has on a commander while he or she makes a decision or develops a plan. It is even less possible to measure the exact influence that an intuitive concept has on an individual largely because he or she applies the concept automatically and possibly even subconsciously. However, one can examine a commander's actions and communication and determine whether or not it is likely that a concept is present in the commander's mind whether consciously or subconsciously. While analyzing a commander's actions and communication using the concept of shih will not completely explain that commander's action, it will provide a valuable perspective to enrich one's 64 Ames, "Introduction," 76. 
65
66
67
understanding of PLA actions. 
68
69
70
68
69 Ames, "Introduction," 71-72. The second aspect is the consideration of morale of one's army and that of one's enemy. This is a component of the greater context that this study will consider individually. According to Sun Tzu, "The line between order and disorder lies in logistics (shu); between cowardice and courage in strategic advantage (shih); between weakness and strength in strategic positioning (hsing)." 
72
73
74
The third characteristic of shih that this study analyzes is the idea of the indirect versus the direct approach. Mott and Kim conclude that Chinese commanders prefer to use an indirect approach instead of a direct one. This study examinse some of their conclusions regarding direct versus indirect approaches. The question is whether the commander had the option of an indirect versus direct approach and whether he, as Mott and Kim argue, used a direct approach as a component of a larger indirect approach. 
75
73
74
75
76
77
One example of this manipulation is a political leader's use of the propensity of diplomatic relationships between the following:
1. the leader's state and the enemy state; 2. the leader's state and friendly states 3. the leader's state and neutral states 4. the enemy state and states friendly to it 5. the enemy state and state's neutral to it.
The key is that the political leader understands the holistic propensity of diplomatic relationships and uses these relationships to his or her advantage. Another example is a military commander taking into account the interaction of the terrain, his forces, the enemy's forces, morale of troops on both sides, the strategic objectives on both sides, logistics, and deception. From these interactions the commander determines what propensity emerges from the entire situation. He 76 Ibid., 
[35]
[36]
133,
226,
227. 77 Ibid.,
[35]
[36]
133,
226,
227.
78
As this study mentioned, it is impossible to determine whether or not a leader is using an intuitive concept. However, one can determine whether there is a high probability that the concept was one of several factors influencing that leader's behavior. In the case of the concept of shih, one must examine each of the aspects individually and together. Looking at whether or not a leader used a direct or indirect approach only provides a single data point. Shih is a holistic concept and therefore one must look at the whole as well as the parts. If a leader demonstrates intentional manipulation of his whole context, sensitivity to creating courage in his troops, an indirect approach, and exploits the propensity in a situation, there is a high probability that the concept of shih is affecting his plans and decision. A leader using one aspect of shih is inconclusive at best. 79
This study analyzes two case studies to ascertain whether or not shih is a determining factor in PLA operational art. This study selects from campaigns that the PLA has conducted since the formation of the PRC in 1949. 
80
Things,
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
Mott and Kim,
The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture,
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[43]
[44]
Sawyer,
The Art of War,
[143]
[144]
[145]
[146]
[147]
Sunzi,
[118]
[119]
[120]
[121]
War. 
81
The criteria for selecting these case studies is twofold. For one, the case study must present strategic context for commanders and political leaders to manipulate. Conflicts that only had the potential for a small impact (good or bad) on the strategic position of China will likely show little indication of whether or not shih had any influence on the outcome. Another criterion for selecting case studies is that they must have enough information to provide this study with the material to analyze. While it would be interesting to study the Chinese use of cyber-activity over the last ten years, the only material available comes from reports and analysis of the attacks.
There is no available material related to the actual communications between Chinese political leaders and operational commanders. It is difficult enough to define the concept of shih and analyze whether or not it was a determining factor in a given conflict. If there is limited material on the event in question, it becomes even more difficult to determine the role, if any, that the concept of shih played in the conflict in question. Given the problematic nature of defining shih and limited information on a conflict, the conclusions would be highly speculative. Therefore, this study selected case studies that have sufficient historical record from which to gain insight into the use of the concept of shih. 
82
83
81
82
83
84
85
This study does not analyze the other major conflicts because they do not provide the same broad strategic context that the selected case studies provide. The Sino-Soviet War does meet both criteria. However, because most of the fighting amounted to no more than several sequential border clashes, there is less of the operational art to analyze. 
86
84
87
88
The strategic situation, as the Chinese viewed it, leading up to and during the Korean War is important to understand if one is to analyze the influence of shih on Chinese operational art during the war. The Chinese had only recently overcome the Chinese Nationalist government on the mainland and strongly desired to complete their victory by seizing Taiwan. 
89
On February 14, 1950, Stalin and Mao signed the Sino-Soviet Military alliance, which included "$300 million in credit and a promise to provide military and industry advisers." 
90
88
89
91
92
93
94
95
96
94
97
98
99
100
101
97
98
Korea, 1950
Korea, -1951, 301. 99 , 301. 99
102
103
106
102
103
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 247-248;
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 301-305;
Mott and
Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 114-117. 104 Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951, 318.
107
"Mao told Peng, 'It would be a tremendous positive influence to the democratic nations and peoples at the capitalist countries. It would be a new heavy blow to the imperialists which would deepen its [sic] mood of pessimism and defeatism.'" 109 Finally, the KPA was now ready to enter the war. The addition of these troops meant that the communist forces now outnumbered the UNC forces. Peng agreed to the offensive and Mao accepted that the results could be limited. 
110
107
'"128-130;
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 248;
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 335, 347, 350, 355;
Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 117-119;
Wortzel, "China's Foreign Conflicts Since 1949
," 272-273. 108 Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 356. 109
110
113
Ridgway. If they thought his army would sulk along Line D and remain passive, they were wrong."
114
Operations Wolfhound and Thunderbolt therefore came as a surprise to Peng. Peng wanted to give up the Han River valley as well as Seoul so that he could prepare his army for a large spring counteroffensive. Mao not only denied Peng's approach but instead ordered him to conduct a fourth offensive, arguing that, if there was another offensive, the United States and the United 
111 Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 382. 112
113 Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 249;
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 382-383, 388;
Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 117-119;
Short, Mao: A Life, 431-432.
115
116
117
118
115
116
Korea, 1950
Korea, -1951, 403-416;, 403-416;
Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 121-122. 117 Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 250-251;
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 426, 429-434, 441-448, 452;
Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 123-125.
119
120
During the negotiations in late 1949 early 1950, Mao secured a credit of $300 million, a Sino-Soviet alliance, and a commitment to provide industry and military advisors. 
121
Before the commencement of operations, Peng recognized that he could not logistically support the CPVF with its equipment requirements. Instead of trying to invent a way to carry more supplies, Peng altered the logistical context by altering the task organization of the CPVF so that it required less equipment. 
124
125
126
123 Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 247;
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 14-16, 294, 296
124
Korea, 1950
-1951, 300. 125 Ibid., 296, 356;
Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 114-119, 127
126
127
128
129
Korea, 1950
Korea, -1951, 300-301, 380-382, 401-403;, 300-301, 380-382, 401-403;
Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 116, 119-122;
Wortzel, "China's Foreign Conflicts Since 1949," 273. 128
131
132
133
130 Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 252-253;
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 292-297, 317;
Mott and
Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 126. 131 Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951, 296.
134
135
136
Additionally, Mao saw the utility in creating momentum within the international community through the propensity of the Sino-Soviet relationship, yet he appeared to have lost touch with the momentum of the situation of the CPVF on the peninsula. Aside from his rather direct operational approach, Peng's actions, or at least his desired actions, were in line with all four aspects of shih. 137
While the Sino-Indian War was much smaller in scope than the Korean War, like the Korean War, it had far reaching international repercussions. In order to understand the origin of 
136 Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 292-297, 299-305, 318, 336, 381-383, 401-402;
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 249-250;
Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 114-122;
Wortzel, "China's Foreign Conflicts Since 1949," 273. 137 Ames, "Introduction," 73, 76-77;
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 242-253;
Jullien, The Propensity for Things, 11-13, 25-31, 50-51;
Sunzi, 118-122;
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 14-16, 292-297, 299-305, 318, 336, 381-383, 401-402;
Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 104, 107-129, 224-225.
138
140
157
158
159
157
158 Corr, The Chinese Red Army, 110-111;
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 264-267;
Feng and Wortzel, "PLA Operational Principles and Limited War," 187;
Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 145-148;
Sandhu, "Sino-Indian War of 1962," 215;
Wortzel, "China's Foreign Conflicts Since 1949," 276-277;
Yeh, "The Frontiers of China," 76.
160
161
162
Following the stalemated Korean War, China understood that the propensity of modern conflict favored forces based on a western model. Therefore, the PLA went through a rigorous modernization that included modernization in equipment, training, and tactics. China exploited this propensity in twentieth century warfare, which favored westernized forces. Through this exploitation, China had already created momentum years before the conflict with India took place. China also used the conflict to exploit the propensity of the Soviet Union to provide military equipment to allies but no direct support. China used this propensity to demonstrate to India that China could dominate them while the Soviet Union did nothing about it. Another area of propensity that China exploited was the ability of one conflict to have ripple effects into other conflicts. China used a war that lasted a little over a month to impact territorial disputes with multiple other countries for years to come. 
163
During the both the Korean War and the Sino-Indian War the concept of shih influenced the way that both political and military leaders conducted operational art. Evidence shows that leaders sought to understand and manipulate their context, bolster the morale of their troops while degrading the enemy's morale, favored an indirect approach, and exploited the propensity in their situation. However, shih is a cultural concept that leaders apply intuitively, and it is not a force that somehow determines actions. Regardless of their cultural context, people still have autonomy, as Porter points out, and can choose to apply shih or not apply it. 
164
165
164
165 Millet, The War for Korea, 1950
-1951, 380-381, 401-402;
Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 119-122.
166
While shih is not the only factor that directly influences PLA's operational art, it is an important one. By understanding shih, one can explain why the PLA behaves in ways that are very odd to westerners. The PLA's withdraw to the previous boundaries following the Sino-Indian border dispute is an example of such behavior. When one views this incident from a western perspective, it can be near inexplicable. When viewed through the lens of shih, this behavior is completely rational. Shih helps place historical PLA operations into their proper context. 
167
169
166 Mott and Kim,
The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture,
[224]
[225]
168
Examine present Chinese actions using shih in combination with international relations theories in order to gain a holistic understanding of Chinese intentions. Two topics provide excellent material for future study with regard to understanding of current Chinese actions using shih as an interpretive lens. One is Chinese actions in and around the South China Sea. China is using A2AD systems, land reclamation, territorial claims, and diplomatic relationships to advance their interests in the South China Sea. 
170
171
The danger of viewing Chinese actions without using shih is the potential to "project" American concepts onto Chinese actions. 
172
Include the concept of shih (probably using a different name) into US military doctrine, training, and education. As operational artists from various cultures and backgrounds attempt to mediate between strategic purpose and tactical actions, they need to view problems from multiple perspectives. Shih provides another perspective on that mediation. By viewing problems through the holistic lens of shih, operational artists can examine solutions that may not have been apparent from their operational background. An example of this is Mao and Peng's approach to the first two Chinese offensives of the Korean War. By using shih, Peng was able to create a momentum that ensured the CPVF would meet the political objectives set by Mao. While shih will not always provide the best solution, using it will ensure the operational artists have as many options as possible at their disposal. Shih will not only help us understand Chinese operational art but operational art itself.
There are several potential places to insert the concept of shih into US military doctrine.
Operational Design one area. By including the concept of shih of as one of the elements of operational design, the US military would gain an excellent tool for understanding and exploiting potential within a given context. The idea of Operational Design is difficult to grasp, and shih offers an excellent framework for understanding Operational Context and the potential within it.
Shih would also provide a useful addition to the Mission Analysis step of the Military Decision Making Process (MDMP). Shih could be a way to get staff sections to see the Operational environment holistically, instead of merely from their own particular Warfighting Function. 
173
174
There are two predominant spellings of shih, which are shih and shi. This study will used the "shih" spelling unless quoting directly from a source that spells it "shi."
Dima Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation: The Impact of Cultural Factors On the Revolution in Military Affairs in Russia, the US, and Israel (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2010), 15.
Ibid.   
Sunzi,[118][119][120][121] 
Ibid., 127, 200.   
Hanzhang Tao, Sun Tzu's Art of War: The Modern Chinese Interpretation, trans.  Shibing Yuan (New York: Sterling Innovation, 2000), 124.
Ralph Sawyer, The Art of War, trans. Ralph D. Sawyer and Mei-chün Sawyer (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994), 146.
Ibid., 146.   
François Jullien, The Propensity of Things: Toward a History of Efficacy in China(New York: Zone Books, 1999), 11-18.    
Ibid., 19.   
David Lai, Learning from the Stones: A Go Approach to Mastering China's Strategic Concept, Shi, Advancing Strategic Thought Series (Carlisle, PA: Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute, 2004), 22.
Segal, Defending China, 183.   
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 238; Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951, 47;  Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 104.   
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951, 295.   
Ibid.,[298][299][300][301] Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture,[114][115][116][117] 
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951, 305.   
Ibid.,[317][318][319][320] 336; Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture,[117][118][119] 
 106  Millet, The War forKorea, 1950Korea,  -1951, 335.  , 335.   
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951, 389.   
Segal, Defending China, 95, 247.   
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 236-238; Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951,  47.    
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951, 296.   
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 249; Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951, 389.   
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 246-253; Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951,  300-301; Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 116.   
Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951, 292-297, 300-301, 381; Elleman, Modern  Chinese Warfare, 246-250; Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 114-122,  126.    
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 249-250; Millet, The War for Korea, 1950-1951,  14-16, 47, 292-297, 381-383; Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture, 113- 114, 126; Wortzel, "China's Foreign Conflicts Since 1949," 273; Zhang, Mao's Military  Romanticism, 121.   
Ibid.,[148][149][150][151][154][155][157][158] Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 261,[267][268]  Segal, Defending China,[147][148][149][150] 
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare, 254-255; Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of  Chinese Military Culture, 145-147; Wortzel, "China's Foreign Conflicts Since 1949," 275-277.   
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare,[255][256][257][258] Feng and Wortzel, "PLA Operational  Principles and Limited War,[180][181] Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of Chinese Military  Culture,[143][144] 151, 156.    
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare,[255][256][257][258] Mott and Kim, The Philosophy of  Chinese Military Culture, 151, 156.   
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare,[262][263][264][265][267][268] Mott and Kim, The Philosophy  of Chinese Military Culture,[148][149][150][151][152][225][226] 
Elleman, Modern Chinese Warfare,[254][255][256][257][258][262][263][265][266][267][268] Mott and Kim, The  Philosophy of Chinese Military Culture,[145][146][147] 
Malcolm Davis, "China's militarisation of the South China Sea and Australian defence policy," The Strategist (November 15, 20215): 1, accessed March 28, 2015, http://www.aspistrategist.org.au/chinas-militarisation-of-the-south-china-sea-and-australiandefence-policy/.
  171  Benjamin David Baker, "Where Is the 'string of Pearls' in 2015?," The Diplomat (October 5, 20215), accessed March 28, 2015, http://thediplomat.com/2015/10/where-is-thestring-of-pearls-in-
2015/172Adamsky,[91]
[92]
Field Manual 6-0, 9-6 to 9-16; Joint Publication 5-0, IV-4 to IV-16.
Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation,[88][89][90][91] 
AGENCY 
NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) U.S. Army Command and General Staff College
12
DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY PLA People's Liberation Army PRC