# ID: 89315d7325a342fa85f8f27d92521d64
# Title: War on the cheap: US military advisors in Greece, Korea, the Philippines, and Vietnam
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The North Korean Communists came to power due to the direct intervention of the occupying Soviet forces.
Although the Japanese had mostly dismantled the Korean communist movement during their occupation, the Soviets nurtured its reemergence following the Second World War and supported Kim Il Sung's rise to power.
Kim's personal history is obscured by aggrandized state-directed biographical accounts of his heroism, wartime leadership, and devotion to country fabricated to justify his position as supreme ruler over the North Korean people.
14 Kim's actual story is that he spent much of his life in Manchuria and Russia, fought the Japanese before and during the Second World War, and ended the war as a captain in the Soviet Army.
15 The Soviets supported Kim's emerging totalitarian regime with advice and materiel that far outweighed what the United States provided to the South.
As Allan Millett writes, the Soviets sent "as many as eight hundred advisers and administrative personnel" and supplied the NKPA with weapons to replace those seized from the Japanese.
16 As James Minnich writes, the NKPA "adopted much of the Soviets' military doctrine and tactics, incorporating combined arms operations and depending upon conventional lines of communication for 14 One among an ocean of blatant examples of state propaganda is an official DPRK history, Twenty-Year-Long Anti-Japanese Revolution Under the Red Sunrays, written by Kim Il-Sung and other North Korean leaders, in which Kim is continually referred to as "The Great Leader."
The book describes what may have been a company-sized ambush led by Kim against the Japanese, for which Kim is melodramatically feted as "respected leader Comrade Kim Il Sung, great military strategist and evervictorious, iron-willed brilliant commander."
Il-Sung Kim et al.,
Twenty-Year-Long Anti-Japanese Revolution Under the Red Sunrays, vol.
4. (
Pyongyang: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1986), 309.
15 A. N. Lanʹkov, From Stalin to Kim Il Sung: The Formation of North