# ID: 8946570c41f44c62be2abf39e67265b5
# Title: Homeland defense of Hawaii: protecting the state against the evolving ballistic missile threat presented by China, Russia, and North Korea
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
China, Russia, and North Korea continue to invest heavily in ballistic missile technology, expanding their nuclear weapon employment capabilities and presents a persistent threat to the safety and security of America. Due to their relative proximity to Hawaii, they pose a significant challenge to the homeland defense mission. A comprehensive evaluation of near-peer threat countries and rogue states' ballistic missile capabilities provide the necessary data to assess the effectiveness of the current United States' ballistic missile defense program. A detailed analysis of the global missile defense system examines the sensors, communications, and kill vehicle interceptors required to detect, identify, track, target, and defeat adversary ballistic missiles during launch, boost, mid-, and terminal-phases of flight. The focus of the investigation is the Pacific region and the ability to defend Hawaii against a ballistic missile attack from China, Russia, or North Korea. This research paper will attempt to identify any potential gaps in the layered missile defense system by answering the primary question: How does America defend Hawaii against the evolving ballistic missile threats posed by China, Russia, and North Korea? 15.
The 2017 National Security Strategy (NSS) recognizes the growing BM threat, listing the first vital interest as the "fundamental responsibility to protect the American people, the homeland, and the American way of life." (U.S. President 2017, 4) China, Russia, and North Korea continually investing heavily in BM technology to overwhelm America's defenses by seeking longer ranges, faster employment speeds, higher altitudes, and employing multiple warheads designed to defeat BM defenses. The scientific advancements in BM technology create an enduring and complex problem for the homeland defense (HD) of America.
The NSSs foundation focuses on nuclear deterrence by preserving peace and stability through discouraging aggression against the U.S.. China, Russia, and North Korea all maintain an arsenal of BMs that threaten the State of Hawaii. In the NSS, President Donald Trump asserts, "We will defend our country, protect our communities, and put the safety of the American people first." (U.S. 
President 2017, 7)
The 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS) key objectives are defending the homeland from attack, deterring adversaries from aggression, and maintaining favorable regional balances of power in the Indo-Pacific, Europe, the Middle East, and the Western Hemisphere 
(DoD 2018, 4)
China's political goals threaten to displace the U.S. in the Indo-pacific by reordering the region in its favor and presents the highest persistent strategic threat to American interests 
(Davidson 2019)
President 2017, 25)
(Williams and Dahlgren 2019)
Russia's goal is to restore its great power status and establish spheres of influence near its borders by seeking to divide the alliances between America and partner states.
During a U.S. House Armed Services Committee Testimony, Indo-Pacific Commander, Admiral Phil Davidson stated, "Moscow regularly plays the role of spoiler, seeking to undermine U.S. interests and impose additional costs on the U.S. and our allies whenever and wherever possible." 
(Davidson 2019
President 2017, 2)
ICBMs have ranges over 11,000 km, well capable of reaching the U.S. In addition to near-peer competitors, rogue states also threaten America's security.
North Korea continues developing nuclear weapons and missiles to threaten the entire planet. Admiral Davidson further testified that "Until the nuclear situation is resolved on the peninsula, North Korea will remain our most immediate threat." 
(Davidson 2019
advantages. North Korea remains one of the most rapidly developing threats to national security due to their unprecedented pace of missile testing to include upgraded BMs, sea launch testing, and recent space exploration (MDP 2018b).
The NDS nests within the priorities of the NSS, with both listing HD as a top concern. In 1898, the former Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Navy, Theodore Roosevelt, argued that Hawaii's strategic location would establish the U.S. military as a world superpower 
(Shepardson 1998
Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD). Globally transportable, rapidly deployable capability to intercept and destroy BM inside or outside the atmosphere during their final, or terminal, phase of flight (U.S. DoD 2018a).
Throughout the research process, the author made the following assumptions:
1. China, Russia, and North Korea possess the capability to employ a BM attack on Hawaii. This assumption is necessary to determine America's capability to detect and defend against an inbound BM attack.
2. The next assumption relies that unclassified sources reflects current information, accurate data, and sufficiently addresses the research questions.
This assumption was necessary to complete the research by comparing pertinent facts and figures of threat and friendly capabilities.
3. Finally, the assumption that only U.S. assets are available to defend Hawaii's homeland during the time of attack. This assumption was necessary due to the limited access to partner capabilities and remains the U.S.' primary requirement for HD.
Limitations 1. The primary limitation is the security classification. This paper remains at the UNCLASSIFIED level due to the research available and analysis conducted.
As a result, the study did not include higher-level classifications of threat capabilities, homeland defensive measures, and current operational plans.
2. The secondary limitation pertains to the latency of information. Due to the pace of evolving threats and advancements in technology, data on weapon systems are always in flux. This research will utilize present facts and figures to compare and contrast BM and defensive capabilities.
In order to narrow the scope of this study, this thesis focuses only on the BM threats to the State of Hawaii, imposing the following delimitations:
1. This research only covers the BM threat to Hawaii presented by China, Russia, and North Korea. China and Russia currently possess strategic bombers. The H-6, Tu-160 Blackjack, and Tu-95MS Bear can target Hawaii with airlaunched cruise missiles 
(Kristensen & Norris 2018)
2. This thesis will not cover threats to other locations as listed in the homeland defense mission other than Hawaii.
3. This analysis does not discuss the cyber threat or any other capabilities that China, Russia, or North Korea may possess to disguise or delay the detection and engagement of a BM attack.
The purpose and scope provide a basic understanding of the primary and secondary research questions and justifies the significance of this research. The definition of key terms ensures adequate comprehension of the thesis material throughout the paper.
The purpose of this paper is to examine the BM threat to Hawaii to ensure the safety and security of American lives against a persistent danger. 
The NSS illustrates the President's goal of national security by placing the safety, interests, and the well-being of Americans first. The NSS lists HD as the highest priority calling for a layered missile defense system capable of defending the homeland against missile attacks. The NSS emphasizes North Korea's expansion of military weapons, expending hundreds of millions of dollars on nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons threatening our homeland (U.S. 
President 2017, 46-48)
The NSS also stresses the importance of deterrence, stating that the U.S. must "Preserve peace through strength by rebuilding our military to deter adversaries." (U.S.
President 2017, 4) The U.S. must increase resources to convince adversaries that America can and will defeat them, discouraging potential enemies by modernizing current capabilities, acquiring new technology, improving readiness, expanding the military, and affirming the political will to win. The requirement to invest in military capabilities is requisite to building a force that facilitates the prevention of future attacks. The national objective is to ensure HD without disrupting the longstanding strategic relationships with Russia or China (U.S. 
President 2017, 8)
The NDS reiterates the necessity of HD and defines the responsibilities, roles, and functions of the military services. The DoD's enduring mission is to provide combat- Russia continues to expand its strategic and non-strategic nuclear forces, emphasizing the potential coercive and military uses of nuclear weapons in its doctrine.
Russia assesses the threat of nuclear escalation or actual first use will de-escalate the situation in advantageous terms for Russia. The U.S. seeks to maintain strategic dialogue to manage nuclear competition and minimize nuclear risks (U.S. DoD 2018b, 7-8).
Russia's ability to employ BM nuclear warheads capable of ranging America's homeland and a strategy of striking first creates a significant, viable threat to Hawaii's security.  The Sea-Based X-Band (SBX) radar operates out of Honolulu and has a range of 2,500 miles, but only a 25-degree field of view. The SBX's design, provides long-range precision tracking, discrimination from decoys, and provides in-flight updates to GBIs.
The SBX must sail from the port to the western Pacific for optimal positioning for BMD.
Due to its size and weight, the SBX travels at only eight knots per hour 
(Williams 2018b)
THAAD systems utilize the AN/TPY-2 high resolution, X-band radars in either a terminal or forward-based mode. Currently, the U.S. controls ten TPY-2 radars, five radars assigned to THAAD units, and the others deployed to Japan (two radars), Turkey, Israel, and the Persian Gulf. Designed for BM engagement, the THAAD system can intercept BMs outside the atmosphere and upon reentry. TPY-2 radars can detect and track missiles in boost and early midcourse phases, identifying the speed and trajectories of BMs (U.S. DoD 2018a). The two sites located in Japan are located at Kyogamisaki and Shariki, have a radar detection range of 1,000 km, and an engagement range of 200 km 
(Williams, Karako, & Rumbaugh 2018, 85)
Currently deployed in eight countries, the Patriot missile defense system provides regional security against BMs, including Japan and South Korea. ICBMs, Pentagon officials state, "the SM-3 IIA's size, range, speed and sensor technology, the thinking suggests, will enable it to collide with and destroy enemy ICBMs toward the beginning or end of their flight through space, where they are closer to the boundary of earth's atmosphere" (CRS 2019, 5). The SM-3 will add another layer of defense to augment the current GMD system.
The GMD system relies on early detection of a BM launch to effectively engage a BM attack in its midcourse phase of flight. The STSS is an experimental system designed to provide persistent sensor coverage of launch to destruction of BMs 
(Williams, Karako, and Rumbaugh 2018, 97)
The STSS orbits at 1350 km, 58-degree inclination, and has an orbital period of 120 minutes. The sensor can detect a BM launch, track its trajectory during mid-course, and transmit targeting data to remote ground-and sea-based interceptors (MDA 2017).
The data gathered by the many radars and sensors communicate with Command and Control, Battle Management, and Communications (C2BMC) network for BMD. The C2BMC collects and processes sensor information, providing a complete picture of the missile defense battlespace to HD commanders. Specifically, PACOM will receive data from TPY-2 radars, SBX, UEWRs, Cobra Dane, and various space sensors regarding any BM launch threatening the Pacific Region 
(Williams, Karako, and Rumbaugh 2018, 101)
A thorough analysis during the literature review provides evidence that there is a lack of information regarding a direct link concerning the ability of the U.S. to protect the
State of Hawaii against a potential BM attack from China, Russia, or North Korea. The research methodology addressed in the next chapter will highlight the requirement for additional research regarding the evolving threats from near-peer states and rogue nations, the current capabilities of the U.S. BMD, and conduct a comparison to determine the feasibility of protecting Hawaii against the technological advancements.
The most informative research drew from the reports and articles concerning the threat capabilities to include the operational ranges, speeds, technology, warhead payloads, and defensive countermeasures. The literature review also provided essential details of the U.S. BMD capabilities and limitations. This data is necessary to compare against potential attacks to assess the effectiveness of America's BMDS.
The greatest challenge to overcome in this research concerned the classification, validity, and currency of available data. The abundance of information from web resources required additional research and validation to ensure accuracy and up-to-date facts during calculations. Trusted sources, such as Jane's, were utilized, however, restricting the analysis to the unclassified level leads to assumptions that nations and states report accurate capabilities and limitations to the world.
anti-jamming, signatures, quantities, and launch mechanisms will identify potential mitigation measures. After ascertaining the potential risks posed by BM threats, gaps will be identified through a detailed assessment of homeland BMDS capabilities.
An effective BMD requires the ability to employ active and passive defensive measures. Should deterrence fail, the U.S.' ability to detect, disrupt, destroy inbound missiles will result in national security. This research will identify current U.S.
capabilities to detect a BM launch, track inbound missiles, C2 required from employment, and active missile defensive measures.
The early identification of BM pre-and post-launch warnings will be instrumental Wellerstein, historian of science at the Stevens Institute of Technology, the estimated casualties will surpass 800,000 (see Figure 
1
The missile can employ a single three MT nuclear warhead via an airburst or surface detonation resulting in an estimated 609,890 casualties (See Figure 
2
(Wellerstein 2012)
BM configured with ten MIRVs, each containing a 750 kT warhead. The results estimated over 900,000 casualties and the destruction of crucial infrastructures necessary to conduct ongoing defensive measures or a counterattack (Wellerstein 2012) (See Figure 
3
Several limitations for the employment of surface ships include missile employment ranges, limited Aegis-equipped vessels, and competing operational missions. The original design of the Aegis system and SM-3 missiles were to intercept the midcourse and terminal phases for short and medium-range BMs, not ICBMs. The SPY-1 radar requires advance warning from other sensors to enable tracking and discrimination 
(Williams, Karako, and Rumbaugh 2018, 94)
The Aegis Ashore program currently operates on Kauai, Hawaii, in the Pacific region. The site is for testing and evaluation only and not linked to the operational BMD program. The defense of Hawaii will depend on the proper positioning of surface ships equipped with Aegis to counter a BM attack effectively. In addition to Aegis, the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system also provides a layer of BMD.
The THAAD system utilizes hit-to-kill technology during the terminal phase of flight within an employment range of 200 km 
(Williams, Karako, and Rumbaugh 2018, 85)
Deployed Patriot systems are in eight countries throughout the world, including Japan and South Korea, but currently not in Hawaii. The defense system provides a 360degree field of view out to 100 km (Missile Defense Advocacy Alliance 2020). Due to the proximity and range of the Patriot deployed locations, the system will not provide effective defensive capabilities for the protection of Hawaii. The remaining kinetic option and primary BMD interceptors are the Ground-based Interceptors (GBIs).
GBIs are located at two locations in the U.S., Fort Greely, Alaska, and Vandenberg Air Force Base (AFB), California. Fort Greely maintains forty GBIs and is located approximately 3,000 miles to the north of Hawaii. The GBIs has an estimated closing speed of 25,700 km/h (16,000 mph), which will reach Hawaii within eleven and a half minutes 
(Parsch 2007)
China and Russia sustain BMs capable of employing multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles (MIRVs) that will overwhelm BMDS. The U.S. requires upgraded kill vehicle technology to defeat the evolving MIRV weapons to defend the homeland effectively against a BM attack.
Proposed recommendations range from acquiring a redesigned kill vehicle (RKV), a multi-object kill vehicle (MOKV), and directed energy. The RKV increases performance and reliability, improved data communications, increasing the interceptors' probability of kill. The MOKV will achieve a volume kill by destroying numerous targets within a threat cloud, reducing the amount of interceptors required and the ability to counter the MIRV threat 
(Williams, Karako, and Rumbaugh 2018, 79-80)
The concept of directed energy utilizing Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) mounted lasers, flying at 65,000 feet, will provide an alternative layer to BM defense 
(Williams, Karako, and Rumbaugh 2018, 112-113)
(Williams, Karako, and Rumbaugh 2018, 112-113)
The current BMDS has insufficient capabilities to defend Hawaii against the Bolstering BMD capabilities will fortify homeland security, strengthen deterrence, ensure protection for allies and partners, and prepare for future threats.
Research and evaluation must continue to expand the capabilities of space-and terrestrial-based sensors to provide the range and level of detail required for targeting advanced BM technology. In addition to sensors and radars, emphasis on explorations
U.S. Census, Hawaii is home to over 1.41 million U.S. citizens and contains numerous critical infrastructures to include: nineteen military bases, multiple early warning radars, the 613th Air Operations Center (AOC), and the United States Indo-Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM) (Hawaii Population 2020). The 154th Wing is located on Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam (JBPHH), enabling the Pacific region with global reach, global strike, and global power capabilities through the employment of multiple platforms. The 154th Wing's organic assets include airlift, air-refueling, and fighter aircraft, "Providing organized, trained units to protect Hawaii's citizens and property, preserve peace, and ensure public safety…to provide operationally ready combat units in time of war." (Hawaii Air National Guard, 2020) Early Warning Radars detect aircraft, cruise, and BM threats to identify tracks of interest (TOIs). The 169th Air Defense Squadron, located at Wheeler Army Airfield, the Sea-Based X-Band Radar (SBX-1), is periodically located in Hawaii. The SBX-1 is a floating, self-propelled mobile active electronically scanned array early-warning radar station designed to provide early warning and tracking of BMs (Missile Defense Agency [MDA] 2008, 3). J/CFACC), and the Theater Area Air Defense Commander (T-AADC) with C2 of joint operations through integrated planning, target identification, weaponeering, sortie allocation, air tasking order production, mission execution management, and operationallevel evaluations (Pacific Air Forces 2014).
U.S. Census, Hawaii is home to over 1.41 million U.S. citizens and contains numerous critical infrastructures to include: nineteen military bases, multiple early warning radars, the 613th Air Operations Center (AOC), and the United States Indo-Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM) (Hawaii Population 2020). The 154th Wing is located on Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam (JBPHH), enabling the Pacific region with global reach, global strike, and global power capabilities through the employment of multiple platforms. The 154th Wing's organic assets include airlift, air-refueling, and fighter aircraft, "Providing organized, trained units to protect Hawaii's citizens and property, preserve peace, and ensure public safety…to provide operationally ready combat units in time of war." (Hawaii Air National Guard, 2020) Early Warning Radars detect aircraft, cruise, and BM threats to identify tracks of interest (TOIs). The 169th Air Defense Squadron, located at Wheeler Army Airfield, the Sea-Based X-Band Radar (SBX-1), is periodically located in Hawaii. The SBX-1 is a floating, self-propelled mobile active electronically scanned array early-warning radar station designed to provide early warning and tracking of BMs (Missile Defense Agency [MDA] 2008, 3). J/CFACC), and the Theater Area Air Defense Commander (T-AADC) with C2 of joint operations through integrated planning, target identification, weaponeering, sortie allocation, air tasking order production, mission execution management, and operationallevel evaluations (Pacific Air Forces 2014).
Should deterrence fail, the U.S. must be able to detect, track, and defeat a BM attack. The 2019 Missile Defense Review (MDR) provides an in-depth description of the MD capabilities and limitations of the U.S., stating potential adversaries are modernizing existing missile systems, securing new and improved technology, and integrating offensive missiles more frequently in exercises and war planning (U.S. DoD 2019, I to XVIII). The MDR stresses the importance of space-based sensors and surveillance required for early detection, launch, tracking, timing, targeting, and destroying BMs (Karako 2019, 1-5). It describes the national level threats from China, Russia, and North Korea and discusses the potential risks arising from a BM launch. According to the MDR, China retains 75-100 ICBMs, possesses four advanced JIN-class SSBM, and can threaten the U.S. with approximately 125 nuclear warheads. before launch (U. S. DoD 2019, VIII). The MDR also presents U.S. capabilities and limitations for BMD. The MDR covers the Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD) system, the Sea-Based X-Band (SBX) radar, Aegis BMD system, Patriot Advanced Capability-3 (PAC-3), and the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) (Karako 2019, 7). The GMD is capable of engaging long-range BMs in the mid-course phase of flight by utilizing Ground-Based Interceptors (GBIs), located at Ft. Greely, Alaska and at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The THAAD system engages short-, medium-, and intermediate-range missiles, located in seven batteries throughout the U.S., Guam, and the Republic of Korea (ROK). The Aegis Sea-based missile defense and Aegis
the HD mission, the Defense Support Program (DSP), and the Space-based Infrared System (SBIRS)
the HD mission, the Defense Support Program (DSP), and the Space-based Infrared System (SBIRS)
by 
China, Russia
North Korea (S)
AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Army General Command
, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other
Joint Publication 3-27: HD, identifies United States Northern Command (USNORTHCOM) and USINDOPACOM roles and responsibilities to deter BM attacks on the U.S., its territories and bases within their respective Area of Responsibility (AORs), and other areas as directed by the President or Secretary of 
Defense (SecDef)
Global Missile Defense (GMD) requires centralized execution with positive direction from the weapons release authority (WRA). WRA is the authority delegated from the president to use certain weapons against ICBMs. USINDOPACOM supports USNORTHCOM and the WRA for homeland BMD using the Global Missile Defense (GMD) system within the USINDOPACOM AOR (U.S. Joint Chiefs of 
Staff 2018, III-19)
JP 3-27 also addresses the Integrated Tactical Warning and Attack Assessment (ITW/AA), which provides warning after initiation of a strategic or tactical aerospace threat event based on an evaluation of information from all available resources. The main purpose is to provide timely, reliable, and unambiguous warning information of BM, space, and air attacks on North America. The United States Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM) provides space surveillance, nuclear detonation detection, and BM warning to North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD). NORAD executes assigned missions for HD by shifting priorities of the ITW/AA systems for attacks against North America (U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff 2018, C-2 to C-3). China, Russia, and North Korea all maintain the capability to employ a chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) attack utilizing BMs. JP-37 further states, "The threat of a BM attack against the homeland is the one strategic threat by a rogue state that would require the use of fires to protect the homeland." (U.S.   The U.S. BMD system maintains marginal capability to defend Hawaii against a BM equipped with a single warhead from China, Russia, or North Korea. However, an advanced ICBM traveling at speeds of twenty-five Mach, employing decoys, and MIRVs weapon technology, will overwhelm the missile defense systems and render Hawaii vulnerable. America's BMD system requires improvements in sensor coverages and interceptor capabilities to achieve an adequate layered missile defense system. into new multi-target kill vehicles and directed energy is necessary to counter multiple independent reentry vehicle warheads designed to defeat the current U.S. BMDS.
For short-term success, operationalizing the Aegis Ashore test site on Hawaii and positioning Aegis destroyers provides a layered missile defense system critical in countering BM attacks. To combat the pace of evolving threats, the DoD must prioritize speed of delivery, continuous adaptation, and deliver enhanced performance by streamlining the acquisition process to ensure flexibility in developing, testing, and fielding missile defense systems (U.S. DoD 2019, XV). 