# ID: 89858b49e16c4ba39ac798c98721d3a0
# Title: Military Review. Volume 83, Number 6, November-December 2003
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2003.0
# Fulltext:
although force levels may decrease during the next few years, our commitment to victory will not.
our forces in iraq and afghanistan must understand and prepare for changing threat environments and their impact on the irregular warfare environment as our adversaries adapt and other opportunists surface when rivals are defeated.
a rule to heed: do not underestimate these challenges just because you understood the information and threat environment during your last deployment.
MR T He russo-georgian War that broke out in august 2008 already shows all the earmarks of being a watershed event in world affairs.
it is already reshaping policies and governmental calculations throughout the world.
the most striking aspect of this war is russia's unrelenting, aggressive unilateralism.
By early september 2008, less than a month since the war began, russia had refused to abide by its own cease-fire, expanded its occupation zone, looted georgian territories under its control, demanded an arms embargo and regime change in georgia, unilaterally recognized south ossetia and abkhazia, and issued repeated ultimatums to america to not rearm georgia and to stop providing humanitarian assistance.
russia has also threatened poland with nuclear strikes, told america it may suspend its cooperation with regard to iranian nuclear nonproliferation and preventing iran's purchase of air defense missiles, announced its intention to complete iran's Bushehr nuclear reactor, and threatened turkey with retaliation for keeping the Bosphorus straits open for humanitarian relief shipments.