# ID: 89cf466a1cfd4250b393da8c246290c4
# Title: Unconventional Deterrence Strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2005.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
Held captive by the accepted strategic framework, time and time again the losers explained away their defeat by citing mitigating factors.
Unconventional warfare is not a new phenomenon in history. As in the biblical conflict between David and Goliath, guerrilla warfare has showed its potential throughout history; from Fabians and Spaniard guerrillas' fighting successfully against Hannibal, and later, Napoleon, throughout the colonial wars of the 20 th century, to the driving out of both Cold War superpowers, as in Vietnam and Afghanistan. The current conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq, as well, exemplify the difficulties that can be created for an overwhelmingly dominant antagonist in fighting against resistance of this kind. Likewise, the Russians have encountered similar difficulties in Chechnya.
It is generally agreed by military strategist and theoreticians that guerrilla warfare is a weapon of the weak. Ever since Mao, who first explicitly transformed guerrilla warfare from being merely a tactical approach, to being a full-blown strategy, guerrilla warfare has been considered as an underdog's weapon of necessity, rather than choice -"defeat is invariable outcome where native forces fight with inferior weapons against modernized forces on the latter's terms" (as cited in 
Mack, 1983, p. 176)
This rule has been proven repeatedly during the 20 th century. Compare, for example, the outcomes of the Gulf War of 1991, in which the underdog chose to wage a conventional war of attrition and maneuver, playing to the opponent's strengths, with the Vietnam War, where the underdog refused to fight on the terms of a superior enemy, adopting a low-intensity guerrilla warfare method, instead. However, guerrilla warfare has remained more accepted by sub-state groups (mostly for insurrectionary purposes)
than it has by weak states. In contrast to sub-states actors, small states have not treated guerrilla warfare as a way to balance their inherent military weaknesses, vis-à-vis stronger opponents, especially in defensive wars. Guerrilla warfare has been either an ancillary function, if any, of main conventional forces, or has been believed to arise, spontaneously, out of the common populous, as a response to the enemy's occupation.
For instance, Hans von Dach's Total Resistance (which, in fact, is a guerrilla handbook for the Swiss society and military) clearly appreciates the potential of guerrilla resistance.
However, Dach advises what to do, only after conventional troops have been overrun. In other words, Dach suggests that guerrilla warfare is not supposed to replace conventional resistance.
The current war in Iraq, as well, seems to fit into the pattern above discussed.
Although the Iraqi forces were crushingly defeated on the battlefields, as of late, coalition forces have been facing a seemingly insurmountable insurgency. On the other hand, speculations have been made that Saddam Hussein may have learned the lessons from the first Gulf War and, subsequently, concentrated his war efforts on strategies for engaging the opposition in guerrilla warfare. 
1
Keegan's (2004)
However, even though Saddam Hussein may have carefully preplanned and prepared for the guerrilla war, he, definitely, did not try to deter his opponents by using this kind of warfare. Would such an attempt have been reasonable? Because of the US Administration apparently made every effort to reassure their own public that the war would not be a Vietnam-type "quagmire" (i.e., that the war in Iraq would be short and decisive), such deterrence, via unconventional war tactics, would have been logical.
Overall, deterrence is the first line of defense 
(Joseph, 2001, p. 53)
It is interesting to note that not all of these ideas, namely both fighting unconventionally and deterring by it, are new. Indeed, the idea of asymmetric warfare usually includes guerrilla resistance and terrorism, and has been circulating among strategists, who have tried to predict the future challenges for the US, since the end of the first Gulf War 
(Mahnken 1993;
Allan, 1994;
Pfaltzgraff and Wright, 2000)
(Russet, 1994, p. 41)
Morgan, 2003, p. 164;
Freedman, 2004, p. 47)
John J. 
Mearsheimer (1983)
Huth (1988)
Mearsheimer (1983)
Huth (1988;
1999)
That is to say, the defender's military capabilities in repulsing an attack from the very beginning play an important role in determining deterrence outcomes, because attackers generally do not like prolonged wars of attrition. Similar to earlier studies, Huth also does not look beyond the common argumentation, i.e., that large military capability is the only way to threaten the aggressor with prolonged war.
Therefore, this study seeks answers to the following questions: "What if the defender promises a protracted war by guerrilla resistance, instead of repulsing the largescale attack?"; "What if the defender threatens to deny the aggressor of his political objectives, instead of defeating the aggressor's forces on the battlefield?"; "What if the defender threatens to engage the aggressor in an endless, un-winnable fight?"; "What if the defender boosts his denial element with the threats of terrorist strikes on the challenger's regime, population, and/or economic structures?"; "What if the defender's strategy is to make the aggressors military superiority irrelevant?" In other words, "Can the stronger opponent be deterred by such unconventional threats as guerrilla warfare and terrorism?"
1.
The purpose of this study is to examine and discuss unconventional deterrence, and thereby, to broaden the deterrence debate, while helping to fill gaps in deterrence theory. The main research question is whether a strategy of unconventional deterrence employed by relatively weak states can deter greater powers from their aggression.
Supporting research questions are as follows:
-How should unconventional deterrence be defined?
-What are the conditions for successful deterrence?
-Are there dynamics and/or determinant factors that are unique to small wars?
-Can a small state create the conditions for successful deterrence using unconventional warfare to deter larger states?
This study does not intend to reformulate deterrence theory, or solve the internal deterrence debates. In fact, deterrence theory is too complex to be covered in detail in a study such as this. Thus, this study accepts current deterrence theory, with all of its major weaknesses, inherent theoretical inconsistencies, and practical unreliability.
2
Morgan (2003)
In addition, two other ideas need to be mentioned that are currently circulating in academic papers. Although a full discussion of these ideas is beyond the scope of this study, both are significant to the broad framework presented here:
-The nature of modern war is changing. Low-intensity conflicts, or "fourth generation warfare", have become a common area of analysis by today's strategic thinkers. In a seminal work on this topic, The Transformation of 
War, Martin van Creveld (1991)
(1991, p. 197)
3
Cronin (2002)
(pp. 38-41)
Although the majority of scholars worry about terrorist organizations, it seems reasonable to argue that the processes of globalization and technological development can, and will, be exploited by weak states, as well.
This study limits itself to the examination of unconventional threats as a deterrent, rather than as a compellent. Although both deterrence and compellence are coercive strategies 
(Freedman, 2004, p. 27)
(Pape, 1996, p. 7)
(Pape, 1996, p. 6;
Morgan, 2003, p. 2;
Freedman, 2004, p. 110)
(Art, 1980, p. 7)
(Pape, 1996, p. 6
Although unconventional deterrence is not necessarily limited to weak states, and strong states, as well, can use unconventional threats in their overall security strategies, this study concentrates on weak states. However, both in theory and in practice, it is impossible to draw clear boundaries between weak and strong states (or small states versus great powers). Therefore, definitions of weak states tend to be very imprecise. Among the majority of theoreticians, the consensus appears to exist only on one point with regard to weak states: the characteristic, central to the definition of weak states, is that they cannot defend themselves by their own efforts against any of the great powers 
(Handel, 1981, p. 76)
(Platias, 1994, p. 45)
Being more precise, and going to the essence of the matter, this thesis concentrates on weak states. Weak states, in the words of John J. 
Mearsheimer (1983)
In turn, according to the author, when this lack of balance of forces is overwhelming, "the concept of [conventional] deterrence does not really apply" 
(Mearsheimer, 1983, p. 59)
Of course, it would be naïve to argue that Mearsheimer is completely wrong, and that there is an easy way out of this predicament. The difficulty of this predicament is nicely illustrated in a popular Finnish war novel when it says, "One Finn may be worth ten
Russians but what do we do when the eleventh comes along?" (as cited in 
Handel, 1981, p. 76)
In addition, pure unconventional deterrence does not seem to be the best option for aligned states, or for those that are involved in extended deterrence. Generally speaking, a weak state that concentrates its defense according to the expectations of an external military assistance, normally needs to defend some important strategic points of their national territory, in order to facilitate the intervention of its allies. In turn, that is inherently inconsistent with unconventional capabilities, which are not the best means for holding territory. Therefore, this study is limited to neutral, or non-aligned, weak states which, for whatever reason, concentrate their efforts primarily on the mobilization of internal resources to guarantee their defense.
Another distinction must be made between status quo and revisionist states. Since "weakness" is a relative concept, any state can find itself in a position of either being an underdog, or being a "great power," vis-à-vis its opponent, and of being either a defender, or a challenger of the status quo. The reason why this distinction is important for our discussion is that, for a relatively weak state that not only seeks to deter the strong from aggression, but also aims to challenge the existing status quo, pure unconventional deterrence would not be the best strategy. Although the nature of war is changing, a revisionist state needs to maintain larger or smaller conventional forces for expansionist purposes (e.g., to occupy opponent's territories, control it, implement occupational duties, etc.), because entirely unconventional forces appear to be not enough for these tasks in most cases. Therefore, pure unconventional deterrence seems to be limited to weak states that are satisfied with the status quo. That is not to say, however, that revisionist states cannot use unconventional capabilities as a part of their overall strategies.
The methodological approach used here is primarily theoretical. This study combines insights from deterrence, and "small war" theories, to outline a framework for unconventional deterrence strategies. Because unconventional deterrence has not been used as an elaborate strategy, there is no basis for a pure inductive approach. That is, there is no sample of case studies to analyze, construct a theory, and proceed to testing it. 
4
i.e. one trying to deter a great power through the use of unconventional threats.
In addition, insights drawn from small war theories are used to discuss the dynamics of small wars. Students of small wars deal with a paradoxical phenomenon, namely why some conflicts do not conform to the "iron rule of power," and an underdog is able to defeat the strong in war. Therefore, their insights are functionally significant for examining unconventional deterrence. As we will see below in the discussion, many determinants of small wars also reflect the requirements for successful deterrence.
5
The problematic part of this study, as mentioned above, is that there are no cases where a weak state utilizes unconventional deterrence. Therefore, the only option to support or deny propositions made in this study, is to analyze the actual cases where guerrilla warfare was been used to fight against the strong. In other words, the "model" is tested indirectly. The assumption is that if the weak can deny the objectives of the strong, via a particular type of warfare, it is reasonable to suggest that the threat of this kind of resistance can be used as a deterrent. In addition, in the majority of cases where the weak denies the strong his objectives by unconventional warfare, the weak actor is a sub-group within a state, rather than being a state, itself. However, this thesis contends that there are no reasons to suggest that the weak state cannot exploit the advantages of this kind of warfare, as well.
Two cases are analyzed in this study -the Vietnam War of 1964-73, and the Afghanistan War of 1979-89. However, because these cases have been widely analyzed, there are no extensive historical reviews of either conflict in the text. Both wars were chosen from an extensive list of guerrilla wars for the following reasons: 1) both are classic examples of the stronger side losing a war against the weaker side who used guerrilla tactics; 2) the asymmetry of power in both cases was very high -in both cases, the strong was a recognized superpower; 3) the regimes of the stronger in the two conflicts were of a different type, one being authoritarian (i.e., the USSR) and the other democratic (i.e., the US). Hence, this thesis has avoided limiting itself to the notion that only democracies fight small wars badly.
A.
The essence of deterrence is preventing the other party from doing something unacceptable, through threats of harming him if he does 
(Morgan, 2003, p. 1)
Freedman (2004)
Huth (1988)
Two widely analyzed types of deterrence -conventional and nuclear -are based on different kind of capabilities, and on different modes of inflicting cost through the use of these capabilities. While conventional deterrence is mostly associated with conventional forces denying an opponent's objectives on the battlefield, nuclear deterrence is primarily based upon punitive, or retaliatory, strikes, through the threat of using nuclear weapons on, primarily, non-military or quasi-military targets. However, neither conventional nor nuclear deterrence is strictly limited to counter-force and counter-value strategies, respectively. Conventional deterrence is sometimes associated with punishment (e.g., strategic bombing campaigns with conventional weapons), and nuclear weapons can be used on tactical levels to deny an opponent's objectives on the battlefield. Furthermore, war-fighting schools argue that the credibility of nuclear deterrence depends on the threatening party's ability to fight, and win at any level, even in an all-out nuclear war 
(Morgan, 2003, p. 24)
Following the logic of distinguishing between conventional and nuclear deterrence, unconventional deterrence can be defined as persuasion of the opponent not to attack via threats of unconventional warfare, such as guerrilla war and terrorism, including their various subcategories (e.g., assassinations of politico-military leadership, cyber-terrorism, terrorism by WMD, etc.).
6
1
As mentioned previously, deterrence theory groups deterrence strategies into two general categories -punishment and denial.
7
Mearsheimer (1983)
Pape (1996)
However, one has to acknowledge that, in unconventional deterrence, the boundaries between denial and punishment strategies are far blurrier than in conventional and nuclear deterrence. 
Freedman (2004)
Guerrilla attacks are intended, primarily, to diminish the opponent's will, instead of trying to defeat him military. In sum, in unconventional deterrence, denial strategies appear to involve more punitive elements than denial in conventional deterrence, because the former operate to deny the opponent of his long-term political objective, and are not aimed at gaining a short-term military victory. In order to achieve the former objective, the weak state has to concede the latter (i.e., military victory) to the aggressor.
Hence, based on the distinction between denial and punishment, one can identify two main strategies of unconventional deterrence -guerrilla warfare and terrorism. While the former is about threatening to deny an opponent his political objectives, the latter concentrates on punishing his population.
Guerrilla warfare, although usually associated with revolutionary and subversive wars, insurgencies, insurrections, etc., is treated primarily as combat tactics in this study.
As Klonis suggests, what defines guerrillas is how they fight, but not why, where, or when (as cited in 
Hoffman, 2000, p. 12)
Laqueur, 1998, p. 392)
8
9
However, it can also be used also as a separate strategy of unconventional deterrence. In other words, assassinations of key leadership, especially high-level decision-makers, can be utilized as a basic deterrent threat, employed on a strategic level.
10
Likewise, terrorism is a broad socio-political phenomenon. In this work, however, terrorism is considered as being tactics of attacking non-combatants for political purposes.
11
Morgan (2003, p. 15)
Buzan (1994)
). According to this logic, only terrorism by WMD can be considered a feasible deterrent, as long as the opponent believes that the party threatening is able and willing to 12 On cyber-terrorism and vulnerabilities of developed nations, see for example 
Verton (2004)
13 For example, nuclear deterrence does not consider the morality, and legitimacy of targeting civilians per se. The question of targeting civilians is only considered in the context of deterrence credibility. In other words, the core of the problem is not that it is unethical to target civilians but that opponent may not believe that the deterrer is ready to inflict a very large amount of destructiveness on the deterree's population for some unessential (from the deterree's perspective) reason. inflict large-scale destruction. 
14
Freedman (2004)
Freedman, 2004, p. 38)
Watman and Dean Wilkening (1996)
Freedman (2004)
15
In addition, it is logical to suggest that due to limited destructiveness of unconventional threats (with the possible exception of WMD), the declared response to aggression has to be tailored much more carefully to the fears of specific opponent, his society, and leadership involved.
The relatively limited destructiveness of unconventional threats appears to be one of the most problematic parts of unconventional deterrence. As 
Morgan (2003)
(Buzan, 1994, p. 26)
Watman and Wilkening (1995)
(Watman and Wilkening, 1995, p. 29)
Also, limited destructiveness is closely connected with the aggressors' cost sensitivity, in both material and human terms. Since the deterrent threats need to change the aggressor's cost-benefit calculations, there would always be a question, in unconventional deterrence, whether the cost that can be inflicted by unconventional deterrence is large enough to be "unbearable," or unacceptable, for the aggressor.
Because of the limited destructiveness of threats, it may be very rational that an aggressor would choose to suffer the cost. Thus, the degree to which the opponent is cost-sensitive is of high importance in unconventional deterrence. That is, the more the aggressor is insensitive to the cost, the more unreliable unconventional deterrence would be in practice.
In addition to the possibility that the aggressor's decision to attack and suffer a cost may be rational, because of the low destructiveness of unconventional threats, the prospects of deterrence success can be even more impaired by the "bounded", or limited, rationality of an opponent. According to the concept of limited rationality (which seems to be broadly acknowledged in deterrence theory as closely reflecting decision-making in practice), decision-making usually satisfies minimum criteria of rationality, or "reasonable" relationship between values, objectives, and decisions. At the same time, however, decision-making can suffer from a wide range of errors and misperceptions, such as, lack of information, group-think, time constraint, "analytic bias" (i.e., overestimating one's and underestimating the opponent's capabilities), general psychological (i.e., non-pathological) influences, miscalculations, cognitive biases, ignorance of low-probability outcomes, wishful thinking, etc. 
(Davis & Arquilla, 1991b)
Therefore, Keith B. Payne suggests that it is necessary "to examine as closely as possible the particular opponent's thinking -its beliefs and thought filters" 
(2003, p. xi)
In contrast, the logic in unconventional deterrence seems to be completely the reverse.
Due to the limited destructiveness of unconventional threats, it is more difficult to influence the opponent's decision-making process. In other words, if the aggressor, for example, has a preconception that his "glorious army" cannot be defeated by "lousy guerrillas," increasing the number of unconventional capabilities, most probably, would have little effect to change this predisposition.
Hence, the limited destructiveness of unconventional threats seems to be a problem inherent in unconventional deterrence: to deter an opponent via threats of precise loss is more difficult than through threats of devastating damage. Therefore, it is reasonable to suggest, that in unconventional deterrence, strategies and threats have to tailored very carefully and precisely to a specific opponent, his leadership, and his society in order to produce the desired deterrent effect. This thesis contends that the lower the destructiveness of threats, the more precise tailoring of threats to the opponent's fears and vulnerabilities is needed. Most probably, for example, threats of cyber-terrorism would not have any deterrent effect for the opponent whose economy barely depends on information technologies. If the aggressor is not cost-sensitive in terms of human lives, the threats to target the relatives of decision-makers would, most likely, produce a better deterrent effect than would threats of indiscriminate terrorism. A low-intensity insurgency, perhaps, would be a deterrent if the leadership of a country has a preconception that the armed forces are meant to wage wars, not to build nations.
It is worth noting, however, that the position taken here is that the limited destructiveness of unconventional threats is their inherent weakness, and the most problematic area of unconventional deterrence, may not necessarily be true, or as problematic as suggested. 
Freedman (2004)
Unfortunately, it is difficult to find evidence whether this inference holds or not in deterrence among states. If it did, unconventional deterrence would be far less problematic than suggested in this study. However, it seems reasonable to argue that in either case, the weak would only increase the deterrent effect of their threats, by concentrating on boosting the level of certainty of some response to the aggression, notwithstanding the limited destructiveness of these threats.
One of the circumstances most favorable to the use of unconventional deterrence, seems to be, when it can reinforce already internalized fears of the opponent.
Unfortunately, deterrence theory does not explicitly address the importance of tracking internalized fears, and reinforcing them in deterrence strategies. The "rule of thumb" of deterrence is identifying an aggressor's values that can be threatened, and his vulnerabilities 
(Carns, 2001, p. 9)
Freedman (2004)
16
Freedman (2004)
The best example of this kind of internalized deterrence, associated with unconventional deterrence strategies, is the aversion, especially of the US, to "small wars" (i.e., guerrilla conflicts). Gil 
Merom (2003)
(Erdmann, 2002, p. 47;
Merom, 2003, p. 247)
Lord (1998)
national interest must be vital and clearly threatened; and the U.S. must employ overwhelming forces to win, not only decisively, but also quickly 
(Luttwak, 1995, p. 112;
Merom, 2003, pp. 246-247;
Lord, 1998)
Merom (2003)
According to 
Freedman (2004)
Looking for conditions of successful deterrence has been the basic area of research of deterrence scholars. The fact that deterrence has been one of those rare theoretical concepts that has been both vitally important and practical, theoreticians have been forced toward analyzing the requirements for deterrence that could enable states to adopt effective and credible deterrent policies. Unfortunately, notwithstanding the substantial body of theoretical and empirical works available, the more common conclusions appear to be contrary to expectations, namely that deterrence is inherently unreliable, and that there is no way of finding the general formula of conditions under which deterrence is likely to succeed or fail. However, theoretical and empirical findings suggest a number of widely agreed upon conditions, which can be useful in shaping coherent deterrence strategies.
In general, two facets of successful deterrence are usually discussed in the studies -capabilities and credibility. In other words, for deterrence to succeed, the deterrer must have the means to implement his threats, and the aggressor must believe that the threats will be implemented. 
Watman and Wilkening (1995)
Huth 
(1999)
Although the importance of the balance of military capabilities is an unsettled issue in deterrence theory, the military capabilities between deterrer and attacker have been given the most attention in analyzing deterrence situations 
(Huth & Russett, 1984, p. 501
Russet (1994)
Even though, as 
Morgan (2003)
Mearsheimer (1983)
(Handel, 1981, p. 92, p. 258)
Concerning the balance of military capabilities, several studies have found that local, or short-term, military balance is more important than strategic, or long-term, capabilities (for example 
, Huth, 1988)
(Mearsheimer, 1983;
Huth, 1988
Huth, , 1999;;
Watman & Wilkening, 1995;
Glaser & Kaufman, 1998)
Huth (1999)
(Mearsheimer, 1983, p. 64)
Watman and Wilkening (1995)
This leads to the inference that military capabilities that can deny a cheap and quick victory have the greatest deterrent influence 
(Watman & Wilkening, 1995, p. 67)
Hammes (2004)
To be precise, most of the above mentioned theoreticians, when elaborating on the notion that aggressors do not like protracted and costly wars, specify that they are speaking about 'wars of attrition'. 
17
Handel (1981)
273). After discussing the cost of the Vietnam War for the US, 
Handel (1981)
In sum, unconventional capabilities can have deterrent effects, if the aggressor believes that he can be prevented from obtaining a quick and cheap victory.
The problematic aspect, however, is that guerrilla warfare appears to defy all the rules of calculating offensive/defensive force, and force-to-space ratios. 18 In other words, military balance, the facet of deterrence that has received the most attention in analyzing deterrence situations, becomes useless as an analytical tool if the deterrer threatens to deny the aggressor of his objectives, via engaging him in a guerrilla war. In case of employing terrorism as a means of punishment, the military balance would be even more irrelevant. Concerning guerrilla warfare, at least, it is logical to argue that the more troops an aggressor has on the ground, the more difficult it would be for guerrillas to operate.
However, if the deterrer threatens to punish the aggressor's population with terrorist acts, the aggressor's superior military capabilities become irrelevant to a large degree.
Therefore, it appears that in unconventional deterrence, the sheer numbers of military forces available for both sides does not matter as much as does the deterrer's strategy. In other words, if the weak state is able to adopt a strategy that decreases the utility of the aggressor's military capabilities, increases prospects of protracting the war, and threatens to deny an aggressor his political objectives, even considerably inferior military capabilities can have some deterrent effect.
Both military capabilities and a strategy, or a plan of employing armed forces to achieve military and/or political objectives (Arreguin-Toft, 2001, p. 99), are integral parts of overall military power. It is logical to argue that armed forces, no matter how enormous they are, will never unfold their full potential without a coherent and elaborate plan of how they are to be employed. More importantly, as Thomas G.
Mahnken (1993) suggests, "military effectiveness is the result of developing a strategy to 18 T. E. Lawrence's attempt to shape guerrilla warfare into the exact science (including calculations of force ratios) is usually criticized as having resulted in overly broad generalizations, and not having much explanatory power. See on Lawrence's approach to guerrilla warfare, for example, 
Laqeuer (1998, pp. 169-171)
Beckett (2001, pp. 19-20)
Asprey (1994, pp. 179-191)
A notable exception to this is 
Mearsheimer's (1983)
However, he narrows his analysis only to conventional deterrence, and states, in straightforward fashion, that his theory does not apply to guerrilla wars, such as the Vietnam War (p. 15). Because of this omission of guerrilla warfare as a strategy of war, Mearsheimer, as mentioned above, comes to the orthodox conclusion that the military balance matters when he claims that, only when opponents possess about equal military capabilities, does strategy become a determinant of deterrence. Yet if the Vietnam War, or other guerrilla conflict, had been included in the Mearsheimer's analysis, his conclusion -"deterrence is largely a function of military strategy" (p. 7) -would have been more general and more broadly applicable. It appears to be reasonable to suggest that if a military strategy can be adopted to deny an opponent his objectives or prevent a fait accompli, strategy will matter in any kind of deterrence, not only in conventional deterrence.
In unconventional deterrence, strategy appears to be of a high importance for determining a deterrence's success or failure. Because weak states will never be able to match great powers, in terms of military might, their adoption of the right strategy is the only option to increase the deterrent effect of their inferior military capabilities. As Athanassios G. 
Platias (1994)
Platias (1994)
(1994, p. 59
In brief, unconventional deterrence appears to be a necessity for the weak state, vis-à-vis a greater power, because weak states will have, neither enough short-term military capabilities to repulse the attack, nor long-term, or strategic, capabilities to threaten aggressors with a protracted war of attrition. Thus, guerrilla warfare, as a denial strategy, and terrorism, as a punishment strategy, are two ways for underdogs to maximize deterrence: while guerrilla warfare strategy protracts a conflict, terrorism makes most of the aggressor's military capabilities irrelevant.
a.
The "balance of motivations," and its main element, interests at stake, seem to be the most readily analyzed aspect of credibility in deterrence situations. In fact, while the balance of military forces is the main component of capabilities, the balance of motivations is the main element of credibility. According to 
Watman and Wilkening (1995)
Freedman (2004)
Morgan (2003)
The balance of motivations is mostly a function of interests at stake, or the "balance of interest." However, besides interests, a few intangible elements also appear to be a part the overall balance of motivations. Although such intangible aspects -which are considered as the components of "will" in this study 
19
As well, it is worth noting that although will seems to be a relatively important element for the balance of motivations in deterrence situations, in general, some of the facets of will may have a particularly great influence for boosting unconventional deterrence strategies. For example, since guerrilla resistance requires population support, the cohesiveness of population (i.e., perceived by the enemy) may increase significantly the credibility of unconventional deterrence. Hence, the balance of motivations is not strictly associated only with interests at stake, and even though they are the main element, they can be reinforced or diminished by some intangible aspects of will.
Concerning the concept of interests at stake, deterrence theory "predicts that if the balance of interests favors the defender deterrence should hold" 
(Lieberman, 1995, p. 7)
(Freedman, 2004, p. 47)
Regarding unconventional deterrence, or, more precisely, deterrence of the strong by the weak, the question is whether it is possible to establish some logic predicting the eventual balance of interests. This thesis posits that, in most situations, the asymmetry of interests would likely be in favor of the weak, because the greater power's attack on the weak state would most probably threaten the national survival of the latter. In contrast, the stronger parties usually do not need to choose between survival and non-survival while considering attacking the weaker. However strong and strategically important his interests are, they probably would not be greater than that of national survival, or even 'regime survival'. Even if the greater power's attack is limited in its aims, and does not threaten the national or regime survival of the weak, territorial integrity is usually considered as an essential interest. As 
Freedman (2004)
(1996)
(Pape, 1996, p. 7)
In addition, it is generally acknowledged in deterrence theory, that direct deterrence, or deterring an attack against one's territory, is considered easier and more credible than extended deterrence, or deterring an attack on an ally. As Thomas Schelling elaborates, "the difference between national homeland and everything 'abroad' is the difference between threats that are inherently credible, even if unspoken, and threats that have to be made credible" (as cited in 
Platias, 1994, p. 54)
Freedman, 2004, p. 46)
Summing up, in deterrence situations when the weak are trying to deter the strong, the balance of motivations would likely be in favor of the weak. Since sovereignty is usually perceived as the most vital issue at stake, it is reasonable to believe that the greater power's interests, however strategically important, would rarely match the weak state's interest at stake. As well, whereas the greater power's decision to attack, or not attack, would rarely be identified with a question of national survival, for the weak, this question looms large when facing the attack of a stronger opponent. Although, suggested here is the notion that direct deterrence is inherently more credible than extended deterrence, and that intrinsic interests are more deterring than strategic, that does not mean that the weaker state can neglect emphasizing the asymmetry of interests in bargaining strategies. Notwithstanding the inherent credibility concerning the interest and motivations, the weak would only strengthen the deterrent effect of its strategies by continually accentuating the asymmetry of issues at stake.
Reputation, or a "state's record of past behavior," is another principle determiner of deterrence credibility 
(Watman & Wilkening, 1995, p. 58)
(Freedman, 2004, p. 53)
In other words, it is difficult to establish the extent to which reputation is important for deterrence success or failure. Huth (1999) appears to conclude that reputation is the least elaborated upon variable in deterrence theory. He suggests that our knowledge is limited to identifying "when reputations form and what impact they have on deterrence" (p. 44).
Concerning the importance of reputations for deterrence credibility, views vary from the assertion that the deterrer's past behavior creates strong beliefs about his behavior in the future crisis and has strong influence on the aggressor's decision whether to challenge deterrence, to the argument that reputations are largely irrelevant for deterrence outcomes, because aggressors usually pay more attention to the current specificities (e.g., balance of military capabilities, issues at stake, and signals received from the deterrer), and do not think that the past behavior is a reliable predictor of future behavior. 20 Huth (1999) concludes that empirical evidence does not strongly support any of these views (pp. 41-43). He suggests that reputation is limited in its effects, and that the deterrer's past behavior in the conflicts with other states has no significant impact on deterrence outcomes in many deterrence situations (p. 42). However, he says, reputational influences can be important (p. 43). Huth proposes an intermediate position -
"reputations can form and be important but only under certain conditions" (p. 33). Most likely, reputations are important when they contradict the aggressor's assessment of casespecific variables, and when they arise from the past record of interactions between the same deterrer and aggressor. As well, reputations that are important tend to be formed within the same geographic region, and may have important effects on the aggressor's calculations, only for a relatively short period of time (because of the changes in strategic environment, leadership changes, etc.) 
(Huth, 1999)
Lieberman (1995)
(Lieberman, 1995, p. 30)
Following the logic of these inferences, this thesis also proposes that in unconventional deterrence, only context dependent reputations would likely have an important impact on the aggressor's calculations. Most probably, if the aggressor has already lost a guerrilla war against the same deterrer, reputation would have the strongest effect for the credibility of unconventional deterrence. For example, if Vietnam or Lebanon employed unconventional deterrence against the US and Israel, respectively, there would be a high probability that the deterrers' reputations would influence the calculations of potential aggressors. On the other hand, if the deterrer has been crushingly defeated in a conventional war against the same potential attacker, the credibility of unconventional deterrence, probably, would not be greatly influenced by the reputation of a "miserable" conventional force's performance on the battlefield. The deterrer may, rather, exploit this shift of defensive strategies to his own advantage, by emphasizing his strategic adaptability, and learning the "lessons-learned." The established reputations of national cohesion and nationalistic fervor may also have an effect on the aggressor's 20 See 
Huth (1997)
Huth (1999)
In deterrence theory, bargaining strategy is considered to be a component of deterrence credibility. The general assertion, according to Lieberman, is "that the crisis-bargaining-behavior of the defender influences deterrence outcomes" 
(Lieberman, 1995, p. 31)
Huth (1999)
Watman and Wilkening (1995)
Huth (1999)
In brief, concerning particular bargaining behavior, 
Huth (1988
Huth ( , 1999) )
"diplomatic policies that include flexibility and a willingness to compromise and negotiate on secondary issue, combined with a refusal to concede on vital security, increase the likelihood of deterrence success" 
(Huth, 1999
, p. 38). Overall, Huth (1999)
In regard to unconventional deterrence, there is no evidence to suggest that bargaining behavior should be somehow conceptually different. That is to say, that the role of bargaining strategies in unconventional deterrence is the same -as a means to signal interests, intentions, and resolve for an aggressor. Because unconventional threats are not so impressive and self-evident, clearly conveying threats to the opponent may have a strong effect for deterrence outcome. As well, some kind of flexibility, reassurance, and willingness to compromise on secondary issues, if situation allows, would presumably increase the deterrent effect of overall unconventional deterrence strategy.
Legitimacy is not considered as being a determinant of deterrence outcome in deterrence theory, and is rarely discussed by deterrence theoreticians. 
Watman and Wilkening (1995)
Therefore, the present study stays within the limits of the question as how legitimacy can affect deterrence credibility, and does not discuss whether terrorism, as such, or targeting civilians, in general (thus, the problem goes even beyond terrorism), can be a "just" warfighting technique.
In general, deterrence theory considers legitimacy, only in the light of credibility. In other words, it does not matter whether interests or means are legitimate, as such. Legitimacy becomes important only when it can impair credibility -if the aggressor believes that the deterrer thinks about his defended interest as being illegitimate, the aggressor can discount the threats, expecting that the deterrer may back down after the attack, and not implement the threats. 
Watman and Wilkening (1995)
Therefore, in unconventional deterrence, the problem is not that some defending methods are illegitimate, per se, but how the weak can convey the message that they treat these defensive methods as legitimate, and the implementation of threats will not be impaired. 
Watman and Wilkening (1995)
(Pape, 1996, p. 6)
Concerning the legitimacy of defensive mechanisms in unconventional deterrence, the problem is more complicated. It may be reasonable for the aggressor to believe that the perceived illegitimacy of defensive means can handicap the implementation of threats. However, even at this point of time, it appears that some weak states (e.g., Iran, Sudan) could easily convince the potential aggressor that they would retaliate by terrorist strikes in response to attacks on their homelands. Because of their leadership reputations, associations with terrorist activities in the past, and, apparently, not so rigid approach to terrorism as a fighting technique, the aggressor would likely believe that the threats would be implemented notwithstanding their connotation with illegitimacy. Other weak states may emphasize the defensive, in contrast to offensive, use of terrorism in their public diplomacy, in order to diminish the negative connotation.
Punitive retaliation by terrorist acts, in fact, is conceptually the same as counter-value strategies in nuclear deterrence. In both cases, the targets are civilian populations. Thus, weak states could emphasize that their deterrence strategies function in the same way as that of greater powers. In other words, public diplomacy could question why the weak should be limited in their defensive strategies while the stronger can target civilians in their strategies. The question could be stressed, what is more illegitimate and unethicalvast damage of nuclear strikes, or limited destruction of terrorist strikes? On the other hand, if the weak state, itself, doubts the legitimacy of terrorist threats or/and finds it difficult to convince an aggressor that the threats will be implemented, notwithstanding that the aggressor perceives them as illegitimate, the weak could concentrate their deterrence efforts on denial (by guerrilla warfare) as a primary strategy of unconventional deterrence.
You know you never defeated us on the battlefield," said the American colonel.
The North Vietnamese colonel pondered this remark a moment. "That may be so," he replied, "but it is also irrelevant.
The Iraq War of 2003, once again, has raised the "small war" phenomenon to the fore. Although it is too early to make general conclusions, or speculate about what has been called "the second Vietnam," it is, apparently, evident that the world's only superpower, the U.S., has had difficulties in realizing its aims and, thus, ending the war.
History suggests that even underdogs sometimes do win wars against considerably superior belligerents. One could argue that that is just a matter of accident, the result of a Clausewitzian "fog of war." However, it seems that too many examples of this may have occurred -for instance, the Peninsular War, the Algerian war of 1954-62, the Vietnam War of 1964-73, the Afghanistan War of 1979-89, the Lebanon war of 1982-83, the Chechnya War of 1994-96, etc., to ignore this as being a paradoxical phenomenon. On the other hand, and more typically, there are plenty of counterexamples, i.e., where the weak have lost wars, occasionally with their population even being exterminated. However, these cases conform to the "iron rule of power." What seems counterintuitive (due to overall Western predominance) is that in the 20th century "underdogs seem to have done rather well in small wars" 
(Merom, 2003, p. 4)
2001
As mentioned above, some theoreticians of small wars have been trying to determine the dynamics of small wars. 22 In other words, the question is whether there exists some logic, or determinants, behind this seemingly paradoxical phenomenon -i.e., an underdog's victory over a stronger opponent. Concerning unconventional deterrence, in general, and deterrence by the weak, in particular, the small war phenomenon matters in two ways. First, if an underdog's victory in war against the strong does not have any basis in logic, and appears to be only an incidental aberration, unconventional deterrence would seem to be very problematic. That is to say, it would be unreliable to threaten the strong, in order to deny him his objectives (at least with particular types of resistance), if underdog victories are accidental, rather than being a predictable result. Second, insights from discussions on small wars can suggest a number of conditions that may influence the outcome of unconventional deterrence -ones that can either be created by the weak, or that are intrinsic to the deterree (and the international system in which the opponents interact).
1.
The small war phenomenon is rather illogical, in itself -i.e., the notion that underdogs can prevail in conflicts against antagonists who are superior, in every respect.
Victories by underdogs are a paradox for realism, particularly 
(Merom, 2003, p. 5)
(Arreguín-Toft, 2001, p. 94
The most feasible explanation of small wars, fitting this balance-of-power paradigm of realism theory, is both an over-extension of power, as well as an omen signaling the decline of hegemony. According to Robert Gilpin, hegemons expand to the 22 A plethora of terms, such as asymmetric war, low-intensity conflict, military operations other than war, 4 th generation war, etc., is used alternatively with the concept of small war. However, these appear to be much broader concepts than we discuss. For the purpose of this paper, we borrow 
Merom's (2003)
Merom, 2003, p. 6)
Follath, 2003)
(Merom, 2003, p. 6)
Another approach to small wars, closely connected with the perspective of the balance-of-power paradigm, follows structuralist argumentation -i.e., that a great power should be prepared to defend its status and interests against other would-be great powers.
That is to say, great powers cannot afford to allocate a large part of their efforts to wars that do not threaten their survival, and cannot generate major systemic changes in the international system. According to Robert M. 
Cassidy (2002)
(Cassidy, 2003, p. v)
Both the balance-of-power paradigm and the structuralism approach especially stress the relevance of overextension-of-power and structural-constraint arguments during major, or systemic, wars. That is to say, great powers need to concentrate their resources and efforts on other strong antagonists during their major wars, thus making the guerrillas' struggle more efficient in non-major war areas. From this point of view, Napoleon gave up Spain because he needed his forces for the invasion of Russia. For the same reason, guerrillas in the Balkans successfully resisted Hitler's forces; and Britain gave up their American colonies, due to troubles elsewhere 
(Merom, 2003, p. 6)
Although these arguments of an over-extension of power and structural constraints cannot explain the small war phenomenon by themselves, their insights may be relevant for unconventional deterrence, at least, in theory. First, unconventional deterrence, most probably, would seem most feasible when a strong warring nation faces a dozen other "hot spots" throughout its zones of influence, and perceives its military capabilities as being on the edge of being overextended. Bearing in mind the efficiency of guerrilla tactics in tieing down much larger conventional units, or in protracting a conflict, and in preventing stronger opponents from ending a war in just several decisive blows, it is reasonable to suggest that guerrilla resistance would work better as a deterrent if the strong followed a strategy of concentrating its forces on one "hot spot," i.e., dealing with just one conflict decisively, and only then moving on to the next. Second, if the greater power faces other would-be great powers, i.e. those which want to challenge the former conventionally, unconventional deterrence by the weak likely would work better, because the stronger opponent would not be able to concentrate his resources and efforts on the small war with the weaker opponent. In fact, this notion rests on the argument that a big-war paradigm (or large, mechanized conventional forces oriented towards greater firepower) is not the best means to fight small wars. Hence, if the great power needs to adopt a big-war paradigm due to necessity, the weak may maximize the deterrent effect of its forces by concentrating on a different type of resistance.
The majority of analyses regarding small wars may be subsumed by the over-all pattern of counter-insurgency theory. Students of counter-insurgencies, approach the problem by asking why strong actors fail to win small wars. In other words, small wars are not lost. They are not won. The general conclusion is that great powers do not manage to employ appropriate means in dealing with insurgencies. Some of the main reasons why overwhelmingly superior forces, both militarily and socio-economically, usually fail to convert their advantages in small wars are: malfunctioning military doctrine, failed things being equal. Notwithstanding the profusion of analysis of small wars, and broadly agreed-upon principles of a successful counter-insurgency strategy,
23
Lord (1995)
In fact, the argument for the effectiveness of guerrilla warfare is closely associated with the above discussed interaction-of-strategies approach. However, the counter-insurgency and the effectiveness of guerrilla warfare approaches look at the small war phenomenon from different angles. While the latter suggests that the strong failed to adopt the right strategies, the former argues that guerrilla warfare is inherently effective as a military tactic, and difficult to beat. Such arguments reached a peak in 1950s and 60s, when it was often assumed, based on historical data, that insurgents were likely to be successful 
(Beckett, 2001, p. viii)
Laqueur, 1998, p. 390)
(Boot, 2002, p. 314)
(Laqueur, 1998, p. 275)
Because of the ability to resist and counteract superior forces, guerrilla warfare has been commonly considered to be the weapon of choice by the weak, or, in other words, "classic 'poor man's war'" 
(Beckett, 2001, pix)
Merom (2003)
In conventional warfare, armies seek to marshal their forces for decisive battles. They therefore rely on a great deal of logistic support, fixed bases, and a few wide supply lines. These require a great deal of centralization investment of material and human resources in infrastructure, and its defensive maintenance. Ultimately, these offer good targets, particularly for the militarily superior side. Guerrilla warfare, by relying on small independent formations, and on supply and shelter from an existing, widely decentralized infrastructure -the general population -can avoid much of the burden, as well as a single knockout blow. (p. 34)
In turn, 
Merom (2003)
Another peculiarity of guerrilla conflict is nicely reflected in H. 
Kissinger's (1969)
For weak states, this approach to small wars seems to suggest several points. First, guerrilla warfare is operationally effective: it requires only limited resources, can tie down considerably larger numbers of the enemy's troops, does not offer easy targets for the superior opponent, and cannot be defeated with a single, or even several, decisive blows. More importantly, guerrilla warfare appears to be the only option that provides some chance to resist successfully against the opponent who is superior in every respect.
In turn, if the weak state considers deterring the strong by denial, adopting a guerrilla warfare strategy would likely have a higher deterrent effect than preparing to defend the territory conventionally, simply because in the latter case, the victory of the strong appears to be preordained.
One of the most elaborated upon dynamics of small wars draws attention to the asymmetrical relationship between belligerents. The underdog's victory is often primarily a function of an asymmetry of interests. Andrew 
Mack (1983)
Some motivational approaches on the other hand, put more emphasis on the significance of various intangibles, or will, than on, more or less, "perceptible" interests.
Although an antagonist's will is usually derived from its interests, "faith in a dream" (using 
Bell's (1999)
(Bell, 1999, p. 170)
(Rosen, 1972, p. 168
Bell (1999)
R. Thompson and M. Howard emphasize, in particular, the significance of the social strength of underdogs in small wars (as cited in 
Merom, 2003, p. 10)
Bell (1999)
(Liddell Hart, 1968, p. 349)
Laqueur (1977)
In fact, the argument that the dynamics of small wars are a function of an asymmetry of interests and will is connected with the assertion that the balance of motivations matters for deterrence success. For weak states, this approach would suggest emphasizing the interests at stake, and the will to protect these interests in deterrence strategies, while pointing out the political vulnerability of the great powers to long, protracted, and unwinnable guerrilla wars.
Another argument about the dynamics of small wars refers to the political system of a warring great power. As Stephen P. Rosen argues, the social structure of the political unit can affect its ability to generate military power (as cited in 
Lwin, 1997, p. 17)
Concerning small wars, the common argument is that democracies are cost-sensitive and fight small wars rather badly. In contrast, authoritarian political systems are less susceptible to internal and external opposition 
(Mack, 1983, p. 192)
(Merom, 2003, p. 26)
Merom (2003)
For weak states, this approach suggests that guerrilla warfare, as a defensive strategy, would be more successful against democracies. Of course, this does not translate automatically to more reliable unconventional deterrence, unless the aggressor's leaders believe that internal opposition can prevent them from achieving their war aims further down the road. Thus, the underdog's public diplomacy, stimulating internal discussions in the strong state regarding the possibility of attack, may increase the deterrent effect of the unconventional deterrence strategy.
"breaking point," US forces believed they would be able to "stabilize" South Vietnam, and then exit 
(Arreguín-Toft, 2001, p. 118)
Bell (1999)
America had the appropriate resources -an endless supply of tangible assets -to win, to turn Saigon around, to fashion an army that would in alliance pursue a war of attrition to inevitable victory" (p. 288). As 
Summers (1995)
(Boot, 2002, p. 316)
Laqueur (1998)
After the French retreated from Indochina, and the Geneva accords partitioned Vietnam into two countries, with Ho Chi Minh in control of North Vietnam and vague allusions to common elections in 1956, the Vietminh apparently focused on consolidating their rule over the North Vietnam for the next several years. However, guerrilla war in the South never ceased, entirely, and began increasing, gradually, from 1957 
(Laqueur, 1998, p. 270)
(Laqueur, 1998, p. 274)
(Asprey, 1994, p. 618)
Joes (1996
Joes ( ) reports, that between 1954
Joes ( and 1958
(Boot, 2002, p. 287)
Bell (1999)
After the naval incident in the Gulf of Tonkin in 1964, the US retaliated with limited air strikes against North Vietnam, which turned into a prolonged bombing campaign. In March 1965, the first ground combat troops landed, providing security for an American airbase. By that time, the number of regular North Vietnamese soldiers who had been dispatched to the South was estimated at 38,000, and the Vietcong numbered at least 220,000 
(Boot, 2002, p. 294)
(Bell, 1999, p296)
It is interesting to note, as 
Laqueur (1998)
However, they did not launch an outright invasion of the South. Having in mind the US commitment to South Vietnam, it seems that the Vietminh realized, from the very beginning, that fighting a conventional war of pitched battles against a superior enemy would inevitably result in their defeat. Instead, the NVA regulars and Vietcong guerrillas used, essentially, classic guerrilla "hit-and-run" tactics (e.g., ambushes, laying mines, and raids on airfields, military bases, and police outposts). Nor did they agree to fight on the enemy's terms, i.e., in large-scale engagements, with the exception of several conventional offensives, which proved to be militarily disastrous for the NVA and Vietcong (discussed below in the text). 
Boot (2002)
When guerrillas chose to fight, they used some irregular tactics (e.g., extensive tunnel systems 
[Bell, 1999, pp. 299-308]
(Beckett, 2001, p. 90)
Likewise, "air strikes against the Vietcong were not decisive either, because the enemy was usually not visible" 
(Laqueur, 1998, p. 275)
Bell (1999)
Although low-intensity guerrilla warfare was the pivotal aspect of the NVA and Vietcong strategy, it was not the only one. The intensity of war fluctuated. As prescribed by the "orthodox" guerrilla warfare doctrine, the NVA and Vietcong, on occasion, gathered their troops for smaller or larger scale "phase III",
24
However, the common outcome of these pitched battles -the "American battlefield triumph" (using 
Bell's words (1999, p. 318
Arreguín-Toft (2001)
Beckett (2001)
(Bell, 1999, p. 313)
(Boot, 2002, p. 308
(Bell, 1999, p. 315)
(Bell,
199,
315)
The majority of the subsequent, main-unit engagements between the NVA and the US forces also demonstrated the same pattern -i.e., superior firepower prevailed over the underdog in the battlefield. In the second round of the Tet Offensive in May 1968 and in the siege of Khe Shan, US conventional power triumphed 
(Bell, 1999, p. 318)
(Joes, 1996, p. 103;
Beckett, 2001, p. 192)
Collins (1986)
"what happened in one province or even part of a province did not often affect events elsewhere" 
(Asprey, 1994
(Asprey, , p. 1206))
Mujahedin" only in 1985 
(Beckett, 2001, p. 209)
Poole (2004)
Although it is not open to speculation how more elaborate strategic coordination may have affected the military performance of the mujahedin, the fragmented social structure, as 
Shaw and Spencer (2003)
(Cassidy, 2003, p. 36)
Poole, 2004, p. 98)
(Asprey, 1994
(Asprey, , p. 1208))
Second, the Afghanistan war exemplifies the difference between occupying a country and holding it: "while it was relatively easy to seize Afghanistan, it was quite another matter to keep it" 
(Shaw and Spencer, 2003, p. 177)
2002)
However, the stabilization of Afghanistan and the elimination of insurgency proved beyond the will and means of the Soviet Union to achieve 
(McMichael, 2002, p. 262)
The easy conventional victory quickly evolved into a protracted guerrilla war. The Soviets invaded with the limited military objectives in mind -provide stability by establishing garrisons in key locations, build up the DRA Army into effective force, and, avoiding fighting themselves, direct and support (with air, artillery, intelligence, and logistic) the DRA Army's operations against insurgents throughout the countryside.
However, they overestimated the feasibility of transforming the DRA Army into an effective fighting force 
(McMichael, 2002, p. 263)
(Blank, 1988, p. 62)
(Collins, 1986)
(McMichael, 2002, p. 264
(Beckett, 2001, 211)
(Asprey, 1994
(Asprey, , p. 1206))
(Collins, 1986)
(Beckett, 2001, p. 211)
(McMichael, 2002
, p. 265). McMichael (2002)
Joes (1996)
(Bell, 1999, p. 220
(Asprey, 1994
(Asprey, , p. 1207))
(Beckett, 2001, p. 211)
(Collins, 1986)
Blank, 1988, p. 72)
In sum, the Soviet-Afghan war demonstrates the potential of guerrilla warfare as a weapon against a militarily superior enemy. The mujahedin were able to protract the war, thus, making the cost too big for the Soviet Union to persist. The Soviets retreated without realizing their political aims. As well, this war clearly exemplifies the difference between invading and occupying a country, and holding and ruling it. Swift and massive invasion did not assure successful stabilization of the country afterwards. The mujahedin repelled Soviets not by successful conventional defense, but by discouraging occupation.
objectives. Particularly, the Afghanistan War exemplifies that there is a considerable difference between defending a country conventionally and discouraging an occupation.
Therefore, the present study contends that the balance of military capabilities is not an overriding determinant in deterrence. Deterrence theory also needs to consider the opponents' strategies (i.e., weighing military strategies). If an inferior opponent adopts a strategy that makes the aggressor's military superiority irrelevant, to a certain degree, deterrence may hold, notwithstanding an overwhelming imbalance in military capabilities. Hence, strategy is also a determinant in deterrence situations. In unconventional deterrence, especially, the deterrer's strategy is more important than the balance of military capabilities between the opponents.
Small war theories also suggest that underdogs' victories in war are not accidental. Although it is impossible, for obvious reasons, to establish an unambiguous small war dynamics, and identify conditions under which an underdog's victory would be guaranteed in a small war, several insights from these theories support the argument of this thesis. That is, that an underdog may increase the deterrent effect of its military capabilities by concentrating its defensive efforts on unconventional warfare. First, great powers adopt big-war paradigms through sheer necessity (which, in fact, is not the best approach to dealing with guerrilla resistance), because they need to be prepared to counter other "would-be" great powers. Second, counterinsurgency is a difficult task, even under the best of circumstances. Thus, there is no easy and quick answer to countering guerrilla resistance -a weak actor, employing guerrilla resistance, is difficult to defeat. Third, the balance of interests and motivations, usually, favors the weak in small wars. Therefore, the stronger opponent is politically vulnerable in protracted wars.
Finally, guerrilla warfare may be an optimal weapon of the weak. Compared with conventional defenses, hit-and-run tactics, the avoidance of pitched battles, operating through a decentralized command, the ability to blend with civilian populations, and a much lower reliance on uninterrupted logistic support, all allow the underdog to counteract a great deal of the superior firepower of the enemy, and to tie down large numbers of the enemy's troops. As well, in a small war, the underdog does not need to defeat the opponent, militarily. All he must do is protract war by not losing, thus gradually wearing down the opponent's political will in persisting. Hence, these insights suggest that, by adopting guerrilla warfare strategies, underdogs would likely increase the deterrent effect of their military forces, vis-à-vis the superior enemy.
However, this study also concludes that unconventional deterrence, as a strategy, is far more problematic and unreliable, compared with nuclear and conventional deterrence. Unconventional capabilities are neither very impressive, nor clear in their levels of destructiveness. Because of their relatively limited destructiveness, there will always be a high probability that the aggressor will take a risk, or choose to suffer the price. Hence, its low destructiveness is an inherent weakness of unconventional deterrence. To deter the aggressor, via threats of inflicting a precise loss, is far more difficult than through threats of inflicting devastating damage. The low levels of destructiveness of unconventional deterrence suggests that, first, unconventional deterrence will work only when the opponent is cost-sensitive, and second, that unconventional deterrence strategies should be tailored, very precisely, to the vulnerabilities and fears of a specific opponent, its society, and its leadership, in order to produce the deterrent effect.
The present study suggests that the relatively limited destructiveness of unconventional threats can be compensated for, to a certain extent, if an unconventional deterrence strategy can reinforce the opponent's internalized deterrence. An aggressor that has previously manifested difficulties in dealing with unconventional warfare, will more likely be deterred through the use unconventional threats, than an aggressor that has not so manifested. One of the circumstances most favorable to the use of unconventional deterrence occurs when the opponent's previous unfortunate experience in small wars has resulted in it having some internalized fears. The best example of such internalized fears is the US's aversion to small wars as a result of their experience in Vietnam. The existence of the long-term self-deterrent effect, induced by the US's lost war in Vietnam, increases considerably the likelihood that the threats of resistance through guerrilla warfare will produce the desired deterrent effect. The presence of such a threat may have made it more difficult for the U.S. to invade Iraq in 2003. On the other hand, the difficulties in defeating the ongoing insurgency, and stabilizing Iraq, may increase, even more, the US's sensitivity to low-intensity, guerrilla wars. Concerning punishment strategies by retaliatory terrorist attacks, unconventional deterrence appears to work better if the aggressor had a painful experience in dealing with terrorism on a previous occasion. Thus, if internalized deterrence exists in an opponent's strategic culture, unconventional deterrence strategies would be much more feasible and credible.
Notwithstanding the above-mentioned unreliability of unconventional deterrence, this study concludes that, concentrating defense efforts on guerrilla resistance can increase the deterrent effects of the underdog's military capabilities, vis-à-vis a superior enemy. If the aggressor is able, literally, to overrun the deterrer's military forces on the battlefield, conventional deterrence is not feasible. On the other hand, by resisting unconventionally, the weak state has, at least, a possibility to succeed in protracting a conflict, and denying the great power from acquiring his political objectives. When the imbalance in capabilities is overwhelming, deterrence is most likely to succeed when the weak state adopts a strategy that does not play to the strengths of the enemy. While the Soviets-Afghan war suggests that the aggressor can be repulsed entirely through guerrilla warfare, the conventional phases of the Vietnam War suggest that military defeat is an inevitable outcome when the weak state tries to fight the strong in a conventional war of pitched battles. Overall, the only type of conflicts in which great powers have lost against underdogs has been guerrilla wars.
Boot (2002)
Beckett (2001)
For example, Herbert E. Meyer (2004)  thinks, "the CIA failed to project Saddam Hussein's war strategy -to melt into the population and then launch guerrilla attacks rather than fight our army head-on in the field."
See
Morgan (2003)
Gray's (2003)
See for example
Mahnken (1993)
Pfaltzgraff and Wright (2000)
Wilson et al (2001), and
This problem reflects the development of nuclear deterrence theory and strategies during the Cold War. Although nuclear weapons were used in war, "there was no basis for an inductive theory"(Freedman,  2004, p. 22). In other words, there were no cases of failures or successes of nuclear deterrence to be analyzed.
Warfigthing, as well as defense, and deterrence are not the same. However, they overlap. One can better deter by making an opponent to believe that he has capabilities not only to inflict an unbearable cost, but also to win a war. All things being equal, the higher the probability, perceived by a challenger, that he could loose a war, the more credible deterrence will be.
Sometimes the term 'unconventional' is used to indicate non-conventional forces or nuclear weapons and WMD. However, it is more common in military science to refer by 'unconventional' to guerrilla warfare, terrorism, and other shadowy ways of warfare. Therefore, the usage of 'unconventional' seems to be appropriate in this study.
Distinction between denial and punishment was first elaborated by Glenn
Snyder (1961)
See Delbruck (1985, pp. 293-295)  on distinction between annihilation and exhaustion strategies.
See on guerrilla warfare, for example,
Asprey (1994)
Laqueur (1998), and
Beckett (2001)
Decapitation as a separate strategy, although implemented by air power, is elaborated byPape  (1996, pp. 79-86).
See on the definition of terrorism, for example,Laqueur (2004, pp. 232-238).
In the strategic and political discourse, the use of the concept of WMD (which usually includes nuclear, biological, radiological, and chemical weapons) is problematic and imprecise per se, because sometimes a terrorist act by conventional bomb can be more destructive than by, for example, chemical weapon. Most likely, only nuclear and biological terrorism can inflict relatively large-scale destructiveness.
Pape (1996)
Sometimes, it is used the term 'self-deterrence' in policy debates. According to
Freedman (2004)
The authors do not explicate why protracted wars should be necessary that of attrition in order to be disliked by aggressors. Most likely, they tacitly assume that only wars of attrition are costly enough for the aggressors. In general, they omit guerrilla wars in their analysis, most likely to simplify them.
The concept of will is sometimes used alternatively with the concept of credibility in deterrence studies. We think that the credibility is much more complex than the term "will" suggests. Therefore, we use the concept of will more narrowly, indicating such obscure intangible aspects as national cohesion, religious fervor, etc., which may or may not amplify or reduce overall credibility.
Conversation on 25 April 1975 in Hanoi between Colonel Harry G. Summers, Jr. and Colonel Tu.   As cited inSummers, 1995, p. 1.   
For example, Ian F. W.
Beckett (2001)
Mao identifies three phases of insurgency, or "people's war": Phase I -building extensive political support and underground networks; Phase II -launching protracted guerrilla struggle; Phase IIIdeveloping of regular units, which, in conjunction with popular uprising, will finally overrun an enemy's forces. See on Mao revolutionary experience, for example,Beckett (2001, pp. 70-86).
and do not reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of Defense
U.S. Government
strategies, poor military and/or political leadership, non-coordination of military and political affairs. As mentioned above, the big-war approach is usually pointed out as counter-productive in dealing with guerrilla resistance. 
Arreguín-Toft's (2001)
Arreguín-Toft (2001)
(pp. 108-109)
COIN [i.e., counter-insurgency]
(Arreguín-Toft, 2001, p. 19)
Merom (2003)
Arreguín-Toft (2001)
Although it is reasonable to conclude that small wars are lost because a wrong strategy/approach was adopted, the complex relationship between the possibility of escalating violence and the ability to win a small war suggests that it is difficult to find an "indirect approach" that would determine the victory of the strong in small wars, all other
Although the Vietnam War of 1964-73, and the Afghanistan War of 1979-89, are not directly related to unconventional deterrence, both wars are classic examples of conflicts in which guerrilla warfare played an essential role. Thus, the focus of the discussion of these case studies is on the underdogs' strategies that allowed them to protract the conflicts, make the opponents' overwhelming military superiority irrelevant, and deny the strong their political objectives. Both cases suggest that: first, adopting a guerrilla warfare strategy may compensate for an overwhelming military inferiority; and second, that having large enough short-term and/or long-term military capabilities is not the only way to protract a war and prevent an opponent from a fait accompli (which has been identified as a requirement for successful deterrence). In turn, both cases support the argument that the weaker opponent could increase the deterrent effects of their inferior military capabilities, vis-à-vis great powers, by adopting guerrilla warfare strategy.
After twenty-five years of their being involved in Vietnam (i.e., from their first giving of material support to the French in 1950, to the evacuation of the US embassy in Hanoi in 1975), the US withdrew without realizing its political aims, notwithstanding its commitment of vast expeditionary forces, and overall strategic superiority. Saigon fell to the North Vietnamese communists (i.e., the Vietminh). With the cost of about 50,000
American military killed in action, 150,000 seriously wounded, and the price tag of at least $110 billion 
(Handel, 1981, p. 274;
Beckett, 2001, p. 192)
(Merom, 2003, p. 232)
The US got involved in Vietnam incrementally, from 729 Americans assigned to Military Assistance and Advisory Group in 1954, to 541,000 military personnel in 1969.
But confident that after one more escalation would cause the enemy to reach the Vietnamese all-out conventional offensive. However, with the US ground troops and air support withdrawn, and material support critically curtailed, the North communists were no longer an underdog. 
Mack (1983)
The Afghanistan war -often referred to as "Russia's Vietnam" -provides a classic textbook study "of how a major power can fail to win a war against guerrillas" 
(Joes, 1996, p. 119)
Afghanistan (1979-89)
(McMichael, 2002, p. 270)
(Joes, 1996, p. 121)
(Joes, 1996, p. 120)
(McMichael, 2002, p. 270)
(Shaw and Spencer, 2003, p. 177)
(Beckett, 2001, p. 212)
(Odom, 1998, p. 247)
The pattern for the Afghani guerrilla resistance was established, even before the arrival of the Soviets to Afghanistan. Armed revolt throughout the countryside and uprisings in cities had been increasing incrementally as a response to anti-Islam and antitribal reforms, implemented by the communist regime, which came to power through a military coup in April 1978 (although it is not clear whether Moscow orchestrated this coup). By the time the Soviets invaded the country, virtually no part of Afghanistan, except the major cities, was securely controlled by the government 
(Collins, 1986)
However, the Soviets' presence inflamed the resistance even more, instead of intimidating insurgents. The invasion provided the common enemy for the fragmented resistance. Shortly after their arrival in the country, the Soviets came under fire from hitand-run attacks. Soon, impelled by the appeal of the jihad (or "holy war against infidels"), foreign Islamic fundamentalists also began infiltrating into Afghanistan to join the resistance.
Soviet embassy and KHAD (secret police) headquarters. The supply operations followed the same pattern -operating in small units. According to 
Hamizrachi (2003)
Shaw and Spencer, 2003, p. 178)
(McMichael, 2002, p. 264)
Cassidy (2003)
For the present discussion, two aspects of the Soviet-Afghan war are of high importance:
First, the mujahedin successfully resisted the invader, and forced him to withdraw his forces, entirely, by using guerrilla warfare (with the possible exception of very sporadic bigger-unit encounters, and mobile defense using cave and tunnel systems).
They neither operated in conjunction with conventional forces, nor tried to develop themselves gradually into a regular army to crush the invader's military forces in pitched battles 
(Joes, 1996, p. 125)
Afghanistan not because they needed their armed forces elsewhere, or because the
In this study, unconventional deterrence is defined as persuading the opponent not to attack through using threats of unconventional warfare, such as terrorism and guerrilla resistance. Terrorism is treated primarily as a punishment strategy, where the deterrer threatens to punish the aggressor's population by making retaliatory terrorist strikes, while guerrilla warfare is defined as a denial strategy. By adopting a guerrilla warfare strategy, the deterrer threatens to protract a war, thereby, making it more costly for the aggressor, and to deny, eventually, the aggressor from achieving their political objectives.
Unconventional deterrence, in general, and the possibility of a weaker opponent deterring a stronger one, in particular, are largely unexplored areas in deterrence theory.
In fact, because the underlying hypothesis of commonly-held deterrence theory is based on the balance of military capabilities between the deterrer and the aggressor (i.e., weighing the military strengths of one against the other), the weak are virtually precluded from the possibility of deterring a considerably stronger opponent. On the other hand, deterrence theory also argues that deterrence should obtain, all other things being equal, if the aggressor is precluded from achieving a short and decisive victory. Aggressors do not like long wars, because they are costly, and unpredictable. Unfortunately, deterrence theory does not look beyond the common argumentation, that having military capabilities to match the opponent's military muscle is the only way to threaten him with either a prolonged war, or defeat on the battlefield. However, this thesis contends that, by adopting a certain military strategy, an underdog may protract a war, notwithstanding being overwhelmingly mismatched, militarily. Large, strategic capabilities that can withstand a long war, and/or short-term military forces, to repulse an attack, from the very beginning, and defeat the aggressor, militarily, are not the only possibilities in protracting a war, and/or denying the aggressor from achieving his objectives. The US-Vietnamese and the Soviet-Afghan wars suggest that an inferior opponent can protract a war by adopting a low-intensity guerrilla warfare strategy, which, in both cases, counteracted the superior military capabilities of the opponents (i.e., the US in the first, and the Soviets in the second). In turn, the Vietnamese communists and the Afghan mujahedin succeeded in denying the superpowers from achieving their political