# ID: 89cf44670d7543b3ac27dba101d39407
# Title: Power, Paradigms and Perspective: Framework of Opportunity in the Revolution in Military Affairs
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1995.0
# Fulltext:
This thesis adopts the adversary's perspective to consider the revolution in militaryaffairs, thereby breaking free of the intellectual constraints imposed by the American paradigm of warfare, doctrine and force structure. The adversary's need to circumvent our overwhelming military superiority is the starting point for a revolution in thought from which might spring a true revolution in military affairs. A new intellectual framework for war is outlined. This forms the basis for rational but unconventional conjecture regarding strategies adversaries might use.
It is based on the ongoing transformation of global society and the most recently developed concepts from today's sciences. Its centerpiece is an alternative to the classic center of gravity model employed to focus strategies of war. Based on dissipative structures this model better accounts for a thinking, non-monolithic enemy, unpredictability, diverse forms of conflict, and developments that transcend what is commonly considered as the revolution in military affairs.
Our adversaries will fulfill their need to circumvent American military superiority with opportunities in the pervasive Third Wave and new concepts from today's science. The resultant revolution in thinking will revolutionize warfare. There, forms of warfare that include other than traditional military power are not only possible but likely.
A new intellectual framework for war is outlined. This forms the basis for rational but unconventional conjecture regarding strategies adversaries might use. It is based on the ongoing transformation of global society and the most recently developed concepts from today's sciences.
Its centerpiece is an alternative to the classic center of gravity model employed to focus strategies of war. Based on dissipative structures, this model better accounts for a thinking, non-monolithic enemy, unpredictability, diverse forms of conflict, and developments that transcend what is commonly considered as the revolution in military affairs.
Our adversaries will fulfill their need to circumvent American military superiority with opportunities in the pervasive Third Wave and new concepts from today's science. The resultant revolution in thinking will revolutionize warfare. There, forms of warfare that include other than traditional military power are not only possible but likely.
To prepare for war demands, then, the exercise of imagination.
-Douhet, Probable Aspects of Future Wars ... to make sense of today's great changes, to think strategically, we need more than bits, blips, and lists. We need to see how different changes relate to one another.
-Alvin Toffler, Powershift   The future does not equal the past. We can not hope to adapt to, or even successfully anticipate, the nature of future war unless we understand the ongoing transformation of society, the limits imposed by our way of thinking, and how both are perceived by others. For, despite its defining characteristic of physical violence, war is fundamentally an attack on the intellect, persuasion: "an act of force to compel. . . ." 
1
2
(On a very basic level war is about change, with one or both sides fighting to alter the previous status quo.)
Various adversaries assess the relationship between their abilities, the opportunities of the moment and enemy vulnerabilities differently. The only constant is a never-ending struggle to gain a compelling, relative advantage. This struggle manifests itself in intrigues or strategies, destruction of the enemy or his capabilities, and the unintended and unexpected outcomes that result from the infinite variety of interactions of the first two. Or, as Clausewitz, the foremost western military theorist more eloquently put it, "a paradoxical trinity" 3 of rational thought, violence, and chance is the essence of this no-holds-barred struggle between competing intellects to gain a compelling advantage.
Historically, such advantage is to be achieved where the enemy can be surprised, or where he is relatively weak. This is key to understanding the revolution in military affairs (RMA).
This thesis argues that the revolution in military affairs is most appropriately viewed as a revolution in thinking about war, or perhaps more precisely, strategies. Here, RMA. is not the sufficient cause of the next great transformation of war but rather the foreseeable consequence of a larger transformation in society or civilization. This larger phenomenon makes possible new patterns of thought because it brings with it new capabilities, new processes and new objectives. These new things are both the cause and result of new concepts-designed to explain and exploit them. These revolutionary capabilities, processes and objectives are inseparable and virtually indistinguishable from the innovative ideas that accompany them, but it is certain that these new things demand new thinking. New things and new thinking presage a revolution in strategies.
The potential of such new strategies will be exploited, if not by us, then by those who seek to avoid our strength when they challenge us.
Consequently, this thesis adopts the adversary perspective in order to develop an intellectual framework-perhaps the outline of a new paradigm-for war that is fundamentally different than the one we use now.
A strategy based on such a new framework might conceivably circumvent our strategy. This framework is derived from a combination of observed transformations in society and some of the most current developments in science. The inclusion of society's transformation ensures the framework's contextual relevance; the latest science enhances its conceptual relevance. Innovation is possible in both areas. This combination of new things and new thinking is used to consider scenarios of war that employ strategies with a radically different emphasis, at least, than the traditional American vision of war.
One outcome of the new framework is an alternative to the traditional center of gravity metaphor that we now view as the key to decisive effects in war. Changes in society, specifically the dynamic redistribution of power, indicate that a center of gravity is no longer an adequate depiction of nations or others at war. Today, too, science challenges the metaphor's basic assumptions of determinism, causality, objectivity and discrete effects. The alternative model is based on the description of dissipative structures from the science of biology. While it mat not completely'supplant the center of gravity model, it may better account for a thinking enemy and the generally acknowledged understanding that lasting decisive effects come only from within. The dissipative structures model may have greater applicability across a broader spectrum of war or conflict.
The thesis is thus organized to provide an overview of current thinking in Chapter One, focusing specifically on why we need a fresh perspective on the revolution in military affairs. Chapter Two reviews some of the current literature on the subjects of RMA, change in society, and war. The literature review is purposely broad to consider new perspectives, and avoid taking the subject out of context. Chapter Three develops the new framework. It begins by tracing the origins of our mostly Clausewitzian paradigm of war in Newton's science and dynastic societies. It further notes where important changes in science and society argue for new thinking and then contrasts concepts from today's sciences with those from the earlier framework. Scenarios based on the new framework constitute Chapter Four, and Chapter Five presents consequences and implications. But this attempt to discern the future begins with the present, and the need for a fresh perspective.
The Western Way of War . . . American Style
Our very military strength may be the source of our greatest vulnerability. An honest self assessment might acknowledge that we are too emotionally attached to, and heavily invested in, the western way of warfare. The "western way" uniquely regards war as both an abnormal human condition and the means of last resort. According to Seabury and   Codevilla, only the western tradition of warfare requires exceptional moral justification. 
4
Another tenet peculiar to our philosophy of war is that the military instrument of power is almost exclusively decisive. This is both cause and effect of our Judeo-Christian beliefs. If war is "an aberration to be justified in detail," 
5
historian John Keegan notes that Clausewitz actually wrote that war is the "continuation of political intercourse with the intermixing of other means." 
6
Russell Weigley, however, challenges the notion that the military instrument of power retains its presumed monopoly of decisiveness:
At no point on the spectrum of violence does the use of combat offer much promise for the United States today. . . . Because the record of non-nuclear limited war in obtaining acceptable decisions at tolerable costs is also scarcely heartening, the history of usable combat may at last be reaching its end. 
7
8
While Weigley is perhaps overly pessimistic in light of recent successes in Grenada, Panama and Haiti, John Keegan seems to believe the Gulf War proves his point:
In the Gulf a Clausewitzian defeat was inflicted by the forces of the coalition on those of Saddam Hussein. His refusal, however, to concede the reality of the catastrophe that had overtaken him, by recourse to a familiar Islamic rhetoric that denied he had been defeated in spirit, whatever material loss he may have suffered, robbed the coalition's Clausewitzian victory of much of its political point. Saddam's continued survival in power, in which the victor's seem to acquiesce, is a striking exemplification of the inutility of the 'Western way of warfare' when confronted by an opponent who refuses to share its cultural assumptions. 
10
The Vietnam War provides a familiar example of the clash of cultural assumptions. America possessed the better force by every imaginable standard. Americans won every major battle but lost the war.
We were beaten by a superior strategy. This strategy attacked our perceptions and, contrary to our conceptual framework, viewed the military instrument of power as a catalyst rather than the defeat mechanism:
The supreme command for the Viet Cong / North Vietnamese Army (VC/NVA) forces had a coherent strategy for conquering South Vietnam that the Americans neither fully appreciated nor effectively countered. In general terms, Communist strategists followed Mao-Tse-tung's principles of guerilla war. But ever inventive, the Vietnamese Communists adapted strategies for their unique circumstances. It was a strategy devised in the early 1960's when America only had advisers in Vietnam, and tenaciously clung to during the difficult years of massive US military activity until final victory. In essence, it proved a war-winning strategy.
The overriding goal was to effect a withdrawal of American forces from South Vietnam to bring about negotiations leading to a new, Communist-dominated government in the south. To achieve this political end the National Liberation Front fought on three fronts: political, military and diplomatic. The political battle involved mobilizing support from the people of South Vietnam while undermining the South Vietnamese government. The military component required confronting the Americans and their Allies on the battlefield to inflict losses whenever possible. On the battlefield there were no objectives that had to be held. The diplomatic element of the three-prong strategy focused on mobilizing international opposition to the American war effort and promoting anti-war sentiment in the United States. As explained by a high-ranking Viet Cong: "Every military clash, every demonstration, every propaganda appeal was seen as part of an integrated whole; each had consequences far beyond its immediately apparent results. It was a framework that allowed us to view battles as psychological events." n Less well resourced than Americans, the North Vietnamese crafted a strategy that avoided trading military resources for military objectives.
They circumvented American strengths to attack American vulnerabilities.
Like Kutusov against Napoleon, and ironically, George Washington against the British, the North Vietnamese mostly avoided decisive military engagements. Washington, too, despaired of winning a decisive engagement 
12
13
14
One of the reasons Jonathan House gives to explain why only the Germans fully exploited the potential of the technological developments preceding World War II to create blitzkrieg is what might be called the "Phoenix Factor." Unlike their adversaries, "they had been deprived of their weapons by the Versailles Peace Treaty of 1919 and could therefore start fresh." 
15
While we struggle to justify and retain a force structure that has, in the past, ensured military success, they will search for the power-not necessarily military power-to neutralize it. If we would anticipate the wars of the future we must, like our adversaries, direct our search beyond the constraints of the "western way of warfare," or what has become the American style of warfare.
The two might be distinguished by their interpretation of proportionality. While both acknowledge wars of limited objectives, the American style, particularly since the Vietnam War, has increasingly been marked by the desire to bring virtually unlimited or overwhelming force to bear. The generation of tremendous relative advantage, in the form of overwhelming force, has become a de facto pre-condition to American warfighting. Consequently, this is what we seek after in the current revolution in military affairs. As skeptically described by A. J.
Bacevich, we have come to believe that future wars will follow rules suited to the military's long-standing preferences: with politicians kept at some remove and the people observing appreciatively, generals will preside over neatly defined campaigns and battles, producing in short order and at tolerable cost the victories required to restore international comity. It is a vision of the Persian Gulf War replayed over and over again. 
l0
Such thinking is indicative of a shared set of beliefs among American military professionals, a paradigm, that extends also to what we do not seek in the revolution in military affairs. Because the only effective military force we can conceive of is one similar to, but better than, the one we possess, the only opportunities we exploit are ones that enhance our force in its present form. Bacevich describes this narrowminded approach as "preserving the well-bred horse." His epithet is a pointed reference to an earlier instance of military myopia on the part of British Field Marshall Sir Douglas Haig. He notes that.
It was Haig who a year into the war [World War I] could inform the War Office with utter conviction that "the machine gun is a much overrated weapon, two per battalion is more than sufficient." Even after the war, this redoubtable cavalryman was still insisting that mechanical wonders like airplanes and armored vehicles would find use in campaigns "only [as] accessories to the man and horse." "As time goes on," Haig predicted in 1925, "you will find just as much use for the horse-the well-bred horse-as you have ever done in the past." 
1 '
Our philosophy of war springs from paradigms provided by Newton and Clausewitz. It is deterministic, assuming that the application of force will have certain predictable outcomes, and that overwhelming force will yield decisive movement. It encourages reductionist thinking. We break the war and the battlefield up into discrete, well-bounded compartments: operating systems and warfare areas; levels (strategic, operational and tactical), and instruments of power. It portrays belligerent nation-states as simplified spheres with a notional center of gravity which can be manipulated to move the enemy in the direction we desire. We need only identify and locate it, and there mass the effects of our overwhelming military power. Conversely, the inability to identify, locate, or mass effects at, the center of gravity leads to a protracted war of attrition, undesirable due to its cost in lives, time, and material.
But this is a way of thinking specific to ourselves and not necessarily the only, or best, way of considering war. It is time to consider the subject from our adversaries' perspective. The Eastern way of warfare, first set down by Sun Tzu and as modified by Mao Tse Tung, Ho Chi Minh, and Giap, casts military power in a much less dominating role: at most it should be considered the coup de grace for an enemy prepared for defeat by other means, or other instruments of power. The ideal, according to Sun Tzu, is to achieve one's strategic objectives without resorting to combat. Given the current disparity between U.S. combat power and that of our potential adversaries, the Eastern school of thought is likely to attract new adherents.
It seems unreasonable to believe that adversaries will cease to exist. It seems equally unreasonable to believe that such adversaries will limit their ways and means of opposition to fit our vision of war, or our standards of appropriateness for the military instrument of power.
Presently, we are the only military superpower. Why would our adversaries attack where they can generate the least relative advantage: at our greatest strength? Recognizing both our military strength and the implications of our force projection based strategy, potential adversaries can be expected to adopt strategies which attempt to circumvent both.
They might design strategies based on the following spectrum of U.S. response; from most to least optimal:
(1) avoid our military strength altogether, (2) stay below our threshold of force projection, ( While much of this seems obvious, the point is that power historically exists in various forms useful for those who would exploit it. From the perspective of our adversaries it is apparent that something new is required to circumvent U.S. military might. New opportunities for the acquisition of power occur when advancing technology and changes in society combine with innovative thinking. In their unrelenting search for greater relative power, those who would wage war will maximize these opportunities. This is a major premise of this thesis. Our adversaries will likely find their solutions where these opportunities meet their need for circumventing action. This view of the RMA-that it may provide greater opportunity for our adversaries than for ourselves-is admittedly unconventional. It is not, however, unjustified.
Recognition that a technology driven revolution is occurring in societies around the world is nearly universal. Described as the Third
Wave by the Tofflers in their bestseller of the same name, it is referred to more commonly as the Information Revolution, in reference to its predecessors, the Industrial and Agricultural Revolutions. A concurrent revolution in warfighting is the subject of much discussion within professional military and strategy circles. Sometimes referred to as simply a revolution, or, with pointed precision, as the militarytechnological revolution, 
19
probably is also an old phenomena. As described by Metz and Kievit, RMA is dramatic and decisive change; permanent, fundamental and rapid:
The basic premise ... is simple: throughout history, warfare usually developed in an evolutionary fashion, but occasionally ideas and inventions combined to propel dramatic and decisive change. This not only affected the application of military force, but often altered the geo-political balance in favor of those who mastered the new form of warfare. The stakes of military revolution are thus immense. 
20
Despite widespread disagreement on what in the past qualified as a revolution in military affairs, most agree that the exploitation of technology is central to its revolutionary quality. Technological innovations, inventions, spring from new ideas, trends, or societal needs and gain momentum from the advances of other recent innovations and their impact on society. This synergism, a catalytic combination that is greater than the sum of its parts, is the engine for the revolution, i.e.
continued rapid growth and innovation. New tools fill the need to get something done in a better fashion and create new opportunities to do things that previously might not have been conceived. They confer power on their owners. As often as not, those empowered by this engine of revolution were not the ones previously dominant.
An example of such an engine is the technology of metallurgy in the nineteenth century. The conversion of naval ships from wood to metal spawned a quest for more lethal guns. More lethal guns drove improvements in armor and a conversion from iron to steel. The lessons learned from this gun / armor cycle fed the development of a concurrent innovation, the steam propulsion plant, improving its efficiency to the point that steam could replace sail as the sole means of propulsion. Freed from the vagaries of the wind, ships could choose direct routes and attain higher average speeds. Greater mobility gave navies greater relevance because they could apply combat power more quickly in more places. 
21
Strategic effects were just as decisive: overseas alliances were more important because combat and logistics assistance could be obtained more rapidly. Naval powers rose (U.S., Japan) and fell (Russia, Spain) as they embraced or ignored the new technologies, or as their relative advantage was altered by the choices of their adversaries. The worldwide geo-political balance was changed. Over the course of a few decades, naval warfare was permanently and fundamentally altered.
Technology and war are inextricably entwined because both are fundamentally about leverage. War is the application of irresistible, usually destructive, power to force one's enemy to do one's will.
Technology is the use of tools to more effectively and efficiently apply power. Weapons are the tools of war. The purpose of each is the achievement of greater leverage, or comparative advantage. Consequently, it is easy to consider the revolution in military affairs as a womb for weapons of greater effectiveness, efficiency and economy. But this view misses the point of the RMA: the rules of the game have changed.
The Gulf War is often noted as the beginning of the era of In the course of the six hour inspection of cargo the Jordanian master of the vessel displayed customary Arab hospitality, offering light foods and drink. He was educated, well read, and spoke English fluently.
He had previously sailed for a Kuwaiti company, but had been dismissed as a result of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. His resentment showed. His views on the Gulf War were fascinating. He quietly but firmly insisted that Iraq had won the war. Although he acknowledged that Iraq had been driven from Kuwait, he maintained Saddam had succeeded in punishing the Kuwaitis for their liberalism and largesse, had demonstrated it was possible to defy the West, and was still a force to reckoned with in the region. The captain further maintained that Saddam's popularity was far greater and more enduring than we imagined, and that, through a miracle in the desert, Saddam had been allowed to retain the bulk of his military might. Upon debarking the ship several hours later, I felt that I'd been through the Looking Glass: how could an otherwise rational individual draw such absurd conclusions about a relatively straightforward application of military power?
An answer may be provided in a passage from Lester Thurow's Head to Head: the coming economic battle among Japan. Europe and America. Anticipating the future from current events is a difficult thing.
The question remains, however, how does one identify the significant issues, trends and developments that will affect the military profession in the future? This thesis considers the problem analogous to that of the homicide detective who compares motives, means and opportunities to find likely suspects and gather confirming or refuting evidence. In this thesis, the crime scene is the context of changing society and technology.
The suspects are sovereign nations and other groups. The circumventing action is the motive, and RMA but some of the means. Opportunity is the surprise inherent in the unanticipated use of technology and new concepts.
Like the detective, this thesis seeks only a preponderance of evidence and a good fit. The burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt will be left to others.
Endnotes *Carl Von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter  Paret, (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1976), 75.
2 Carl Von Clausewitz, On War, trans. O. J. Matthjis Jollis (New  York, 1943):
18, quoted in Theodore Ropp, War in the Modern World, (Durham, Duke University Press, 1960), xv. 
3 Clausewitz,
On War,
ed. and trans. Howard and Paret,
89. 4
Ends and Means, (New York, Basic Books, Inc., 1989), 18. 
5
6
10 Keegan,
xi.
,
6
12 "we should on all Occasions avoid a general Action, or put anything to the Risque, unless compelled by a necessity, into which we ought never be drawn." Quoted by Weigley, 3. 22 Today, in its capstone doctrinal publication, FM 100-5 Operations, the Army refers to these extremes of force concentration as mass and economy of force, two fundamental principles of war; the ability to rapidly shift between them is called agility.
23 E.G. Krepinevich, "Keeping Pace with the Military-Technological Revolution," 24. Also, as previously noted, John Keegan, A History of Warfare. (New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 1993), xi, calling it a Clausewitzian victory. Finally, Alvin and Heidi Toffler, War and Anti-War: Survival at the Dawn of the 21st Century, (Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1993), 66. The Tofflers describe it as a dual war possessing both the embryonic elements of the next form of war and standard elements of the most common form of war. 
24
25
26
A major premise of this thesis is that the context in which the revolution in military affairs takes place is critically important to its analysis. Consequently, the literature review includes a wide variety of sources, from equally diverse disciplines. There is scholarly precedent for a broad, multi disciplinary approach. In his preface to the second edition of Patterns of War Since the Eighteenth Century, Larry Addington credits noted historian Theodore Ropp for persuasively stating that "war is best studied as a process of change in its socio-political, technological and organizational aspects." Addington employs this approach to present a "synthesis of the many changes of war" in the context of the "patterns peculiar to each age." To this end, he devotes a chapter to each age, using the similarities and differences of the previous age to highlight war's evolution. As might be expected, his explanations frequently leave strictly military topics to seek causal relationships in the economics, politics and technology of the day. A multi-disciplinary approach is not only an accepted approach but warranted by the nature of the subject.
The differing opinions about the RMA is another reason to emphasize scope over depth. The discussion about the RMA has been likened, by more than one writer, to the story of the blind men and the elephant. As each man touches the elephant's tail, tusk, ear, side, etc., he precisely describes it as a snake, spear, leaf, wall. . . . None comprehend the true nature of the beast. So, too, it seems with those writing about the revolution in military affairs. The literature review sought different perspectives in the hopes that, together, they might provide a more descriptive picture. Themes that recur in the literature are that change in any discipline is both a physical and intellectual process, and that power is largely dependent on its context and target.
Both themes figure prominently in the new perspective on the revolution in military affairs presented later.
As indicated above, much has recently been written on the Information Revolution, military technological revolution and the revolution in military affairs. This thesis owes much of its impetus and organization to two articles:
"Keeping Pace with the Military-Technological Revolution" by Andrew F. Krepinevich, Jr., and "Revolutions in Military Affairs" by James R. FitzSimonds and Jan M. van Tol; the primary question and two of the secondary questions are suggested by the authors in the latter article. 
1
3
J. Bacevich entitled "Preserving the Well-Bred Horse." The title refers to the previously qouted predictions by British Field Marshall Sir Douglas
Haig, who said that, in future wars, airplanes and armor would be used only as accessories to man and horse. 
4
Although it liked to pretend otherwise, the Army . . . never solved the problem of how to fight on a nuclear battlefield. ... As the Vietnam War demonstrated with conspicuous clarity, the preferred American style of waging war was (and remains today) ill-suited for such [low intensity] conflicts. ... As interpreted by the services, the underlying aim of today's so-called revolution in military affairs is to declare null and void the problems posed by these two earlier revolutions. 
6
7
8
War and Anti-War is almost a sequel to their previous trilogy, focusing on anticipating changes to war and peace-keeping (peace-making) requirements. Significantly, War and Anti-War arose out of discussions the Tofflers had with an Army officer tasked to staff the concept. 9 Not surprisingly, it provides some of the most thought provoking analysis of the subject.
The Revolution in Military Affairs is the currently popular phrase assigned to the dynamic changes in how war can be fought. Although some disagree, 
10
Their success-international bestsellers, acclaim, and prizes, and continued access to leaders in every discipline-may be the best indicators of their competence and credibility. But it is two of their themes in War and Anti-War-the dominance of knowledge superiority and the civilianization of war-that indicate RMA should be considered the effects of a larger system process.
The Tofflers claim that knowledge superiority is the new key to national survival. Unlike traditional military, economic, or past technology leads, however, knowledge superiority is exceedingly fragile; harder to hold than quicksilver, because it is a fundamentally different resource. Knowledge is inexhaustible. It can be used by both sides simultaneously. And small inputs can have disproportionately large effects, providing an immense (and presumably immediate) shift of tactical or strategic advantage. 12 They do not claim that these inputs must be traditionally military in nature. Indeed, their concept of "civilianization of war" supports the opposite conclusion.
To the Tofflers, the civilianization of war is the irony filled counter-process of downsizing the defense industry. As defense industries restructure for survival, many attempt to find civilian oriented applications for their formerly military specific products and/or services. As they succeed and develop goods and services for new markets, these industries transfer technology and know-how that have lost none of their potential for war giving "fearsome military capabilities to some of the smallest, poorest, and worst governed nations on earth. Not to mention the nastiest of social movements." 
13
The fundamental concept of War and Anti-War is that we make war in the same way that we make wealth. In part one, "Conflict," the Tofflers convincingly argue that, since methods of wealth generation are used to differentiate civilizations 15 , methods of wealth generation should also be useful to differentiate between their respective methods of warfare. And by extension, if a current wave of change is sweeping across the globe, then the resulting new form of civilization will bring with it a new form of warfare. This new wave is the Third Wave, in which information is both the primary resource and principle of organization. Part one concludes with the "Clash of Civilizations" that casts past wars as part of a master conflict between powerful First Wave and Second Wave interests within and between countries, responsible for the industrialists prevailing within their countries, and the industrialized countries dominating the world.
It casts current and future wars as part of the same master conflict, this time resulting from the tensions between the rising Third Wave interests and the two older forms of civilization.
Part two of War and Anti-War, called "Trajectory," is devoted to tracing both the evolution and the revolution of the past warforms.
Significantly, they tackle the issue of revolutions in warfare up front, stating that the term has frequently been applied too generously to what were simply profound changes or sub-revolutions.
[These] basically add new elements or create new combinations of old elements within an existing 'game.' A true revolution goes beyond that to change the game itself, including its rules, its equipment, the size and organization of the 'teams,' their training, doctrine, tactics, and just about everything else. It does this not in one 'team,' but in many simultaneously. Even more important, it changes the relationship of the game to society itself. By this demanding measure, true military revolutions have occurred only twice before in history, and there are strong reasons to believe that the third revolution -the one now beginning -will be the deepest of all. 1 " "Trajectory" proceeds to describe how each Wave's revolution shaped a particular form of war. The First Wave, the agricultural revolution, allowed communities to produce an economic surplus worth fighting over and hastened the development of the state. Generally true to its societal context, First Wave warfare was tied to the land and its seasonal cycle. Second Wave warfare reflected the Industrial Revolution's defining feature: mass production. The characteristic of quantity shaped both the execution and thought of war, up to and including weapons of mass destruction. Third Wave warfare, reliant on information derived precision rather than quantity, made its appearance in the Gulf War.
The Tofflers' work speaks to several issues and themes of this thesis. Like John 
Keegan,
17
Their distinction between evolutionary and revolutionary changes in warfare is instructive. They provide the most clear articulation of the characteristics of future warfare and how to determine those characteristics. Finally, the wide scope of their approach seems to be an appropriate precedent.
Stephen Peter Rosen's book, Winning the Next War is similarly focused on future warfare, but is less broad and oriented more toward His work makes a case for linkage between RMA and strategic thought:
Exploiting this military-technological revolution should be an integral part of the Pentagon's long-term strategic planning process. Stimulated by the accelerating rate of global technological change, military-technological revolutions are taking place with increasing frequency. Because they radically change the nature of military competition in peace and war, they have profound consequences for global and regional military balances. And because militarytechnological revolutions can occur in relatively short periods of time, they often lead to the unexpected and seemingly rapid decline of dominant military organizations that could not or would not adapt to the changing environment. 
19
In The Transformation of War Martin van Creveld takes the newspaper editor's approach, addressing the "who, what, why, when and how" of war. In his view, low intensity conflicts are the predominant form of contemporary warfare and the military superpowers have neither the weapons, organizations, or theory to properly conduct it.
My basic postulate is that, already today, the most powerful modern forces are largely irrelevant to modern war -indeed that their relevance stands in inverse proportion to their modernity. If this is correct, then the reasons must be sought on the conceptual level represented by modern strategic thought. 
20
21
The authors of War: Ends and Means seek not to develop a new theory of war but to educate "a generation of Americans that has come to think of peace as its birthright . . . [and] whom the absence of the military draft has trained to live as if military matters were a spectator sport." 22 It is expressly not written for strategic theorists, military professionals, or historians. This is well for there are some tremendously oversimplified lessons drawn from specific military events and capabilities.
As an example, the authors claim that despite the fact that sea-skimming cruise missiles give ships only a few seconds warning, nowadays radar-controlled Gatling guns can put up a wall of bullets that will stop the cruise missile a few hundred yards from the ship. This can put conventionally armed, antiship cruise missiles out of business. Only if the cruise missile is carrying a nuclear explosive will it stand a chance of having any effect at all. 
23
Yom Kippur War is reduced to a battle of attrition achieved through superior knowledge of terrain. 
24
The Tofflers provide a better account and identify the pertinent lesson.- 
5
time is perhaps the most crucial element in technical innovation. The longer an idea takes to reach the battlefield as hardware, the shorter will be its period of usefulness. Moreover, the contemporary American practice of delaying innovations in order to make them better, more reliable, and able to defeat countermeasures that do not yet exist is doubly foolish because it deprives operating forces of new technology until it is no longer new. 
26
27
Only when what came to be known as Western or Judeo-Christian civilization gradually accepted that, as one formulation put it, all men are created equal did this civilization come to deem armed hostility a departure from the normal state of peace, a departure that only good reasons could render legitimate. For St. Augustine and for the entire Christian tradition that has followed, the primary purpose of government is the maintenance of peace. The classic Christian title for the ruler is Defensor Pads, the defender of the peace. The Christian tradition approves of war under a variety of circumstances. But it leaves no doubt that war is an aberration to be justified in detail, contrary to a standing presumption in favor of peace. Hence Western literature has always been full of people agonizing over the moral claims of waging war or making peace. Surely no traditional Chinese or Indian manual of statecraft ever agonized over the legitimacy -as opposed to the prudence -of attacking a neighboring principality or of oppressing foreigners. Thus, peace, the kind characterized by people treating each other more or less as they would like to be treated, is the peculiar and hard-won creature of Western minds. . . . This line of reasoning is shared by no other tradition. Our nearest intellectual neighbor, the Muslim tradition, though it recognizes the brotherhood of all men under God, defines peace as the State proper only among the Umma, the believers in Islam. Nonbelievers, by definition, live in Dar al Harbliterally, the place of war. It is proper for Muslims to cut back this realm by the sword.
The bulk of mankind, though, lives under neither the Christian nor the Islamic tradition. 
28
The relationship between weapons, war, strategy and policy is the subject of Weapons Don't Make War, by Colin S. Gray. Presented as an inquiry designed to help explain the structure of the problem without advocating a specific solution, Gray nonetheless challenges much conventional thought. Weapons, he says, (in particular nuclear weapons) retain a "subordinate but two way relationship" with strategy and national policy. 
29
To be specific, no forces of any technical kind are inherently strategic, and whether or not particular forces are offensive is a matter of policy and strategy determination. It is unsound to judge "strategic quality according to geography (range) or quantity or quality of lethal effect (nuclear / non-nuclear).... to think of a weapon as inherently "strategic is to confuse instrument with effect. Similarly, habitually to call weapons offensive or defensive invites a blurring of critical tactical, operational, strategic, and policy distinctions. 
30
31
32
33
34
-the technological future is far less dreadful and frightening than many of us have been led to believe . . . the democratic process is itself an asset with which, if we can find the enthusiasm and the skill to use it and the faith to make it strong, we can build a world in which all men can live in prosperity and peace. 
35
31
38
39
Above is the conception of the Strategic Defense Initiative. His assessment of the impact applied science, or technology, had on all facets of warfare is at least as accurate as our hindsight. Like commentators today, he notes that "there is chance and change, a great war may come in ways we do not see;" 40 and that "the application of science . . . renders wars more swift and more rapidly destructive."" 1
Explaining, he notes that This [is] a result of the application of science to war in a degree that has completely altered warfare. The combination of science, engineering, industry, and organization during the last decade created a new framework that rendered conventional military practice obsolete. Radar, jet aircraft, guided missiles, atomic bombs, and proximity fuzes appeared while we were fighting; they determined the outcome of battles and campaigns even though their determining nature was not fully exploited in that contest. Over the horizon now loom radiological and biological warfare, new kinds of ships and planes, an utterly new concept of what might be the result if great nations flew at each other's throats. 
42
Pure science may go its own way, if it is allowed to do so, exploring the unknown with no other thought than to expand the boundaries of fundamental knowledge. But applied science, the intricate process by which new knowledge becomes utilized by the forces of engineering and industry, pursues the path pointed out to it by authority. 
44
In Warfare as a Whole, Frank Kitson provides a British perspective on how technology, and nuclear weapons in particular, have changed the ways in which wars are likely to be fought; which he believes is not fully appreciated. Comparing the period since World War II with the one separating Waterloo from the Crimea, Kitson states:
the technological development of weapons and equipment that has taken place in that time, including the introduction of nuclear weapons and the use of space for military purposes, represents an even more fundamental advance in man's capability to wage war than the introduction of the stirrup and the introduction of gunpowder added together. 
45
It would not be surprising to find that the full implications of the developments that have taken place in the ways of waging war have not always been fully reflected in the way in which the army has prepared for its likely future tasks. 
46
War can best be defined as the use of force in pursuit of a nations interests, or, in the case of internal strife, in pursuit of the interests of a group within a nation. War can manifest itself in many different forms some of which are hardly recognizable as such, but they all have to be considered when a country's defence policy is being formulated. 
47
This idea of warfare being a whole recurs frequently in the writings of foreign exponents of the art, but has not been accepted very readily by the British who prefer to regard the different sorts of war; e.g. limited war, or general war or insurgency as being entirely separate. But unless warfare is seen as embracing all its various forms there will be a great temptation to avoid preparing for some of them altogether. 
48
To Kitson, warfare encompasses a broad spectrum that includes subversion on one end and "all out war" on the other. While acknowledging the existence of intermediate steps and overlaps in time and space, Kitson proposes a whole warfare framework that grows with the scope and complexity of the belligerents.
At the less intense end of the spectrum, subversion is illegal means short of the use of armed force. It is taken up by one section of the people of a country to either overthrow those governing the country or force them to do things which they do not want to do. This may involve the use of political and economic pressure, strikes, protest marches and propaganda; and include the use of violence against recalcitrant members of the populace to engender their support. Insurgency is what subversion becomes when armed force is used against the government on a significant scale 49 in addition to the methods already mentioned. Conventional war is conflict between two or more countries limited in either terms of geography or of weapons. All out war is not limited in any way and in is war in which all weapons are used or likely to be used.
Since he suspects nuclear war being one of the forms of war eclipsing the resourcing of others, Kitson is interested in the impact nuclear capability has on warfare. He concluded that the existence of nuclear weapons forced at nuclear powers and non-nuclear powers alike to alter the way they waged war. In short, he says, nuclear weapons have completely altered the way in which war should be thought about and practiced. 
50
Whilst the existence of nuclear weapons makes it too dangerous for the major powers to confront each other at all, and often prevents nonnuclear powers from fighting to a finish with conventional weapons, it is still possible for a country to pursue its interests by fostering insurgency in an enemy's country or at least by taking advantage of any discontent that may arise there. 
51
Although open to criticism due to its Cold War orientation, awareness is a function of three things: our improved understanding of nature and the consequences of science; our adeptness in the deliberateness of their use; and population growth. 
52
To employ these tools people must organize themselves differently than in the past, which equates to social change. This reorganization means old goals are replaced (at the very least in priority) with new ones. This strains traditional values and beliefs, which creates conflict. 
53
New technology creates new opportunities for men and society, and it also creates new problems for them. It has both positive and negative effects and it usually has the two at the same time and in virtue of each other. 
54
A new invention or technological development -a new tool, in short -generally creates a new opportunity, either to do something differently or better than before, or to do something that simply was not possible at all before. Some previously distant aspiration may thus become converted into an achievable goal. 
55
Techno-Diplomacv is a period piece, written by Glenn E. Schweitzer as an argument to garner scientific and technological support for Perestroika. As a long time participant in international diplomacy, Schweitzer makes some interesting observations regarding technology and power.
Science and technology can be equated with power -military power, economic power, environmental power, and the power of new ideas and hopes.
The concept of supremacy through military power lost much of its earlier significance shortly after the world entered the age. Longer ago both superpowers crossed the threshold of nuclear capacity to destroy civilizations, rendering additional weapons of little military value . . . clearly attempts to achieve military superiority should become less of a driving force in the development of superpower relations. 
56
57
58
Force Without War also speaks to the relative strengths of the various instruments of power. It is a Brookings Institution study of the two hundred plus instances of the application of U.S. military power short of war since World War II. One reason for its inclusion here is what it reveals about American strategic options:
In all these situations, there is a risk that lesser military actions may lead to pressure for greater U.S. involvement.
The case studies bear this out: the Castro regime did not yield at the Bay of Pigs, Hanoi and the Viet Cong were not swayed in the early 1960s, and India dismembered Pakistan in 1971. In each case, either the U.S. suffered humiliation or the fear of exposure embarrassed decision makers into escalation and war. 
59
Another reason the study is included is that it indicates our most frequent means of recognizing or causing a threat to vital interests to be recognized is the use of military force. If Schweitzer is correct about the decreasing relevance of the military instrument relative to a technological or informational instrument of power, our favorite method may be obsolete. Conversely, we may miss an important signal in a form we do not recognize.
Finally, the study is an example of a rigorous comparative analysis used to develop the appropriate questions for further study.
This will be studied as potentially applicable to the methodology of this thesis.
Like Head to Head: the coming economic battle among Japan, Europe and America, The Coming War with Japan casts our current ally as a likely adversary. Unlike Head to Head, The Coming War with Japan builds a case for armed conflict. The authors are careful to make clear their motives: "This is most emphatically not an attack on Japan or an example of Japan bashing . . . both the U.S. and Japan are victims of forces they can neither control nor resist." 
60
The common strategic interest was the containment of the Soviet Union. During the Cold War a perfect synergy between Japan's economic interests and America's political interests caused America to counter the intent of the post war constitution it had imposed on Japan; that is to remove permanently any possibility of future challenge from Japan. Japan became so important to American strategic interests that America was willing to endure substantial discomfort from Japanese economic competition. Indeed, as Japan became an increasingly formidable economic power, the U.S. became increasingly dependent on it politically . . . its political importance to the U.S. forced America to cede to Japan substantial economic authority, far more than would be enjoyed by a nation that had surrendered unconditionally. 
61
With glasnost, however, the equation shifts, for if the Soviet Union accepts its encirclement then the foundation of the U.S. -Japanese alliance dissolves . . . because the U.S. will no longer need to endure Japanese economic encroachments, since the strategic payoffs . . . will cease to have meaning after the Cold War. 
62
03
Harbor was an inevitable result of Japan's need to reduce the vulnerability of its sea lines of communications for imported raw materials. 
64
65
In Another View on the Revolution in Military Affairs, Jeffrey Cooper argues that much discussion of RMA has been at best misdirected: too much attention has been paid to identifying the key technologies for the RMA and too much time is still wasted on RMAs as technologydriven phenomena . . . far more emphasis than warranted has been placed on using RMA to defeat another heavily mechanized regional hegemon like Iraq (and Doing it better), rather than on preparing to address new challenges, including potential emerging competitors . . . RMAs are not merely more clever or even more elegant technological breakthroughs than are evolutionary military innovations; these revolutions are more profound in both their sources and implications . . . this RMA, fueled by the 'Information Revolution' may have potential for more sweeping and fundamental changes than most of its historical cousins. 
67
Interestingly, he appears to disagree with what others have declared comprised revolutionary changes in the conduct of war: by his count four RMAs have occurred since the Napoleonic RMA. 
68
In The Revolution in Military Affairs: a Framework for Defense Planning, Michael J. Mazarr concurs with Coopers' willingness to ascribe broader impact to this current revolution and cites War and Anti-War to explain military revolutions are the product of broad social and political transformation. 
69
Given the historical relationship of Newtonian physics and the Industrial Revolution, he seems, intuitively, to be on the right track. His framework consists of four principles-information dominance, synergy (also known as jointness) 
71
Since paradoxes forced scientists to give up long cherished theories for more complete ones, Wheatley proposes that organizational paradoxes require similar treatment. In fact, noting the preponderance of organizational theorists with hard science or engineering backgrounds, she believes that the advances in science must be reflected in organizational theory because organizational theory has always been purposely based on our understanding of science. A similar line of thinking seems appropriate for war and military organizations.
Wheatley's explanations of science are relatively brief, relying less on a complete treatment than the legitimacy of the experts she quotes. Thus, her argument is sometimes difficult to follow. Unless one understands Newton's laws of motion and rules of reasoning, for instance, it is a leap of faith to accept how dramatically they shape our world view. Since her argument is mostly inductive, this leap may be too far for some.
On the other hand, Wheatley superbly highlights many of the implications of the new sciences-quantum mechanics, chaos theory, and self organizing dissipative structures. In an important way, each describes a world profoundly different than that described by Newtonian physics. Quantum mechanics contradicts our expectations of certainty and objective measurement; chaos redefines equilibrium, stability, order, and cause and effect; and dissipative structures teach new lessons about change and self renewal. When applied to organizational theory, the aggregate should persuade planners and managers to reconsider their notions of organizational design, interaction, control and measures of effectiveness. By extension, the same applies to parallel aspects of war or revolutions in military affairs.
The revolution in military affairs is linked both to perceptions and to organizations. Wheatley explanation of the ubiquity of the out-dated Newtonian paradigm helps explain some of the difficulty of understanding the changing nature of war. Thus, the Newtonian paradigm is the starting point for thinking about war in new and different ways. It is important to note that, unlike revolutions in natural scientific thought, revolutions in military science-and in the social sciences in general-entail an objective revolution in the underlying reality of the very substance of the revolution: the revolution in war entails the revolution in military thought. Notice that in the so-called Galilean and Copernican revolutions the structure and process of the solar system remain the same; it is only looked at in an entirely different manner. This new way of looking at the solar system itself constitutes the revolution. Unlike natural scientific revolutions, military and political revolutions are historically mediated, that is, qualitative changes in the underlying reality are induced by man himself. For example, with the Industrial Revolution commanders actively chose to adopt certain technological devices that transformed qualitatively the very substance of military reality. 
74
This anticipates the argument of this thesis: that the larger Information Revolution, and the science and technology that accompany it, makes possible a revolution in the way war is conceived of and conducted.
To evoke this potential, however, requires revolutionary thinking.
Schneider's avowed purpose is "to provide the rational foundations" 75 of the decision-making that engendered the revolution in Soviet military theory and strategy. Here, too, he anticipates the direction of this thesis. The next chapter attempts to create a rational but new framework that explains a possible revolution in war. Schneider indicates that a revolution in thought coincident with the Industrial Revolution made possible the Soviet revolution in military affairs.
Wheatley states that current developments in science are creating a revolution in thought. The Tofflers argue that the Information Revolution or Third Wave will, like the Industrial Revolution before it, revolutionize all aspects of society. Chapter Three attempts to show how the revolution in thought caused by new sciences and the empowerment of individuals coincident with the Third Wave may shape the next revolution in military affairs, for those who choose to evoke its potential.
In terms of the detective analogy used earlier, Schneider seeks to explain a "criminal" of the past, this thesis the "suspects" still at large. In both cases, although it may differ profoundly from ours, their intellectual framework has consistent, rational patterns. The evidence here suggests those patterns originate in the related revolutions in science and society. The next chapter analyzes today's revolutions in science and society to anticipate one such framework. CHAPTER THREE PARADIGM SHIFT ... be aware that for the military mind the Clausewitzian outlook is the most comfortable one. The professional military man is preoccupied with the problem of using military power effectively. Such power is used most effectively (and moreover is sanctioned by tradition) when it is at the disposal of a politically stable nation state and directed against other states. This is the Clausewitzian paradigm of war.
-Anatol Rapoport, introduction to On War 1
Military thinking about the RMA tends to focus on warfighting.
Other authors (the Tofflers, John Keegan, Samuel Huntington, Martin Van be what we understood it to be-that is, different "rules" may applybecause our framework of analysis and the context in which we understood it is obsolete. Failure to update our conceptual framework consigns us to old thinking about new things and preserving Haig's well-bred horse. 
2
Because these paradigm shifts are virtually inseparable, the analysis below is not organized to address each in its turn. Instead, it begins with the role Newton's science-Kuhn's penultimate paradigm-played in the Industrial Revolution, and covers the continuing influence of that paradigm. Clausewitz's On War is shown to be a paradigm heavily influenced by Newton. But it is also shown that the basic assumption of the Clausewitzian paradigm-the existence of a monopoly of power symbolized by the center of gravity-is no longer universally applicable. (3) To every action there is opposed an equal reaction. 
7
It is important to note that, to prove his theories, Newton invented a new form of analytical mathematics, geometric calculus.
Geometric calculus considered incrementally smaller pieces of an irregular shape in order to more closely approximate its area or volume. From the beginning, Newton built on Descartes' assertion that accuracy and truth were to be obtained through precision, which in turn was to be achieved by considering smaller and smaller parts of the whole. This mathematical analysis led directly to the scientific method, which retained its presumption of a universal relationship between truth, precision and increasingly minute measurement. Van Doren notes that this method of analysis is contained in Book Three of Princioia, which Newton entitled "The System of the World." There were four rules of reasoning:
(1) Admit no more causes of natural things than such as are both true and sufficient to explain the appearances.
(2) To the same natural effects we must, as far as possible, assign the same causes.
(3) The qualities of bodies which are to be found in all bodies within the reach of our experiments, are to be esteemed the universal qualities of all bodies whatsoever.
(4) In experimental [science] we are to look upon propositions inferred by general induction from phenomena as accurately or very nearly true, notwithstanding any contrary hypothesis that may be imagined, till such time as other phenomena occur, by which they may either be made more accurate, or liable to exceptions. 9
There was an additional caveat, Van Doren continues, for Newton loathed hypotheses: "[this] argument of induction may not be evaded by hypotheses." Hypotheses, to Newton, were unsupported conjecture, not deduced from observed phenomena and thus had no place in his world. 9
Newton's most famous experiment with light contributed to the way in which this new world was perceived and illustrates a key characteristic of Newtonian thought. To understand its nature, Newton viewed white light through a prism, noting it refracted into the colorful spectrum of visible light. When sent through a second prism, the colors combined to again form white light. When considered with his reasoning that "the qualities of bodies which are to be found in all bodies within the reach of our experiments, are to be esteemed the universal qualities of all bodies whatsoever," it is no wonder we hold Newton responsible for our tendency to judge the whole by scrutinizing its parts.
The Newtonian legacy included both a description of the world and a particular way of thinking. His rules of motion spoke of a specific world view. In the Newtonian vision, the universe was a vast, complex, clock-like machine, complicated but understandable with sufficient intellectual effort. The clock maker was "infinitely rational, his works were totally predictable, and a few simple laws would reveal what made everything work. Reductionist thinking proliferated." 10 Not only could the universe be understood but, with its machine-like regularity, it could be predicted. A belief in this determinism and application of Newton's Laws of Motion allowed men to alter the world on a grand scale and begin the Industrial Revolution: by 1700, Galileo, Descartes, and Newton, together with a host of scientific contemporaries, had changed . . . ignorance into knowledge. Suddenly practical men realized why machines did what they did. As a result they saw how to make them do it better. The discoveries in mechanics came with astonishing rapidity, one after another, and each new discovery called for the next. 11
The Master Paradigm
The second part of the legacy is more profound, for it taught us how to think and how to organize knowledge, that is, our commonly held beliefs. It is Newton's paradigm:
The four rules of reasoning, and the added prohibition against hypothesizing, that is, offering explanations not directly supported by experiments, could be said to define the scientific method as it has been practiced since Newton's time and as it is still practiced, for the most part, today. Newton's rules established a new paradigm, to use a term employed by the eminent historian of science, Thomas S. Kuhn, in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962). The new paradigm inaugurated the age of science. The most valuable and useful tool for acquiring knowledge ever invented had been distributed among men, and with it they would proceed to try to understand everything they could see and many things they could not, as well as control the 12 world around them in heretofore unimaginable ways.
Kuhn's paradigm has two salient characteristics. First, it must be sufficiently unprecedented to attract an enduring group of adherents away from competing modes of explanation.
(This brings to mind General DePuy's dominating concept; a line of thinking so profound and different that it seizes the intellectual initiative, forcing all it encounters to acknowledge it and react. 13 ) Secondly, it must be sufficiently open-minded to leave all sorts of problems for the redefined group of practitioners to resolve. 
14
16
When Principia finally appeared in 1686, it made the world gasp. The greatest problem in the history of science up to that time, the problem of how and why the universe worked as it did, had been solved. 17
Newton's legacy, then, is not only his explanation of motion that truly enabled the Industrial Revolution, but also our master paradigm, the method of analysis that was easily transferred to efforts to solve other poorly understood phenomena, in all disciplines of knowledge.
as explained by Newton. Newton's paradigm provided Clausewitz's point of reference. After three hundred years of use, it is also ours: Newton's explanations and methods have combined to form a sub-conscious, or perhaps more precisely unconscious, perspective on the world.
In Leadership and the New Science, Margaret Wheatley says that Newton gave us the universe we "know," with all its implied filters:
Each of us lives and works in organizations designed from Newtonian images of the universe. We manage by separating things into parts, we believe that influence occurs as a direct result of force exerted from one person to another, we engage in complex planning for a world that we keep expecting to be predictable, and we search continually for better methods of objectively perceiving the world. These assumptions . . . come to us from seventeenth century physics, from Newtonian mechanics. They are the base from which we do research in all of the social sciences. Intentionally or not, we work from a world view that has been derived from the natural sciences. 
22
Michael Howard indicates Clausewitz understood and probably rejected Newton's world view or paradigm:
There had been no lack of effort before Clausewitz's time to apply scientific principles to the conduct of war. Throughout the eighteenth century there was a widespread impatience that, in an age when the universe was yielding more and more of its secrets to scientific enquiry and when reason was replacing custom and superstition as the criterion of human judgement, the conduct of war should still be such a clumsy, wasteful and uncertain business. . . . But this search for scientific certainty in military affairs was taking place at a time when thinkers in other areas of human activity were beginning to question the whole idea of scientific certainty, a Newtonian universe whose objective reality was governed by forces and principles quite external to man. The idea that man . . . created . . . and moulded the world through his own consciousness had taken deep hold in Germany. . . . Intellectually Clausewitz was very much a child of his time. For him war was not an activity governed by scientific laws but a clash of wills, or moral forces. 
23
Like so many other German intellectuals of his time, he combined the best of two worlds -the tradition of the Enlightenment, which emphasized rational objective analysis and the search for clarity, with the German romantic tradition (formulated in part as a reaction to the French as representative of the Enlightenment), which focused on the psychological, emotional, intuitive and subjective dimensions in the interpretation of the surrounding world. The dialectical relationship between the Enlightenment on the one hand and German romanticism on the other -the two elements complementing rather than contradicting one another -created a synthesis on a higher level.
Representing the duality of human nature, his theory is as successful; in presenting the calculating and rational side of war as in analyzing its non-rational and unpredictable qualities. While war is waged primarily to achieve rational ends, it is not a rational process. Hence his emphasis on the role of uncertainty, chance, friction, and luck in war owes as much to German romantic perceptions of the human condition as to Newtonian rationality. 
24
Nor was uncertainty alien to Newtonian reasoning. Long before Clausewitz, Newton had to account for the difference between the ideal and actual worlds. With Newton's clock-work universe the concept of entropy entered our collective consciousness. Machines wear down; they eventually stop. In Yeat's phrase, 'Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold, mere anarchy is loosed upon the world. . . .' If we want progress, then we must provide the energy, the momentum, to reverse decay. By sheer force of will ... we will make the world hang together. 
25
Real wars differ from abstract war, says Clausewitz, because idealized conditions are never realized. Mobilization of forces is not instantaneous; events are governed not only by strict causality but also by chance; psychological factors are important determinants of decisions made by men, etc. Clausewitz subsumes all of these perturbing circumstances under the concept of 'friction,' an obvious allusion to the analogous concept in physics, which is invoked to explain the discrepancy between real and idealized mechanical processes. 
26
More parallels are evident in Clausewitz's dictums. Compare "War is thus an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will" 28 to Newton's first law of motion: "a body continues at rest or in uniform motion until it is compelled to change." Clausewitz's statement that "the second attribute of military action is that it must expect positive reactions" 29 is Newton's third law: "for every action there is opposed an equal reaction."
Similarly, Newton's second law (motion is proportional to force applied) seems to be present in the following:
If the enemy is to be coerced you must put him in a situation that is even more unpleasant than the sacrifice you call on him to make. 
30
Any change that might be brought about by continuing hostilities must then, at least in theory, be of a kind to bring the enemy to still greater disadvantage. 
31
Theory must be comprehensive, that is, able to account all aspects of its subject. . . .
[Newton's Rule 3: results determined locally are assumed to be universal];
It must be based on the constants or absolutes of its subject, not on phenomena that may be temporary. . . .
[Newton's Rule 2: To the same natural effects we must assign the same causes.]; Theory must constantly pass the test of reality . . . [it] must be sufficiently flexible and open to take account of imponderables, and it must have the potential for further development. [Newton's Rule 4: look upon empirically developed theory as accurate or very nearly true until disputed by observed phenomena, when it is to be made more accurate or subject to exception.] 32 Newton's injunction against "hypothesizing" appears to contradict what Paret describes as Clausewitz's dialectic of "constant interplay between the observable present and hypotheses concerning the timeless phenomena of war," 33 until it becomes apparent that the same term is used with different intent. To Newton, hypotheses represented all that was bad in earlier scientific thought: mere conjecture with no grounds in observable fact. Clausewitz, too, shared "the practical man's horror of abstractions that could not be related to fact, of propositions that could not be illustrated by examples, of material that was not relevant to the problem in hand." 
34
35
Other influences not excluded, Clausewitz shared Newton's vision of the world. Indeed, it would have been difficult for him to comprehend the sciences of his time without accepting the conceptual framework from which they sprang. We too believe Newton's paradigm, for it has permeated virtually all knowledge and "we have prospered in this belief for many centuries." 36 Once Von Moltke publicly endorsed On War, the high degree of consonance between Clausewitz and Newton facilitated its rapid acceptance.
It "fit" both the master paradigm of the day-Newton's-and daily experience in a world organized according to Newtonian precepts.
A key Newtonian precept borrowed by Clausewitz that remains popular today is center of gravity. Newton used it to simplify the mathematical treatment of gravitational forces on planets: static, heterogeneous entities symbolized by a homogeneous point. This simplification enabled him to develop his general rules of motion that reconciled the movement of terrestrial bodies with that of celestial bodies. Taking the metaphor for his own, Clausewitz employed it to explain in simple terms how military forces should act on enemy states.
In the relatively static, dynastic system of his time, the simplification was not overdone:
This paradigm (which today is recognized by many political scientists to be a highly abstract idealization) was a moderately realistic model of the international system which Clausewitz knew best. . . . 
37
The differences between the implications of this most basic assumption of Clausewitz's paradigm and the reality of today can no longer be ignored.
The shift of the monopoly of power from nation/states to individuals augurs for a paradigm shift.
The connections between several of the most frequently noted trends-decreasing decisiveness of war, emergence of non-nation/state actors, merging levels of war, the revolution in military affairs, and the Tofflers' Third Wave-become more readily apparent when considered in terms of power, or more appropriately, relative power. The underlying concept is one of articulation, a concept repeatedly advanced by Archer Jones in The Art of War in the Western World. Although never explicitly defined, his many examples imply that articulation can be thought of as the sub-division of a force to the lowest level independently capable of affecting the outcome. Put another way, articulation is the smallest group with significant power. Today, we may be achieving-the irreducible minimum: the individual. Individuals are becoming more powerful. Advances in science and technology are placing in the hands of ordinary people tools possessing power once accessible to only the most wealthy and educated, or to nations. Personal computers now can store more data in minutes than most individuals could previously assemble in their library over a lifetime.
The majority of the world is accessible by plane within a day, by personal communication devices-fax, modem, cellular phone-in minutes.
Information and knowledge are no longer the possession of a select few.
With the aforementioned information technologies, free worldwide television news coverage, satellite communications, Internet, and the explosion of market-driven information services, most individuals have access to more sources than they can personally process.
These technologies enable individuals or small groups to assume roles and exercise powers previously reserved for national governments.
At the outset of World War I, there was a two week difference between when the government learned of the assassination of the Archduke and when the American public was told. No longer can a government rely on such an "information float" for time to formulate strategy and shape public opinion. Now, as often as not, CNN informs the world of critical events before government officials are briefed. Except limited areas, Western governments cannot presume to be better informed than their constituents.
Nor is a government's diplomatic power the monopoly it once might The increasingly dynamic changes in the relative power of individuals and states makes it less appropriate to use the center of gravity metaphor. Unlike dynastic and post dynastic states where power was relatively static; today's dynamic, heterogeneous organizations can not be treated as a simplified point. The metaphor fails because there are too many players with significant power who continuously alter the distribution of power. There may not be one hub from which all power springs. This refutes a basic presumption of the Clausewitzian paradigm, and is one reason why it no longer accurately describes the role of military power in achieving national objectives.
A second argument for a new framework is that the paradigm set forth in Newtonian science-the one from which Clausewitz borrowed concepts and terms-is being challenged by new scientific developments.
These sciences describe a world that often adheres to rules quite different from those expected by Newton, Clausewitz and today's students of war. To a scientist and historian like Kuhn, this would perhaps explain why so many respected writers (e.g. John Keegan, Martin Van   Creveld, Alvin and Heidi Toffler, Steven Metz) are noting with ever increasing frequency that Clausewitz's theory seems, at best, limited or out of date. Kuhn would note that On War is based on Newton's paradigm, and that advances in quantum theory, chaos theory and other disciplines are proving Newton's paradigm inadequate. As Margaret Wheatley puts it: the science has changed. If we are to continue to draw from the sciences to create and manage organizations, to design research, and to formulate hypotheses about organizational design, planning, economics, human nature, and change processes (the list can be much longer), than we need to at least ground our work in the science of our times. We need to stop seeking after the universe of the seventeenth century and begin to explore what has become known to us in the twenty-first century. We need to expand our search for principles of organization to include what is presently known about the universe. 
38
For instance, quantum mechanics explains common, worldwide phenomena that Newtonian or classical physics could not. Newton's world is made of separate, discrete entities that can be reduced to a single point-a center of gravity-from which it can be considered to act on, or be acted on by, other entities. These discrete entities form larger entities that can be taken apart and analyzed to understand their nature.
'The whole corpus of classical physics,' writes Danah Zohar in The Quantum Self, 'and the technology that rests on it is about the separateness of things, about constituent parts and how they influence each other across their separateness.' Classical physics studies a world of things and how connections work across the separations. In this world of things, there are well-defined edges; it is possible to tell where one stops and another begins, to observe something without interfering with its identity or function. The 'thing' world, therefore, leads to a belief in scientific objectivity. 
39
In the machine model, one must understand the parts. Things can be taken apart, dissected literally or representationally (as we have done with business functions and academic disciplines), and then put back together without any significant loss [of understanding]. The assumption is that by comprehending the workings of each piece, the whole can be understood. The Newtonian model is characterized by materialism and reductionism -a focus on things rather than relationships. . . . 
40
Quantum mechanics theory demonstrates some inadequacies in classical physics. The two slit experiment, in which atomic particles act as both waves and particles depending upon the observers' participation, refutes the concepts of piecemeal analysis, objective observation and a deterministic world of irrefutable laws. Field theory, a concept that reappears in many of the new sciences, emphasizes relationships over discrete entities.
Relationship is the key determiner of what is observed and how particles [or other things] manifest themselves. Particles come into being and are observed only in relationship to something else. They do not exist as independent 'things.'[They are part of] a strange yet enticing view of a world that . . .'appears as a complicated tissue of events, in which connections of different kinds alternate or overlap or combine and thereby determine the texture of the whole. These unseen connections between what were previously thought to be separate entities are the fundamental elements of all creation. 
41
Quantum based theories of power, of which war might be considered a subset, might indicate that analyzing the structures (TOEs, wiring diagrams) of the adversary organizations misses the point of the organization: the relationships between the people and organizations internal and external to the group. The structure is important only to the extent that it facilitates or inhibits interaction. This interaction might be considered a field, with potential dependent on the number and involvement of participants. Given the manner in which the observer / participant evokes quantum reality, a quantum based philosophy could also be expected to eschew rigid methodologies or conceptual templates.
Chaos theory is evident in all of the new sciences and, now that we know what to look for, many of the old sciences. Chaos was once believed to be complexity so great that it simply had too many variables to accurately track and use to make predictions.'' 2 True to its Newtonian outlook, this view held that the key to understanding chaotic systems was to simplify and reduce the variables. Since chaos was cast as the antithesis of order and predictability, chaos was a negative factor. In science, it was chiefly represented by entropy or friction. Were it not for entropy and chaos, the world would be predictable, regular and proceed in the direction we moved it. This led to a widely held belief that from order came efficiency, and that from structure and control came order. Autonomy was perceived to be a step away from anarchy and chaos. 
43
Chaos theory now proposes that chaos and order are inextricably inter-related. 
45
46
Chaos theory also challenges the concepts of cause and effect and incremental change. What Newtonian scientists and engineers were taught to ignore-very small differences at the beginning of a problemchaoticians believe make prediction impossible. Known as sensitive dependence on initial conditions, or the "Butterfly Effect," it is the idea of critical non-local effects espoused in the old tale that begins "For want of a nail the shoe was lost. ..." The scientific method and other traditions of classical analysis tend to ignore a single nail, or the flap of a butterfly's wings in Beijing when considering the problem of a tornado in Texas. Chaos theory teaches that such simplification assumes that "arbitrarily small influences don't blow up to have arbitrarily large effects." 47 But they do, and because they do, specific prediction is impossible. Empirically we see this in both unintended or second and third order effects of our actions.
Finally, fractals, the geometry of chaos, re-emphasize the importance of patterns (like the strange attractor) and the futility of objective measurement (captured in Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and demonstrated in the two-slit experiment). Fractals are the patterns within patterns within patterns that we are now discovering throughout nature, as we seek after the incremental precision implied in Newton's calculus. When applied to a seemingly straightforward problem like "How long is the coastline of Florida?" fractals demonstrate that precise measurement is impossible. With greater magnification (or smaller, more precise increments) a more precise, and different, answer is always possible. 
4B
Rather, it might be better conceived as a field that interacts with other fields, producing effects that are fractal-like: ultimately unmeasurable and unpredictable but remaining within certain recognizable boundaries.
Given the interaction between events, individuals and electronic media, the often invoked concept of "national will" seems to work better as a potentially chaotic (as specifically described above) field than as a center of gravity.
Recent discoveries in biology provide similar images of power and change. One such discovery, that of dissipative structures, has much in common with chaos theory because it too explains change in nature.
Formerly, fluctuations, disturbances, turbulence were signs of trouble; acceleration of the process of natural decay that is inherent in all systems (like entropy). These manifestations of change were indications of the decline of the system, change for the worse.
The connotations were profoundly negative:
Both our science and our culture have been profoundly affected by the images of degeneration contained in classical thermodynamics. When we see decay as inevitable, or society as going to ruin, or time as the road to inexorable death, we are unintentional celebrants of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. ... It is both sad and ironic that we have treated organizations like machines, acting as though they were dead when all this time they've been living, open systems capable of self-renewal. We have magnified this tragedy by treating one another as machines, believing the only way we could motivate others was by pushing and prodding them into action, overcoming their entropy by the sheer force of our own energy. 
49
50
Instead of whirling off in different directions, each part of the system must remain consistent with itself and with all other parts of the system as it changes. There is, even among simple cells, an unerring recognition of the intent of the system, a deep relationship between individual activity and the whole. 
51
The last of the new sciences considered here, morphogenic fields, also contradicts conventional assumptions of a linear, cause and effect model of behavior modification. Conceptually, morphogenic fields lie at the intersection of quantum theory, dissipative structures and learning theory. Previously, natural selection explained how species "learned."
The mechanism was hardship that winnowed out those not suitable to the new environment. In military history this might be best exemplified by the theories of social Darwinism prevalent prior to World War I. Management theory also subscribed to this survival of the fittest concept. Companies either adapted to changing market conditions or went out of business.
Such adaptation relied on the individuals being quickly re-trained or replaced.
Morphogenic fields advance a different view of the learned behavior of a large group. Knowledge may be retained in an undiscovered group memory, an invisible structure that helps shape behavior.
Apparently, some of what we know how to do comes not from our ownindividual-acquired learning but from knowledge that has been accumulated in a "human species" field, to which we have access. Whole populations shift their behavior because the content of their field changed, not because the individuals have taken the time to learn the new behavior. 
52
And morphogenic fields may account for the observed phenomenon that might be called "the art of the possible;" that is, how generally once a new standard or breakthrough is achieved, others rapidly achieve what was previously unattainable. Alternatively, it may explain some of the intangibles of command climate.
One of the implications for military theory and strategy is that relative advantages based on knowledge, such as high technology for instance, may be governed by this natural phenomena. Strategies relying on retaining a high technology edge may be "unnatural" or at least the non-optimum path. Once a technological breakthrough is achieved, morphogenic fields imply that it is much easier for others to catch up.
On a more optimistic note, a strategy of engagement, even at low levels, would seem sound because each engagement adds to the hypothetical morphogenic field, and thus, has an effect larger than the sum of its individual events. These four disciplines-quantum mechanics, chaos theory, dissipative structures and morphogenic fields-describe a different world that often operates according to different concepts than the one from which we have developed our traditional philosophy of war and power. If the principles and implications that describe the natural world are transferrable to the activities of man, then these new sciences refute the basic assumptions of what has been, to this point, our master paradigm.
They also undermine our notions of how power is applied because the rules of the game have been redefined. For our every action, unpredictable nonlocal effects are as likely as expected, precise effects. Fractals and the two-slit experiment call scientific analysis into question. These things require a new model and method for considering how power, military or otherwise, accomplishes its ends.
It might be helpful at this point to consider how this potentially revolutionary intellectual framework differs from the one in use now. A summary of the above discussion, comparing the extended implications of the Newtonian paradigm and the paradigm outlined by the new sciences, might be as described in Table 
1
Change mechanism refers to how power is applied to impose change. Medium describes the substance of power; point of application describes where it is used. Range and magnitude of effect refer to precision and proportionality. Change in each case is limited by the difference between how change is imposed and the mechanisms that seem to oppose it. Model and control refer to how we visualize and manipulate the object or organization in question. Scope and focus of analysis address how best to understand the target. Desired state, system quality, and strategy orientation refer to the condition, characteristics, and strategy inferred by each model. Perception of conflict contrasts the role conflict plays in each framework. In science, Newton's concepts are still useful in many specific applications. This would seem to be true too for the implications of those concepts when applied to other disciplines. For instance, center of gravity may still be an appropriate way of thinking of a coherent, homogeneous adversary. Or, if an adversary employs Newtonian thinking, or is one of the Tofflers' Second Wave societies, then perhaps he may be best understood through a Newtonian analysis, since he is likely to organize and operate according to the Newtonian paradigm.
But the new sciences offer the outlines of a new framework from which to plan and make war. These fundamental concepts may be what is "revolutionary" about the revolution in military affairs. This new framework for the application of military power, or any power for that matter, may be entirely consistent with the concepts of the new master paradigm. Alternatively, it might have elements of both, manifesting itself as the dual form warfare postulated by the Tofflers. Regardless, because of the paradigm shifts detailed above, the Clausewitzian construct of massive nations marshalling forces to strike each others' center of gravity has limited applicability both literally and figuratively.
If war is waged to change an opponent's intentions then a description of change in dissipative structures may provide a better metaphor than forces acting on centers of gravity:
In a dissipative structure, things in the environment that disturb the system's equilibrium play a crucial role in creating new forms of order. As the environment becomes more complex, generating new and different information, it provokes the system into a response. New information enters the system as a small fluctuation that varies from the norm. If the system pays attention to this fluctuation, the information grows in strength as it interacts with the system and is fed back on itself (a process of autocatalysis). Finally, the information grows to such a level of disturbance that the system can no longer ignore it. At this point, jarred by so much internal disturbance and far from equilibrium, the system in its current form falls apart. But this disintegration does not signal the death of the system. In most cases the system can reconfigure itself at a higher level of complexity, one better able to deal with the new environment.
Dissipative structures demonstrate that disorder can be a source of order, and that growth is found in disequilibrium, not in balance. 
53
54
When applied in conjunction with the context of the new sciences, this description in many ways seems to match the real-life function and process of war, and analogous uses of other instruments of power. Power has been described as the ability to affect the condition or behavior of something or someone. 
55
In this model, the effect of power is to stimulate change that will result in self-referenced re-organization of the target. Like all chaotic systems, the target's degree of change cannot be accurately or precisely anticipated but will be similar to its earlier incarnation.
Because of non-local effects and critical mass effects, its point of application does not need to be the hypothetical center of gravity, but any catalytic point where access is effective, efficient or economical.
In order to be effective, the objective of any application of power must be a process: internally driven, presumably irreversible change. At the same time, the ability to effect the right kind of change, one that is in line with our larger strategic objectives, must be considered in terms of probabilities and quality of power, as much as quantity. Lasting effects--decisiveness-are achieved only if this process is initiated.
If the dissipative structures model better describes the process of power, than anyone who can initiate the process has significant power.
Power might now be re-defined 
56
This model and the expanded definition of power complete the description of a possible new framework that allows a revolution in thinking, one that might be expected to accompany the revolution in military affairs. Together with the empowering changes of society and the concepts of the today's sciences, they provide a rational foundation from which to consider possible options for our adversaries. Like the homicide detective, though we are not murderers, we can learn to think like one. This framework avoids, hopefully, "abstractions . . . not related to fact, propositions . . . not illustrated by example, material . . . not related to the problem at hand." Newly described natural phenomena indicate our old foundation for rational thought-Newton's master paradigm-is incomplete. Disciplines of knowledge built on that foundation thus require revision. Our paradigm of war is one such body of knowledge that draws heavily on concepts, metaphors and terms originally defined or re-defined by Newton and his followers. The paradigm shifts described above require us to reconsider their continuing relevance and the manner in which they exclude competing concepts, metaphors, etc. The dissipative structures model and the new science concepts allow us to consider a new paradigm of war, one that our adversaries may employ . . . consciously or not. What follows is, hopefully, a reasonable "interplay between observable present and hypotheses concerning the timeless phenomenon of war." CHAPTER FOUR SPECULATION ON FUTURE WARS More important still was perception. His adversaries perceived that their own limiting factors applied to others as well. They defined the contest in their terms, and if that's how [he] played the game, then [he] would lose. So his most important task was to make up his own set of rules. And so he would. . . .
The "rules," then, for a framework in which to speculate about possible strategies of notional adversaries are as follows. The RMA and the Third Wave are environments that admit many forms of power that are readily exploitable. The alternative paradigm is one means of determining whether or not these forms of power can be used against America. The concepts of today's new sciences provide new metaphors for conceptualizing the "wars" outside of the mostly Clausewitzian paradigm that is perpetuated by our doctrine and force structure. Each adversary will be given a strategic objective that would likely be opposed to U.S. interests. A strategy consistent with that objective will be developed in accordance with the framework above. The only principles of the war per se will be those from the new sciences, a desire to circumvent American military strength to the greatest extent feasible, and the exploitation of relative advantage wherever available.
In both scenarios, relative advantage occurs not as a result of an attack on our center of gravity but through the use of strategies that are better modelled by dissipative structures.
Case 1 Tom Clancy's Debt of Honor provides an imaginative scenario that includes what might be termed a revolutionary form of war. His plot begins in the American Midwest, where a freak auto accident involving two Japanese compact cars kills seven in a spectacular auto accident. The victims are two teenage girls and all but one daughter-a twin-of a police officer's family. The deaths are attributed to the structural failure of the car's fuel tanks. The fuel tanks had previously been the object of a hotly contested trade issue in which the Japanese refused to accepted a fuel tank of U.S. design and manufacture on the grounds of poor quality. The auto industry and Congress seize the unfortunate opportunity to quickly enact a restrictive trade reform bill that establishes a negative quid pro quo between the two countries. Every impediment and obstruction to trade encountered by U.S. products in Japan will be mirrored in the U.S.
The move creates an environment that, from the Japanese perspective, is highly reminiscent to that existing just prior to World War II. Again, it would seem, restrictive U.S. trade practices threaten to strangle the Japanese economy, this time by denying them their largest export market. The shrewd manipulation of the predictable emotional and economic reaction in Japan provides an opportunity for a group of hawks to resurrect dreams of Japanese political and economic independence.
These hawks are the Zaibatsu: 20 or 30 of the very largest Japanese industrialists that form a shadow government through their control of the Prime Minister and members of the Diet. Clancy's construction of the Zaibatsu plan is a thought provoking study in how power may be wielded today.
The Zaibatsu plan includes all of the instruments of power, and is similar in both design and defect to Yamamoto's strategy prior to the Battle of Midway. From December 1941 through June 1942, the Japanese sought a decisive Mahanian battle to eliminate U.S. naval power in the Pacific. Such a defeat, they thought, would, in combination with the demands of war in Europe, force the U.S. to negotiate a diplomatic settlement. Without the naval forces necessary to interfere, the U.S. would be forced to accept the new status quo: the establishment of the Greater East Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere that extended Japanese hegemony to the central Pacific. Time was a crucial element of the strategy, as it assumed that the Japanese could rapidly fortify their newly acquired islands to an extent that would make unfeasible U.S. efforts to rebuild military power and re-capture the islands. Chance-the absence of the carriers at Pearl Harbor at the first attempt, design-Nimitz's direction to his commanders to avoid a decisive defeat at all costs, and Japanese flaws-lack of agreement between Imperial Army and Navy staffs on strategic priorities, overly complex plans, and expectations of an unreasonably cooperative enemy, combined to deny the Japanese the time to establish their fortified perimeter. They never achieved the relative advantage in military power required to force the U.S. to accept a diplomatic solution.
Clancy's Zaibatsu have ostensibly learned from these mistakes.
In Debt of Honor, the U.S. military drawdown and nuclear disarmament are faster and deeper than reality: the U.S. Pacific Fleet is down to four carriers when the U.S. and Russia destroy the last of their ICBMs.
Clancy's strategic environment drastically reduces the relative advantage in the military instrument of power that the U.S. has enjoyed for the last half century and his Zaibatsu recognize the opportunity to exploit conditions desired but never achieved in World War II. Again, time is a crucial element of their overall strategy and, again, military actions are designed not to annihilate the nation but to remove military options from U.S. planners and force negotiation and compromise.
Clancy neutralizes the U.S. Pacific Fleet through two devices.
First, two carriers are tied to the Indian Ocean to discourage an Indian invasion of Sri Lanka. Indian aggression has been carefully orchestrated by the Zaibatsu. Second, the other two carriers are "accidentally" torpedoed by a Japanese destroyer during a large scale exercise. The torpedoes do not destroy the carriers but severely damage their screws, To that extent, Clancy's scenario is rather conventional. But the informational and political aspects of the Zaibatsu plan are striking.
All moves are designed to create ambiguity with regard to intent and, when necessary to make public, portrayed as something other than what they are.
More than well coordinated deception operations, these instruments constitute attacks as much as the military operations.
After invading Saipan, the Japanese move thousands of citizens there, and lower the voting age to eighteen, which makes their invasion force eligible to vote. Then, in diplomatic negotiations with the U.S., they offer a compromise: leave the fate of Saipan up to a local referendum on self determination. Such an offer poses a difficult problem for the U.S., which is forced to choose between a vote it can't win and declining a process that is the essence of American political thought.
The loss of Saipan by referendum, however, has the same effect as losing the island through invasion.
The Japanese manipulation of the voting population could be viewed as shifting the political center of gravity. Given the relative homogeneity of the two groups of voters, this might be appropriate. On the other hand, if the voting population is viewed as a dissipative structures model, one is forced to reconsider the system dynamics, the internal relationships, and what might now constitute effective stimuli.
Clancy neatly encapsulates another probable dilemma of future war: the participatory role of the press. As Wheatley points out, there is'no such thing as objective participation. Reporters collect information, evaluate it, put their own spin on it, and disseminate it, making it available for friend and foe alike to use. In Debt of Honor, Clancy focuses on reporting of the repairs to the carriers, which are central to the U.S. inability to respond to the invasion in an effective military fashion. The initial reports provide the Japanese a window of six months to execute their strategy before the carriers can be fully repaired. But when repairs are limited to the bare minimum required to get one CV operational, the window becomes a week. The National Security Advisor asks the press not to report the departure of the carrier, indeed, to continue reporting its presence in the shipyard. In the book, they agree . . . not because of patriotism, but because of the likely lashback in the event they are perceived to have caused American deaths by telegraphing the counter-invasion.
The military actions are not, however, the Japanese main attack.
In fact, the main attack does not employ or target military forces but rather is a deliberate and complex assault on world confidence in the American economy.
The first problem the U.S. faces is recognizing that the naval attacks and the economic catastrophe are related and intentional phenomena. Clancy's Wall Street scenario relies heavily on the lack of a "smoking gun." The smoking gun-catalytic manipulation of U.S. bank stocks coordinated with the malicious dumping of U.S. Treasury notes and currency speculation to undermine the U.S. economy-is eradicated through the artifice of a computer virus in the software that records all stock transactions on the New York Stock Exchange. Until the records are reconstructed, it is impossible to determine the key fact: that the dumping of U.S. bank stocks that precipitate the NYSE crash occurred not as result of normal world market fluctuations but as a result of collusion. Initially, none of his protagonists realize that the stock market crash is a man-made phenomena. Thus, for a critical period, the U.S. government does not realize it has suffered the economic equivalent of Pearl Harbor. Once the situation is clarified, though, it is apparent that the military attacks are a strategic economy of force. The most dangerous threat is the economic attack. The potential trump card is the nuclear capacity that, in the book, only Japan retains.
Arguably, the American economy might be considered a center of gravity. It certainly is a hub of American power. But the economy is not a homogeneous static structure, it is dynamic, distributed and as sensitive to internal conditions as external ones. Neither is it entirely predictable: similar inputs often result in different outcomes. It is for good reason that economics is known as the dismal science. In short, the economy is more like a dissipative structure.
The attack is designed like the stimuli required to initiate the process of change in the dissipative structure. The intentional devaluation of the dollar and U. S. Treasury bonds is one set of stimuli.
They are designed to set the conditions for non-local effects. The dumping of the bank stocks is another stimuli, but in conjunction with the declining dollar, it achieves the cataclysmic change inherently possible in dissipative structures. The worldwide loss of confidence is the ultimate in non-local effects, and the stock market crashes. The worst of the three possible outcomes of change in a dissipative structure-failure of the system-is the goal of the Zaibatsu plan.
The Americans respond to the economic loss in a fashion reminiscent of Saddam's response to the Gulf War: by denying the effect of the victory. This too is consistent with the dissipative structures model. The effect of externally applied stimuli are subject to internal conditions. There is no absolute or objective power, it is highly dependent on the relationship between stimuli and structure. Because there are no records, the desperate stock transactions that occurred as both cause and effect of the crash are considered as never having occurred. The rest of the world (i.e. the European governments and the large investment houses) goes along for two reasons: first because this eradicates their tremendous losses and, second, because it offers them the opportunity to profit from the now invalidated currency speculation that began the mess. U.S. stocks, Treasury notes and dollars, driven down by a crash that now will not happen, are suddenly a great bargain. This, in turn, causes all to dump yen to maximize profits. To stop its catastrophic devaluation, the Japanese frantically buy yen but our ultimately overwhelmed by the coalition against them in what Clancy calls the First Economic World War. The Zaibatsu plan boomerangs viciously on the Japanese. Without the cooperation of other participants in the worldwide economic system, they have little hope of avoiding cataclysmic economic failure.
Clancy's Americans employ the military instrument of power in three ways, virtually simultaneously. First, conventional and special operations target the Japanese AWACs, forcing the Japanese to reposition its most capable naval assets close to Japan to augment air surveillance. This allows the carrier to surreptitiously sail well before expected with roughly twice the normal complement of fighters to destroy the Japanese In many ways, Clancy's scenario is consistent with the summary of the "new" paradigm outlined in Chapter Three of this thesis, pages 75 and 76. The value placed on the primary target-the dollar-is highly subjective and only measurable relative to other currencies. The application of power, while conventional in the strictly military arena, is modelled well by processes of dissipative structures. The most dangerous weapons are intangible and work directly on the intellect.
While the banks and other financial centers might be considered decisive points, they may be better described as nodes, access points to the economic dissipative structure or field. The effects are non-linear and not subject to objective measurement. Only when the American analysts take a holistic approach and stop compartmentalizing their various problems (in traditional Newtonian fashion) do they see the relationships between them and the larger pattern of attack. All in all, the scenario is rationally constructed when considered by the standards of the new paradigm.
While it has holes-can an aircraft carrier really sail surreptitiously from Pearl Harbor?-his scenario indicates a recognition that Third Wave changes in society and technology augur the existence of new battlefields, targets, and weapons in addition to the old. Currency, stocks and other financial instruments are can theoretically be employed as a weapon to attack national economies, a primary target. Economic warfare might not be terribly farfetched. Iran's economy is slowly recovering from the debilitating war with Iraq. Even so it is not comparable with the wealth of Saudi Arabia.
While they possess the most powerful military in the region, its use must be limited by concerns of triggering decisive U.S. involvement. Diplomacy might increase their oil revenues but is unlikely to achieve their goal of control of regional oil.
The export of Islamic revolution is a good starting point, however, for it offers a venue where the Iranians can claim a relative advantage. As fundamentalists, the Iranians are in effect claiming to be better Muslims than the moderate Arabs of the GCC. While not a tangible advantage, it is both powerful and exploitable in the context of the new framework described above.
Viewed in terms of the dissipative structure model and the revised definition of power (content, communication and connection), the Islamic revolution provides Iran the power to dramatically influence its predominantly Islamic neighbors. The "content" is a more radical interpretation of the Islamic religion, which emphasizes solidarity among Muslims, casts the disparity between the wealth of the moderate Arab monarchies and their subjects as the result of greed and exploitation, and views association with the West as indicative of spiritual bankruptcy.
Not unmindful of this, the Saudis, for instance, provide subsidies for their subjects and are careful to limit the presence of Westerners in their country. Even Bahrain, the most liberal of the GCC nations, closely monitors the "footprint," or size, of U.S. forces in their country. All Arab nations avoid appearing too closely aligned with the West; recently the Saudis refused to let U.S. agents capture the terrorist suspected of planning the 1983 truck bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut. 
1
The power of the Islamic revolution is "communicated" in numerous ways. In many, though not all, of the region's countries, the Islamic religious community is, to varying degrees, part of the various echelons of government. Separation of church and state is not an Islamic ideal.
The Islamic revolutionary message has access to both religious and political channels.
The news media provide a conventional means of communication. A significant difference though is that the Shah was correctly perceived as closely allied with U.S. interests. Saddam is not. This puts Saddam's seemingly irrational challenges of U.S. military supremacy and U.N. sanctions in a different light: they can be viewed as wholly pragmatic and prudent. Unlike the Shah, he is fighting the great Satan at every turn, and "the enemy of my enemy is my friend." It would appear to be an effective counter to the conditions caused by economic sanctions that U.S. policy makers hope will encourage his constituency to dump him.
Iran would be the most ready to respond to his downfall, especially if it was arranged with Iranian collusion. Equipped with the mobile forces, transports and communication equipment that they possess or can easily acquire, all part and parcel of the RMA, and increasingly de rigueur, Iran could conceivably seize control of Iraq and install their own fundamentalist government before others could organize sufficiently to challenge them.
(Again, differences between Shia and Sunni presented difficulties that cannot be discounted, but are beyond the scope of this thesis.)
In this scenario, it is unlikely that control of Iraq would satisfy the strategic objectives of Iran. Iran's leaders might at this point consider two options. Option one would be to consolidate their gains and continue to rely on the non-local effects of Islamic fundamentalism to weaken the monarchies' hold on Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
Option two might be to accelerate the time table through direct action.
The direct action does not necessarily mean military action. Rather, it can be anything that "connects" with their adversary's dissipative structure and thus has a likelihood of causing disproportionate effects.
Their decision would likely be based on the progress of the revolution and their assessment of potential U.S. involvement.
Arab neighbors and U.S. policy makers. A probable outcome would be offers of increased U.S. military presence and assistance packages. But heightened concerns about fueling the spread of Islamic fundamentalism would make both a difficult political choice for Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
Conceivably, it is to Iran's benefit to encourage U.S. deployment to the region. On one level, it would be consistent with a sophisticated Force projection is not easily repeated often. Each mobilization and deployment forces America's leaders to expend political capital. The American political environment is such that the threat must be real and the deployment have readily apparent purposes. If an early deployment appears not to have been justified, the next one may require a higher standard of proof. The Iranians gain by making it potentially more difficult for the U.S. to decide to project power in the future.
A third way they may benefit is from real or contrived incidents that embarrass both the U.S. or its Arab hosts. The spectrum of possibilities range from routine infractions of cultural norms to something similar to the accidental downing of a Iranian commercial airliner by the U.S. Navy. Each incident provides ammunition-influenceto the fundamentalists, erodes the legitimacy of the monarchies, and makes U.S. presence harder to accept. Again, a key, recurring theme here is that small incidents can have disproportionate, even decisive, effects. Alternatively, if the spectacle of public trial, imprisonment or execution is expected to be too divisive or controversial, the Royal family may be killed outright or made to simply disappear.
Western hostages, on the other hand, are much more valuable alive than dead. It is to Iran's advantage to minimize the number of casualties to western workers and their families in order to reduce justification for intervention. On the other hand, hostages taken for "safekeeping" create internal pressures on their governments to both resolve the crisis in a manner that minimizes jeopardy to the hostages. Repatriation would be understandably slow due to the general unrest inherent in the revolution.
The hostages, however, are newsworthy, and media interest in them presents an opportunity for the Iranians to publicly demonstrate their health and welfare while reiterating a "firm but fair" message: they have no ill will towards the American people per se, and intend no harm to their "guests," but cannot tolerate outside intervention in an Islamic jihad.
The hostages will be released when the situation stabilizes. Whether this is an act of terrorism or an act of war is subject to debate; but that it would provide a certain amount of leverage is not. Such leverage is subjective, and dependent mostly on conditions in the host country, as indicated by the new paradigm.
If they can gain control of Kuwaiti and Saudi monetary reserves before they are put out of reach, the Iranians might engage in currency manipulation to discourage intervention. This may sound farfetched.
However, in times of crisis such assets are "frozen" not by posting guards at a bank but by securing them electronically. This makes it a question of timing, knowledge and access. Electronic thievery and computer piracy are not without precedent. Using Saudi and Kuwaiti money, the Iranians might buy U.S. dollars and Treasury notes, forcing the dollar up against foreign currencies and instantly making U.S. exports more expensive. The stock exchanges and the U.S. economy would be immediately negatively affected. The Iranians might then threaten to sell off their holdings in order to rapidly devalue the dollar. The resulting speculation and uncertainty would cause a loss of confidence in the economy. This "greenmail" is also not necessarily farfetched: currency speculation has exceeded the ability of the central bank system to control it. Here, then, the Iranians use the relative value of money as content, dollars to communicate, and connect with the American economy in an attempt to influence American policy. Such policy is not the product of a monolithic central power but of a field of power that includes politicians, bureaucrats, journalists, pundits and the public. Here, too, the most descriptive metaphors are from new sciences: the economic and political effects will be non-local and non-linear, unpredictable but recognizably bounded, and if carried on past a certain point, achieve a critical mass of crisis proportions. There appears to be significant leverage in the economic instrument of power.
As Iran perceives the U.S. moving towards military intervention, they might be expected to resort to preventative and pre-emptive efforts to deny or disrupt power projection. the arms market, but the scenario did not address the changes in organization and operational doctrine likely to be necessary to fully exploit their potential. The end state, while apparently achieving their strategic objective, did not "prove" U.S. military power had been permanently circumvented.
On the other hand, despite some leaps of imagination and some holes, the speculation above does indicate that a country such as Iran has available the ability-the power-to wage war on terms that minimize U.S.
advantages in military power and maximize their own alternatives.
Technology transfer, "civilianization" of defense industries, the rise of dual use technology, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, etc., all work to mitigate the technological edge the U.S. relies upon. This changes feasibility and acceptability estimates for predominantly military courses of action.
Our force projection strategy provides some significant opportunities for adversaries to exploit. Lift assets are finite and not easily replaced. So are points of entry into a region. Both represent vulnerabilities as well as opportunities. The possibility that there may be a window of use for force projection, i.e. that, politically we can deploy too early or, by waiting, lose the opportunity to exercise that option, is an interesting notion that bears further investigation.
The scenarios indicate also that economic and information instruments provide a form of power that, more than ever before, can be exploitable in war. The U.S. does not hold as great an advantage in these forms of power as in the military instrument. 
The dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate to the stormy present. As our case is new, we must think anew, and act anew.
-Abraham Lincoln 1
It is the old the prevents us from recognizing the new.
-Comte
This thesis asks a simple question to stimulate thinking about the future of war: How might our adversaries wage war against the U.S.?
The effort was likened to that of the homicide detective who carefully investigates the crime scene and surrounding circumstances, attempts to develop insight into the perpetrator's mind, and then reconstruct the crime. That, more or less, has been the design of this thesis: Chapter Two presenting evidence of profound changes in society, science and warfare; Chapter Three developing a rational, albeit markedly different, intellectual framework-paradigm-for those who might attempt to circumvent American military power; and, in Chapter Four, a projection, rather than reconstruction, of how such attempts might be consummated.
This chapter provides an assessment of consequences and implications of the preceding ideas.
The basic presumption remains that, despite our status as the sole remaining military superpower, wars have not become extinct.
Instead, war will change-as it always has-to fit the current circumstance. Other nations, groups, etc., will still disagree, sometimes violently, with U.S. policies and actions. In the face of overwhelming U.S. military might, intelligent adversaries will seek alternatives that allow them to avoid our military strength while pursuing objectives and interests that conflict with our own. This line of reasoning will cause our adversaries to consider non-military ways of imposing their will on us. And because of this, they have greater reason to innovate. To anticipate their solutions-our future threats-a new way of thinking is required, one that exploits the conceptual possibilities of today's science and society.
This attempt to update our concepts of war with new knowledge is not without precedent. In the 17th century, Montecuccoli became "the first modern theorist to attempt a comprehensive analysis of war, in all its aspects." Incorporating the prevailing popular concepts of "law" and "systems," Montecuccoli searched for a universal paradigm that would integrate all knowledge derived from experience, but constrained himself to a framework within the teachings of the Catholic Church. Predictably, this proved impossible. In 1799, Bulow recognized that recent changes in war constituted a revolution, but failed to understand its nature. Believing that the problem was one of structure and geometry, 
3
4
Natural phenomena also imply that absolutes do not exist.
Everything must be considered in its environment or system, nothing can be "known" except in relationship to something else. Today's sciences indicate that nature may have no objective reality. Relativity is the norm. Objective measurement is impossible because the mere act of measurement causes unpredictable changes; the measurer becomes part of the system. The man-made corollary to this is the role of the news media in world events today. Considered in terms of the definition of power presented here-content, communication, and connection-the media shape information (content), communicate it to dissipative structure-like organizations, and use ratings and public opinion polls to ensure they maintain the connection with their target audience. If this is a viable model for power, and it appears to be so, it refutes a long cherished notion of the media: the ideal of objective, non-participatory reporting.
The new sciences imply that the media cannot help but participate in that which they report on. And the lack of a monopoly of power by any one media organization (even CNN is more ubiquitous than omnipotent) indicates that the media too might be considered as a dissipative structure.
If the distribution and diversification of power make dissipative structures a useful model, war might be perceived a conflict in which adversaries attempt to change each other. In dissipative structures, decisive change is linked to the ability to stimulate the internal process of self organization. The corollary in war might be that decisive victory perception, valuation and cognition," as the definition of absolute would infer. Because of this, power is, in consonance with today's science, intrinsically relative and subjective. These qualities support the idea that power must be commutable. Perceptions alone determine whether one form is more or less powerful than another.
Some may question the relevance of a framework for war that addresses threats of other than military power. For many, "non-military" often seems to mean non-threatening. The scenarios indicate this is misguided, however. Whatever the ways and means employed, our adversaries will still pursue objectives and interests antithetical to our own. If power is relative, then our predisposition to measure (national) strength and threats by the quality and quantity of military might possessed creates for us a blindspot which our adversaries may unexpectedly exploit or attack. Conceivably, because of this predisposition, we might not recognize such an attack until too late. If circumventing U.S. military strength is not sufficient motivation for our adversaries to investigate these options, perhaps the opportunity to achieve surprise is.
By invoking paradigm shifts, I have arguably rewritten the rules to justify the scenarios which, in turn, purport to show how the rules may have changed. The logic is admittedly somewhat circular. But if one accepts that the paradigm shifts are real, then "all bets are off." All rules must be zero-based; reevaluated to determine their continuing relevance and applicability.
The rules of the new paradigm, characteristics really, might be summarized as follows:
1. War is a violent contest of power.
2. Power can exist in many forms.
3. Each side will naturally seek a relative advantage, pitting strength against weakness; this leads to circumventing action. 7. The way we make war is the way we thin*. Our perceptions and thought processes dominate war. Thus, a revolution in military affairs can fulfill its potential only with a concurrent revolution in thought.
Today's sciences and changes in society make possible such a revolution. The best metaphors to describe the processes and functions of warfare involving Third Wave participants are derived from Third Wave sciences: chaos theory, quantum mechanics, morphogenic fields, and dissipative structures.
As noted earlier, Theodore Ropp made a strong case for considering war as "a process of change in its socio-political, technological and organizational aspects." This thesis has attempted to weave apparently congruent processes of change into a tapestry depicting logical implications. The RMA cannot be viewed outside of its context.
In context, it appears that this revolution in military affairs is not the quantum improvement of traditional methods of warfare but a revolutionary way of thinking about war and the subsequent transformation of warfare into a new but still familiar form, which in all likelihood adheres only to Clausewitz's trinity of rational thought, chance and violence.
The fact that Blitzkrieg, submarine warfare, or Napoleon's decisive battles were "new but recognizably familiar" did not help their respective victims. Each of these innovations was, at some point, adjudged as irrelevant, insignificant or simply not threatening by its seemingly more powerful potential victims. If history is not to repeat itself at our expense, we need to consider how circumventing action fosters innovation, and innovation often leads to revolutionary concepts that rewrite the "rules of the game." Like the detective, we need to think like the suspects, and observe where the opportunities in the ongoing transformation of science and society meet their need to circumvent our strengths. The framework presented here is one way to begin.
CERTIFICATION FOR MMAS DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT (Documents with this statement may be made available or sold to the general public and foreign nationals).
STATEMENT B: Distribution authorized to U.S. Government agencies only (insert reason and date ON REVERSE OF THIS FORM). Currently used reasons for imposing this statement include the following:
1. Foreign Government Information. Protection of foreign information.
2. Proprietary Information. Protection of proprietary information not owned by the U.S. Government.   Currently most used reasons are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10.   STATEMENT F: Further dissemination only as directed by (controlling DoD office and date), or higher DoD authority. Used when the DoD originator determines that information is subject to special dissemination limitation specified by paragraph 4-505, DoD 5200.1-R. 
Information Age technology resulted in an unprecedented rout of the fourth largest military power in the world. But that assessment is predicated on a Western perspective. Not all concur.
Information Age technology resulted in an unprecedented rout of the fourth largest military power in the world. But that assessment is predicated on a Western perspective. Not all concur.
26
What Americans like about American football -frequent time-outs, lots of huddles, unlimited substitutions -is not found in world football. It has no time-outs, no huddles and very limited substitutions. It is a faster game. So too is the economic game ahead. All sides will call themselves capitalists, but the participants will be playing two very different games.
What Americans like about American football -frequent time-outs, lots of huddles, unlimited substitutions -is not found in world football. It has no time-outs, no huddles and very limited substitutions. It is a faster game. So too is the economic game ahead. All sides will call themselves capitalists, but the participants will be playing two very different games.
Although usually invoked vis-a-vis nuclear weapons experts, the concept is equally applicable to conventional weapons experts. U.S. feasibility and acceptability estimates usually assume technological superiority. The At this point then the Iranians have used the Islamic fundamentalist revolution and a not altogether unconventional insurgency to progressively destabilize Iraq, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. What's more, the endgame in each case included modernized but conventional military forces. Perhaps this is an example of the self-similarity and strange attractor principles of the new science: any new incarnation of something bears much resemblance to its former self. Modernization included technologies typically associated with the RMA and readily available in
MMAS Thesis Author's Signature:
MMAS Thesis Author's Signature:
A. J. Bacevich, "Preserving the Weil-Bred Horse," The NationalInterest. 37, Fall 1994, 48.   
Ibid., 123. Ibid., 127. Ibid., 128. Ibid., 77. Ibid., 99. Ibid., 146. Ibid., 10. "Ibid., 19. Ibid., 96. See also 
James Gleick
Seyom Brown
Constancy and Change in united States Foreign Policy from Truman to Johnson. (New York, Columbia University Press
Robert Dilenschneider
Art of Persuasion, (New York
Prentiss Hall Press
1990
Endnotes 
1
2
3 T. A.
Heppenheimer, "Build-Down," American Heritage, 44/8, (December, 1994). 
4
5
6
7
8 Ibid., .49. 9 Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler, War and Anti-War: Survival at the Dawn of the 21st Century, (Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1993), 5-11. 
10
"Future Shock, The Third Wave, and Powershift were published under only Alvin Toffler's name; throughout War and Anti-War he is careful to credit wife Heidi as co-author of each.
12 Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler, War and Anti-War: Survival at the Dawn of the 21st Century, (Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1993), 148. 
13
15
The Tofflers call civilization the only term "sufficiently all-embracing to include such varied matters as technology, family life, religion, culture, politics, business, hierarchy, leadership, values, sexual morality, and epistemology." 
16
17
Among military theorists, Clausewitz stands alone.
With the possible exception of the ancient Chinese writer Sun Tzu, no other author has ever been remotely as influential, and indeed his work forms the cornerstone of modern strategic thought.
His continuing relevance is perhaps best illustrated by the fact that he is one of the few military thinkers to whom homage is paid on both sides of what, until recently, used to be the Iron Curtain. 
5
But the idea and image of this world, so newlyconceived of as mechanical, also opened up new avenues of thought and action. 
6
The publication of Principia articulated three rules that governed the motion of all things:
(1) Every physical body continues in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a straight line, unless it is compelled to change that state by force or forces impressed upon it.
(2) A change of motion is proportional to the force impressed upon the body and is made in the direction of the straight line in which the motion is impressed.
Without ever mentioning "paradigm," Michael I. Handel states that Clausewitz "did for war what Copernicus did for astronomy, Newton for physics, and Darwin for natural history. On War represents a revolution of ideas, a transformation of man's conception of war and his place in it.
This was "a break with continuity, the establishment of a new order that . . . severed its ties with the past." 18 Anatol Rapoport goes further, stating "Clausewitz views war as a rational instrument of national policy. The three words 'rational,' 'instrument,' and 'national' are the key concepts of his paradigm." 
19
The actors in the Clausewitzian paradigm for international relations . are, as has been said, sovereign states which for all practical purposes can be considered as persons. 
20
Iran might be better positioned to drive a wedge between Saddam and his people. Although animosities from their decade long war must remain, and the differences between Shia Iraqis and Sunni Iranians are not insignificant, Saddam's legitimacy as paragon of Islamic rule is questionable. In many basic ways he is failing to provide for his people.
While his people suffer he is building palatial villas for his family and cronies. His version of justice is unlikely to fit even the most liberal interpretation of the Koran. He is alienated from virtually all other Arab rulers. His only means of support seem to be his animosity to the U.S. and a ruthless security apparatus.
The information technologies of the Third Wave enable the Iranians to wage a virulent disinformation campaign against Saddam.
Inexpensive transistor radios could be provided to Shia and Kurdish rebels This new revolution, known as the Post-Industrial Revolution, the Information Revolution, or the Third Wave, empowers individuals, primarily through the egalitarian distribution (or availability at least) of knowledge. From knowledge, a form of power in and of itself, comes the will go to the side that can best initiate such change in its adversary.
The side that can do this-or possesses this "power"-has a significant relative advantage.
Power, then, becomes simply the ability to affect the condition or behavior of something or someone. 8 Any resources or methods that "affect the condition or behavior. ..." confer power. The type or form of power, is no more or less important than the ability to communicate it and its ability to connect meaningfully to the adversary.
Different forms of power then can conceivably be used interchangeably.
A relative advantage in one instrument of power may be equally threatening as a relative advantage in another.
Consequently, if one form of power may be reasonably substituted for another, then other instruments of power can theoretically be employed to circumvent American military superiority. Yet our commonly held presumptions about power make sharp distinctions on the basis of ways and means. But the theory and scenarios developed here imply that power is Despite the obvious inference to the contrary in Lord Acton's famous dictum, there exists no such thing as absolute power. The absolute power that corrupts absolutely can only exist in relation to other, varying degrees of lesser power. There is no power independent of "human