# ID: 89e15bdd71434d4db619cb51cbeda23c
# Title: Russia's Non-Linear Warfare and the US Military's Role in Countering the Threat to the Baltic States
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, there were 300,000 US military personnel stationed in Europe; now there are 30,000. For the past 25 years, the US and other Western powers hoped Russia would eventually emerge as an open, democratic, and non-threatening nation; this has not happened. In 2000, Russia elected Vladimir Putin to the presidency. Putin, a former Lieutenant Colonel in the KGB, set out to return Russia to the status of a great power once again; reforming the military was a crucial part of his plans. The ways Russia has employed the military are alarming: a mix of military and non-military actions, covert and undeclared operations, and a heavy use of Information Operations. Since its war with Georgia, Russia's belligerence has increased. Russia annexed Crimea in 2014, and has been heavily involved in combat in Eastern Ukraine since that same year. To deter Russian non-linear warfare in Eastern Europe, the United States should reassure NATO allies by increasing the size and capability of the ground based military force in the Baltic States to deny Russian infiltration efforts while enabling the flow of follow-on forces ashore within twenty-four hours of indications and warnings of hostile actions.
alarmed by the use of unmarked and undeclared Russian "little green men" executing combat operations-both "low end" and "high end" while Russia denied any involvement. I became concerned as I watched the international community seem to be frozen with indecision about what should, and could, be done about this denied intervention.
Knowing that partisan activity, guerilla, irregular, and hybrid warfare have been and will forever continue to be relevant methods of combat to wage war, it seemed to me that Russia was implementing something new and different. As I researched what many (but not all) scholars and Russian experts refer to as "non-linear warfare," 1 I realized the significance of the threat posed by non-linear warfare coupled with the will and intent of Russia's leaders. I conclude in this paper that as much as we would like to believe Russia will eventually become a responsible, open, and democratic nation, this is not the goal of Russia's current leaders. I identify one specific and tangible step that the US should take to counter Russia's increasing and relatively unchecked belligerence-increasing the size and capability of military forces in the Baltic States.
While this alone will not solve the problem of a belligerent Russia, with an evolving method of employing its military; it is a necessary and logical step that should have a positive impact.
1 General Valery Gerasimov, Russian Chief of the General Staff is widely considered as the primary champion of non-linear warfare. In an article published in 2013 he describes methods for a nation to impose its will through a combination of military and non-military means. Effective methods include "…the broad use of political, economic, informational, humanitarian, and other nonmilitary measures…" Russia's non-linear warfare in Crimea and Ukraine employed unmarked, undeclared forces. Non-linear warfare is described in a later section of this work.
The US military presence in Europe has decreased from 300,000 when the Cold War ended in 1991, to 30,000 currently. 
3
4
5
The purpose of this work is to answer the following questions: As Russia reasserts itself within Eastern Europe, employing its military in unique ways that are challenging to defeat, how should the United States adjust to prepare for, deter, and potentially respond to a crisis caused by Russia's Non-Linear Warfare? Despite the military draw-down and fiscal constraints the US needs to support its NATO allies by preparing to respond to further Russian aggression in Europe. Due to their strategic location, historical relationship, and an ethnic Russian minority, the Baltic States (Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania) are at risk to Russian aggression in the form of non-linear warfare. For example, if Russia were to apply a similar model to Latvia as it did in Crimea, first Spetsnaz and other "little green men" 6 would arrive in Latvia's urban areas; within 24 hours additional motorized, mechanized, and helo-borne forces (all undeclared) would arrive in force. This undeclared force would seize all key government buildings and, significantly, all key infrastructure-such as port facilities, airfields, rail heads, bridges and power plants within 48 hours.
If these events occur, the US and NATO have minimal means to apply military forces on the ground-the US military currently lacks the ability to rapidly aggregate sufficient motorized, mechanized, and armored forces ashore in the Baltics. Russia would then have the time and space to flood more forces into position, while employing their robust Information Operations capabilities and using "netwar" 7 to dominate the narrative of events within the Baltics, for Europe, Russia, and the world. To deter Russian non-linear warfare in Eastern Europe, the United States should reassure NATO allies by increasing the size and capabilities of the military 6 "Little Green Men" is a term commonly used to describe armed, uniformed, organized Russian speaking military forces that are commonly believed to be unmarked Russian soldiers operating in an undeclared status in Crimea and Ukraine. 
7
force within the Baltic States to deny Russian infiltration efforts while enabling the flow of follow-on forces ashore within twenty-four hours of indications and warnings of hostile actions.
The Origins of Russia's Non-Linear Warfare: Relative Weakness to NATO Russia's adoption of what has come to be known in the west as non-linear warfare originates from Russia's overall relative weakness in comparison to the combined military forces of all NATO forces following the collapse of the Soviet Union. This has been the case for decades; however, it should be noted that the gradual withdraw of US forces from Europe since the fall of the Soviet Union has been significant, and the relative combat power of Russia has increased recently as NATO forces, specifically US forces, have been reduced sharply. At the conclusion of the Cold War, the US had approximately 300,000 military personnel in Europe, now the US troops in Europe number just 30,000. Moreover, the US reduced its military presence not just in overall numbers, but in relative "posture" within Europe, meaning the 30,000 personnel are not a cohesive fighting unit that is deployed along key terrain in a heightened state of readiness. Rather, these 30,000 personnel are spread out across multiple large joint headquarters, with smaller operational forces scattered throughout Eastern Europe and conducting liaison and security cooperation.
Realizing the US has been withdrawing steadily from Europe, and becoming engaged in Iraq and Afghanistan, Russia remained relatively weak militarily for almost two decades following the collapse of the Soviet Union; however, Russia over the past eight years has significantly transformed its military to be a smaller, more responsive force. 8 As Russia looked 8 One of the major goals of the military transformation was to reduce the size of the military from 1.3 to 1 million total personnel. In essence this was "…the de facto renunciation of a mass mobilization army in favor of a more professional and combat-ready outfit." Mikhail Barbanov, "Military Reform: Toward the New Look of the Russian Military," Valdai Discussion Club, Moscow; (July 2012) P15.
to reinvigorate its military, it did not choose to grow it in size, instead, it did the oppositechoosing not to compete with size and mass, but instead by creating a more efficient and flexible force to be applied differently. Russia's non-linear warfare is less of an adoption of a brand new way of war, and more of a refinement of old practices applied in new ways with new technology (I will expand on this point in detail later in this paper).
9
12
The reforms significantly increased the amount of money spent on increasing the technological capabilities required for the smaller, more elite, and more specialized forces to be total. Furthermore, her analysis found the force suffered from outdated technologies and structural inefficiencies that would be "…swept under the rug or lead to mere 'window dressing' efforts at improvement. Therefore, despite nearly non-stop reforms since 1992, the main problems inherited from the Soviet era remained more than a decade later." Athena Bryce-Rogers, "Russian Military Reform in the Aftermath of the 2008 Russia-Georgia War," P355. https://www.gwu.edu/~ieresgwu/assets/docs/demokratizatsiya%20archive/GWASHU_DEMO_21_3/T0320R1173M 61414/T0320R1173M61414.pdf. effectively employed. In support of the "New Look" transformation, "The State Armament Weapons Program"-this covered the period from 2011 to 2022-allocated 616 billion dollars to weapons and technology purchases. 
13
Though the reformed military would still call for the strategic containment of NATO to be done primarily through strategic nuclear deterrence, Russia sought to reform its military into a more useful and relevant force capable of furthering its national interests. The Russian military reforms that began in 2008 started with a rapid and bold rearrangement of forces (firings, staff "flattening," and consolidation of commands). This significantly reduced the overall size of the military, and simultaneously increased the actual readiness of the overall force. Prior to the reforms the officer ranks were mid-grade and staff heavy (an egg-shape instead of a pyramid shape hierarchical structure-as depicted in the below graphic). By making the force smaller Russia aimed, in part, to create a more professional military.  
On 27 February, 2013 an article appeared in Russia's Military-Industrial Courier (Voenno-promyshlennyi kur'er) entitled "The Value of Science in Prediction." 
16
In both Crimea and Eastern Ukraine (with operations in Ukraine still ongoing) Russia employed the theories and practices explained in Gerasimov's article precisely. Indeed, one can read Gerasimov's article and match each major concept highlighted in print with specific events within Russian operations in Crimea and Ukraine. Below is a description of how Russia executed Gerasimov's intent in Crimea and Ukraine, and a brief discussion of what observations Russia made as well as future implications for the West.
Gerasimov's article begins with the following: "In the 21st century we have seen a tendency toward blurring the lines between the states of war and peace. Wars are no longer declared [italics author's] and, having begun, proceed according to an unfamiliar template."
This statement is significant as it is true that in both Crimea and Ukraine Russia never "declared war," in fact Russia never admitted to any level of involvement. Gerasimov goes on to state that effective methods include "…the broad use of political, economic, informational, humanitarian, and other nonmilitary measures -applied in coordination with the protest potential of the population." 17 It is noteworthy that in Crimea the annexation, though military personnel were involved, was almost a bloodless affair due to Russia's political, informational, and nonmilitary measures.
There is a tendency to view non-conventional tactics that have been used before as new when they are employed in challenging ways. It should be noted that Russia has a long history of using political, informational, nonmilitary measures, and partisan activity in conjunction with conventional forces; also that Russian history reflects a tradition of dynamic and ever changing applications of force, both military and non-military to achieve strategic goals. 
18
18
'" 19
Perhaps most importantly the ratio of "non-military" to "conventional military" methods is extremely high. In his article Gerasimov states that "the role of nonmilitary means of achieving political and strategic goals has grown, and, in many cases they have exceeded the power of force of weapons in their effectiveness." This statement shows the head of the Russian military believes that the future of warfare is changing; indeed, the article highlights some of the methods he intends on employing to keep pace with an evolving world. Some of the more effective methods of non-linear warfare-and the ones most challenging for a conventional military force to counter-are old methods being employed with new technology. Specifically, Information Operations (IO) are enabled like never before through the internet, social media, twitter, and the proliferation of cell phones throughout all socioeconomic levels in most European countries. And though all countries in Europe have access to this new technology, Russia has shown itself to have both the will and the vision to use and refine the most effective ways to use technology in support of its national objectives. Effective IO is central to Russia's non-linear warfare-Spetsnaz 20 infiltration and agitation, state run media, cyber-attacks, and a network of "trolls" (described below) enable and contribute to all 
19
20
other methods of non-linear warfare. Russia is effective at IO and keeps getting better through practice.
At the heart of Gerasimov's non-linear warfare is a heavy reliance on what may be termed Information Operations (IO) throughout all phases of non-linear warfare. This was demonstrated in Russia's annexation of Crimea and its operations in Eastern Ukraine. Central to the annexation of Crimea was Russia's use of 
IO. 21
23
24
The other major Russian IO school of thought is the Dugin school. 
25
26
The main way in which the two "schools" differ is primarily in the nuance of how Russia's netwar mechanism should be structured. Ultimately though, like Panarin, Dugin argues the 23 Jolanta Darczewska, 14.
24 Jolanta Darczewska, 14. 
25
importance of creating what he calls the "Eurasian Network" to wage netwar on the "Atlantic Network."
Both Panarin and Dugin are scholar-philosophers, and both were embraced and therefore empowered by the most powerful man in Russia, Vladimir Putin. Putin appears to recognize the two men as true experts whose teachings will inform and add value to the military and other security entities. 
27
In 2012 as Russia's military was being transformed Putin, in his article "Being Strong:" National Security Guarantees for Russia formally stated the following:
We need to learn to look ahead, 'over the horizon,' and estimate threats for 30-50 years ahead. It is a serious task that requires that we mobilize the resources of civilian and military science and algorithms of reliable long-term forecasting. What kind of weapons will the Russian Army need? What kind of technical requirements will our defense industry have?" He goes on to state "…information and communications technology, has fundamentally changed the nature of armed conflict…." and that "…Space-based systems and IT tools, especially in cyberspace, will play a great, if not decisive role in armed conflicts. 
28
29
When Russia annexed Crimea, it tested its ability to use non-linear warfare in the contemporary environment-true to Gerasimov's article, non-military measures were at the heart of the operation and IO were present before, during, and after Russia annexed Crimea. The annexation was a gamble of sorts, or at least a calculated risk. It appears that Putin bet on the fact that most NATO member states would be outraged-but would not take military action to repel the incursion because Ukraine was not worth a war with Russia; he was right. 
30
accnMdApnl 21 ,lOJS)
The above model shows direct military action only occurs in phase 3 when conflict actions begin. This implies that on 23 March when Putin oriented his commanders onto taking back Crimea, there were possibly two phases "hidden/unnoticed emergence" and "sharpening" True to the teachings of Panarin and Dugin, Russia dominated the narrative of what was actually happening in Crimea. Russia waited to admit its involvement in Crimea until its forces had firm control of Crimea, until it was certain that events would remain peaceful, and until it was clear that NATO would not become militarily involved; only then did Russia admit to its involvement, and even then Russia never admitted the extent of its operations there. Instead
Russian IO pushed disinformation, spread rumors and falsities, and made counter-accusations against the West, in keeping with usual practices.
Within Crimea, Russian IO effectively encouraged and enabled the population not to resist and also that falling under Russia was in their best interest. Outside Crimea, NATO and other nations were slowed down as they sought to establish the truth about what was happening.
Meanwhile within Russia, IO (including state run/influenced media outlets) controlled the narrative of what took place to great effect, pushing the message that Putin and his military had intervened masterfully-ensuring peace, and only upon Crimea's request.
Effective Russian IO contributed to an incredible rise in Putin's domestic approval ratings. 
36
With Crimea, non-linear warfare had now been tested and proved effective in achieving its immediate goals in the contemporary environment.
With such success in Crimea, due in large part to the effectiveness of IO, Russian operations in Eastern Ukraine offer some glimpses into the shortcomings of non-linear warfare.
Though at this point Russia has achieved some of its objectives there, currently Eastern Ukraine is far from under Russian control in the way that Crimea is. In Eastern Ukraine events on the ground certainly demonstrated the lethality and effectiveness of Russian non-linear warfare;
however, Ukraine's successful resistance (so far) against Russia's efforts offers insight into ways to resist non-linear warfare.
Russia's annexation of Crimea was, relatively speaking, an efficient and effective event.
Overall the conflict resulted in very little actual violence or loss of life. This was, however, not the case when Russia became involved in Eastern Ukraine. Russian involvement in both Crimea and Eastern Ukraine is essentially a part of the same overall operation, 37 with Russia's primary objectives being to gain influence and even territory while preventing Ukraine from aligning with what Russia sees as a US/NATO/ "Atlantic" sphere of influence. 
38
In April 2014, an amalgamation of pro-Russian insurgents seized control of key terrain, government buildings, and infrastructure within the cities of Luhansk and Donetsk in the Donbas region of Eastern Ukraine. Through examination of factors preventing (at least for now) Russia from success in eastern Ukraine, one finds implications for how to counter non-linear warfare.
The rapid adaptation of Ukrainian conventional combat power to circumstance on the ground was Russia's first stumbling block. Ukraine's military proved capable of reacting to and 
37
38 Daniel Dewitt, in an article published in Small Wars Journal describes that "Putin…sees the United States and the NATO Alliance as fundamentally opposed to Russia's interests. He is determined to drive wedges between NATO member states, thereby weakening the Alliance and raising questions of its credibility as a defensive and deterrent force in European affairs." Daniel Dewitt, "The Inauguration of 21st Century Political Warfare: A Strategy for Countering Russian Non-Linear Warfare Capabilities," Small Wars Journal, (Nov, 2015).
countering the actions of Russian backed separatists and "little green men" (likely Russian military personnel with no Russian insignia) once they began appearing in the Donbas.
By US standards, the Ukrainian military forces at the onset of conflict were only moderately ready for combat operations and suffered from older more lightly armored equipment. At the beginning of the conflict, Ukraine's military consisted of approximately 130,000 total personnel, and the structure of the military reflected its Soviet roots -large "skeleton" units that were undermanned and reliant on a mobilization effort to reach full strength. By the end of the 2014 the mobilization did in fact occur, yielding a large increase in personnel and bringing the overall number up to approximately 232,000 Ukranian military personnel.
39
Russian conventional military action-still never declared by Russia at present-inflicted thousands of casualties on Ukrainian forces. Current estimates place the total number of Ukrainian military service personnel Killed In Action (KIA) since 2014 at over 2,500. In November 2015, the Ukrainian General Staff reported a total of 2,673 KIA. 
40
There were many factors that prevented Russia's operations in Ukraine from achieving full success; however, it is clear that Ukraine's timely and kinetic response was significant in disrupting the efforts of pro-Russian separatists, Russian agents, and Russian conventional forces (both little green men and designated forces just east of the Russian border). Within three days of the "pro-Russian separatists" seizing key terrain, Ukraine's leaders vowed to retaliate with force, and nine days after the first separatists' seizures military force was employed. 
41
Within nine days of the first "little green men" appearing in the Donbass, Ukrainian conventional military force arrived and influenced the situation to change the calculus on the battlefield. Dr. Phillip Karber,
42
In March and April of 2014, The Russian Army was massed on the eastern Ukrainian border. Although weakened by two decades of force structure decline, lack of modernized technology, and abject neglect of readiness, the Ukrainian Army conducted the largest counter-mobilization of any European army since the end of World War Two and deployed its fifteen Brigades east of the Dnepr to confront the Russian threat illustrated in these documents. The Russian Op Plan was designed to be executable as of 29 April 2014…In comparing the timeline of Ukraine's redeployment to the East with Russia's concentration on their border, it becomes apparent, that the option for a quick fait accompli was denied. One of the classic academic debates over deterrence is the difficulty in proving the success of an action that produces a non-event. This case potentially provides one of the clearest examples of deterrence working as a result of a defensive effort. That is a lesson that should not be lost on NATO."
Military force capabilities, size, and proximity to the initiation of conflict mattered in Ukraine, as the Ukrainians were able to influence the vastness of their time and space. How does this equation change in potential, future areas such as the Baltic States?
When military personnel are deployed to an area without Russian insignia, and their presence in the area is officially denied, matters of "response" from outside nations are severely complicated and stalled. But in Ukraine one observes that conventional military responses from within the affected conflict area proved capable of denying Russia the terrain and the ability to dominate the sphere of IO. Russia's non-linear warfare relies on a high ratio of non-military to military actions-4 to 1 as professed by Gerasimov; however, events in Ukraine demonstrate that an opposing conventional military force inhibits the effectiveness of both non-military, and military actions.
Dr. Karber, reaches the conclusion that conventional military forces, and their response, affects the entire system of non-linear warfare.  Some of the key benefits of an army division are its sheer mass. Divisions range from 15,000 to 20,000 personnel and they consist of anywhere from 160 to 240 tanks, an aviation brigade consisting of approximately 100 helicopters, and from 50 to 70 artillery pieces. Such a large force would provide a highly capable ground combat force with helicopter aviation assets to the Baltic States. However, such a force would pose a serious logistical challenge to the three small Baltic States as none of them currently possess the infrastructure to house this number of troops.
Another option may be a smaller US Army brigade sized task force in which supporting aviation and other assets are added to the force; this would reduce the overall size of the force while still maintaining requisite combat power. However, either of these army forces would lack organic fixed wing aviation assets and therefore would need to coordinate and plan across services. Additionally, the US Army is in a period of downsizing, and its forces are already stretched thin globally.
A better option may be a MAGTF slightly bigger than that of the Special Purpose (SP) MAGTF currently stationed in the Balkans known as the Black Sea Rotational Force (BSRF).
57
Furthermore, despite the significantly smaller size of such a MAGTF the force would still possess the ability to execute a myriad of operations ranging from security cooperation to conventional offensive and defensive combat operations.
Despite its smaller size, a MAGTF possesses both helicopter and fixed wing air assets.
Additionally, a MAGTF has a logistics element skilled at coordinating and enabling the rapid flow of follow on forces through port and air facilities. One of the missions that MAGTFs regularly train for are Joint Forcible Entry Operations (JFEOs). A JFEO requires execution of combat operations in a non-permissive environment with simultaneous execution of logistical throughput.
In order to truly deter Russian non-linear warfare in the Baltic States, any US force positioned there needs to be able to hold key terrain, block an armored penetration, and enable the secure and timely flow of follow on forces. An army division, brigade task force, or a Baltic State-based MAGTF would provide the capabilities required to offset Russian mass at key points, while simultaneously setting conditions and coordinating for the follow on flow of forces.
Regardless of the size of the force that the US DOD decides upon, there is an urgent need for an increase of US military forces ashore in the Baltic States. In the conclusion of his "Lessons
Learned" about Russian non-linear warfare in Ukraine Dr. Karber offers the following:
The strategic "lesson" is that Eastern Europe needs American presence on the ground and in the air. A CONUS based U.S. Army designed for 'assurance and deterrence' but that arrives too late with too little is not a solution to their problem and not a structure the country will sacrifice for. 58
Dr. Karber's assessment is that without significantly increased military presence in Eastern Europe, Russia will continue to exert force to gain influence within the region; I agree.
58 Phillip A Karber.
The reality is there are not enough military forces in the Baltic States currently to prevent Russia from eventually employing non-linear warfare there; this is something the US can change.
Joint Publication 3-0 Operations states the following about deterrence:
Deterrence stems from an adversary's belief that a credible threat of retaliation exists, the contemplated action cannot succeed, or the costs outweigh the perceived benefits of acting. Thus, a potential aggressor chooses not to act for fear of failure, cost, or consequences. Ideally, deterrent forces should be able to conduct decisive operations immediately. However, if committed forces lack the combat power to conduct decisive operations, they conduct defensive operations while additional forces deploy. 
59
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union and the concurrent end to the Cold War, the US and most of the international community hoped that Russia would eventually become an open, democratic, and non-threatening nation. This is reflected in the massive US troop withdrawal from Europe, from 300,000 down to 30,000. The point of this paper is not to criticize this hope, nor the action of the large draw-down of forces; rather, it is to shed light on the reality that Russia does not share the same desire as the West in this regard. The facts are that under Vladimir Putin's leadership Russia has steadily sought to strengthen is military, demonstrated in the strikingly swift and broad reaching military reforms that began in 2008. Further evidence of Putin's intent starts that same year, in 2008, when he sent tanks, troops, and aircraft into the sovereign country of Georgia. This event was an indicator of future events to come in Crimea and Ukraine.
According to Putin, that order was given on the morning of 23 February 2014. That same afternoon there were pro-Russian demonstrations held in the Crimean port city of Sevastopol. A mere four days later, 27 February, armed troops wearing masks and uniforms but no Russian insignia (popularly referred to as "little green men"), seized key buildings and infrastructure in Crimea-including the Supreme Council building of Crimea.
According to Putin, that order was given on the morning of 23 February 2014. That same afternoon there were pro-Russian demonstrations held in the Crimean port city of Sevastopol. A mere four days later, 27 February, armed troops wearing masks and uniforms but no Russian insignia (popularly referred to as "little green men"), seized key buildings and infrastructure in Crimea-including the Supreme Council building of Crimea.
The operation was strategically risky for Russia. It was unclear how the West, specifically NATO, would respond-that said, because the West did nothing to intervene militarily in Georgia in 2008 Russia had reason to believe that again the West would not intervene. Still, Russia's Crimea operation was a calculated risk; however, Russia's non-linear warfare mitigated threat to Russia in numerous ways. By initially deploying plain-clothed Spetsnaz forces into Crimea, the Russian military was able to effectively coordinate with pro-Russian elements within the region to identify local military and law enforcement composition, disposition, and strength.
The operation was strategically risky for Russia. It was unclear how the West, specifically NATO, would respond-that said, because the West did nothing to intervene militarily in Georgia in 2008 Russia had reason to believe that again the West would not intervene. Still, Russia's Crimea operation was a calculated risk; however, Russia's non-linear warfare mitigated threat to Russia in numerous ways. By initially deploying plain-clothed Spetsnaz forces into Crimea, the Russian military was able to effectively coordinate with pro-Russian elements within the region to identify local military and law enforcement composition, disposition, and strength.
52  
52  
Andrius Kuncina, and Daisy Sindelar, "How to Survive a Russian Invasion," The Atlantic, (22, Jan 2015), http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2015/01/how-to-survive-arussian-invasion/384692/.
General Joseph Dunford, U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff stated this about as he testified at a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing on his nomination as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Matthew Rosenburg, "Joint Chiefs Nominee Warns of Threat of Russian Aggression," The New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/10/us/general-joseph-dunford-joint-chiefs-confirmation-hearing.html?_r=0.
The US currently has about 30,000 troops in Europe, compared to a height of 300,000 soldiers at the end of the Cold War. U.S. forces often have to borrow equipment from allies, such as British helicopters. Lt. Gen. Ben Hodges, the Army's top general in Europe stated, "we have to figure out how you make 30,000 feel like 300,000." Daneil Wiser, "U.S. General: We've 'Hugged' the Russian Bear for Too Long," Washington Free Beacon, (January 7, 2016), http://freebeacon.com/national-security/u-s-general-we-have-hugged-the-russian-bear-for-too-long/.
Non-linear warfare has no specific definition, however it is characterized by an increased reliance on non-military means such as political, economic, informational, humanitarian, and other nonmilitary measures -applied in coordination with the protest potential of the population. This is supplemented by military means of a concealed character, information operations, and "declared" military action only in the final stages of conflict. Russian nonlinear warfare is dynamic and evolving; I explain the methodology throughout this paper.
  5  On 31 December, 2015, Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a decree that updated Russia's National Security Strategy out to 2020. Carl Schreck, "Putin Signs New Security Strategy Warning of Heightened Risks From West" Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty,(December 31, 2015), http://www.rferl.org/content/putin-signs-new-securitystrategy-warning-of-heightened-risks-from-west/27460849.html.
Russian scholar Charles K. Bartles, argues that though the West commonly attempts to categorize Russia's methods as new, "…there have been many Russian commentaries that state this concept is nothing new, that the aspects of hybrid war mentioned by Western analysts have been practiced since warfare began." Charles, K.Bartles, "Getting Gerasimov Right," Military Review, (Jan-Feb 2016).
Mikhail Barbanov, "Military Reform:  Toward the New Look of the Russian Military", Valdai Discussion Club, Moscow; (July 2012) P3.
Historian Athena Bryce-Rogers, in her detailed study of Russia's Military Reforms, finds that instead of Russia's advertised 1.3 million man military, the force was in reality much weaker-numbering approximately only 900,000
Mikhail Barbanov, 7.   
Mikhail Barbanov, 3.   
Firurc 1 Source" Barb3110'\•, ~likbail. -~•liliwy Rd arm: Toward the Ncl-\• Loci: «th< R1mioa Army" \'oldlli Diicu"'°" ClubAnlllylical R<PCI~ ~loscow. July 2012
General Valery Gerasimov, "The Value of Science in Prediction," Military-Industrial Courier, (February 27, 2013) P1.
Jolanta Darczewska, 17.   
It is noteworthy that Putin chose not to "purge" these two stalwarts of IO theory and practice as it is a significant departure from methods of power consolidation and threat elimination historically used in Russia by top leaderssuch as Josef Stalin-as both Panarin and Dugin were prominent figures in IO during previous regimes.
28 Vladimir Putin, "Being Strong: National Security Guarantees for Russia," Rossiyskaya Gazeta,(February 2012
).29  Russia's "troll army" reportedly consists of hundreds of paid bloggers who work shifts 24 hours a day in which they flood internet forums, comments sections, and social networks, often working in teams through proxy servers to spread propaganda that praises Putin, Russian domestic and international policy, and seeks to discredit the West.
Marvin Kalb in his book "Imperial Gamble: Putin, Ukraine, and the New Cold War," argues that Putin's "gamble in Crimea (and it was a gamble) was reckless, even dangerous," but was based in part on the lack of military intervention after Russia's invasion of Georgia in 2008. Kalb is a nonresident senior fellow with the Foreign Policy program at Brookings, a Harvard Professor, and former Moscow bureau chief and host of Meet the Press.
Simon Shuster, "Putin's Man in Crimea is Ukraine's Worst Nightmare," TIME, online magazine, (10 March 2014), http://time.com/19097/putin-crimea-russia-ukraine-aksyonov/.
CSIS, 'The Ukraine Crisis Timeline,' CSIS.org, http://www.csis.org/Ukraine/index.htm.
Before the Crimean operation, in January 2014, Putin's domestic approval rating was 65 percent; this spiked to 80 percent in March. By June of 2014 Putin's domestic approval rating was 89 percent-the highest of Putin's 15 years in office.
GlobalSecurity.org "Military Personnel of Ukrainian Armed Forces in 2014," www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/ukraine/personnel.htm.
Ukraine Today, "Over 2,500 Ukrainian Soldiers Killed Since Russia Invaded Ukraine," Ukraine Today(November 20, 2015), http://uatoday.tv/politics/over-2-500-ukrainian-soldiers-killed-since-russia-invaded-ukraine-538686.html.
Dr. Phillip Karber spent a year in Ukraine during the conflict. He focused on interviewing Ukranian military leaders at all levels and he personally observed numerous kinetic engagements, ultimately being wounded and
Phillip A Karber.   
The Black Sea Rotational Force (BSRF) began in 2010 and has evolved every year; currently the force consists of approximately 500 Marines and sailors. The BSRF is based primarily in Mihail Kogălniceanu International Airport. It is a MAGTF capable of a range of missions from Security Cooperation to Joint Forcible Entry Operations (JFEO).
Joint Publication 3-0 (Chapter V, P10).
T ORT f D TER O MlLIT ARY TUDI Major
population is approximately 27 percent Russian, Estonia's is 25 percent, and Lithuania's is 6 percent. One of the main reasons for Putin's annexation of Crimea was his concern for protecting "the rights of ethnic Russians," commonly referred to as "compatriots." 
45
46
The Kaliningrad Oblast 47 is significant due to its location and its status as a sovereign Russian territory. The Oblast has a population of approximately 942,000, and of those 86.4% are ethnic Russian according to the 2010 census. 
48
45
46
Ultimately, Russia's continuing development and use of non-linear warfare-massive IO efforts, infiltration, agitation, and undeclared troops-is a real challenge for the West to deal with. However, hoping it just stops and goes away is not a responsible course of action. The West is capable of defeating this threat, and it is time to implement logical, responsible actions;
Russia's use of non-linear warfare is alarming but it can, and should, be defeated.