# ID: 89f22ab4d706427ab3588567e0ad9c40
# Title: A Threat Analysis on Russian Use of Low Yield Battlefield Nuclear Weapons
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Russia has continued to develop nuclear capabilities inherited from the Soviet Union and maintained the tradition of nuclear planning as seen in their exercises.
US government reports, Russian government rhetoric, and Russian military exercises indicate Russian modernization in its non-strategic nuclear weapon capability.
Russia's military has acknowledged NATO and the US militaries' advantage in conventional munitions capabilities and identified a need to achieve an offset.
Nuclear weapons provide that capability.
During the Cold War, both the US and the Soviet Union planned to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a conventional war in Europe.
The fact that both militaries saw battlefield nuclear weapons as something to plan and resource, it stands to reason both militaries saw the use of nuclear weapons on the battlefield did not necessarily lead to the use of "strategic" nuclear weapons.
Instead, some military planners and strategists believed that militaries could use nuclear weapons at the tactical and operational level without escalating to using strategic nuclear weapons against population centers.
Whether or not that assessment is valid is not significant for this analysis.
Because if that estimate remains a planning assumption with key Russian military planners, it leaves the window open to the use of battlefield nuclear weapons regardless of it actually escalating to strategic nuclear weapons.
The Russian government's belief that it can use BNW without necessarily escalating to strategic nuclear weapons is evident as Russia continues its research, development, exercising, and modernizing of Russian NSNW capabilities.
Russia's modernization of its tactical nuclear capability is the most substantial evidence of its intent to use it and a clear demonstration of Russia's high degree of threat with its low yield battlefield nuclear weapons.