# ID: 89f22ab4d706427ab3588567e0ad9c40
# Title: A Threat Analysis on Russian Use of Low Yield Battlefield Nuclear Weapons
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
There is a significant amount of literature discussing the "Russian way of war" and what strategic goals the Russians would attain using non-strategic nuclear weapons (NSNW). In contrast, there is almost no literature exploring what the use of these weapons would look like at the operational or tactical level against NATO ground forces. This analysis focuses on why and how Russia would employ low-yield battlefield nuclear weapons (LYBNW), a specific subset of NSNW. It explores in what context the Russian military would use LYBNW in a tactical sense to achieve strategic objectives and what that risk is to NATO forces. Specifically, the research answers: How should the US and NATO ground forces understand and respond to the threat posed by Russian LYBNW in the EUCOM area of responsibility?
To answer how and if Russia will employ LYBNW against ground forces, a threat analysis methodology is used. This method analyzes two concepts: intent and capability. A brief risk assessment with a hypothetical scenario is conducted to synthesize and contextualize the threat analysis. The scenario will aid in assessing the likelihood and consequences of the Russian use of low-yield battlefield nuclear weapons.
There is a significant amount of literature discussing the "Russian way of war" and what strategic goals the Russians would attain using non-strategic nuclear weapons (NSNW). In contrast, there is almost no literature exploring what the use of these weapons would look like at the operational or tactical level against NATO ground forces. This analysis focuses on why and how Russia would employ low-yield battlefield nuclear weapons (LYBNW), a specific subset of NSNW. It explores in what context the Russian military would use LYBNW in a tactical sense to achieve strategic objectives and what that risk is to NATO forces. Specifically, the research answers: How should the US and NATO ground forces understand and respond to the threat posed by Russian LYBNW in the EUCOM area of responsibility?
To answer how and if Russia will employ LYBNW against ground forces, a threat analysis methodology is used. This method analyzes two concepts: intent and capability. A brief risk assessment with a hypothetical scenario is conducted to synthesize and contextualize the threat analysis. The scenario will aid in assessing the likelihood and consequences of the Russian use of low-yield battlefield nuclear weapons.    
During the Cold War, Russia in the form of the Soviet Union enjoyed a position as one of two global powers and the local hegemon in Eastern Europe. To support this balance of power against NATO and the US, the USSR maintained a large military that included strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons (NSNW). After the fall of the USSR, Russia had the most extensive inventory of NSNW in the world, with estimates ranging between 20,000 and 25,000.0 F
1
In the post-Soviet era, Russia went through a period of retreat from the international community. During this withdrawal, NATO and the US extended their influence within Russia's near abroad. At the time, Russia saw and continues to see this as a security threat.1 F 2 Many in the Russian government saw this as a betrayal. Some in the Russian government believed the US promised to restrict NATO enlargement during the negotiations to reunify Germany. However, this was not the case. Since the end of the Cold War, NATO has added 14 member states, with four of them bordering Russia.2 F 3 NATO expansion not only exacerbated Russia's mistrust of NATO and the US but inflamed Russia's feelings of insecurity during a time of transition. While Russia was in its state of retreat, the Russian military lost any ability to achieve parity with NATO forces, reinforcing Russia's diminished role in international politics.
Over the past two decades, Russia has reasserted its influence in Central and Eastern Europe and is actively working to counter what it perceives as NATO encroachment. To counter this encroachment, Russia is reasserting itself militarily, including threatening the use of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. This threat is credible as Russia has modernized its nuclear force, incorporated nuclear capability into large scale military exercises, and terminated the Cold Warera "no-first-use" policy. Russia replaced the "no-first-use policy" with a limited first use policy that would seek to "escalate to de-escalate" potential conflict in cases Russia perceived as an existential threat.3 F 4
Russia has shown a renewed desire to compete with the US and NATO. To mitigate the escalation risk, NATO must maintain a credible deterrence threat in both conventional and unconventional capabilities. Deterrence is optimized if the target does not see how they may achieve a relative overmatch in a given area. Currently, it stands that Russia has a relative overmatch in non-strategic nuclear weapons.4 F 5 This report will analyze a particular class of non-strategic nuclear weapons: low-yield battlefield nuclear weapons (LYBNW). At its most basic, analysts often define NSNW as a nuclear weapon delivered by short and intermediate-range delivery systems. The 2010 New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty defines strategic nuclear arms as anything delivered by intercontinental ballistic missiles, sea-launched ballistic missiles, or heavy bombers.5 F 
6
4
5
6
7
8
9
Relative to Russia, NATO has a small inventory of non-strategic nuclear weapons. Furthermore, should NATO lack air supremacy or fail to achieve any air superiority, Russia can significantly mitigate or even deny NATO's ability to employ NSNW. Whereas the employment of Russian non-strategic nuclear weapons is not dependent on air or naval supremacy; instead, it can deliver with ground-based missile systems like the Iskander or cannon artillery.9 F 10 Additionally, over the last 20 years, US and NATO forces have operated mostly against insurgencies and countering terrorism. The focus of NATO and US forces against non-state adversaries has atrophied their ability to operate within a chemical or nuclear environment. This atrophy places NATO at greater risk and Russia in a position of greater relative advantage in the use of non-strategic nuclear weapons. The Russian advantage is most pronounced in the realm of LYBNW, which they developed to service tactical level targets with the expectation that America would not escalate to strategic nuclear weapons.1 0F
11
There is a significant amount of literature discussing the "Russian way of war" and what strategic goals the Russians would attempt to attain using non-strategic nuclear weapons. In Given what we know, if Russia would employ LYBNW it would likely be in the early stages of a conflict to deny NATO's ability to disrupt Russian anti-access and area denial (A2AD) capabilities. Russia views its A2AD capability as essential for victory in a conventional war. Russia will employ low-yield nuclear weapons in conjunction with an information campaign to diffuse global backlash and reduce the possibility of nuclear escalation. The Russian theories and practice of escalate to de-escalate and new generation warfare are the Russian strategic concepts at the root of the paper's argument. Additionally, Russia likely views non-strategic nuclear weapons as a key decisive offset available to the Russian military to achieve a relative advantage.
To answer how and if Russia will employ LYBNW against ground forces, a threat analysis methodology is used and provides the paper's structure. This method analyzes two concepts: intent and capability. A brief risk assessment is conducted to synthesize and contextualize the threat analysis, centered on a hypothetical scenario. The scenario will aid in assessing the likelihood and consequences of the Russian use of low-yield battlefield nuclear weapons.1 2F 
13
14
1
5
15
LYBNW provide an option for the Russian military to achieve strategic objectives as these weapons serve as a counter to NATO's perceived conventional weapons overmatch.
Understanding how the Russian government views security is vital to comprehend why Russia desires to employ nuclear weapons at the tactical level. Throughout Russian history, foreign powers have repeatedly invaded Russia's territory, with Russia suffering massive casualties. The most recent was World War II, during which the Soviet Union's civilians and military sustained an estimated 24 million casualties. That is well over one-third of the estimated global deaths due to World War II.1 5 F 
16
However, in the last fifty years, these advantages have eroded. With the fall of the USSR, Russia lost territory that it viewed not only as Russian or Russian protectorates but a security buffer.1 6F 
17
Russia's median age rose six years over the last thirty years, from 33 years in 1990 to 39.6 years in 2020. Russia's current population growth rate of -0.16 percent ranks 205 of 237 countries in the CIA World Factbook.1 7F 
18
19
21
22
NATO's perceived conventional weapons and economic overmatch, along with the loss of the USSR's territory and demographic changes, automatically prohibit Russia from conducting a war of annihilation. Instead, to attain their ends, Russia will use a war of attrition that attempts to leverage specific abilities to achieve a relative advantage to achieve limited objectives. Russia will leverage its information capabilities to exacerbate political divisions within NATO member 
19
23
24
25
26
28
30
28
29
30
34
32
33
34
was defending ethnic Russians. This logic clearly shows Putin defines "self-defense" to include defending the "nation" of Russia, not just the Russian Federation.3 4F 35 Additionally, Russian military and political theorists continually express that the West, particularly the US, is interested in regime change throughout the world, pointing to the "color revolutions."3 5F 36 Using the Russian Federation's security concerns as context, the statement below takes a new meaning. "The Russian Federation reserves the right to use nuclear weapons in response to use against it and (or) its allies of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, as well as in the case of aggression against the Russian Federation with the use of conventional weapons when under threat the very existence of the state."3 6F 37
The statement of a "threat to the very existence of the state" takes new meaning as the Russian government may see an existential threat should they perceive NATO actively intervening in their right to "self-defense" of ethnic Russians. The Russian government further developed this logic in a document approved by Putin in June 2020, The Basic Principles of the Russian Federation on Nuclear Deterrence. It states the Russian Federation may use nuclear weapons in response to the use of nuclear weapons or a weapon of mass destruction against Russia or "its allies."3 7F 38 Non-strategic nuclear weapons present an opportunity for Russia to achieve a physical overmatch relative to the NATO militaries. Non-strategic nuclear weapons provide Russia with an overmatch, not in themselves; instead, it is in concert with other Russian capabilities to include information and integrated air defense systems (IADS).
35 Josh Rubin, "NATO Fears this Town Will Be the Epicenter of the Conflict with Russia," The Atlantic, January 24, 2019, accessed December 17, 2020, https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive /2019/01/narva-scenario-nato-conflict-russia-estonia/581089/. 
Four themes influence and display Russian desire to use non-strategic nuclear weapons: changes to Russian strategic resources, the Russian theory of escalating to de-escalate, Russian strategy aims to further its security and influence, and the published Russian policy of using nuclear weapons to achieve those aims. The Russian military believes employing low-yield nuclear weapons against NATO ground forces present a high probability of success for two reasons. The US and Western Europe have shown they will de-escalate conflict if threatened with a broader war that threatens wider European security. Secondly, Russia believes its advantage in low-yield nuclear weapon capability and information warfare will escalate a conflict to the point that NATO will de-escalate. General Gerasimov's perspective on modern warfare stresses the importance of leveraging advantages during the initial period of war.
Russia believes "escalate to de-escalate" will succeed and that nuclear weapons are instrumental to it. From an August 2000 declassified CIA report, Russia's former Atomic Energy Minster made statements in 1996 and 1999. He stated developments in NSNW would blur the lines between "conventional and nuclear war," and low-yield nuclear weapons will "lower the psychological threshold of nuclear weapons use and would increase the likelihood of a nuclear strike in a local conflict." During that same timeframe, Russian military officers advocated for the employment of NSNW in non-lethal strikes early in a war to de-escalate a conflict.3 8F 
39
42
In 2013, the same year Gerasimov wrote his article, two Russian military theorists authored an article for the Russian journal, Military Thought. Their paper, "The Nature and Content of a New Generation-War," outlines the role and importance of information operations, 40 Zachary Keck, "Russia Threatens Nuclear Strikes Over Crimea," The Diplomat, July 11, 2014, accessed December 17, 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2014/07/russia-threatens-nuclear-strikes-overcrimea/; Russian Federation Presidential Decree, The Military Doctrine of The Russian Federation (Moscow, February 5, 2010), accessed December 17, 2020, https://carnegieendowment.org/files /2010russia_military_doctrine.pdf; Jacek Durkalec, "Nuclear Backed 'Little Green Men': Nuclear Messaging in the Ukraine Crisis" (Report, The Polish Institute of Foreign Affairs, Warsaw, July 2015), 7-8, accessed December 17, 2020, https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/193514/Nuclear%20Backed%20%E2% 80%9CLittle%20Green%20Men%E2%80%9D%20Nuclear%20Messaging%20in%20the%20Ukraine%20 Crisis.pdf. 
41
42
43
44
Russian theorists and Gerasimov continually highlight this need in military journals and speeches.
Additionally, the information operations begin before hostilities start to set conditions to achieve the desired effects. Charles Bartles argues that from Gerasimov's point of view, in the modern version of warfare, belligerents use non-military to military means in a ratio of 4 to 1.4 4F 
45
46
47
The previous two sections argue that Russia's military and government intend to use nuclear weapons to achieve their strategic aims. Russia expects NSNW to achieve the limited objective of escalating a conflict to the point that NATO member states will have no appetite to escalate further. It is not the Russian military's view that they can accomplish a Svechin war of annihilation against NATO; instead, they must execute a war of attrition and achieve limited aims. Additionally, as the rest of the analysis will discuss, Russia's leadership does not intend to use non-strategic nuclear weapons to make a wasteland of Europe. Rather, it will use low-yield nuclear weapons with low collateral damage to target NATO ground forces and affect NATO's psyche.
The 2014 invasion of Ukraine showed Russian willingness to use nuclear weapons to achieve its ends. The next two sections discuss Russia's resources and knowledge to carry out 
46
47
Within this threat analysis, resources and knowledge are components of the concept of "capability." The analysis of Russian LYBNW resources will address Russia's material resources and their experience and skills. This section will show that Russia currently has the material resources to engage NATO ground forces with a low-yield nuclear weapon, and they have programs that are modernizing their non-strategic nuclear weapons technologies. These recent programs do not start from ground zero; instead, they improve upon the world's most extensive estimated non-strategic nuclear weapons inventory.4 7F 
48
In the 1980s, the USSR had between 15,000 to 25,000 non-strategic nuclear weapons compared to the American inventory of no more than 6,000. In May 2020, the US Nuclear Posture Review assesses Russia as possessing from 1,000 to 6,000 non-strategic nuclear weapons.
In comparison, the US has dismantled some of the 500 non-strategic nuclear weapons it possessed at the beginning of the 21st century.4 8F 
49
48
49
50
The fission-fusion reaction is central to this discussion. Enhanced radiation weapons (ERW), or what is often called "neutron bombs," result from the fission-fusion reaction.
Scientists originally developed the technology in 1958 at Lawrence Livermore Laboratory. 
50
52
The reduced blast and thermal effects reduce collateral damage while the neutron and gamma radiation effects still destroy or neutralize human targets.
Additionally, an enhanced radiation weapon would have the same radiological lethality as a fission reaction five times a neutron bomb's blast effect. Still, the use of armor or hardened structures does not significantly mitigate enhanced radiation weapons effects.5 2F 53 ERW's ability to overcome armor's protection was why the American government would employ these weapons against the Soviets if needed. The logic behind the use of neutron bombs was the Soviets had an advantage in armored formations. It would serve as an equalizer while mitigating collateral damage and nuclear fallout. Ironically, the Russian military sees the same opportunity to use ERW against NATO forces in today's operational environment.5 3F 
54
52
53
54
When examining Russian rhetoric, military discussion, and posturing, as discussed earlier, it appears that the Russian government and military intend to maintain a tactical nuclear weapon capability to offset NATO's relative advantage in conventional weapons capability.
Russia believes it can achieve this offset at a relatively low cost.5 5F 56 However, Russian belief in its non-strategic nuclear weapons' utility becomes even more apparent when examining Russia's nuclear weapons research and development. Declassified CIA reports from June 1999 and August 2000 show the Russian government was actively developing new tactical nuclear weapons capabilities. The reports discussed a Russian program that developed a nuclear weapon with a yield of .3 kt tailored radiation yields; hard x-rays, also known as gamma radiation; and soft xrays. The 1999 and 2000 reports explicitly state these weapons would serve well against ground forces and reduce collateral damage in a war Russians estimate would take place within their territory.5 6F 
57
58
According to this CIA report, the purpose of this capability is to deter superior NATO conventional capability.5 8F 
59
The US nuclear posture review, US officials, and independent analysts express that Russia has significantly more non-strategic nuclear weapons than the US and its NATO allies.
Russian officials have stated Russia can accomplish a comparative military advantage over NATO at a relatively low cost with NSNW. Based on the military capabilities that enhanced radiation weapons provide, it appears that these non-strategic nuclear weapons could help the Russian military achieve its limited objective of escalating to de-escalate a conflict with NATO.
However, it would require Russian leaders to employ these weapons in a very deliberate fashion. 
58
Integral to new generation warfare is the incorporating of information operations and information capabilities. It is not merely an integration that is additive; instead, an ability that amplifies the effects of military operations to achieve their aims while mitigating their risk. New generation warfare is an acknowledgment of what Svechin illustrates in his 1920 book, Strategy, that military conflict will not resolve till "a solution has been reached on the political and economic fronts."6 0F 
61
61 Svechin,
Strategy,
249.
Through its plans to employ tactical nuclear weapons, Russia aims to change underlying assumptions of the relationship between NATO and Russia. This change challenges the underlying belief that NATO's conventional capability can prevent Russia from achieving strategic goals. By changing which weapons are available to use short of strategic nuclear war, Russia estimates it can dictate terms in "[t]he process of the shaping a new polycentric model of the world order."6 1F 62 According to Russia's 2015 National Security Strategy, Russian strategic goals include countering NATO's further expansion and Russia asserting itself into the resolution of global problems. The Russian strategic document directly asserts that "The role of force in international relations is not a declining factor."6 2F 
63
64
2
63
64
65
3
3
67
The first and second are that a NATO conflict with Russia would incur a high cost of human life, and conventional or nuclear war will not achieve NATO aims. Last is that NATO members' domestic audiences would prefer Russia to achieve its strategic aims to a NATO military intervention. Low-yield nuclear weapons would serve as tools to reinforce these information objectives. The difference in effects between strategic and low-yield nuclear weapons would further inject confusion into the information environment and decision-making cycles. Suppose the effects of battlefield nuclear weapons use are limited to NATO military assets with no significant collateral damage. The question then opens if the US or its NATO allies are willing to employ non-low yield nuclear weapons and further escalate a conflict from a "conventional" to a "nuclear" war. 
66
Bartles,
"Getting Gerasimov Right,
[34]
[35]
Svechin,
Strategy,
91. 67
It is in the Russian military's interest to strike early in the "resolution" phase, as depicted in figure 
2
3
68
The necessity for NATO to move troops to a potential conflict zone near Russia's border highlights Russia's relative advantage in its ability to develop defensive positions before the significant buildup of NATO forces. Russia's advantage increases with their existent anti-access area denial (A2AD) capabilities, which will hinder NATO and the US's ability to establish a foothold in an area of conflict. Due to Russia's perception of NATO's conventional weapon's superiority and its analysis of US operations in Iraq and Kosovo, Russian planners emphasize the initial period of war in their doctrine.7 1F 
72
73
75
According to a 2019 report by Hans Kristensen, Russia has three different nuclearcapable munitions for its Iskander missile system. This short-range ballistic missile (SRBM) launcher is employed at the Russian army group level, organized into Iskander brigades. These brigades have a total of 12 Iskander launchers. Russia has one brigade deployed in the Kaliningrad region, placing a tactical nuclear-capable system between two NATO countries, Poland and Lithuania. With the Iskander's reported ability to range 500 km, Russia can range most of Poland and just over the German border from the Kaliningrad Oblast.7 5F 76 Additionally, Russia may easily modify the Iskander to range over 500 km.7 6 F 77
In addition to the Iskander system, Russia also has aircraft capable of delivering nonstrategic nuclear weapons, such as the Tu-22M3M, Tu 22M3, Tu-22, Su 24/34/57, and MiG-31K (see Table 
1
76
77
Russian capability goes beyond resources. Russia has a history of planning the employment of battlefield nuclear weapons. In the 1960s, Russian doctrine planned to use nuclear weapons to create a hole in a prepared defense that Soviet mechanized forces could exploit. In the 1980s, Soviet doctrine identified multiple battlefield nuclear weapons employment would result in highly restricted terrain due to excessive cratering. This estimate drove Soviet doctrine to recommend employing tactical nuclear weapons on the enemy's second echelon or reserves. In addition to the Soviet's incorporating tactical nuclear weapons into their doctrine, the Soviet military made plans for a two-phased nuclear operation that employed thousands of nuclear weapons. NATO discovered copies of the plan after German unification, which the USSR left behind in East Germany.7 7F 
78
79
Recently, Russia exercised nuclear capabilities during military exercises. Notably, in the 2009 Zapad Exercise, Russia employed a simulated nuclear strike using aircraft while conducting an amphibious assault on a simulated Polish beach in Kaliningrad.7 9F 
80
81
82
78
Bartles,
Russian Way of War,
[204]
[205]
[206]
[207]
[384]
[385]
[386]
Russia has continued to develop nuclear capabilities inherited from the Soviet Union and maintained the tradition of nuclear planning as seen in their exercises. US government reports, Russian government rhetoric, and Russian military exercises indicate Russian modernization in its non-strategic nuclear weapon capability. Russia's military has acknowledged NATO and the US militaries' advantage in conventional munitions capabilities and identified a need to achieve an offset. Nuclear weapons provide that capability. During the Cold War, both the US and the Soviet Union planned to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a conventional war in Europe. The fact that both militaries saw battlefield nuclear weapons as something to plan and resource, it stands to reason both militaries saw the use of nuclear weapons on the battlefield did not necessarily lead to the use of "strategic" nuclear weapons. Instead, some military planners and strategists believed that militaries could use nuclear weapons at the tactical and operational level without escalating to using strategic nuclear weapons against population centers. Whether or not that assessment is valid is not significant for this analysis. Because if that estimate remains a planning assumption with key Russian military planners, it leaves the window open to the use of battlefield nuclear weapons regardless of it actually escalating to strategic nuclear weapons. The Russian government's belief that it can use BNW without necessarily escalating to strategic nuclear weapons is evident as Russia continues its research, development, exercising, and modernizing of Russian NSNW capabilities. Russia's modernization of its tactical nuclear capability is the most substantial evidence of its intent to use it and a clear demonstration of Russia's high degree of threat with its low yield battlefield nuclear weapons.
Risk Assessment of Russian Use of LYBNW Overview This section will assess the risk presented to NATO ground forces in a conventional war against the Russian military on the European continent. The scenario provided will give a limited context to analyze the likelihood and the consequence of Russian employment of low-yield nuclear weapons against NATO ground forces. This risk assessment is based on Hank Prunckun's approach in his book, The Scientific Methods of Inquiry for Intelligence Analysis. The analysis examines the likelihood of employment of LYBNW in a scenario, and the consequences should it occur.8 2F 
83
83
In the summer of 2024, the Russian military has moved into the Estonian city of Narva.
The city has an ethnic Russian majority. The city is an industrial city where many of the residents cannot get Estonian citizenship due to their inability to speak Estonian, a prerequisite for Estonian citizenship. Russia claims it is merely coming to protect an ethnic Russian population that desires to be part of the Russian Federation.8 3F 
84
The Russian government uses the result of the referendum to move its military forces into Narva. Putin states his only desire is to protect the Russian people in the city and enforce the referendum's "democratic" outcome. The Russian military inserted troops into the city without a shot fired and established security and control points without any armed struggle. After a brief period of political negotiations, Russian and Estonian forces engage in a short military engagement. Immediately, Russia claims Estonia attacked a territory of Russia's people, which is now part of the Russian Federation through a democratic referendum. Russia argues it did not attack Estonia; instead, Estonia attacked Russia. Russia thereby undermined "Article V" from the Washington Treaty. In the scenario, some members question the validity of "Article V" in this context and do not support its invocation.
The two primary Russian strategic aims are to destabilize the NATO military alliance and firmly establish the Russian position in a multipolar world. An operational objective to achieve these ends is to localize Estonia's conflict and prevent all NATO allies from entering the conflict.
The second operational objective is to cause NATO forces to culminate militarily in the initial period of war due to military attrition, political division, and lack of economic resolve. A pivotal element to Russia's operational art is information operations. Before the seizure of Narva, Russia began its information operations to achieve Russian information goals. The first goal is to convince NATO that it will not reach its strategic aims through a conventional or nuclear war with Russia without incurring a significant loss of life. Second, it is preferable to let Russia achieve its political aims as opposed to NATO military intervention. Third, Russia will attempt to convince NATO members that their national political interests are so divergent that NATO is not viable or mutually beneficial. The fourth goal is, Russia will view any significant NATO military action as an existential threat. Russia will reference the history of regime change in the "color revolutions" and US operations in the Middle East to make a case for existential threat.
This risk analysis scenario assumes Russia met some of its information operation goals.
Due to Russia managing the information space, not all NATO member states support military intervention and do not enter the conflict. As discussed in the Russian doctrine section, Russia would view NATO airstrikes and cruise missile attacks as decisive to subsequent NATO operations. To prevent the US or NATO from capitalizing on these strikes, Russia would employ its integrated air defense against NATO aircraft and standoff munitions. In this scenario, NATO would likely use a ground-based surface to surface fires assets to attack Russian air defense systems. Russia would likely employ a low-yield nuclear weapon against the ground-based surface-to-surface systems to destroy this capability. Russia would see non-strategic nuclear weapons as a relative advantage compared to the US and NATO's precision strike capability. An offset that Russia would have trouble achieving with other assets. A likely US system Russia would target is the ground-based multiple launch rocket system, which the United States has a brigade worth stationed in Germany currently.8 4F
85
On the tactical level, the consequences would be catastrophic, major on an operational level, and major on a strategic level. It would be catastrophic on the tactical level as the delivery of a 1kt weapon could kill or incapacitate personnel in a 2 km radius or 12.5 sq km and affect electronics in a similar area.8 5F
86
On the tactical level, NATO, specifically the US, would have difficulty retaliating to a LYBNW with a NSNW. American non-strategic nuclear weapons are gravity bombs delivered via dual-capable aircraft, sea-launched ballistic missiles, or sea-launched cruise missiles.8 6F 
87
89
87
Kristensen and Korda, "Tactical Nuclear Weapons, 2019," 258-259. 88 DIA, Russia Military Power, 33, 62-65. 89
The Russian military's use of LYBNW presents a high threat level, which leads to an extreme level of risk to NATO ground forces should NATO and Russia enter an armed conflict on the European continent. Table 
5
The major driving force behind the high threat level is the Russian military's unmatched capability in the realm of LYBNW. Russia has the most extensive inventory of non-strategic nuclear weapons in the world and a doctrinal understanding of their use.8 9F 
90
93
95
Politically, Russia's desire to employ these weapons lies not necessarily in their belief in nuclear weapons as ends in themselves. Instead, non-strategic nuclear weapons are means to achieve Russian political aims of ensuring Russia's current government's survival in the face of 
91
92
93
94
95
The extreme level of risk LYBNW present at all three levels of war is rooted in the tactical level's catastrophic consequences. As discussed earlier, battlefield nuclear weapons in the form of enhanced radiation weapons have high-speed neutrons, which are highly lethal to humans. The US may mitigate this risk in two ways at the tactical level: prevent the delivery of the battlefield nuclear weapons on tactical formation through interdiction of munitions delivery or provide protection to likely affected personnel from neutron radiation.
Additionally, at the operational and strategic level, the US can further mitigate the risk by disrupting or preventing Russia from achieving its information operations objectives. On page 24, Figure 
2
96
96
97
98
This paper has four major recommendations to lower the threat presented by Russia's potential use of low-yield nuclear weapons against NATO ground forces and lower the overall risk level should an armed conflict occur between NATO and Russian military forces. The recommendations fall into three areas: protect the force, information operations, and NSNW strike capability.
The first recommendation is to develop a wider range of highly mobile short and medium-range air defense assets capable of defeating aircraft, cruise missiles, and ballistic missiles. Ensure these assets can be distributed throughout the battlefield to ensure Russia cannot capitalize on their denial of NATO air assets but destroy any Russian systems capable of delivering a BNW. Second, develop; update; and exercise tactics, techniques, and procedures for dealing with nuclear use. In this same vein, conduct research and development to deal with the issue of neutron absorption to decrease the effects of enhanced radiation weapon technology. By reducing the consequences of the successful use of LYBNW on NATO ground forces, these weapons' overall utility will decrease.
Thirdly, NATO needs to develop and execute information operations that deny Russia's information operations objectives. These operations should not only strengthen or protect NATO member nations' resolve to support Article V of The Washington Treaty but weaken Russian political resolve to use "force as a factor" in Russian international relations.9 8F 99 Even more vital is to facilitate the belief among Russian military strategists that the use of NSNW would not provide an asymmetric advantage. With a standard internet search, one can easily find a significant portion of NATO and US doctrine. NATO and US militaries publish doctrines for both their militaries' consumption and that of a larger global audience. NATO and the US can leverage 
99 Russian Federation Presidential Edict 683,
National Security Strategy,
4.
Lastly, research and develop LYBNW capability and delivery systems that can defeat Russian air defenses. This will provide a clear option to retaliate against a Russian use of lowyield nuclear weapons or any non-strategic nuclear weapons. Developing NATO's low-yield battlefield nuclear weapons capability is not merely an issue of "tit for tat," but one that is about removing any illusion that the Russian military has any relative advantage in terms of munitions capability. All these recommendations aim to increase tactical and operational options available to achieve strategic aims while limiting options available to Russian strategists who see NATO's growth and vitality as antithetical to their strategic aims.
37  
37  
Amy Woolf, Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service,   
2020), 11.2 Russian Federation Presidential Edict 683, The Russian Federation's National Security Strategy(Moscow, December 31, 2015), 4, accessed December 17, 2020, https:/www.ieee.es/Galerias /fichero/OtrasPublicaciones/Internacional/2016/Russian-National-Security-Strategy-31Dec2015.pdf.3 Stanley R. Sloan, Permanent Alliance: NATO and the Transatlantic Bargain from Truman to Obama (New York: Bloomberg, 2010), 130; North Atlantic Treaty Organization, "Member Nations," accessed December 8, 2020, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_52044.htm; North Atlantic Treaty Organization, "NATO on the Map," accessed December 8, 2020, https://www.nato.int/nato-on-themap/#lat=53.25718495852529&lon=22.174970774517835&zoom=0&layer-1.
Michael Cannon, "Battlefield Nuclear Weapons And Tactical Gridlock In Europe" (Monograph,  School of Advanced Military Studies, 1988), 35.    
Office of the Deputy Secretary of Defense for Nuclear Matters, Nuclear Matters Handbook (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2020), 226, accessed December 17, 2020, https://www.acq.osd.mil/ncbdp/nm/nmhb/index.htm.
Hans Kristensen and Matt Korda, "Tactical Nuclear Weapons, 2019," Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 75, no. 5 (September 2019): 252-253, accessed December 17, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1080 /00963402.2019.1654273.
Katarzyna Zysk, "Escalation and Nuclear Weapons in Russia's Military Strategy," The RUSI Journal 163, no. 2 (May 2018): 7, accessed December 17, 2020, https://doi/org/10.1080 /03071847.2018.1469267.
Ibid.,[4][5] 
Hank Prunkun, Scientific Methods of Inquiry for Intelligence Analysis, 2nd ed. (Lanham, MD: Rowland and Littlefield), 283-302.
Ibid., 289.   
Russian Federation Presidential Decree 2876, The Military Doctrine of The Russian Federation (Moscow, December 25, 2014), accessed December 17, 2020, https://rusemb.org.uk/press/2029; Russian Federation Presidential Edict 683, The Russian Federation's National Security Strategy, 4; Zysk, "Escalation and Nuclear Weapons," 9-10.
National World War II Museum, New Orleans, "Research Starters: Worldwide Deaths in World War II," accessed November 25, 2020, https://www.nationalww2museum.org/students-teachers/studentresources/research-starters/research-starters-worldwide-deaths-world-war.
17 Hani Zaitoun, "28 Years After Restoring Independence, the Shadow of the Russian Bear Is Still Swirling Over Estonia," Pulitzer Center, November 20, 2019, accessed December 17, 2020, https://pulitzercenter.org/reporting/28-years-after-restoring-independence-shadow-russian-bear-stillswirling-over-estonia; Ben Stiel, "Russian Clash with the West Is About Geography not Ideology," Foreign Policy, February 12, 2018, accessed December 17, 2020, https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/02/12/russiasclash-with-the-west-is-about-geography-not-
ideology/.18  Worldometer, "Population of Russia (2020 and Historical)," accessed December 10, 2020, https://www.worldometers.info/world-population/russia-population/; US Central Intelligence Agency, "Population Growth Rate," CIA World Factbook, accessed December 10, 2020, https://www.cia.gov /library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/344rank.html.
Ben Connable, Stephanie Young, Stephanie Pezard, Andrew Radin, Raphael S. Cohel, Katya  Migacheva, and James Sladden, Russia Hostile Measures: Countering Russian Gray Zone Aggression  Against NATO in Contact, Blunt, and Surge Layers of Competition (Santa Monica, CA: RAND  Corporation, 2020), ix, 48-50, 55.    
US Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Transnational Issues, Evidence of Russian Development of New Subkiloton Nuclear Warheads, Intelligence Memorandum (Washington, DC: Central Intelligence Agency, August 2000), 7.
Mark Galeotti, "The 'Gerasimov Doctrine' and Russian Non-Linear War," In Moscow's Shadow (blog), July 6, 2014, accessed December 17, 2020, https://inmoscowsshadows.wordpress.com/2014/07 /06/the-gerasimov-doctrine-and-russian-non-linear-war/.
Keir Giles, James Sherr, and Anthony Seaboyer, Russian Reflexive Control (Ontario: Royal  Military College of Canada, 2018), 45, accessed December 17, 2020, https://www.researchgate.net/profile /Keir_Giles/publication/328562833_Russian_Reflexive_Control/links/5bd4b1714585150b2b8b2a21/Russi an-Reflexive-Control.pdf.
Valery Gerasimov, "The Value of Science Is in the Foresight: New Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying out Combat Operations," trans. Robert Coalson, Military Review 96, no. 1 (January-February 2016): 23-29, originally published in Military-Industrial Kurier (February 2013).
CIA, Office of Transnational Issues, Subkiloton Nuclear Warheads, 7.   
US Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2017), 33.
Rubin, "NATO Fears of Conflict."   
US Department of the Army, "Bavaria US Military Combat Units," US Army Europe, accessed December 2, 2020, https://home.army.mil/bavaria/index.php/units.
Snow, "Enhanced Radiation Weapons,[4][5]; Office of the Deputy Secretary of Defense for NuclearMatters, Nuclear Matters Handbook, 228.   
Woolf, Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons, 5; Kristensen and Korda, "Tactical Nuclear Weapons,  2019."   
Acknowledgments I could not have completed this monograph without the love and support of those closest to me. Specifically, I would like to thank my monograph director, 
Dr. Adam Lowther
Matthew Yandura
Dan Beck
Rei Manneck
Aaron Fletcher
Approved by: 
__//SIGNED/19MAY21/ABL//__________
Monograph Director Adam B. Lowther, PhD
__//SIGNED/19MAY21/MJY//___________
Seminar Leader Matthew J. Yandura
COL __//SIGNED/19MAY21/BAP//_______
School of Advanced Military Studies Brian A. Payne, COL