# ID: 8ac823959db0447e8ca4d52307c31131
# Title: Plagues and Power: The Evolutionary Influence of Disease on Great Power Competition
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Disease has contributed to the reshuffling of the regional and global orders throughout history. Strangely, this variable has been neglected vis-à-vis Great Power Competition (GPC), creating a "plague gap" in the literature on international relations and transitions of power. In general, historians and political scientists connect power shifts to military clashes, diplomacy, or economic developments. Investigating the emergence and spread of novel diseases throughout time offers a new variable to the discussion. My findings explore how disease has factored into the decline of some empires (the Athenian, Roman, Byzantine, and Mongol empires) and the expansion of others (Spain and Great Britain). In GPC disease can be used as an instrument of conquest or as a collaborative tool of governance. Disease can weaken states' abilities to compete economically and militarily with rivals. The ongoing GPC with the People's Republic of China (PRC) and the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) pandemic provides yet another example of this pattern. My research suggests the possibility that COVID-19 will accelerate Chinese superiority and reshape the international order in the PRC's favor. Consideration must be given to the inclusion of disease in determining national policy in GPC. v
This thesis assesses the effect(s) of disease on regional and global competitions resulting in power transitions. Traditionally, power shifts are measured mainly by political, economic, and military capabilities and resources in the international system. The foundational efforts to understand power shifts rely on international relations models, like the Balance of Power Theory, as the baseline for measurement and transition of power.
Balance of Power Theory emphasizes the deterrence of a state that strived to use its power to control others. At the conceptual level, this is sound logic, but the effects of disease are generally not factored into the equation. The inclusion of disease as a sometimes-decisive factor may help us understand how and why great powers lose out or gain ground. Disease is not limited to historical empires; it has persisted in modern times and will likely continue well into the future. The current COVID-19 pandemic showcases the power of disease in a globalized world despite revolutionary medical practices.
By and large, the literature on international relations predicts that power shifts will occur by way of economic, political, and/or military means, but has excluded disease from the calculus. Arguments from international relations authorities such as John Mearsheimer contend the power for a state is a function of economic and military capabilities to influence great power controls, completely excluding disease. 
1
2
This thesis captures the ways in which disease has affected power throughout history. The main findings of the research have uncovered a trend in power transition enabled by disease. It makes three major arguments. The first: disease can stop the expansion of economic and military power. Territorial and commercial expansion has been a basis of power but also as a means of disease transmission-as is evident with Greece and Rome. Expansion fueled trading, and the movement of goods associated with trade as well as troops to protect the growth, connecting the classical world. 
3
4
Second, disease can assist expansion when a population is immune. Leveraging the immunity, states expand into uncharted territories, decimated the locals and swung the power pendulum in favor of the colonizer or aggressor. During the colonialization of the Americas, the European colonizers utilized the lessons of the "military revolution" against the people of the New World. 
5
Lastly, collaboration on or offer of humanitarian and medical aid spurs the possibility for cooperation. In the twentieth-century, medical technological breakthroughs provided the belief that infectious disease had lost its power over humanity. 
6
In order to fill the "plague gap" in literature, this thesis first researched international relations theorists and historians to identify the lack of disease inclusion into power shifts.
To fill this gap, historical case studies in which disease altered power were chosen and then grouped into chapters based on effects and the era of occurrence. The focus on only one specific conflict or a single period would be too narrow for this project's scope. The vignettes offer historical samples of plague-induced power shifts from the perspective of both primary and secondary sources. The evolution of a disease in power transitions throughout history filled the "plague gap," which had previously excluded it from the Balance of Power theories and other historical sources.
This thesis focuses on historical examples where disease caused or contributed to the decline of a regional influencer or a Great Power. Following the introduction, the second chapter, "Plague Gap in Power Politics," describes the Balance of Power Theory and the prospect to consider disease as a variable. The use of numerous political scientists' work in the chapter charted how military, economic, and political factors, but not disease, contributed to power shifts. The second part shifts to historians and their coverage of disease. These writings demonstrate the debilitating effects of disease on populations, but do not relate those effects to power transitions.
The rest of the thesis spans from the ancient world to the present. The third chapter, "Old World Imperialism," includes empires from the ancient world. The Athenian, Roman, Byzantine, and Mongol Empires each have extensive documentation on disease and the power shifts that resulted. In each case, expansion introduced disease. The logistical requirements for trade served as the facilitator for germ introduction into susceptible populations. The decline in the economy and military of the empires by disease set forth a shift in regional supremacy.
The fourth chapter, titled "Colonization and Competition Between Great Powers," examines the discovery of a "New World" by European colonizers. The ability of imperial powers to use disease-whether intentional or not-against the local populace accelerated the gains in power. Disease factored into the conflicts that occurred between European powers in the New World as well. The established power in the region held immunities over its rivals and provided an advantage in local battles-notably in the case of Havana (1762).
The fifth chapter, "Twentieth-Century International Power Relations and Global Cooperation," encompasses pandemics and the successes achieved by global cooperation.
Medical achievements in the twentieth century allowed governments to eliminate disease in one case and control disease, but only if the nation had the resources. The emerging and underdeveloped countries lack the ability to fund these endeavors and rely on the willingness of superpowers to assist. That motivation drove collaboration, in the case of the U.S. and the Soviet Union, but frictions remained because of the Cold War animosities.
The sixth chapter, "Twenty-First Century Pandemics: A Change in the International Order?," comprises of two novel diseases that spread from China, accelerated by globalization and the lack of information from the Chinese government. Despite the modern advances in medicine, the diseases disrupted everyday governmental, business, and societal functions. China's ability to recover first from the outbreaks put it in an advantageous position to assist recovery and accelerate the rise of China economically and its improved image as a responsible, effective government.
The research reveals that disease has been a significant causal variable in power transitions along with economic and military terms. On this basis, I recommend the inclusion of disease in any future literature on the subject. Additionally, revisions or additions should be made to previous writings on the topic to include disease as an equal variable. Political scientists and historians need to emphasize the importance of disease to ruling governments to include disease as a factor in national policy. Understanding how disease has impacted our predecessors remains essential as the world becomes more connected, more reliant on each other, and yet characterized by GPC.
The combination of alliance politics and military capabilities forms the basis of the Balance of Power Theory. Simply put, "a balance of power involves a particular distribution of power among the states for that system such that no single state and no existing alliance has an 'overwhelming' or 'preponderant' amount of power." 
7
8
What occurs with the introduction of a disease into this system? How will it affect the state's capabilities and its ability to compete in the international system? The imbalance caused by a large-scale, prolonged pandemic on a state's economy may tip the balance of power to the state that can recover the quickest. Whether a state is independent or dependent on other states may affect the decrease or increase of power post-plague. These critical questions remain relevant throughout the examples discussed in the process of this thesis.
Typically, social scientists and historians have researched power in terms of economic and military resources and capablities. For example, Hans Morgenthau's book, Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace (1948) addresses, supports, and critiques numerous theories about power. He primarily supports and focuses on realism theory regarding power and its interaction with other nations globally. 9 Foreign and domestic politics reveal three basic patterns: states try either keeping power, increasing power, or demonstrating power. 
10
11
Inis Claude expands on Morgenthau's in his in Power and International Relations   (1962), Inis Claude Jr. denotes power mainly in terms of military capability and the capacity to coerce, kill, and destroy. 
12
13
15
16
16 Kennedy, XV-XVI. See also William H. McNeil, A World History. McNeil emphasizes that in any given age the world balance was liable to disturbances emanating from one or more great powers affecting the balance of power. militarily and economically. A state's replacement as a leader in the international system occurs when another country converts its resource bases into a military power that outstrips the leader. 17
In Kenneth Waltz's book, Theory of International Politics (1979), he argues that one must study the state in the international system to understand the state. Waltz examines how an anarchic system affects a state through the distribution of capabilities. 
18
19
In line with Kennedy and Waltz, John Mearsheimer stated the basis of power ties to particular material capabilities in his book The Tragedy of International Politics (2014). 
20
21
22
18 Waltz, Theory of International Politics, 102.
19 Waltz, 132.   20 Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, 55.   21 Mearsheimer, 20-21.   22 Mearsheimer, 21. See also George Quester, Offense and Defense in the International System, for the offense-defense balance in international relations. can sufficiently challenge their military capabilities, but the transition to a global hegemon is virtually impossible because balances have always formed to thwart aspirants. 
23
24
25
As the review above suggests, scholars have been excluded plagues from international relations and the Balance of Power Theory. Diseases lie in the sometimes unforeseen and uncontrollable acts of nature that affect the human race, explaining its exclusion. In terms of economic and military force, the constant variables seem to be more measurable or controllable-nevertheless disease remains.
Historians have generally been more attentive to the subject of disease and power.
For example, William H. McNeill, Plagues and Peoples (1976) covers the impact of diseases on human history. His analysis begins with the early man as a hunter/gatherer, then transitions to human migration and population clusters. Humans' ability to alter the natural balance is extraordinary and has set biological evolution into overdrive. 
26
27
The interdependence of nations and the natural disaster examples Parker gives about widespread destruction of resources highlights how-as in a pandemic-states collapse. 
28
29
32
The germ is a different variable.
The inclusion of disease into power political calculations accounts for an essential variable in determining why some nations gain power and others lose power. The "plague gap" in power politics exposes, especially in today's interdependent, COVID-ridden world, how important it is for a nation to handle a pandemic and develops a historical pathway of disease in GPC. Filling the "plague gap" should bring attention to examples throughout history when plagues have profoundly altered power relations. This thesis' ensuing chapter will emphasize just how significant disease can be in international relations and the making-or un-making-of global order.
32 Diamond, 205.
Power politics is not a new concept; ancient civilizations laid many foundations for current international relations theory. In the Mediterranean, ancient states increased power by conquering weaker opponents to increase resources. Hand in hand with territorial expansion, trade flourished across the empires' newly seized areas and brought in novel goods that interconnected the classical world. 
33
34
The Peloponnesian War occurred between the Athenian-led Delian League versus the Spartan-led Corinthian League from 431-404 BCE. 
35
36
37
Athenian historian (and a general), recounted the war in his writings, including an unknown disease that infected and killed thousands of Athenians and inflicted a setback from which their society never fully recovered. 
38
39
40
41
43
People in good health were all of the sudden attacked by violent heats in the head, and redness and inflammation in the eyes, the inward parts, such as the throat or tongue, becoming bloody, and emitting an unnatural and fetid breath…Externally the body was not very hot to the touch, nor pale in its appearance, but reddish, livid, and breaking out into small pustules and ulcers. 
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
The epidemic lasted four years, causing incredible losses in the early stages of the war. This greatly hindered Athens' ability to reinforce its armies. 
51
52
53
54
Nor was this the only form of lawless extravagance which owed its origin to the plague. Men now did just what they pleased, cooly [sic] venturing on what they had formerly done only in a corner, seeing the rapid transitions produced by persons in prosperity suddenly dying and those who before had nothing succeeding to their property…Such was the nature of the calamity, and heavily did it weigh on the Athenians; death raging within the city and devastation without. 
55
56
57
58
59
60
Athens' inability to repopulate its army during the early phases of the war and the Spartan forces remaining mostly unaffected greatly influenced its course. The plague inflicted losses on the population that dramatically hindered Athenian strategy. Some scholars argue that only repeated epidemics may depress population levels for an extended period, but the 56 Hanson, A War Like No Other, 77.   57 Hanson, 80-81.   58 Hanson, 81.   59 Hanson, 79-81.   60 Thucydides, The Landmark Thucydides, 549-52. J.N. Hays objects that the disease had the impact scholars contribute to the decline of Athens. pandemic's early arrival influenced the war. In terms of cultural and soft power, the panic and fear of the disease further changed the Athenian culture leading to the decline of the "Golden Age," aiding in Athens' eventual fall to Sparta. Subsequent Mediterranean empires were not immune to disease dynamics and suffered similar yet significant setbacks as a result.
At its peak, the Roman Empire spanned across three continents and accounted for a quarter of the world's population. 
61
62
63
66
67
68
69
At the onset of the disease in Rome, the Roman physician Claudius Galenus, or
Galen, was summoned to investigate-and like Thucydides-he documented the plague, although for medical purposes instead of historical. 
70
72
Emperor Marcus Aurelius reflected on the plague and its effects on Roman society in his book, Meditations. He said, "For a far greater plague is the corruption of the mind, than any certain change and distemper of the common air can be." 73 Like the citizens' response in ancient Athens, Roman citizens experienced death caused by disease on a scale yet unseen in the empire. Upwards of 2,000 a day died in Rome, which demoralized the city, causing panic and fear. 
74
Those words which once were common and ordinary, are now become obscure and obsolete; and so the names of men once commonly known and famous, are now become in a manner and obsolete names. Camillus, Cieso, Volesius, Leonnatus; not long after, Scipio, Cato, then Augustus, then Adrianus, then Antonius Pius: all these in a short time will be out of date, and, as things of another world as it were, become fabulous. And this I say of them, who once shined as the wonders of their ages, for as for the rest, no sooner are they expired, than with them all their fame and memory. 
75
76
77
Citizens across the empire felt the economic impact. The Romans were unable to feed themselves because of agricultural output decline caused by either death of workers or people fleeing to escape the pestilence. 
78
79
The decline of the empire's economy combined with the fifteen-year epidemic's high mortality rate, with an estimated five-ten million deaths, was particularly devasting for the Roman army. 
82
83
Despite all this, the final tipping point may be Emperor Marcus Aurelius' death-likely to the plague that bears his name, in 180 CE. 
84
85
86
As with Athens, the Roman Empire's conquest brought vast wealth and prosperity to the empire, but with growth, the likelihood of disease spreading increased. The continued expansion and logistical system to support the empire connected the Romans to Trade within the empire and its partners flourished, aided by the movement of goods on ships. 
90
New micro parasitism carried by fleas on black rats originating on ships sailing from India introduced a novel disease in the Eastern Empire. 
92
93
94
95
96
The first symptoms were fever and lassitude, neither of which seemed lifethreatening. But soon, if not on the same day, then shortly thereafter, buboes appeared in the groin or armpits, or sometimes beside the ears or on the thighs. Then the disease progressed rapidly. The victim might fall into a lethargic state or else become delirious, and eating was difficult. Some suffered from none of these symptoms but died painfully when their buboes gangrened…A number of victims broke out with black blisters like lentils over their bodies, and these died swiftly…Pregnant women who contracted surrounding the Mediterranean. The epidemic made its way east to Persia and north and west as far the British Isles. 
111
112
The Mongol Empire, founded by Genghis Khan in 1206 and lasting beyond his death in 1227, subjugated more lands and people in twenty-five years than the Romans had in four hundred. 
113
116
117
After Genghis Khan died, the Mongol Empire's dynasty was threatened from within by internal power struggles within his family, and externally by something more sinister and mysterious than the internal tussles-the plague. 
118
119
120
121
122
The victims were suddenly struck…as with a knife, at the breast, at the shoulder-blade, or between the shoulders; a devouring fire consumed the entrails, blood flowed at the mouth, a burning fever was succeeded by a shivering cold, tumors [sic] appeared on the neck, the hips, under the arms, or behind the shoulder-blade. The issue was always the same-inevitable death, swift but terrible. Out of each hundred persons but ten remained well. 
123
The plague struck the Mongol army in 1345 while it besieged Genoese merchants in Caffa on the north coast of the Black Sea in its territory's western expanses. 
124
126
127
128
The Mongols thrived on military strength and commercial wealth to govern conquered lands in which they were outnumbered by as much as a thousand to one. 
129
The cases considered in this chapter highlight the devasting effects of disease on Great Powers and their ability to shift the power balance when struck by disease. Each of the societies studied shared commonalities leading up to and throughout the novel pathogens' outbreaks. The capitals in the Mediterranean cultures were the cores of these empires, while the Mongols relied on trade zones created after conquering a state. The trade economies for each empire fueled expansion and enhanced the power held in the Mediterranean and Asia. However, both trade and military action, which fostered economic growth and imperial security, also exposed these empires to novel diseases for which people had little immunity.
The introduction of disease into densely populated urban areas is another commonality shared by these societies. The spread of disease was rapid and deadly in their population centers. The sudden onset quickly outran the governments' abilities to handle the sick, and as a result, the corpses began to accumulate within the cities. The death tolls led to towns shutting down and citizens fleeing trying to escape the epidemic, but this only spread the disease out into the rural lands-with the resulting deaths in the countryside negatively affecting agriculture, thus leading to food shortages, furthering the panic and desperation. Troop movements further spread disease and weakened the military's ability to maintain control in these empires' contested regions. The initial death tolls were high, and when combined with numerous waves of disease, it created manpower crises. The militaries in all three cases struggled to replenish their forces over the ensuing decades.
The death of citizens in the city, the losses to the military by both disease and conflict, the collapse of the economies, and the governments' inability to cope with these epidemics weakened the great powers of the time-and well beyond the conclusion of the various outbreaks. This chapter closes the plague gap by underlining the impact of disease on ancient regional hegemonies and the ensuing restructuring of power relations. Imperialist expansion connected areas but resulted in the spread of disease, causing mass casualties to society, diminishing manpower, and destabilizing the social structure.
This chapter examines three cases that demonstrate how the Great Powers of Europe gained influence and territory in the "New World" via numerous factors, but primarily through diseases and their effects on populations. As with the early civilizations from the previous chapter, disease had a formidable impact on New World colonialism. In all cases, the conquerors introduced-intentionally or not-pathogens to which only they had immunities, aiding in forceful territorial development and defense at times.
The first case details the Aztecs' interaction with the Spanish Conquistadors from 1519-1521. The Spaniards' numerically inferior force introduced pathogens to which the Aztecs had no immunities, helping destroy the manpower of the Aztecs and their organized resistance. The second case covers the Spanish reinforcement of the Americas by way of fortifications by disease. In 1762, the British seized the Spanish stronghold in Havana, but an outbreak of yellow fever made the British unable to retain the city. This chapter's last case is the siege of Fort Pitt in 1763 during Pontiac's Rebellion. An Indian uprising in the Ohio River Valley surprised the British, but smallpox was introduced by the British to the Indian population with disastrous effects. Filling the plague gap, this chapter charts the impact disease has had on societies when used strategically in terms of offensive and defensive operations related to GPC.
The late-fifteenth and early-sixteenth century witnessed a series of wars and Cortés fled Tenochtitlan from an Aztec military uprising in the summer of 1520 which led to the death of Moctezuma and his brother Cuitlahuac's appointment as the Aztec leader. 
138
They counted the year from it, as from some famous event." 
139
140
Tenochtitlan's population either died or fled from the disease, leaving no one to care for the sick and run society's necessities. 
141
143
145
147
149
150
In sum, Cortés' conquistadors discovered the Aztec Empire the great riches it held to fuel the Spanish Empire. Cortés' forces were vastly outnumbered but were able to conquer and colonize the Aztecs. The unbeknown introduction of smallpox to the Aztecs by the Spaniards was a key to victory. The Spanish had superior weapons and tactics, but the panic and death caused by smallpox proved to be the great divider, limiting the Aztecs' ability to fend off the invaders. The Spanish colonization of Central Mexico added to the Spanish Empire and separated Spain from the other European Great Powers. 
Over the next century, five great powers of the Atlantic world-Spain, France, Portugal, the Dutch, and England-competed for influence and territory in the Americas. 151 Spain used the knowledge gained of immunities as a defensive means in the New World, a tactic most clearly seen in the defense of Havana during the Seven Years' War.
Nearly a century and a half after the Aztecs fell to Hernán Cortés, the Spanish Empire recognized logistical difficulties, and the tyranny of distance of the New World from Europe would not protect the resources from invaders forever. 152 Spain constructed a network of fortified strongholds in the Americas, creating strategic chokeholds along sea routes to control the movement of trade and treasure. 
153
154
156
Vera Cruz [sic] is reckoned unhealthy, especially when the flota is there, or any great concourse of people…; and when a great number of people loges in the Town together during these heats [sic] they are visited with a pestilential distemper called the vomito prieto, of which disease many people die. 
157
158
The Seven Years' War-known in the U.S. as the French and Indian War-offered a concrete test of these defenses. The conflict erupted between 1754 between the Anglo-Prussian alliance France-with Spain joining France after 1761. 
159
In response, the British government under William Pitt hoped to seize Havana, the key to the Indies.
Within fifty-seven days of Spain's declaration of war, British planners began to prepare for the assault on Havana with an assault force of 12,000 soldiers, slightly more than 14,000 sailors and 3,000 hired hands to crew the nearly 200 transport vessels, and a reserve force of almost 4,000 in North America. 
160
161
The British landed near Havana and quickly captured strategic positions around the city, aided by the fair-weather conditions and a superior force. 
162
Havana putting colonial governor Juan de Prado in a precarious position. Yellow fever was an ally of the Spanish, given their immunity to it, and aided in the British defeat in Cartagena years earlier. 
163
164
165
Had Prado held out another week or two he might have held out forever…or had the North Americans not come when they did, the siege would have failed." 166
The rainy season unleashed yellow fever's full wrath on the remaining British invaders. By mid-October, Albemarle had lost more men to yellow fever than the British had lost in the entire Seven Years' War in all of North America. 
167
168
171
172
In the spring of 1763, warriors from numerous American Indian tribes began besieging outlying British outposts after the policies of General Jeffery Amherst-British
North American commander-imperiled the cultural and economic way of life of the Native Americans. 
173
Valley and Great Lakes region. An outbreak of smallpox occurred in Fort Pitt, and General Amherst ordered Fort Pitt to give blankets from the smallpox hospital to the Indians. 
174
The Seven Years' War, concluded by the Treaty of Paris, ceded Great Britain all Canada, the Great Lakes, the Ohio territory, and the Acadia maritime provinces from
France in 1763. 
175
173 Francis E. Flavin, "A Pox on Amherst: Smallpox, Sir Jeffery, and a Town Named Amherst," Historical Journal of Massachusetts 30, no. 1 (Winter 2002): 10-12. See Also David F. Marley, Wars of the Americas, pp. 297 and Fred Anderson, Crucible of War, pp. 545-53.  174 Oldstone, Viruses, Plagues, and History, 63. Francis Flavin, "A Pox on Amherst" and Elizabeth Fenn, "Biological Warfare in the Eighteenth-Century North America: Beyond Jeffery Amherst" both contend while Amherst discussed giving the Indians blankets with smallpox, it might have been carried out weeks prior before his orders. Jack Diamond in Guns, Germs, and Steel, estimates range up to 95 percent of the original Native Americans were killed by the European invaders by way of war and disease, pp. 359. 175 Baugh, The Global Seven Years War, 1754-1763, 639-40. Many other land secessions took place between Britain, France, and Spain to satisfy the parties to agree to the Treaty of Paris is 1763. See Also Francis Parkman, The Battle for North America, pp 738-46. alliances with the French. Suddenly, the Native Americans were under British rule. 
176
177
178
179
180
181
A series of letters between Colonel Bouquet and General Amherst shows the two discussed the possibilities of intentionally spreading smallpox to the Indians. 
183
184
185
186
187
186 O'Meara, Guns at the Forks, 229-30.
threat near Fort Pitt but incurred heavy losses. 
188
General Amherst's austere policies sparked an uprising from the Indians after the war and the peace treaty signed with France. Pontiac banded several tribes together and launched an assault on the British forts in the Ohio River Valley, surprising the British.
British soldiers weakened by the yellow fever outbreaks in Havana the year prior slowed the response force. British military leaders in the area unleashed smallpox onto the Indians by giving them blankets from the smallpox hospital ward at Fort Pitt. The epidemic quickly spread through the Indians, weakening the warrior army leading to their eventual defeat in the Pittsburgh area by Colonel Bouquet. Both sides felt the effects of disease unleashed by a foe. But in the end, the use of biological warfare allowed Britain to consolidate its newlywon hold on North America.
The cases considered in this chapter highlight the devastating effects of disease when introduced to societies without immunities. Each of the great powers relied on superior military and technology forces to conquer a substantially larger force-altering the New World borders and Old World order of power in the process.
The introduction of disease into a susceptible population-whether intentional or not-is the commonality. The cases of imperial conquest in the New World all benefited from the introduction of disease into society. Smallpox overcame the Aztecs and the Native Americans, a factor as important as military field operations. The Spanish used immunities gained from disease to fortify the Americas from European invaders. The British were able to seize a Spanish stronghold. Once yellow fever set in, they did not have the force required to sustain the fort, much fewer operations in the Caribbean, and it had lasting effects on their responses to the Indians in North America. Pontiac's rebellion strained the already overextended British force, and biological warfare likely proved to be the tactic required to quell the Native American uprising. Much like the empires in the previous chapter, 188 Peckham, 213.
This chapter will examine twentieth-century pandemics and the medical breakthroughs to combat disease's effects on society by institutions and governments.
Scientific advances and institutional infrastructure give researchers the ability to study and mitigate certain diseases unlike any time in history, creating a "technocracy" of disease control. The cases below suggest that disease in a globalized world can be both a motivation for collaboration and a device of GPC.
The first case is the 1918 Spanish Flu pandemic-arising in the concluding months of WWI-that engulfed the globe killing an estimated 50 million people. 
189
The act of preventing pandemics not only protects a nation's power but establishes a field of GPC unto itself.
Early in 1918, a pandemic began to sweep through the world-aided by natural virulence and troop and refugee mass movement-creating the most recorded disease event in human history. 
190
192
193
194
195
196
197
Disease often accompanies concentrated human activity and movement; the Great Influenza was no different. The U.S.' entrance into WWI in 1917 required full engagement by the American people. Like American soldiers living in close quarters at Camp Funston, millions of factory workers crammed into the cities and lived in similar, tight quarters. 
198
200
As with most other disease outbreaks in earlier chapters, several waves struck. By
August 1918, the disease returned with even deadlier effects in France and made its way back across the Atlantic to begin a second wave in the U.S. 
201
203
WWI. 204 198 Barry,
132. 199 Spinney,
Laura Spinney Pale Rider,
37.
The significant global death toll probably paved the way for scientific research to collect specimen samples for analysis, unlike previous epidemics in history. 
205
206
207
emerged as a global power-albeit a reluctant one-superseding the Old-World Eurasian empires, but that transition was caveated by a sense of internationalism-of which disease control was a foundational component. 
208
209
210
208 Adam Tooze, The Deluge: The Great War, America and the Remaking of the Global Order, 1916-1931 (New York: Penguin Books, 2014), 3-4. The European continent was decimated after the war. The industrial buildup in the United States left it in a position to emerge as a new super power.
209 Tooze, 333-34.  League of Nations health branch dissolved at the onset of WWII, but after the war's conclusion, the WHO emerged in 1948 as a separate, independent organization from the UN unlike its predecessor relying on a parent body. 
211
212
This health organization aims to fight disease in all nations, not just the superpowers. In this case, disease was an agent of great power exhaustion and the making of a truly international society.
The previous chapter highlighted the Spanish and British weaponization of smallpox for power advancement in earlier eras. Attempts to eradicate disease in the twentieth century are strife with questions of power and competition between nations.
Smallpox has long been a feared disease and has ravaged society for millennia. Smallpox killed nearly 300 million people in the Twentieth Century alone. Ironically, as early as the 1700s, the first vaccine ever was developed to protect humans from smallpox infection. 
213
214
An ancient disease, and often confused as a plague (bubonic), smallpox differs because survivors develop lifelong immunities. 
215
216
217
218
219
221
supported the WHO when the government witnessed the USSR's successful smallpox eradication within its borders. 
222
In 1980, reports arose of outbreaks of a mysterious disease with unusual infections and forms of cancer and pneumonia in otherwise healthy individuals. 
226
227
228
AIDS most likely originated in Africa, but the world's connectedness facilitated its movement throughout the world similar to the Mongol Empire and the spread of the Black Plague throughout Europe. 
229
230
Intelligence Agency began to model infection predictions, and the chairman of the National 226 Hays, Epidemics and Pandemics, 427.   227 McNeill, Plagues and Peoples, 9.   228 Hays, Epidemics and Pandemics, 444 and McNeill, Plagues and Peoples, 11..   229 McNeill, Plagues and Peoples, 10-11.   230 Hays, Epidemics and Pandemics, 433.  ten thousand of the four million-plus infected able to afford the treatment. 
238
239
240
241
The global response to AIDS shows the relevance of disease despite the medical advances in containment. Medical researchers had no cure, and treatment of AIDS, was costly leaving many regions in the world unable to afford the "cocktail" treatments. Nations with the resources to minimize and distribute AIDS treatment to those incapable provided an avenue for increased influence. The withholding of relief by a Great Power until certain conditions are met puts an impoverished nation at its mercy. Desperation can lead to irrational decisions during an epidemic, whatever the intentions of the Great Power behind the offer.
The cases considered in this chapter illustrate twentieth-century pandemics and the global efforts to combat their effects. Disease in a globalized world is not only an incentive for cooperation but can also be a tool of GPC. Medical breakthroughs allowed the world 238 Hays, Epidemics and Pandemics, 445.   239 Hays, 445. Pharmaceutical companies have taken legal action against nations to prevent the sale of generic versions of AIDS cocktails. In 2000, one company announced legal action against Ghana to prevent generic cocktails, and the Ghanaian government backed down rather than offend the company. 240 Oldstone, Viruses, Plagues, and History, 282.  to control diseases' effects therapeutically and gave a chance for eradication. Affluent nations can influence impoverished regions and the opportunity to gain power in the area if not challenged by another authority.
The Spanish Influenza outbreak in 1918 during WWI was the world's first twentieth-century pandemic. Despite being consumed with war and its immediate after effects, the U.S. and other countries cooperated and distributed the knowledge gained from 
This chapter will examine two novel disease outbreaks that originated in China and their regional/global impacts. In both cases, the PRC's ability to conceal and then contain the effects of disease within its borders while neighboring regions struggled created exploitation opportunities. Medical technology, healthcare availability, government control, and globalization have generated a system reliant on transnational assistance but susceptible to manipulation. Once again, the threat of a global disease in the interconnected world both incentivized cooperation and drove great power competition. Each case displayed how disease can alter a regional leader's position when other nations cannot mitigate the effects of an outbreak. impacts on the international system when a great power can recover quickly from an outbreak and offer assistance. SARS and COVID-19 initially infected a nation, then spread-whether intentionally or not-requiring global cooperation to contain and combat the threats they posed. However, in both cases, China recovered quickly and then portrayed a message of strength and offered material assistance as its own form of GPC. The consequences of the initial handling of the pandemic by China and its effect on China's rival India remains to be seen, but U.S. unpreparedness for COVID-19 revealed a gap in policy.
disease did not respond to treatments proven effective against other diseases with similar symptoms, meaning the likelihood of discovering a vaccine was low. advance power because of their ability to contain and overcome COVID-19 illness effects and lockdowns designed to prevent the spread. The speed in the development of the COVID-19 vaccine is impressive and required to end the pandemic. The cooperation among governments and private corporations demonstrates how effective a globalized world can be for disease control. That said, the race to return to normalcy has created "vaccine nationalism," like the HIV treatment inequality covered in Chapter Five, as countries choose whether to immunize their citizens first or distribute to the world. 270 U.S. and EU hesitation in exporting the vaccine has created the opportunity for China to enhance its footprint in developing regions through assistance. 
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
However damaging the disease might seem, the country of its origin, China, used the COVID-19 crisis to position itself as a responsible world leader in the wake of disaster. 
279
280
281
282
283
284
285
Communal outbreaks of COVID-19 occurred in numerous other provinces, and once detected, similar lockdowns to Wuhan went into place-affecting millions more around the country. 
286
287
288
While other countries struggled to provide the supplies needed to fight a pandemic, China shipped N95 masks, protective suits, testing kits, ventilators, and loans to over 120 countries as substantial evidence of Chinese success messaging. 
289
291
292
293
294
303
304
305
306
307
308
relationship with yet another ally further showcased the extent the Chinese will go to unbalance the international order. U.S. inattentiveness against a predictable threat-disease in this case-left a gap for destabilization and showed a weakness in American strategy. 
309
310
The short-term effects on the international order caused by COVID-19 remain conditional. Current trends favor an increase in Chinese influence in Europe, Africa, and Asia by the BRI, the Health Silk Road, and their vaccine diplomacy. The United States and other nations' mishandling of the pandemic left a void of influence, which China has filled with medical supplies, financial aid, and vaccine priority. In this case, China's handling of the pandemic put it in a favorable position over other great powers. The apparent selflessness of China to export vaccines over the internal distribution of vaccines furthers its position as a solution to the problem. Until the pandemic subsides and the pandemic "new normal" is no more, it will be challenging to predict how the international order will fall, but signs point towards a realignment of power.
In both cases, a novel disease escaped from China because of global connectedness, and international cooperation turned the tide of the disease in the case of SARS. However, it still cannot be determined for COVID-19 yet. However, the power competition which emerged further fueled an ongoing struggle in power politics. The first, SARS, was contained regionally, while the second, COVID-19, astounded the world and became a global pandemic. Despite current medical technologies, globalization has connected the 308 Lal.
The "plague gap" throughout the history of international relations exposed the critical exclusion of disease as a contributor to power shifts. The cases here reveal the underlying strain disease has put on the essential elements of power-military, economic, political, societal, and technological means and resources in the international system. This thesis identified the fundamental nature of disease as one of the variables in GPC, and one that has not received adequate attention given the stakes.
A theme became evident about disease's impact on national power during the course of this research: connectedness is both a source of power in the movement of people Disease also affects power transitions by eroding human resources, occasional leadership death and societal chaos. The Athenians, Romans, Byzantines, Aztecs, British, Native Americans experienced manpower disruptions because of disease. The shortages hindered the groups' ability to fill the military ranks because of disease and caused the eventual transfer of power in the region. In the case of Athens, the Romans, and the Aztecs, the death of charismatic leadership sent the empires into turmoil and destabilized them.
The societal turmoil spans from the "Golden Age" of Athens to the most recent pandemic in this thesis-COVID-19.
Disease may also be used strategically as an offensive or defensive weapon to pursue or sustain power. In the Spanish conquistadors in Mexico and the British Army in North America, disease played a lead role in the power transition. The Spanish unknowingly introduced smallpox to the Aztecs, and the British knowingly introduced smallpox to the Native Americans. In each case, the defender could not overcome smallpox. Contrary to the previous offensive uses of disease, the Spanish in Cuba showcased the power of disease as a defense. The Spanish New World colonizers understood their immunities to yellow fever and designed their fortifications to greater expose the British to the effects of disease. The British might have realized the lessons learned from Havana and implemented the tactic against the Native Americans.
Disease may either foster global cooperation or competition. The effort to eradicate smallpox saw the unlikely alliance between the U.S. and the USSR during the Cold War.
The collaboration highlighted how effective the fight against disease could be if the Great Powers combined resources for the greater good. The smallpox vaccine diplomacy was a success story, and in large, smallpox has remained eradicated globally. The fight against
10 Morgenthau, Politics among Nations; the Struggle for Power and Peace, 40. 11 Morgenthau, 225-26.
10 Morgenthau, Politics among Nations; the Struggle for Power and Peace, 40. 11 Morgenthau, 225-26.
61 Kyle Harper, The Fate of Rome: Climate, Disease, and the End of an Empire (Princeton, NJ: 64 Harper, 17. See Also Brian Campbell, The Romans and Their World: A Short Introduction.
61 Kyle Harper, The Fate of Rome: Climate, Disease, and the End of an Empire (Princeton, NJ: 64 Harper, 17. See Also Brian Campbell, The Romans and Their World: A Short Introduction.
81 Hays, Epidemics and Pandemics, 20. C. THE BYZANTINE EMPIRE: THE PLAGUE OF JUSTINIAN (541-547 CE) After Marcus Aurelius died in 180 CE, the reign of what was known as the Five Good Emperors ended, marking the beginning of a long decline of power for the Roman Empire in the West. 87 The Western Roman Empire fell after a series of invasions in 476 CE, but its Eastern counterpart lived on in the form of the Byzantine Empire for another millennium. The capital Constantinople provided a strategic position straddling the European/Asian continents, provided better harbors for shipping, and closer proximity to Asian trading powers than the Italian Peninsula. 88 Under Emperor Justinian's rule beginning in 527, the Byzantine Empire recovered numerous western provinces, sustained a short peace with the Persians and increased expansion eastward. 89 Constantinople became a global hub for trade, and its connections with India and China put not only people and goods on the move but also new diseases.
91 William Rosen, Justinian's Flea: The First Great Plague and the End of the Roman Empire
91 William Rosen, Justinian's Flea: The First Great Plague and the End of the Roman Empire
While often maligned, the Mongol Empire was a sophisticated experiment in the early modern state and empire building. Genghis Khan discarded the feudal system of aristocratic privilege and birth; he created a new approach based on individual merit, loyalty, and achievement and connected Europe with Asia by organizing trading towns along the Silk Road to create history's largest free trade zones.
While often maligned, the Mongol Empire was a sophisticated experiment in the early modern state and empire building. Genghis Khan discarded the feudal system of aristocratic privilege and birth; he created a new approach based on individual merit, loyalty, and achievement and connected Europe with Asia by organizing trading towns along the Silk Road to create history's largest free trade zones.
[inside]
[inside]
137 Nobel
137 Nobel
What might happen in the next outbreak of disease if Chinese deception leads to a worldwide pandemic? The COVID-19 outbreak might answer the question.
John J. Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, Updated edition. (New York: WWNorton & Company,
2014), 55. 2 Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers (New York: Random House, 1987), xv-xvi.
McNeill, Plagues and Peoples, 9.   
McNeill, Plagues and Peoples,[15][16] See also Marcia C. Inhorn and Peter Brown, "The Anthropology of Infectious Disease."
Parker, 
Parker, 
Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel,15.   
Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel, 
P. V. N. Myers, Rome: Its Rise and Fall; A Text-Book for High Schools and Colleges. (Boston: Ginn & Company, 1900), 371, http://hdl.handle.net/2027/hvd.hnjxec.
Hays, Epidemics and Pandemics, 23.   
Baugh, The Global Seven Years War, 1754-1763, 647.   
Howard H. Peckham, Pontiac and the Indian Uprising, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961), 212-13.
Hays, Epidemics and Pandemics, 385.   
Spinney, Laura Spinney Pale Rider, 246. Despite President Woodrow Wilson proposing the creation of the League of Nations, the United States never joined the League of Nations.
Oldstone, 278.   
The Lancet, "Li Wenliang," The Lancet 395, no. 10225 (February 29, 2020): 682, http://dx.doi.org.libproxy.nps.edu/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30382-2. Dr. Wenliang later died after contracting COVID-19 from one of his patients.
Yang, "Domestic Contestation, International Backlash, and Authoritarian Resilience."    
Annie Sparrow, "The Chinese Government's Cover-Up Killed Health Care Workers Worldwide," Foreign Policy, March 18, 2021, https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/03/18/china-covid-19-killed-health-careworkers-worldwide/.
285
Sparrow. 286 Castanon and Esomonu, "Why is China Containing COVID-19 Better
than the US?". 287 Amy Gunia, "Would China's Draconian Coronavirus Lockdown Work Anywhere Else?," Time, March 13, 2020, https://time.com/5796425/china-coronavirus-lockdown/.
John Arquilla and Nancy Roberts, "How the Coronavirus Exposed the Flaws in America's Security Strategy," The National Interest (The Center for the National Interest, August 16, 2020), https://nationalinterest.org/feature/how-coronavirus-exposed-flaws-america%E2%80%99s-securitystrategy-166830.
310Arquilla and Roberts.   
AIDS disease overtook a society and inflicted heavy losses to civilian and military populations.
Indigenous societies' inability to respond to the diseases the invading forces brought weakened them. It allowed the Great Powers to conquer and hold territory, reshaping the New World and the GPC to control it.
Intelligence Council, Fritz Ermarth, said: "This is one of those new-age issues, and nobody else is doing anything." 
231
232
233
234
235
237
237 Gellman, "Death Watch," 3.
The SARS epidemic outbreak in 2003 and initially brought comparisons to the Spanish Influenza pandemic. 
242
243
244
The first case of SARS appeared in mid-November 2002 in Foshan, Guangdong. It quickly spread to several other nearby cities before rapidly spreading through different regions in China and then to 35 other countries within months. 
245
246
247
248
260
261
262
263
264
265
AIDS demonstrated another worldwide collaboration to eliminate disease. However, the potential competition to provide treatments for nations unable to afford the "cocktails" foreshadow the COVID-19 vaccine diplomacy employed by China today.
Finally, disease fighting narratives play a role in projecting success and power. In SARS and COVID-19, China isolated the disease outbreak and then exported a success storyline, which painted a positive picture of their handling of the situation, despite the back story. When combined with desperation from other countries engulfed in disease containment efforts, the best answer might not often be the correct answer in GPC. The struggle of the U.S. and the EU created a potential power transition to China. China had the will and ability to mitigate the pandemic. This provided an outlet for China to leverage influence over nations that had previously relied on the U.S. or EU for support. All these questions are unanswerable right now, but the international order will become apparent as the dust settles. Future research will be needed once COVID-19 concludes. The global position-in terms of influence-of each Great Power before and after COVID-19 will provide a clearer picture. Two effects seem probable: novel diseases will continue to infect societies; and how a nation responds to the impact of disease will determine whether it gains or loses power.