# ID: 8b6ebf6666a54510aaf62934a2bfe590
# Title: Moving Beyond Reflection and Discussion: The Case for Canada to Craft a National Security Strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
Historically, the government and people of Canada have been content with defining the country's national security through a healthy economy and the protection of societal values. Historical tendencies suggest Canada has perceived few, if any, existential threats and has rested on its geo-strategic position as a means unto itself of providing security. Moreover, Canadian strategic culture has been heavily influenced by the United States, guiding national security interests through an opportunistic approach. But no longer; the Government of Canada (GoC) stated it will not be a "client-state" within the international order; rather, the GoC seeks to positively shape it. In June 2017, the state clearly articulated its national security objectives. Since that time however, there has been no next step to achieve Canada's stated policy objectives. This paper engages the reader in understanding the vital role a national security strategy plays in the policy-strategy relationship as a tool to centrally manage all instruments of national power in the pursuit of Canada's interests. Moreover, through an examination of the global security environment, the application of power and the conceptual approaches a state may take to national security strategy formulation, this paper demonstrates the relevance and value a national security strategy could bring to Canada's national security framework. Strategies are not born of "immaculate conception." A positive change is required in Canada's national security framework.
We must act as a united people. By that I mean a people who, through reflection and discussion, have arrived at a common understanding of our interests and our purposes.
-The Right Honourable Louis St. Laurent, Secretary of State for External Affairs, 1947   When St. Laurent spoke these words in Toronto in 1947, delivering the Gray Lecture address under the premise of defining Canada's foreign policy objectives, his true goal was to unite the country, having recognized a split along Anglo and French cultural lines. He knew if
Canada was to have any hope of achieving national interests through the application of meaningful national strategies, the country would first have to band together. Over seventy years later, it would seem Canada continues to suffer from the same affliction -an inability to put its full weight behind the pursuit of its national interests.
Enter the concept of a country's national security strategy (NSS), a national statement of how, and with what means, a country will pursue its national security interests. Foundationally, the concept of a country's national security framework speaks to its strategic culture and the need for a strong national base upon which to build national security policy and an NSS, the latter designed to serve several purposes. Chief among them being to direct and coordinate government sub-strategies, to include all instruments of national power, in pursuit of government national security policy objectives. Yet since confederation in 1867, Canada has only once produced an NSS, in 2004, with the expressed purpose of building "a system that works to continually enhance the security of Canadians and contribute to the creation of a safer world."
1
Freeland, Canada's national security framework needs to chart a path that "serves the interests of all Canadians and upholds our broadly held national values; that preserves and nurtures Canadian prosperity and security; and that contributes to our collective goal of a better, safer, more just, more prosperous, and sustainable world." 2 Based on this expression of government intent, and armed with an understanding of the policy-strategy relationship provided within this paper, the role and value of a Canadian NSS document will become evident.
A forecast of the future security environment reveals a world best characterized as complex and unpredictable. These terms are of course relative and it is not being suggested that Canada has not faced complex global issues in the past; however, what is unique in the current environment is the emergence of a global system wherein, "the United States has retreated from its post-1945 role as the dominant underwriter of a liberal international order." 3 As such, and as made evident in Canada's foreign policy, Canada will not and cannot solely rely on seeking shelter beneath a United States umbrella of security; Canada will not be a "client state." 4 By way of impact and as assessed by professor of international and defense policy, Dr. Kim Nossal, "Canada will have to get serious about defense policy." 5 By extension, this argument magnifies the necessity for the Government of Canada (GoC) to get serious about national security policy.
In Canada's June 2017 foreign policy statement, the GoC communicated its vision to its citizens and to the world, as to where it sees itself in the world. However, the GoC has not moved beyond this policy statement, remaining absorbed in St. Laurent's call for reflection and discussion as opposed to articulating a whole of government (WoG) strategy that defines the ways and means of positively shaping the country's future. An NSS document would serve as a viable tool for the GoC to coordinate a WoG effort to pursue its objective of working "tirelessly"
to shape a rules-based international order. 
6
At the heart of this issue is Canada's strategic culture, which will be reviewed in detail. Further, an assessment of the critical issues posed by the future global security environment will highlight the critical role a Canadian NSS document could play in applying all instruments of national power in pursuit of national interests. A brief overview of NSS developmental approaches will then be explored to determine how key allies crafted their own strategies and how these lessons can be applied to the Canadian national security discourse. Finally, the concept of emergent strategy will be explored to determine its pertinence in the development of a Canadian NSS.
This paper offers the reader the opportunity to uncover the relevance an NSS document would offer Canadians, as the GoC pursues its interests on the world stage. The challenges posed by the world today demand an internally coordinated response. The time for reflection and discussion has passed; the GoC articulated its national security policy objectives, it must now take decisive action to coordinate the ways and means to achieve them.
Fundamental in examining the best means for Canada to articulate its NSS is the need to have a foundational understanding of the policy-strategy relationship. There is a healthy level of debate among foreign policy academics and practitioners alike as to the definition of strategy and its relationship with policy. For the purposes of this paper, policy is defined as the overarching idea or intent of the government on a given matter. Oxford professor of history Hew Strachan described policy as providing the "logic" of an issue; policy guides strategy development, outlining the national objectives to be attained. 
7
8
In the context of national security, a policy statement theoretically directs the formulation of a wholistic national security strategy, which in turn directs subordinate instruments of national security strategy, such as a national defense strategy (NDS). This simple construct is represented below in Figure 
1
9
In practice, the policy-strategy relationship deviates from the theoretical model. The relationship between the two is iterative rather than linear, with policy objectives both directing and adjusting to the ways and means that strategy outlines are available to achieve them.
10
11
As presented, the policy-strategy relationship in practice, much like in theory, promotes the requirement for a government to have an overarching strategy to optimally guide substrategies in the pursuit of national objectives and to allow for appropriate policy modifications.
As noted however, Canada has only once produced an NSS. It is therefore necessary to explore how the GoC has approached national security in the past, to gain an appreciation of the continued relevance of the state's national security paradigm.
To create positive within the Canadian national security framework, one first needs to understand Canada's historic approach to national security. From confederation through to the passing of the Statute of Westminster in 1931, which granted full autonomy to the Dominion of Canada, the country's national security policy was defined by the British Empire. Immediately thereafter, the nation was consumed with maintaining its economy throughout the 1930s, leading to its first major sovereign national security decision, the declaration of war on Germany in 1939, albeit without any real alternative.
12
(9/11) era. Through a brief examination of past national policies and practices during this timeframe, a theme is revealed wherein past Canadian governments have chosen to focus their efforts on defining national security through Canada's economic prosperity and placating to the demands of a population divided along cultural and regional lines rather than developing any descriptive NSS.
To gain an appreciation of Canada's national security history post-World War II, a good starting point is St. Laurent's Gray Lecture address in 1947. Canadian historians view his address as the first willful outline of Canadian foreign policy objectives, described by some textbooks as being "the most authoritative definition of Canadian foreign policy" and by extension, the foundation of a national security framework. 
13
In the present day, as historian Dr. Adam Chapnik described, Canadian unity "remains central in Canadians' minds and plays a central role in foreign policy formulation." 14 As such, the dominant theme in Canadian foreign policy discourse was, and remains, an inability to reach common thought on the fundamentals underpinning government policy such that descriptive strategies may be developed. As is the case for Canada's current national security framework, the question arises as to whether or not a lack of national unity is the critical obstacle in producing an NSS document. If the GoC is unwilling to authoritatively express and commit to national security objectives for want of defining national interests, it stands to reason that it would be difficult to formulate any form of meaningful strategy.
13 Adam Chapnick, "The Gray Lecture and Canadian Citizenship in History," American Review of Canadian 
Studies 37, no. 4 (2007): 443-57, 451. 14 Ibid., 454.
15
16
18
19
20
Laurent's call for national unity, socio-economic issues continued to divide the country with successive governments placing even greater value in addressing these matters. The risk of this historical tendency lies in present and future Canadian governments continuing to demonstrate a proclivity to allow social issues and short-term budget planning for defense and security to drive national security policy to a larger extent than a rational national security planning process. 
21
22
18
McAuley also cites additional military historians and Canadian politicians who note Canada as lacking a military culture.
obfuscates how the government could choose to apply soft power to achieve national security interests. 
23
24
The following portion of the paper will address Canada's national security framework in an attempt to better understand how the nation can best articulate its security strategy.
Countries facing strategic threats that demand a WoG response necessitates a comprehensive strategy to achieve desired goals. As renowned national security academic and practitioner Joseph Nye argues in The Future of Power, the ability for a country to get the outcomes it desires rests upon a "new narrative" of judiciously applying all instruments of national power in concert with each other; efforts must be taken to counter the "misconception" that elements of national power can be used in isolation to achieve policy objectives. 
25
23
24
25
26
States, there is no codified requirement within Canadian statutes that mandates the government to produce an NSS. 
27
2
27
28
29
If there is be hope of achieving them, a comprehensive strategy is needed. A clear expression of government intent served as a partial catalyst that warranted the Paul Martin government to produce an NSS in 2004.
As Paul Martin took the reigns as Prime Minister of Canada in late 2003, he was set to lead Canada in the formational years of the post-9/11 security environment. The idea of Canadians being insulated from the evils of the world was disproven. The traditional approach to matters of Canadian national security, that of leveraging the safety of Canada's geo-strategic position, was arguably rendered insufficient to deal with the complexity of global affairs at the time. 
30
31
Canada's national security objectives, referenced by successive governments, for the decade following Paul Martin's departure in 2007. Although the proceeding Stephen Harper conservative government announced its intention to release an updated NSS in 2007, Canada's national security framework instead reverted to the historical trend of leveraging the national defense strategy along with the release of multiple foreign policy statements to serve as a proxy for an NSS. The gaps in such an approach however are easily recognizable. In their research, Canadian board member of the Conference of Defense Associations, Don Macnamara, and Director of the Security Sector Management programme at Cranfield University, Dr. Ann Fitz-Gerald, described this gap as a functional one, contributing to "limited or poor analysis and less than coherent and consistent policy development or decision making." 32 Canada's NDS of 2007 entitled Canada First Defence Strategy, articulated that the NDS was meant to support "broader national security and foreign policy objectives," implying the existence of a central strategy to fuse the GoC's instruments of national power. This inference lends credence to the previously discussed practical role served by an NSS in the policy-strategy relationship. However, the means and ways of centrally coordinating national security interests never materialized under the Harper government, leading to criticism that his government needed to get a "strategic grip on the national security agenda" and produce an NSS. 
33
The current Justin Trudeau government, which took power in 2015, undertook a consultative process in 2016 to engage Canadians on the subject of national security. Our Security, Our Rights, a Green Paper released to solicit feedback from Canadians, focused on Canada's home-game, seeking to understand what should be the appropriate level of impact on the rights of Canadians in the development of security related laws and regulations. 
34
32
35
There is presently no next step defined by the current government to develop an NSS.
The absence of a signal from the government to develop an NSS is lamentable. Given the volatility of the current international order and the complexity of the security environment, an azimuth check, at the very least, is required on Canada's 2004 NSS. Although Canada released a new defence policy in 2017, Strong, Secure, Engaged, it is, as has been argued, an insufficient tool to address national security writ large. Notwithstanding a description of national objectives and a forward from the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the 2017 NDS is focused exclusively on the Department of Defense. As argued by Cox, Strong, Secure, Engaged fails to address the broader issues of defense and security, describing the document as being "not a full defence policy for the Government of Canada." 
36
35
36
It would behoove the government to conduct a holistic review of national security to provide specificity to domestic policy statements contained in the current national security [policy statement] and to ensure alignment with its international policy goals. Given the significant public consultation that has occurred during the Defence Policy Review and the ongoing National Security Green Paper 2016 process, the government is ideally situated to begin formulating a comprehensive policy statement on national security. 
37
38
The Perpetual Challenge of Defining What it Means to be Canadian Before a determination can be made as to how Canada can best articulate its national security interests, those interests first need to be defined. Such definition can be articulated in part through strategic culture. Analysis of Canada's strategic culture reveals a country and government with a historical reliance on other states to aid in defining its national objectives and a population with divergent views on what comprises the state's national interests. Historically, this has forced multiple governments to adopt an opportunistic approach to statecraft. If the foundation upon which national security policy is built is strategic culture, Canada needs a stronger base; however, disunity cannot be made to become the limiting factor in crafting an NSS.
Much like strategy, there is no consensus on the definition of strategic culture. Military historian and theorist Liddell Hart posited that strategic culture is a statement of a nation's "way of war," which became one accepted school of thought. 
39
40
41
42
43
In terms of geography, Canada's geo-strategic position is unique compared to most states.
Canada is surrounded by three oceans and bordered to the south by its ally and global superpower the United States. Well-endowed with natural resources and a strong economy, historically the state has been able to distance itself from the challenges of the developing world. As previously explained, past governments habitually only acted outside Canadian borders while able to maintain a balance with the country's own internal prosperity. For the better part of Canada's short history, "the common Canadian narrative was about shaping the natural landscape and building up population and industry." 
44
43
46
47
48
Canada's unique geo-strategic position encouraged the establishment of strong bilateral agreements with the United States, specifically related to the economy and security. As concluded by Colonel Laforest, the detailed study of geographic, economic and social factors confirms the existence of a powerful United States influence on the development of Canadian national security policy. 
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
The third component adding to strategic culture is focused on the concept of culture itself; the values, beliefs and norms of a society. In his research on the vast influence culture has on strategic culture, Tremblay described the concept using the German term "weltanschauung," meaning a particular outlook on life. 
56
57
58
55
56
59
61
62
60
63
64
63
64 Adam Chapnick, "The Canadian Middle Power Myth," 200. 
65
66
resting on platitudes and conceit will not guarantee the safeguarding and promotion of our strategic interests. 
67
The Future Needs a Focused Canada A detailed overview of the international order and the future security environment is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, a synopsis of the critical issues associated with each will 67 Scot Robertson, "Finding a Way: National Security and Defence Policy for a New Liberal Leadership," Policy Options, December 1, 2003, accessed October 29, 2018, http://policyoptions.irpp.org/magazines/paul-martin/finding-a-way-national-security-and-defence-policyfor-a-new-liberal-leadership/.
68 Uz Zaman, 76.  be provided, demonstrating a need for Canada to clearly articulate its interests in the pursuit of stability in what will be an uncertain future.
The stability of the current international order, anchored by the United States as the world's sole great power, is perceived to be at risk. In his research report on the subject produced for the RAND Corporation, political scientist Michael Mazaar outlined several threats to the order to include a rise in revisionist powers, increased nationalism, and shifting power balances leading to a, "world adrift." 69 Certainly China's grand strategy, to include the one belt one road initiative, along with Russia's strategic posturing and desire for recognition on the global stage provide evidence of a shift away from stability to a theme of great power competition. Moreover, the volatile policy actions of the current United States administration are creating an unwelcomed sine wave in the steadiness of global alliances. The dramatic withdrawal of the United States president from the May 2018 Group of Seven Summit in Canada after publicly lambasting key allies serves as but one example of the world being in, "serious danger of unraveling." 
70
71
69
70 Andrea Hopkins and David Ljunggren, "U.S.-Canada Dispute Escalates after Tense G7; Trump Renews...," Reuters, June 11, 2018, accessed November 13, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-g7summit-wrapup-idUSKBN1J60TG. 
71
72
73
The GoC recognizes the anticipated shift in the international order as being a significant challenge to its national security. Minister Freeland addressed the issue specifically in her foreign policy statement in June 2017 in stating Canada needs a system wherein, "more powerful countries are constrained in their treatment of smaller ones by standards that are internationally respected, enforced and upheld" or Canada risks being significantly disadvantaged. 
74
73 Nossal,
5. 74
75
76
77
The point being stressed is that the current shift is far less subtle than in the past, providing the impetus for the GoC to articulate a strategy for how it will act, on its own accord, in a shifting world order. The United States is, and will remain, a great ally of Canada; but the nature of the relationship has changed. So too must Canada's approach to articulating its NSS.
The trends of the future security have emerged. The concept of globalization will reign supreme and in a certain context make borders relatively obsolete, creating open access to information, influencing cultures and connecting economic markets. This trend includes the opening of new domains of activity for state and non-state actors, to include space and cyber domains. Transnational crime and terrorism will continue to exploit globalization to pursue respective agendas, challenging states' national security frameworks across the global. Threat states, as defined by Western interests, will also use these domains as they look to exert influence through asymmetric means. In this vein, conflict below the threshold, a term used to describe a level of ambiguous aggression falling below that which would incite an armed response from an affected state, will be exploited to avoid western and alliance strengths. 
78
With all this in mind, the strategic utility of force will be proportional to Canada's ability to respond within all domains, invoking all instruments of national power. 
79
In terms of predicting the impact of the future security environment on the utility of force is a challenge. Political scientist Dr. Colin Gray argues that attempting to do so is wasteful and for a country such as Canada, perceived as not facing any existential threat, the only available strategy is to remain as flexible as possible to respond to an unpredictable security environment. 
80
81
These general trends, the shift in the international order and the challenges posed by the future security environment, demonstrate that Canada will face significant risks in the future, more so than those encountered during the past five decades. 82 Canada's geo-strategic position, if not rendered irrelevant, is less advantageous than in the past. Its heavy reliance on the United States as a means to inform national security interests is no longer viable. There needs to be a realization that the world is in a perpetual state of conflict, with ebbs and flows in its intensity and characteristics. The application of power and the comprehensive means to address the challenges of the security environment become paramount to a state's national security. To address these matters, in his book, The Future of Power, Joseph Nye outlines the critical requirement for a state to formulate a WoG response. He describes this comprehensive approach as the judicious application and blending of hard and soft power. A concept focused on achieving behavioural outcomes, the importance of applying the instruments of national power is placed on converting national resources into means to obtain national objectives. 
83
82
83
84
No Strategy is Perfect, but Something is Better than Nothing Notwithstanding the information provided thus far, there remains a lingering question of what purpose an NSS document is meant to serve. In exploring an answer to this question, analysis reveals an NSS can be the product of varying contextual approaches to national security and articulated via different means. Comparative analysis of the approaches to security strategy development espoused by several allied states exposes the relevance of an NSS document for Canada.
In his comparative analysis of several states' national security strategies, Stolberg proposed three primary reasons a state should produce an NSS document. 
85
85
86
With demonstrated practical value, it becomes relevant to explore the conceptual approaches a state may take to develop an NSS, as it will aid in understanding how the GoC could pursue the production of such a document. International relations and strategic studies fellow, Dr. Peter Layton of the Griffith Asia Institute in Australia, posited that there are three overarching conceptual approaches that may be used to develop an NSS, grand strategy, risk management, or opportunism. 
87
88
86
87 Peter Layton, "An Australian National Security Strategy: Competing Conceptual Approaches," Security Challenges 8, no. 3 (2012): 103-20, 104.
88 Donella H. Meadows, Thinking in Systems: A Primer (White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing, 2008), 188. Meadows defines a system as an inter-connected set of elements that interacts in space and time. A complex adaptive system is one that diversifies and evolves over time based on actions within the system, having the ability to make its structure more complex.
emphasizing flexibility in policy and strategy development, described by Layton as "the ship of state is simply sailing on the sea; it has not left a known port nor is it headed towards a desired landfall…the government-is simply seeking to take advantage of any favourable winds." 89 Each conceptual approach will be explored in the context of other state approaches to national security strategy formulation to derive applicable lessons to the Canadian national security discourse.
The 2017 United States NSS may serve as the best example of a grand strategy approach to NSS development. The document's expressed purpose of using all instruments of national power to address global threats, making "America First" on the global stage, meets the very definition provided by 
Layton. 90
91
92
89
93
To argue that Canada, as a middle power, is not positioned to employ a grand strategy conceptual approach to NSS development is short-sighted. As Cox argues, the Canadian government must conduct serious intellectual reflection with a "big Canada mind-set" to produce a grand strategy that will enable Canada to optimally pursue its national interest. 
94
95
94
95
96
97
98
99
96
97 Stolberg,
18.
99 Ernest Bower, "Australia's National Security Strategy: Lessons from the Pivot Down Under," Center for Strategic and International Studies (January 31, 2013), accessed November 14, 2018, https://www.csis.org/analysis/australia%E2%80%99s-national-security-strategy-lessons-pivot-down-under. need to compete using hard power. 
100
Firstly, an NSS is not reserved for great powers backed by a realist vision wherein conflict is a means to an end. Australia's NSS was produced using a conceptual grand strategy approach expressly designed to meet Stolberg's previously identified three purposes of coordinating, informing and communicating a state's activities. Secondly, the production of the 2013 Australian NSS was driven by the citizens of Australia, who expressed the need for the government to act within a changing world. The GoC has recognized the world is changing. What seems to be absent however is the awareness of this fact amongst the Canadian public; for it is Canadians, as evidenced by the Australian experience and Canada's own history, who need to give the GoC the mandate to produce an NSS.
From the various comparative studies of states' national security strategies examined for this paper, there are two additional deductions needing to be highlighted. First, there is no best way to conceptually develop an NSS. Its utility however is irrefutable, in that an NSS serves as a navigational beacon for matters of national security, "represent[ing] benefits to both stakeholders and audiences to ensure the security of the respective state." 101 Second, the notion of a perfect strategy is out of reach for most states. Constraints, to include domestic politics and limited resources, will always exist. However, their implications must be crafted into an NSS, vice being viewed as impediments to its production. 
102
101
Stolberg,
112. 102
Given the complexity of the contemporary security environment and the stated need for adaptability in multiple states' approaches to national security, including Canada's, it could be argued that the more flexibility that exists within an NSS, the greater the benefit to the state.
Accordingly, and as noted by political scientist Dr. Inonut Popsecu, there is a growing number of academics promoting the applicability of emergent strategy in the practice of statecraft and by virtue, national security strategy development. 
103
He described emergent strategy as being a series of individual actions and decisions resulting in a realized pattern where one was not purposefully intended. 
104
3
105
106
106
107
109
The need for this flexibility is exemplified in the United States model for NSS development by having a codified annual requirement to produce a strategy report to re-shape any of the components of the NSS based on changes in the environment.
One must also remember that the means of achieving national security interests are allocated within a bureaucratic system, which is purposefully deliberate and unable to keep pace with an emergent approach to NSS formulation. To overcome such a challenge, Canada would need to "reinvent the architecture and ideology of modern management." 110 An examination of government systems is beyond the scope of this paper; suffice it to say that bureaucracy impedes 
108
Undoubtedly, there is great attraction to apply the concept of emergent strategy to Canadian statecraft as it supports that which is arguably preferred by most politicians, ambiguity.
Moreover, adopting an emergent strategy approach is made even more attractive when considered in combination with McAuley's argument that a grand strategic conceptual approach to NSS formulation is lost on Canada. He described the state's strategic objectives as being "positional rather than aspirational" and that Canada was "not in a position to seek an independent condition B based solely on its own interests."
111
112
Rather, its applicability in NSS formulation lies in allowing for flexibility within a given strategy yet not negating the need to provide the framework of the strategy itself. In so doing, a state would be better poised to achieve Mintzberg's description of an effective strategy, one that mixes the characteristics of deliberate and emergent strategy "in ways that reflect the conditions at hand, notably the ability to predict as well as the need to react to unexpected events." 113 There will always need to be inherent flexibility embedded within a national security framework to respond to emerging threats and "black swans" which risk attaining national security objectives. 114 These challenges however demand intellectual rigour on the front-end of statecraft vice solely employing that rigour in a crisis management context due to lack of forethought. The argument for emergent strategy in statecraft is one for the necessity to monitor and adjust to changes within a complex adaptive system. There is no disputing this requirement; however, there needs to be a baseline from which to adjust and a framework strategy in which to operate.
There is talk occasionally about flexible planning, but as with the pregnant virgin, the obvious contradiction is seldom addressed -except, of course, by those who believe in planning as immaculate conception.
-Henry Mintzberg, Canadian author and academic on business and management Through examining multiple facets of Canada's national security discourse, this paper has attempted to demonstrate the benefits bestowed upon Canada by producing an NSS document, serving as a tool to coordinate government sub-strategies and to operationalize the government's policy objectives. Undeniably, there are challenges in pursuing such a path and the GoC can always find reason, notably exercising the politically safe option of being strategically ambiguous, to steer away from crafting an NSS. However as Mintzberg wrote, "not to our fantasies -may they mostly fall as fast as they rise -but to the wonders of reality" must the 
113 Mintzberg,
25. 114
115
Consider first that the global security environment has changed. Although change has occurred throughout the Canada's history, the key difference now is that Canada can no longer find safety in its geo-strategic position. There is recognition within multiple government documents that, "the global security environment transcends national borders, requiring Canada to help promote peace and stability abroad in order to maintain security at home." 116 Yet Canada is aligned with allies who view existential threats to their applicable position within the international order and the GoC articulated key strategic and existential threats to the nation via its most recent foreign policy statement. It stands to reason therefore that Canada would have, and need, a comprehensive strategy to address these threats, as strategy provides the required "grammar" for the logic of a given policy. 
117
118
115 Mintzberg,
dedication. 116
117
118
119
Second, there needs to be a realization within Canada's psyche that national security extends beyond defense. Canada's tendency to rely on its NDS to act as a proxy for an NSS is an incomplete approach to national security; it fails to leverage the value of using an NSS as a means to coordinate a WoG effort towards the pursuit of national interests. In their analysis of Canada's national security framework, Macnamara and Fitzgerald arrive at the very conclusion that GoC planners fail to clearly understand that national security, "goes beyond…military issues and takes into account the whole range of government activities." 120 Canada's national security interests cannot be solely attained through the application of military force; it demands, as Rupert Smith argued, a coordinated effort of all levers of national power, enumerating objectives to be achieved along with a corresponding resource allocation. 121 Such a coordinated effort is the application of Joseph Nye's "Smart Power" concept, practically exercised through an NSS.
Canada possesses a well-articulated foreign policy statement, providing the necessary logic to guide strategy development. Unfortunately, there is a break in the policy-strategy relationship, an easily discernable gap in the expression of the ways and means to achieve the ends. It is not enough for the GoC to allow its ship of state to be at the mercy of the winds of the international order. Nye reinforced this position in noting that from a "policy-oriented perspective, intentions matter in terms of getting preferred outcomes;" in order to have a chance 
119
120
121 Smith,
378,
391.
123
58  
58  
62 Paul Gecelovsky, "Constructing a Middle Power: Ideas and Canadian Foreign Policy," Canadian Foreign Policy Journal 15, no. 1 (2009):
62 Paul Gecelovsky, "Constructing a Middle Power: Ideas and Canadian Foreign Policy," Canadian Foreign Policy Journal 15, no. 1 (2009):
109 Ibid.
109 Ibid.
Privy Council Office, Government of Canada, Securing an Open Society: Canada's National Security Policy (Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada,
2004), Prime Minister's forward.
Global Affairs Canada, Government of Canada.
Hew Strachan, The Direction of War: Contemporary Strategy in Historical Perspective (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 13.
Arthur F Lykke, "Defining Military Strategy," Military Review (January/February 1997): 183- 86, 183.   
James Cox, "Canadian Defence Policy and Grand Strategy," in "The Strategic Outlook for  Canada 2017," ed. David McDonough and Charles Davies, Vimy Paper, no. 34 (2017): 7-14, 9.   
Strachan, 45.   
Alan G. Stolberg, How Nation-States Craft National Security Strategy Documents (Carlisle Barracks, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War College, 2012), 2-3.
Major-General Éric Tremblay and Dr. Bill  Bentley, "Canada's Strategic Culture: Grand Strategy and the Utility ofForce," Canadian Military Journal 15, no. 3 (2015): 5-17, 12.   
William J. McAuley, "Beyond Delusions of Grand Strategy: A Centrifugal National Security Strategy for Canada" (PhD. Diss., University of Calgary, 2017), 301.
Philippe Lagassé and Paul Robinson, Reviving Realism in the Canadian Defence Debate (Kingston ON, Canada: Centre for International Relations Queen's University, 2008), 38, accessed August 21, 2018, https://www.queensu.ca/cidp/sites/webpublish.queensu.ca.cidpwww/files/files/publications/Martellos/Mart 34.pdf.
Alan J. Stephenson, "Canadian National Security Culture: Explaining Post 9/11 Canadian National Security Policy Outcomes" (PhD diss., Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada, 201), 155, accessed October 10, 2018, https://curve.carleton.ca/system/files/etd/71aa12ab-b289-4add-af70-7b2d6e0f5e91/etd_pdf/842c00dce2e6714a0c4e3a142b78bb6a/stephensoncanadiannationalsecuritycultureexplaining.pdf.
Alan J. Stephenson, "Canadian National Security Culture: Explaining Post 9/11Canadian National Security Policy Outcomes," 7.
Ibid., 104.    
William J. McAuley, "Beyond Delusions of Grand Strategy: A Centrifugal National Security Strategy for Canada" (PhD. Diss., University of Calgary, 2017), 301.
Lagassé and Robinson, 94.   
Denis Stairs, "The Making of Hard Choices in Canadian Foreign Policy," quoted in Alan J.Stephenson, "Canadian National Security Culture: Explaining Post 9/11 Canadian National Security Policy Outcomes" (PhD diss., Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada, 201), 455.
Alan J. Stephenson, "Canadian National Security Culture: Explaining Post 9/11 Canadian National Security Policy Outcomes," 204.
Don Macnamara and Ann Fitz-Gerald, "A National Security Framework for Canada," Policy Matters 3, no. 10 (October 2003): 7.
Alan J. Stephenson, "Canadian National Security Culture: Explaining Post 9/11 Canadian National Security Policy Outcomes," 205-206.
Alan J. Stephenson, Staying Ahead of Trump on Security Requires a Holistic Review of Canadian National Security (Ottawa, Canada: Canadian Global Affairs Institute, 2017), 5, accessed August 20, 2018, https://www.cgai.ca/staying_ahead_of_trump_on_security_requires_a_holistic_review_of_canadian_nation al_security.
Global Affairs Canada, Government of Canada.
David Barno and Nora Bensahel, "Fighting and  Winning in the Gray Zone," War on the Rocks, May 19, 2015, accessed November 13, 2018, https://warontherocks.com/2015/05/fighting-and-winning-inthe-gray-zone/.
79 Chief of Force Development, Department of National Defence, Government of Canada, The Future Security Environment, 2013-2040 (Winnipeg, Canada: Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, 2014), accessed November 13, 2018, http://www.deslibris.ca/ID/
246204. 80 Colin S. Gray, "The 21st Century Security Environment and the Future of War," Parameters (Winter 2008-2009): 13-26.
Ionut C. Popescu, "Grand Strategy vs. Emergent Strategy in the Conduct of Foreign Policy," Journal of StrategicStudies 41, no. 3 (2018): 438-60, 439.    
Henry Mintzberg, The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning (Free Press, 1994), 25.    
Popescu, 448.   
McAuley, 273.    
Global Affairs Canada, Government of Canada.
I extend my thanks to my monograph director, 
Dr. Barry M. Stentiford
Bronwyn Mulherin
, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other