# ID: 8c31958deb8941aa8c3b3d825661d47a
# Title: Russian weaponization of information and influence in the Baltic States
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Russian soft power and non-military information influence pose significant threats to the integrity of NATO in the Baltic States. Russian media, disinformation, and propaganda, manipulation of political processes, infiltration of Russian language education, and organization of ethnic Russians through formal and informal foreign policy structures may destabilize the Baltic States to the point that Russia can justify military intervention, presenting NATO with a strategic dilemma in the Baltics leading to protracted warfare or dissolution of the alliance. Soviet-style "Active Measures" present challenges reminiscent to those faced during the Cold War, with an asymmetric advantage wielded by a regime intent on maintaining domestic stability while conducting propaganda and disinformation campaigns, thus increasing control over domestic information content and flow. Free societies in the West must account for independent media and for the likelihood that observers will believe the disinformation. These challenges require nuanced and comprehensive strategies that address nefarious influence while preventing escalation between the US and NATO against a revanchist and increasingly authoritarian Russia.
While each country should be considered on its own merits, we believe that the integration of each democracy will be a success for us all and the integration of each democracy will be a success for Europe and NATO.
-Vilnius Group Motto I believe Putin is a man of Russia's past, haunted by lost empire, lost glory, and lost power. Putin potentially can serve as president until 2024. As long as he remains in that office, I believe Russia's internal problems will not be addressed. Russia's neighbors will continue to be subject to bullying from Moscow, and while the tensions and threats of the Cold War period will not return, opportunities for Russian cooperation with the United States and Europe will be limited.
-Robert M. Gates, Duty: Memoirs of a Secretary at War
Throughout the 1980s, rumors first emerged and then spread that the Human Immuno-Deficiency Virus, commonly referred to as HIV, and the cause of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS, was a product of US germ warfare scientists.
The rumor appeared to originate in the Indian press in 1983, republished by the Soviet Journal Literaturnaya Gazeta, and given additional credence by Jakob Segal, an East
German biology professor and Soviet-bloc citizen. Segal made these allegations in print and on television, ignoring collegial pressure to avoid making unsubstantiated Infektion stands as a prominent example of disinformation that persists to this day; even though the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) under Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbechev disavowed the AIDS propaganda campaign, some actors continued to publicize the story, including Segal until his death in 1995. 
2
3
4
Catholic (in Lithuania), while Moscow, a distinctly Eastern culture with historical and religious ties to Byzantium, remained under the auspices of the Orthodox Church. Along with Finland, the Baltics retained their own culture; they were not Slavic, their languages used Roman letters, not Cyrillic, and they maintained their own distinct literatures and traditions. Following the collapse of the Romanov dynasty in 1917, the Baltic States enjoyed 20 years of autonomous self-rule, ending in 1939 as a result of the secret protocols of the Molotov-Ribbentrop agreement between Nazi Germany and the USSR.
While the West never recognized their annexation, the de facto status of Eastern Europe as the Soviet Sphere during the Cold War prevented anything besides rhetoric from the West to influence their status. 
5
6
7
Relations between the East and West had deteriorated since shortly after Vladimir Putin became acting President of Russia following Yeltsin's resignation on New Year's Eve in 1999, and Putin's subsequent electoral victory in March of 2000. 8 President George W. Bush determined to improve relations with Russia and its new leader, going so far as to claim he had a "sense of his soul" after meeting with Putin in Slovakia in June of 2001. This optimism quickly deteriorated in the face of cultural and political differences, such as press freedom, Russian democratic reforms, and Russian support for Iran during nuclear negotiations.
9
10
15
15
Russia's Kaliningrad Oblast, strategically located to interdict access to the region from the Baltic Sea or the land route through Poland. The three nations are relatively small, and their terrain open and flat, providing no space to trade for time or significant advantage for defending forces. Demographically, the three nations combined are not even one-tenth as populous as Russia, and their combined armed forces only equal about a single brigade. If Russia chose to intervene militarily in any of the Baltic States under the pretext of protecting ethnic Russian populations, their invasion would be virtually unopposed and could rupture NATO, undoing almost seven decades of stability and international cooperation in Europe. 
16
Russian soft power and information warfare, as demonstrated in Crimea in 2014, pose significant threats to the integrity of NATO. The Baltic States present a unique vulnerability due to their geographic proximity to Russia and their significant Russian minorities that provide Russian influence a vector into Baltic societies. Russian media, disinformation, propaganda, political manipulation, infiltration of Russian language education, and organization of ethnic Russians through formal and informal foreign policy structures may destabilize the Baltic States to the point that Russia can justify military intervention on the pretext of protecting ethnic Russian minorities. This would present NATO with a strategic dilemma that leaves NATO and the US with no favorable outcome.
Authoritarian regimes, such as Putin's Russia, possess inherent advantages when conducting propaganda or disinformation campaigns, as they exercise more control over the flow and content of domestic media, and thus are able to protect their own domestic stability with little to no regard for liberal democratic norms. Western democracies are not able to exert such control. Western privately owned media companies react to market pressures by publishing low-cost content of dubious quality, and their citizens are largely free to communicate disinformation that conforms to their biases.
US military planners, interagency partners, and the NATO coalition need to reorient Western approaches to Russian strategic information warfare. The purpose of this research is to identify vulnerabilities to Soviet-style active measures and political warfare that have been hallmarks for Putin's revanchist Russian foreign policy since 2000. Soviet foreign policy generally fell into one of three categories. "White" operations were overt public diplomacy and trade. "Black" operations were covert subversive efforts that included kidnapping, assassination, and blackmail. The "Gray" zone of operations included unattributed radio broadcasts, hoaxes published by third parties, and ostensibly independent organizations in fact operating as Soviet fronts. 
17
The Baltic States represent NATO's most exposed military vulnerability. 
18
The following assumptions allow analysis from both the Russian and NATO perspective in regards to the political, military, and information environment in the Baltic States, both as members of NATO and former client states in the Soviet sphere of influence.
The first assumption is that all three nations remain enthusiastic members of the alliance, and do not voluntarily choose a policy akin to "Finlandization;" that is, choosing to subordinate their national foreign policy interests to their larger, more powerful neighbor, in this case Russia, in exchange for not meddling in the smaller state's internal 
18
19
The second assumption is that Russia's current paradigm of hybrid warfare has roots in Soviet active measures. This assumption allows analysis to draw on lessons learned during the tenure of the Active Measures Working Group (AMWG) and the United States Information Agency (USIA), two Cold War institutions that played an important role in US strategy to combat Soviet nonmilitary aggression. The US government dissolved the AMWG in 1992 after the end of the Cold War. The USIA continued until the 1998 Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act abolished the agency in 1999 while reorganizing its broadcast and public diplomacy functions throughout the government.
The final assumption is that Russia will not go forward with military action unless they achieve similar success shaping the information environment as they did in Crimea, thus obviating any value in disinformation or manipulation.
The primary research question asks, "What strategic options exist for the US, NATO, and the Baltic States to respond to Russian soft power incursions of propaganda, 
19
In order to answer the primary question, this research frames the first, and most important, subsidiary research question as determining Russian interests and actions by determining what Russia sees as its own strategic objectives. This includes defining how Russia views its own role in the world, and how Russia views NATO's expansion into the former Soviet sphere.
Next, in order to analyze how Russia uses information, one must also understand how Russian doctrine indicates that propaganda, disinformation, and information warfare complement their conventional and unconventional forces, and how Russia supports these efforts with formal and informal foreign policy structures.
After defining Russia's global interests and mechanisms of influence, one must consider how this relates to the Baltic States, how Russia defines its strategic interests in the region, and the ways that Russia weaponizes information and influence in each country using complementary means. Subordinate to identifying the means of influence are identifying persistent themes, and the audiences targeted by Russia in their influence operations in the Baltics. Understanding the relationships between Russia's ends, ways, and means will ultimately lead to answering the primary research question posed above.
The primary limitation in conducting this research is classification. All of the research conducted for this thesis is open source, and thus unclassified, and all of the resulting analysis is unclassified. This paper does not consider current planning efforts in any military headquarters or interagency forum.
The primary delimitation of this research is that it will only focus on information means as a tool of influence, and will only tangentially consider economic or military means. Second, the research only considers the Baltic States due to the shared cultural and historical experiences of the region, and the unique vulnerabilities the region poses to the NATO alliance. Lastly, this research will only analyze secondary sources, and will not generate new data.
CHAPTER 2
The organization of this chapter corresponds to the subsidiary research questions organized by sequence and topic, with the way that each source contributed to understanding the topic and answering the question. First, this process consisted of a broad overview of background information and evolving relationships between the US and NATO, the Baltics, the USSR prior to collapse, and Russia after the Cold War ended.
The first of these topics covers the legacy of Soviet active measures and an overview of the US approach in the closing days of the Cold War. Next, the research addresses the evolution of the relationship between the Baltic States and NATO, and how that dynamic fit into the overall relationship between Moscow and the US after Yeltsin resigned at the end of 1999. To set the stage for the current diplomatic and information environment, the introduction ends by examining the paradigm shift that occurred in all of these relationships when Russia annexed Crimea and signaled a shift in Moscow's approach to world order. Next, the literature focuses on Russian global and strategic interests. This includes Russian views of its own role in a multipolar world, how Russia perceives NATO expansion, and how Russian culture accounts for the legacy of the Soviet-era and its dominion over Eastern Europe and the Baltics. The next section analyzes the ways of Russian information warfare, including how Russian doctrine indicates the ways propaganda, disinformation, and information warfare, support foreign policy objectives and conventional warfare means. The next subject considered addresses specific Russian ends, ways, and means in the Baltics. This includes Russian strategic objectives in the region, and then discussion of the sources that contributed to understanding each individual country of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. This closes with analysis concerning target audiences and persistent themes identified during research. The last section addresses sources that provided answers to the primary research question, describing strategic options available to the US, NATO, and the Baltic States that counter Russian propaganda, disinformation, and information warfare in the region.
The story of Infektion, a KGB disinformation campaign to discredit the US among target audiences in the West and non-aligned nations in Africa, set the stage for this thesis. Erhard Geissler's article in the International Journal of Virology and AIDS titled "The AIDS myth at 30," chronicled the origins of the story that the US created AIDS and how the story spread around the world, persisting even after Soviet authorities disavowed the conspiracy. Alan Feurer's "The Ebola Conspiracy" published in The New York Times provides an example of how the themes of Western conspiracies to depopulate Africa remain in the information sphere even decades after the Cold War ended.
Having linked Cold War disinformation with contemporary foreign policy issues, the research next considers NATO's expansion in Eastern Europe and the historical record of the USSR in the region. Three writings in particular provided the necessary reference points for this description. James Corum, a  Relations between the US and Moscow are captured in a number of newspaper and magazine articles. Michael Wines wrote "Election in Russia: The Overview," for The New York Times in March of 2000 summarizing the conditions and initial expectations the West held upon Putin's election. Western observers hailed his victory as likely to continue economic and democratic reforms that began under Yeltsin, and were initially thankful that the Communist Party, once thought to carry an electoral edge, did not return to power. Peter Baker's "The Seduction of George W. Bush" and Mikhail Zygar's "The Russian Reset that Never Was," both published in Foreign Policy in November 2013 and December 2016, respectively, captured the mood that evolved between US and Russian administrations through 16 years of frustrating relations. In short, the United States believed Putin's Russia embodied a junior partner, perhaps in an apprenticeship role, to promote market reforms and democracy under US leadership. The two sides never saw the issue of human rights the same way, leading to an initial hardening of attitudes that grew progressively worse through two American presidential administrations. These Though this project did not aim to consider economics as a topic, the impact of Eurasian economic imperatives did require some research and description. The International Crisis Group's report on "Eurasian Economic Union: Power, Politics, and Trade," provided a history of the union and its relative regional influence. The researcher derived the methodology for this thesis from the standards published by the Australian Department of Defense Joint and Operations Analysis Division in their "Qualitative Case Study Guidelines," published in 2013. This methodology consists of six interdependent phases: plan, design, prepare, collect, analyze, and share, and defines a case study as "a method for learning about a complex instance, based on a comprehensive understanding of that instance obtained by extensive description of that instance taken as a whole and in its context." 
20
The design phase consisted of determining appropriate limits of research, settling on information as an instrument of national power capacity for influence within the Baltic region as a whole. The reason for this limiting focus was to control the scope of research while finding a region with common cultural and historical ties. Additionally, the Baltic States' unique history and vulnerability concerning Russia, from its Imperial through Soviet stages, makes this topic particularly prescient considering the recent resurgence of Russia in the international arena.
The prepare phase focused on developing the researcher's knowledge of the regional dynamics, including the historical and cultural ties to Russia and the rest of Europe. Understanding the distinctly different views of World War II from a Western and Eastern lens was particularly useful in interpreting the disparate views on contemporary events and how to view respective worldviews according to national interest.
The collection phase of this research consisted of cataloguing existing research in a logical sequence to answer the subsidiary and primary research questions. The researcher used an outline to facilitate reordering information and sequence of research 20 Saša Baškarada, Qualitative Case Study Guidelines (Victoria, AT: Australian Department of Defence, Joint and Operations Analysis Division, 2013), 1-13. questions, and keep track of the catalogue of sources pertinent to this thesis. The variety of literature increased the integrity of the information by ensuring no segment of the thesis relied on the perceptions or analysis of a single source.
The analysis phase occurred throughout the entire project, as the qualitative nature of the analysis began during the plan phase and continued as the catalogue of sources grew, and the research questions developed and evolved. The process was primarily inductive, as the project inherently assumed that solutions to the problems posed by Russian information warfare exist. The researcher focused on deriving policy solutions by narrowing the research questions to an appropriate scope and level of detail.
The sharing phase of the research conforms to the protocols of the US Army Command and General Staff Officer Course for committee review, acceptance, and publication.
The primary purpose of this research is to advocate for policy decisions and resource allocations to mitigate threats posed by Russian information warfare in the Baltic States. To consider the strategic environment from the Russian perspective, the research methodology will derive Russian information warfare doctrine from their publications and statements made by their military and civilian leadership. This doctrine will provide the framework to consider contemporary and current Russian policy in light of their doctrine, derived from case studies. To consider the strategic environment from the US, NATO and Baltic States' perspective, the research methodology will consider case studies from the last decade of the Cold War and how the US responded to Soviet active measures, including responsibilities and authorities of the USIA and AMWG. This thesis will consider the root causes of instability that provide Russia opportunities to exploit through their information campaigns in the Baltics, including minority rights, media access and quality, susceptibility of target audiences to influence, and tensions between the Baltic States and other NATO allies. Determining policy recommendations that address these root causes with holistic approaches that account for cultural and historical differences in the region will answer the primary research question of this thesis. CHAPTER 4 ANALYSIS War furnishes the best opportunities to distract domestic public opinion and destroy the remnants of the political and intellectual opposition within Russia itself. An undemocratic regime worried about the prospect of domestic economic social and political crises-such as those that now haunt Russia amid recession and falling oil prices-is likely to be pondering further acts of aggression.
- The Russian Orthodox Church (ROC) also serves as a distinct cultural pillar for eastern culture, and a necessary component of "spiritual security." The Federal Security Service, or Federal'naya Sluzhba Bezopasnosti, (FSB) identifies both the Roman Catholic Church and Protestant communities as threats analogous to Islamic extremists, no small statement considering the threat posed to Russia by separatists in the largely Muslim North Caucasus, particularly Chechnya and Dagestan. Traditional Eastern values help safeguard the historical memory against Western decadence. Russian "religious diplomacy" therefore plays a key role in Russia's view of multipolarity, both as a unifying theme for domestic security and foreign diplomacy that supports the Russian Compatriots' Policy that targets the Russian diaspora, which resides in countries that otherwise do not identify with Orthodox culture. 
32
39
40
41
40
43
43
44
Operations: defeat layered defenses with an offense intended to defeat the enemy simultaneously across their depth, with modern information warfare techniques targeted against an adversary's morale. 
45
46
47
45
46
47
Joseph Nye's definition of soft power as "influence by an actor with the power of attraction," is the dominant Western view of the concept. 
48
49
50
51
The agency also administers a number of other instruments of soft power. These include Russkii Vek (Russian Century), an online journal catering to Russians living abroad, a program encouraging voluntary return of compatriots to Russia, and a number of youth outreach organizations. Russkii Mir, meaning "Russian World," in English, is ostensibly an NGO, though it also operates under the Russian MFA and Ministry of Education. Its charter is similar to Rossotrudnichestvo, though its audience goes beyond ethnic Russian communities to include any organization exploring Russian culture or language. Russkii Mir also provides textbooks communicating Russian views of history to schools, and, according to Persson, funneling money to dissident organizations and Russian-aligned political parties in the near abroad. 52 51 Nerijus Maliukevicius, "Russian Soft Power and Non-Military Influence: The View from Lithuania," in Tools of Destabilization, ed. Mike Winnerstig (Stockholm, SE: FOI, 2014), 113-114. 
52
53
54
55
57
Both Russkii Mir and the Rossotrudnichestvo agency signed cooperative agreements with the ROC, and Putin himself portrays the ROC as the defender of Christian values in a declining world influenced by Western decadence and secularism. This approach is not novel, but is rooted in Russian history, as Imperial Russia under Ivan III saw itself as the "Third Rome," after the capture of Constantinople by the Ottomans in the 15th century.
The post-Renaissance West advocated this identity to motivate the Russian state to stand with the West against the Ottomans. The Russian title of "czar" owes its etymology to the Roman title of "Caesar," and Imperial Russia used its supposed favor by God to justify expanding its temporal borders into lands previously abandoned to barbarians. 
58 56 Ibid.,
[40]
[41]
58
Russian application of soft power displayed its efficacy in Crimea in 2014, both in shaping conditions for conventional forces to enable annexation and isolating Ukraine from outside assistance until meeting its political objectives. The problems for Russia in the Baltics are more complex, however, as NATO's security guarantees carry a potentially steep cost should Russia commit militarily. Russian objectives therefore are more modest, requiring a more gradual and careful escalation of means.
As stated previously, the Baltic States occupy a unique position between East and West. As former Soviet republics, they share a common, if turbulent, history with Russia.
As members of NATO and the EU, they both integrated with Western institutions and provided Russia with a focus to influence these processes through Eastern cultural institutions dating back to the Soviet-era. It is in this frame that Russian strategic objectives in the Baltics complement global policy objectives. Russia seeks to leverage the Baltics to support Russian prestige and influence in a multipolar world order that balances power against the West in general, counters perceived threats from NATO, and reduces American influence in particular within the Russian sphere of influence.
Overall, Russia's strategic objective in the Baltic States is destabilization, using the region as a lever to weaken Western institutions that it perceives as economic, military, and political threats. 
59
Estonia's greatest challenge to integration with the West has been resolving the status of its Russian minority communities, which as of 2013 comprised 25.2 percent of its population. Narva and Sillamäe are towns situated in northeast Estonia near the Russian border and are majority Russian speaking, presenting a dilemma similar to that Ukraine faced in Crimea prior to the peninsula's annexation in 2014. The towns both approved a referendum for autonomy in 1993, though Estonia's court system ruled the vote illegal and local governing bodies decided to respect that decision. Thankfully for Estonian authorities, the experience of the towns' residents traveling to Russia across the border over the past two decades has tempered desires for integration with Russia. While this reduces the likelihood of violent separatist movements, providing Russian authorities the required pretext for "humanitarian" intervention, cultural differences among communities identifying with Russia constitute barriers to integrating with an Estonian society seeking greater identification with Western values and institutions. 
64
68
68
69
Events exploded on April 26th when excavation of the statue and remains began.
1,500 people assembled, with some of them attacking police, civilians, and government buildings. Rioting intensified the next night as efforts to move the statue increased the next day, and continued until the 28th. The incident provided a venue for Russian diplomatic pressure and led global headlines. Russian disinformation described fascist desecration of the tombs and framed the riots as government sanctioned oppression of Russian minorities. Russian media claimed officials dismembered and discarded the statue and threw the bones of the soldiers away, instead of conducting the planned relocation, and used the protests as pretext to arrest and torture Russians gathered at the site. 
70
71
72
70
22-23. 71
72
Similar to Estonia, Latvia confronts challenges with its large ethnic Russian minority and intrusive Kremlin media. Compatriots' Policies in Latvia use similar methods for mobilization and exploitation in education and youth organizations. Of particular concern in Latvia is Russia's effective manipulation of the Harmony Party to support pro-Russian positions, in both municipal and national governing bodies.
In the education realm, Russkii Mir spent over €170,000 between 2008 and 2014 to support cultural organizations, provide pro-Russian textbooks to schools, and produce films that support Russian views of history, particularly the conditions leading up to Soviet occupation of the Baltic States. 
74
75
76
Disinformation includes exaggerating the size and length of parades, claiming marchers crossed Riga, while in fact they only traveled about 700 meters from a museum preserving artifacts from the Soviet occupation to the Latvian Legion monument. Russian troll factories use these events to mobilize online social networks, further embedding and inflaming outrage against perceived fascist support in both the Russian and Latvian languages. 77 75 Ibid., 92-94. 
76
77
Besides historical ties, Russia encourages other aspects of their culture through compatriots' outreach and popular media. Russian music radio broadcasts target Russianlanguage audiences with multiple channels, and promote a music festival in Jurmela, a popular resort town for Russian tourists. The festival, branded New Wave, celebrates Russian composers, and features a prominent symbol of a wave colored similarly to Russia's flag. Again, celebration of culture is not a negative endeavor, but organizers often use the festival as a venue to ridicule Latvian national symbols, including the Latvian national anthem and traditional dress. Russian television broadcasts the festival, widening the audience witnessing ridicule of Latvian culture. 
78
The media market includes both state-owned and privately owned companies, and the government generally allows access to all outlets. Economic imperatives recently spurred media ownership consolidation, reducing press access as fewer owners control more channels. In this environment of reduced revenue, Kremlin produced Russian language media is available to private broadcasters at a relatively low cost. As in Estonia, production values of programs from Kremlin-owned or affiliated companies are greater than those made locally, and remain popular with local audiences. Latvian authorities attempted to limit foreign-language broadcasts in 2010 by decreeing that 65 percent of programming must be in the Latvian language, though the EU embassy reports that in Latvia's east, citizens can only receive Russian-language news. The Latvian public generally regards Latvian state-owned media as reliable, with Russian broadcast and print media perceived as propaganda. In light of access issues in the eastern areas of Latvia, this may mean that Russian speakers only have access to Russian propaganda as their source of news. Online activists circulated an image in January of 2015 showing the Latgale region of Latvia as a separate "Latgale People's Republic," with its own flag and Cyrillic writing. 
79
Petersburg in 2009. In the financial realm, Latvian government officials claim that the party received $1 million funneled through compatriots' organizations. Within the Russian MFA, the same department responsible for coordinating with Harmony Centre was also responsible for preventing colored revolutions in the Russian sphere. Online activists exposed surreptitious communications between a leader of Harmony Centre and the Russian Embassy intended to coordinate communication strategy between policy positions and Russian media reporting. 
80
The new mayor explicitly expressed support for Russian language and cultural ties to Riga. In 2010, the Latvian President became the only leader among the Baltic States to take an official state visit to Moscow as an incentive for improving bilateral relations.
The head of the Latvian Orthodox Church, subordinate to the Moscow Patriarchate, demonstrated the cultural influence of the ROC by accompanying the Latvian president to Moscow. 
81
82 81 Ibid.,
85,
[89]
[90]
[96]
[97]
A 2008 survey by Russkii Mir determined that the Russian language was declining in popularity among Lithuanian youth, with an increasing number choosing English, and indicating greater interest in Western culture over Russian. 
84
87
The US should revive the USIA to develop a comprehensive strategy analogous to Reagan's National Security Decision Directive 75, in which his administration unified efforts in a whole of government approach to end the Cold War on terms favorable to Western interests. 
91
91
Using the AMWG framework, this international and interagency body should include representatives from intelligence, counterintelligence, law enforcement, diplomacy, and the military. Additionally, this body should consider regional think tank and respected media representation where appropriate to add credibility and transparency to the process. Standards for publication must maintain a high standard for accuracy to preserve credibility, and only include disinformation objectives capable of debunking using unclassified information to avoid mission creep and squandering efforts on reports only released with redaction, and thus harming the perception of transparency. As a departure from the AMWG, this new cooperative body must include online and social media analysis to both identify threats and determine effectiveness of policies. Russian online troll factories combined with so-called transparency organizations such as WikiLeaks and other online "hacktivists" add a new dimension in outreach to isolated communities prone to conspiracies and exploitation.
Due to the possible perception of the US interfering with free speech overseas, the US should rely on its NATO partners to work with the EU to encourage professional standards within the media that mitigate internal security concerns of member states.
One possible forum for a convention on media standards would be the Council of Europe, though Russia's membership in that body may dilute any agreements. Carefully drafted to conform to official, thus sterile, Russian foreign and domestic policy, such standards may meet rhetorical standards for media conduct and provide opportunities to hold Russia accountability in an international setting when members discover convention violations. The convention should address mentorship for nations still in the nascent stages of regulating a free press, such as the Baltic States, and provide a credible forum with legal ties to the European Court of Human Rights to apply remedies if needed. The US should maintain an observer status through NATO to maintain at least tangential contact with processes, if not as an advocate of specific policies.
NATO should also work through the EU to provide support for robust public broadcasting in the Baltics, particularly in Russian language media. Russian productions are consistently higher quality than those of their Baltic counterparts; Estonia and Latvia in particular need credible, professional news and entertainment media as an alternative to Kremlin-owned broadcasts due to their large Russian minorities, especially as these communities increase their political involvement. The US should provide funding, and in cooperation with the EU, develop a Russian language media industry with high quality commercial products. 
92
Policies within the Baltic States should focus on countering Russia's persistent themes and integrating isolated communities into their nations' societies. The immediate existential threat remains Russian aggression, and so the first priority for NATO to counter Russian influence is to provide a credible military deterrent to Russian aggression 
92
93
The historical themes linking the Baltic States to fascism require more holistic and long-term approaches. Estonia and Latvia must resolve issues around stateless residents to remove that topic from international discussion, and extend outreach efforts to integrate their Russian speaking population into society. This should occur alongside no-cost education exchange programs for children in Russian communities and public works projects to improve standards of living in under-served areas that demonstrate to residents of communities like Narva or Latgale their value to the nation at large. Baltic Universities should regularly conduct public policy and historical lectures in the Russian language to discuss how the region suffered from both Nazi and Soviet aggression to present both cultural views in a common forum.
Finally, the Baltic States should encourage exploration of Russia by their ethnic Russian minorities to provide first-hand knowledge of life in the Eurasian sphere, particularly in areas outside of Moscow and St. Petersburg where privation is more pronounced and standards of living are far lower than in the European sphere. These accounts, combined with increased economic and social opportunities in their home 
93
Lastly, the migrant crisis of refugees fleeing North Africa and the Middle East is a particularly difficult topic within the EU, as policy differences between member nations provide opportunities for Russia to exploit as it seeks to encourage fissures between liberal democracies. Russia is apparently pursuing a deliberate strategy in Syria to create incentives for migrants to flee, and then targeting audiences in Hungary, Poland, and the Scandinavian nations to exacerbate ethnic resentment and isolate these communities. This isolation is likely to increase the likelihood that these refugees would be involved in criminal or terrorist activity. Effectively communicating the rational of refugee allocations against countries with aging populations and demand for labor may undermine themes meant to isolate populations and provide imperatives for integration that support the EU common market concept. Finlandization (or Finlandisation). The policy of a smaller neighbor country suborning their foreign policy priorities to a larger, more powerful, neighbor in exchange for domestic autonomy.
Hybrid Warfare. Combination of traditional maneuver warfare, unconventional warfare, information warfare, and political subversion, intended to defeat an adversary force psychologically, with little or no conflict.
Information Warfare. The use of technical and influential means to influence an adversary to act against their own interests.
Molotov Ribbentrop Pact. Agreement signed on 23 August 1939 by Soviet and German foreign ministers, in which Nazi Germany and the USSR defining spheres of influence for each of the two countries, including the Baltic States falling under the Soviet sphere.
Political Warfare. The use of political means, such as government infiltration or electoral influence to compel an adversary to act against their own interests.
Propaganda. Biased or misleading information intended to influence a target audience to take, or not take, a particular action.
Soft Power. A persuasive approach to international relations, typically involving the use of economic or cultural influence to change behavior through attraction, distinct from overt diplomatic or military coercion.
Soviet Sphere or Former Soviet Sphere. Broad description that includes all of the former Soviet Socialist Republics and Eastern European nations behind the Iron Curtain during the Cold War.
US Information Agency. Cold War era agency responsible for monitoring and influencing opinion abroad of the United States and its objectives.
Vilnius Group. Cultural and political affiliation between the Baltic States (Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania) Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Republic of Macedonia, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia with the objective of integrating into European and Atlantic institutions, such as the EU and NATO.
Visegrád Group. Cultural and political affiliation between the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia, with the objective of integrating into European and Atlantic institutions, such as the EU and NATO.
Warsaw Pact. Collective security treaty between the USSR and seven Soviet satellite states in Eastern Europe; abrogated when the USSR disintegrated in 1991.
22
21   
21   
A
Alan Feuer, "The Ebola Conspiracy," New York Times, October 19, 2014, accessed March 21, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/19/sunday-review/theebola-conspiracy-theories.html?_r=0.
James S. Corum, The Security Concerns of the Baltic States as NATO Allies (Carlisle Barracks: US Army War College, 2013), 8-10.
Gvosdev and Marsh, Russian Foreign Policy,[212][213] 
Andrew C. Kuchins, "Why Russia Is so Russian," Current History (October 2009): 318-322.
Michael Wines, "Election in Russia: The Overview; Putin Wins Russia Vote in First Round, but His Majority Is Less Than Expected," New York Times, March 3, 2000,
Peter Baker, "The Seduction of George W. Bush," Foreign Policy, November 6, 2013, accessed March 25, 2017, https://foreignpolicy.com/2013/11/06/the-seduction-ofgeorge-w-bush/.
10
Ibid.   11  Ibid.
Asymmetric Operations Working Group (AOWG), Ambiguous Threats and External Influences in the Baltic States and Poland: Phase 2 (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins, 2015), 12-13.
Mikhail Zygar, "The Russian Reset That Never Was," Foreign Policy,  December 9, 2016, accessed March 20, 2017, http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/12/09/therussian-reset-that-never-was-putin-obama-medvedev-libya-mikhail-zygar-all-thekremlin-men/amp/.
Stuart J. Kaufman, NATO, Russia, and the Baltic States (Washington, DC: Program on New Approaches to Russian Security, 2002), 2.
Abrams, "Beyond Propaganda: Soviet Active Measures inPutin's Russia," 19.   
Ibid., 9.   
Bruce P. Jackson, "A Turning Point for Europe's East," Hoover.org, April 1, 2010, accessedMarch 22, 2017, http://www.hoover.org/research/turning-point-europeseast.
  34  Marko Mihkelson, "Baltic-Russian Relations in Light of ExpandingNATO and  EU," Demokratizatsiya 11, no. 2 (Spring 2003): 276.   
Edward Lucas and Peter Pomeranzev, Winning the Information War (Washington, DC: Center for European Policy Analysis, 2016), 37-39.
Andrew Radin, Hybrid Warfare in the Baltics (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2017), 21-22.
Leila Roos, "Pawns and Paranoia: Baltic-American Anxiety over Russian Aggression" (CUNY Academic Works, 2014), 6, accessed February 25, 2017, http://academicworks.cuny.edu/gj_etds/20.
Kudors, "Russian Soft Power and Non-Military  Influence: The View from Latvia," 76.
Kudors, "Russian Soft Power and Non-Military  Influence: The View from Latvia," 95-99.
Jong et al., "Beyond the Cold War of Words,[40][41][42] 
Kudors, "Russian Soft Power and Non-Military  Influence: The View from Latvia," 82-84.
Ibid.,[123][124] 
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
support Russian themes, emphasizing the threats posed by pro-fascist Western regimes and celebrating Russian and Soviet history. Besides the news, this also includes popular media, such as feature films, documentaries, music, radio programs, and cultural festivals. Consistent communication through the media provides a venue for political mobilization around the Centre Party, the primary vehicle for pro-Russian policies in Estonia.
The ultimate lever of influence at the societal level, and the most effective means to redirect Estonia's integration from the West to the East, would be through their domestic political processes. Russia's efforts in this arena have produced mixed results, as the Russian minority in Estonia split their support among so many parties that none could achieve a large enough percentage to gain seats in Estonia's government. To remedy this shortcoming, Moscow consolidated support for Estonia's Centre Party after that party signed a cooperation agreement with Putin's own United Russia party in 2004.
Kremlin-owned media enables outreach to Russian language communities by featuring the Centre Party prominently in news reports, biasing coverage in favor of the party and against the Estonian establishment. Because of consolidation, polling suggests that 75 percent of ethnic Russians support the Centre Party, though it is not apparent that the party would ever have enough representation to shape anything beyond rhetoric in regards to Estonian policy. 
73
73
The greatest threats Russian influence pose to Latvia is through domestic politics and manipulation of compatriots through the historical lens of the Soviet occupation.
Integration of these marginalized populations require progress in the realm of truly independent and high-quality Russian language media and integration of ethnic Russian populations into institutions outside of Moscow's control. Municipal elections, particularly in the Latvia's capital, can have national policy ramifications when such elections affect almost half of the population and coordinate their communications and policies with Moscow. Failure to address integration of Russian communities in Latvian society could further strengthen political ties between pro-Russian organizations and cause further retrenchment of these communities into Russian controlled media.
Russian approaches to soft power influence in Lithuania differ when compared to Estonia and Latvia due to Lithuania's demographic differences. While Russian minorities comprise just over a quarter of the population in Latvia and Estonia, ethnic Russians in Lithuania comprise only six percent of the entire population, and is in fact the second largest minority in the country after Poles. Russia therefore identifies compatriots according to their use of the Russian language and focuses their outreach to compatriots in Lithuania on increasing tension between Poles and Lithuanians. infrastructure or shale gas exploitation that would undercut Kremlin interests in natural gas or petroleum exports, both to the Baltics and through the region to Western markets.
The Format-A discussion club appears to be a non-partisan forum for discussion of ideas, analogous to TED Talks, but in practice fosters pro-Russian lectures to Lithuanian audiences about pending collapse and crisis in both the EU and NATO. 
85
These media propagate conspiracy theories around neo-fascism and decrying the tragedy of the decline and collapse of the USSR in the face of Western pressure. In line with the rest of the region, Kremlin-owned media and Russian produced programming is higher quality than domestic Russian-language broadcasts, exacerbated by the financial crisis of 2008 that reduced public funding for public media outlets and advertising revenue for private outlets. These channels provide Moscow with multiple avenues to communicate with communities isolated along linguistic lines. These communications efforts often support Russian objectives in Lithuania's political arena. 
86
85 Ibid.,
[123]
[124]
[125]
[126]
[127]
[128]
[129]
[129]
[130]
[131]
[132]
[133]
[134]
[135]
[136]
Politically, the three countries should not accede to Russia interfering in their electoral processes. While an outright ban of specific media outlets would be counterproductive, enforcing campaign laws regarding media coverage and financial contributions should be completely transparent. Electoral administrators, law enforcement, and forensic accountants under the auspices of the EU should audit prominent political parties, whether national or municipal, to ensure that candidates maintain transparency about their financial support and political obligations and allegiances.
This study only tangentially considered economic levers of influence, though thorough analysis of the EEU and Russian energy policy may provide insight into future Russian targets of influence. A future study could compare how the Soviet economy suffered while underwriting the economies behind the Iron Curtain, and compare the economic arrangement of the USSR with the current construct in the EEU.
While this study considered political influence, it was only in the context of how Russia exercised its information capabilities to support candidates. The current rise of nationalism, coupled with allegations of Russian electoral influence among Western democracies, could provide a useful frame to predict and mitigate nefarious influence by authoritarian regimes in the future.
Researchers with access to the region, either through virtual communication such as with an organization like YouGov or the Pew Research Center, could conduct a study