# ID: 8c31958deb8941aa8c3b3d825661d47a
# Title: Russian weaponization of information and influence in the Baltic States
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
The first of these topics covers the legacy of Soviet active measures and an overview of the US approach in the closing days of the Cold War.
Next, the research addresses the evolution of the relationship between the Baltic States and NATO, and how that dynamic fit into the overall relationship between Moscow and the US after Yeltsin resigned at the end of 1999.
To set the stage for the current diplomatic and information environment, the introduction ends by examining the paradigm shift that occurred in all of these relationships when Russia annexed Crimea and signaled a shift in Moscow's approach to world order.
Next, the literature focuses on Russian global and strategic interests.
This includes Russian views of its own role in a multipolar world, how Russia perceives NATO expansion, and how Russian culture accounts for the legacy of the Soviet-era and its dominion over Eastern Europe and the Baltics.
The next section analyzes the ways of Russian information warfare, including how Russian doctrine indicates the ways propaganda, disinformation, and information warfare, support foreign policy objectives and conventional warfare means.
The next subject considered addresses specific Russian ends, ways, and means in the Baltics.
This includes Russian strategic objectives in the region, and then discussion of the sources that contributed to understanding each individual country of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
This closes with analysis concerning target audiences and persistent themes identified during research.
The last section addresses sources that provided answers to the primary research question, describing strategic options available to the US, NATO, and the Baltic States that counter Russian propaganda, disinformation, and information warfare in the region.