# ID: 8c8875117a3f4e77868ef549f1c3b69b
# Title: General George S. Patton was not an Operational Artist
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
Since WWII, historians have lionized General Patton for his bold and daring leadership during Allied campaigns. His many biographers have highlighted his ability to instill discipline, remove incompetent leaders, and form an effective staff. While these attributes evolved in his persona through his military training, Patton applied his intellect to develop a deep understanding of the new methods of warfare that armies encountered on the battlefields of WWII. The application of operational art now required knowledge grounded in the close coordination of air, sea, and land assets to achieve victories at both the strategic and tactical level. While historical examples of daring victories demonstrate what western culture loves in a war hero, a critical analysis of Patton's actions reveal a more compelling story. Closer examination of his actions in the latter stages of the Tunisian campaign, during the Sicilian campaign, and in Western Europe from Normandy to the Rhineland, demonstrate that he excelled at achieving tactical successes, but did not perform well when integrating those tactical successes in campaigns to achieve strategic aims. Patton developed a reputation as a bold and daring leader; however, analysis of WWII campaigns reveals that he did not apply what the US Army now refers to as operational art.
General George S. Patton was not the military genius that historians have made him out to be. Following the end of WWII and his death in 1945, the media, historians, and even former German adversaries raised his reputation to mythical proportions. Today, one still encounters the continued fascination with Patton in works such as Bill O'Reilly's Killing Patton, likening him to Abraham Lincoln, John F. Kennedy, and even Jesus. 
1
As John Lynn wrote in Battle: A History of Combat and Culture, "the reality of war differs from the discourse of war and is to some degree countered by efforts to make reality better by conforming to expectations." Francis Ford Coppola's 1970 film "Patton" had a lasting influence on the public's perception, contributing further to the separation of the reality of Patton's generalship from the myth that such portrayals have created over time. The alteration of history and the misrepresentation of the past have a long history of their own. 2 This led to a public memory of Patton as depicted in popular culture -which essentially depicted him the way 1 Bill O'Reilly, Killing Patton: The Strange Death of the World War II's Most Audacious General (New York, NY: Henry Holt Publishing, 2014), preambles to this work state that "readers around the world have thrilled to Killing Lincoln, Killing Kennedy, and Killing Jesus" The statement suggests Patton is recognized in the same vein as Abraham Lincoln, John F. Kennedy, and Jesus Christ. 
2
American society wanted to remember him; and in a way that does not mesh particularly well with reality. Americans love a winner and its popular heroes; but one wonders whether in Patton's case historians have provided for scholarly purposes an accurate portrayal of his ability to direct large forces in a manner most likely to achieve the strategic aims of the Allied forces.
The myth of Patton might not stem solely from the fiction of the popular media-it might reveal a predisposition within the US military itself for a particular style of leadership. This leads to an important question with ramifications for modern military leaders regarding the need, or perceived need for combat leaders like the flamboyant military genius that Patton has come to represent. Perhaps the Army benefits as much, or more, from the leadership which Martin the battlefields of WWII. The application of operational art in the motorized and mechanized operational environment of WWII required the ability to maintain the close coordination of air, sea, and land assets to achieve victories at both the strategic and tactical level; but it also required a deep appreciation for the importance of logistics, tempo versus speed, and operational risk versus flamboyant gamble. 
5
6 U.S. Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 3-0, Unified Land Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), 4-1. For Army forces, this manual defines operational art as "the pursuit of strategic objectives, in whole or in part, through the arrangement of tactical actions in time, space, and purpose. This approach enables commanders and staffs to use skill, knowledge, experience, and judgment to overcome the ambiguity and intricacies of a complex, ever changing, and uncertain operational environment to better understand the problem or problems at hand. Operational art applies to all aspects of operations and integrates ends, ways, and means, while accounting for risk."
Demonstrating the validity of this hypothesis involves defining the Allied approach to operational art during WWII. Analysis of Allied campaigns in which Patton commanded at various levels from 1942 to 1945 illustrates the overarching Allied approach to operational art, and the uniquely American approach, which did not always mesh well with that of America's allies. Focusing on Patton's actions in these campaigns illustrates the divergence of his methods from the appropriate and successful methods employed by Allied operational artists. While many American commanders understood how to employ the means available to the Allies appropriately to integrate tactical actions into campaigns that achieved strategic aims, Patton proved less well rounded in this respect than many of his peers. He possessed remarkable tactical prowess and-in many ways-exceptional leadership ability, but he often created friction for commanders seeking to conduct operational art in the method most appropriate to the situation.
Analysis of the similarities and differences between Patton's approach to mechanized warfare during WWII and the effective Allied execution of operational art reveal the divergence in his methods. This analysis includes the critiques of historians, politicians, Patton's superiors, and evidence drawn from several historical cases. It reveals that his tactical employment of combat power, while bold and daring, did not fit within the overall Allied approach to operational art in the Mediterranean and Western European campaigns. Similarly, assessment of Patton's actions as the Third US Army (TUSA) Commander in Western Europe-in particular, comparison of his willingness to adhere to Eisenhower's broad front strategy to that of the other Army level Commanders assigned to Bradley's Twelfth Army Group after the Normandy invasion-reveals that even when given this chance to redeem himself, Patton continued to display maverick behavior not in keeping with that of an operational artist. 
7
Prior to Casablanca, American planners noted the early signs of a significant personnel shortage caused by the demands of conscripting soldiers, mass producing war material for new American units, and continuing Lend Lease to Great Britain and Russia. This personnel shortage began to have a dramatic effect on the size and quality of the Army Ground Forces (AGF) in 1943. The AGF had reduced its troop basis (planned number of divisions that it would mobilized to fight the war) because of a combination of limited personnel resources and production capacity. The Allied campaign plan had suffered from excessive focus on tactical forces to the detriment of sustainment activities. 8 This proved particularly problematic for a mechanized combat force fighting in such an austere environment. Upcoming campaigns would suffer similar shortcomings, due to national personnel shortages, not poor planning. Eisenhower, as the OPD (Operations Division) commander, learned the importance of logistics in modern warfare. 
9
Messina. 11
12
On September 1, 1944 Eisenhower as the SHAEF (Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Forces) commander assumed command of all ground forces in Western Europe.
Derived from lessons learned during the North Africa and Sicily campaigns, as well as an assessment of Montgomery's ability, Eisenhower tailored his operational approach to make best use of means possessed by the various Allied forces. This led him to adopt a tempo focused more on close coordination than speed and audacity, aiming to defeat the Axis by operating along supporting lines of operation and applying steady concentric pressure against the enemy front. This approach, generally referred to as Eisenhower's broad front strategy, entailed controlling the tempo, while maintaining operational reach through careful management of logistics to support the tactical actions of the Allied ground forces. Eisenhower remained convinced after the successful breakout of Allied forces from Normandy that strict adherence to this theater strategy over time and space would eventually result in the defeat of the Germans, while exposing the Allies to the least possible risk posed by a still very capable enemy. 
13
14
15
As Eisenhower began preparing to serve as the SHAEF commander, a divergence began to appear between the Allies' relatively conservative application of combat forces and Germany's culturally-driven warfare that emphasized bold, offensive action over considerations like sustainment and protection. Patton, a cavalryman at heart, preferred warfare characterized by emphasis on movement, firepower, daring, and aggressiveness, similar to that of the Germans. This contributed to Patton's reputation among the Germans, who described him as a bold and daring warrior in their own assessment of his performance in North Africa. Adolf Hitler reportedly referred to him as "that crazy cowboy general," likening him to the United States' 14 Christopher Bassford, Clausewitz in English: The Reception of Clausewitz in Britain  and America, 1815-1945 (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1994), 129. Liddell Hart's emphasis of an indirect approach between the wars influenced British strategic thinking. As Bassford suggests, "[Hart's] overarching goal was to find some indirect way to strike at an enemy's strategic vitals, by passing his main strength and thus avoiding the head-to-head confrontation that had led to the bloodbaths of the Great War." version of Rommel. 
16
17
Analysis of the German Army during WWII reveals overemphasis on tactical prowess, combined with a general lack of a holistic operational approach to warfare. This partly reflected neglect of key principles of large unit operations like logistics, while reflecting the effect of Hitler's direct control of German combat forces. As Shimon Naveh wrote, "Hitler's strategic logic was motivated by four principles: destruction, speed, aggressiveness, and opportunism." 
18
The American defeat suffered at Kasserine Pass in March 1943 embarrassed the United States-particularly its army and political leaders-and caused America's British allies and the American public to question the capabilities of American soldiers and leaders to fight effectively.
Most people focused on the bad-the tactical defeats, the routed and panicking units. By the end of several days of fighting culminating in the Kasserine Pass battles, the Americans had lost approximately three thousand personnel either killed or wounded, forfeited over thirty seven hundred prisoners to the Germans, and lost about two hundred tanks. 
19
20
23
24
Having assumed command of the II Corps, Patton had ten days to muster a force of four divisions and over 88,000 troops to support the British Eighth Army in the west. Alexander ordered II Corps to conduct a two-pronged offensive to the east to ease the pressure from the German Tenth and Twenty First Panzer Armies. The attack required Patton to commit two divisions to operations designed to seize objectives along highways fourteen and fifteen (see As the Tunisian campaign came to an end, Patton had neither achieved a significant defeat of German forces nor faced Rommel in combat, Rommel having redeployed back to Germany because of poor health before the Battles of El Guettar and Maknassy. Further, Patton had not forced a German retreat; the German leadership decided to conduct retrograde operations after Montgomery's success at Mareth, repositioning to better defensive terrain farther north. 
33
34
35
36
34
During the Casablanca Conference (January 14-24, 1943), Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt agreed to the next major Allied campaign after completing the capture of Tunisia from Axis forces-the invasion of Sicily. The Americans remained suspicious that the invasion of Sicily, code named Husky, might lead to a long-term commitment to operations in the Mediterranean that would delay America's goal of invading Northwest Europe by a year, delaying the amphibious assault of French beaches, which the Americans had long sought to conduct in 1943, by a full year, to the spring of 1944 at the earliest. While the Americans appeared to support this goal of a 1943 mainland invasion, Author Jim Lacey argues by the time the Americans met with their British allies at Casablanca, they knew they possessed neither the personnel nor the equipment resources necessary to accomplish a landing in 1943, and therefore agreed to the continuation of operations in the Mediterranean much less reluctantly than they led Britain's leaders (and later generations of historians) to believe. 
37
40
41
44
45
46
43
44
45
46
47
49
48
53
By mid-July Alexander could see that Montgomery's Eighth Army needed help, issuing a revised plan on July 23rd allowing Patton's forces to attack from Palermo east to Messina along two main avenues of approach. 
54
55
53
54
Operations,
256,
304;
Rikard,
Patton at Bay,
24;
Hirshon,
General Patton,
59
59
Patton emerged as the hero of Husky in the American popular media. His profile adorned the covers of both Time and Newsweek after his capture of Palermo. 60 However, in the process of capturing Palermo, Patton displayed recklessness, poor judgment, and the tendency to fuel his personal desire for glory with the paranoid conviction that the Allies designed war plans in North Africa and Sicily to make the British Army look superior to the Americans. Fundamentally, Patton demonstrated an inability to rise above the level of tactical proficiency to that of an operational artist. He demonstrated a lack of command and control during his march to Palermo, seen in factors including limited close air support for his ground forces, fratricide during unnecessary and risky airborne landings, and under resourced amphibious operations along Sicily's east coast. After Palermo as the pace of operations slowed, Patton simply ignored logistics opting to focus on his personal approach to warfare and simultaneously disregarded current doctrine.
Patton, a devout believer in the revolutionary capabilities of the tank, and the use of them in large, independent tank formations shaped his decisions. He developed his ideas about tanks under the influence of various interwar theorists of tank warfare, particularly B.H. Liddell Hart, who advocated breaking the front lines of the enemy with overwhelming tank centric maneuver warfare. 
61
63
64
His frustration with his subordinates' slow progress revealed deep seated personal character flaws that proved particularly damaging to his ability to command both in Sicily, and in later campaigns. In the final days of the Sicilian campaign, Eisenhower ordered Patton to apologize to his soldiers; as Patton put it when addressing his troops, "for any occasions when I may have harshly criticized individuals." 
65
Shortly thereafter, Patton shot and killed a pair of mules blocking the way of a US armored column along the coastal road. When their Sicilian owner protested, Patton attacked him with a walking stick and pushed the two mules off the bridge. 
66
67
68
In early May 1944, SHAEF planners developed the operational design for post-Normandy operations to best apply lessons learned in previous campaigns and take advantage of the strengths of Allied combat organizations and equipment. Eisenhower first announced his intent to pursue a broad front advance after the Normandy landings, providing SHAEF a framework that described how the Allies would achieve their military objectives in Europe. This broad front strategy, proved appropriate to the situation the Allies faced on the Western Front in the final campaigns to secure the unconditional surrender of Germany, particularly by managing the tempo of the Allied advance while minimizing risk. This concept took advantage of Allied air superiority and the plentiful American artillery in support of maneuver while strengthening logistical lines of communications to enable Allied forces to maintain a reasonable tempo while avoiding culmination despite limited supply throughput. 
69
70
69 "Eisenhower to Marshall," June 20, 1944, The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower,  Volume 3, Part VIII, Chapter 19, "Single Thrust versus Broad Front", 1937; Walter Bedell Smith,  Eisenhower's Six Great Decisions 70-73; Timothy Lynch, "The Supreme Allied Commander's  Operational Approach" (SAMS Monograph, United States Army Command and General Staff  College, 2014), 9-11. 
70
Following the conclusion of Husky, Eisenhower faced a dilemma with respect to Patton.
Given the reputation that he had established on the home front, among US Army personnel (many of whom saw him as highly effective even if they disliked his personality and leadership style), and among the Germans, who saw him as America's best general, Eisenhower could not afford to lose him. On the other hand, he knew that he had to discipline Patton both in response to criticism of Patton over his actions in Sicily, and to deter similar behavior in the future. 
71
Eisenhower made this decision before the slapping incidents being made public and for reasons related more to Patton's combat performance than these lapses of judgment. The media attention over the slapping incidents, however, merely gave Patton a convenient excuse for his not being selected to command during Overlord. 
72
75
In its advance to Argentan, TUSA covered sixty miles in just two weeks, requiring extensive logistical support. TUSA's G4 emphasized flexibility, improvisation, and adaptation in logistics efforts to enable forward units to conduct sustained operations and exploit breakthroughs rapidly. 
76
85
86
In his memoirs, Patton admitted to making only one mistake during the war, his raid on Hammelburg to rescue American prisoners. Later, he also admitted that his insistence upon directly assaulting, instead of bypassing, Metz was an error. 
87
4
89
90
91
The combination of logistics shortfalls and Patton's personal desires to fight on his own terms served as the chief obstacles to Patton and the TUSA's advance during the Rhineland Campaign. Eisenhower's broad front strategy constrained Patton to an operational approach that forced him to fight according to Eisenhower's vision of operational art, placing him in unfamiliar intellectual territory. Patton adhered to Eisenhower's broad front strategy because he had no choice; even his best efforts to cheat the system to acquire additional fuel and ammunition only worked for short periods, providing him only brief opportunities to choose the best tactical course of action when he did manage to land a blow against the retreating enemy. The idea of Patton as a genius for war does not mesh with his continued efforts to advocate a flawed approach to operational art in Western Europe demonstrated by the failure of Operation Market Garden and the German exploitation of the opportunity presented by the salient in Allied lines during the Battle of the Bulge. Even at the tactical level, Patton's approach proved indecisive when the enemy refused to engage in a contest of movement and maneuver. There is no question that Patton could be highly creative with the enemy on the run in a tactical action, but he proved far less effective as a combat commander participating in a long-term campaign at the operational level. His difficulties elicited a failure to make sound tactical decisions due to the incompatibility of his established battle philosophy with the prevailing battlefield conditions. Patton's genius appears limited to tactical actions involving fire and maneuver, particularly when assessing his effectiveness in the more stabilized approach required on the Western Front in Europe from 1944 to 1945.
The analysis of General Patton's leadership and employment of operational art when assessed over three campaigns serves to illustrate several key points. First, throughout Patton's career he demonstrated unsurpassed leadership and tactical skills when required, and given ideal conditions. At the corps level and below he instilled the warrior ethos, discipline, and tactical proficiency among his troops. When the need to conduct operations above the corps level arose, Patton seemed out of his element, repeatedly arguing with and defying Eisenhower while failing to understand the strategic consequences of his actions. Patton became increasingly insensitive to the needs of his superiors and seemed incapable of adapting his behavior to not only the military objectives, but the political aims as well. As Clausewitz wrote, "…war is not merely an act of policy but a true political instrument, a continuation of political intercourse, carried on by other means." 93 As military action is elevated above the tactical level, a greater sensitivity is required to apply the use of force. The critical evaluation of Patton's actions during the three campaigns described above reveals his flawed employment of operational art during WWII. It illustrates the actions of a commander with reasonable skill at the tactical level, marred by occasional lack of imagination and lapses of judgment, and a flawed understanding of operational art and the political implications of his actions. A "Genius for War" and master operational artist must have a complete grasp of the political aims as well as the acumen necessary to operate within the constraints of the means available. Patton did neither of these consistently.
As the degree of complexity of the operational environment in contemporary warfare continues to evolve, the selection of commanders must involve assessment of leaders' demonstrated ability to conduct operational art. Based solely on tactical military performance, many candidates might seem acceptable, or even optimal, but higher levels of command will require leaders who remain in tune to both the campaign planning considerations and the political nuances of modern operational art. Former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates wrote in Duty, when explaining his decision to relieve General Dave McKiernan of the command of International Security Afghanistan Forces (ISAF) in 2008, "Perhaps more than anything it was two years' experience in watching Generals like Petraeus, McChrystal, Chiarelli, Rod Rodriguez, . . . and observing their flexibility in embracing new ideas, their willingness to experiment, and their ability to abandon an idea that didn't pan out and move to something else." 
94
93
94
Carlo D'este, Patton: A Genius for War (New York, NY: HarperCollins, 1995.), 815. Brighton, Patton, Montgomery, and Rommel, 22; Dennis Showalter, Patton and Rommel: Men of War in the Twentieth Century (New York, NY: Berkley Caliber, 2005), 3.
Robert M. Citino, The German Way of War: From the Thirty Years' War to the Third Reich (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2005), 278.
Shimon Naveh, In Pursuit of Military Excellence:  The Evolution of Operational Theory (Portland, OR: Frank Cass Publishers,
1997), 120.
Douglas Porch, The Path to Victory: The Mediterranean Theater in WWII (New York,  NY: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2004), 398.    
Howe, et al., The Mediterranean Theater of Operations, 549; Wellard, General George  S. Patton, Jr., 91.   
D'Este, Patton; A Genius for War, 466; Atkinson, An Army at Dawn, 434, 441; Douglas Porch, The Path to Victory: The Mediterranean Theater in World War II (New York, NY: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2004), 466.
Howe, et al., The Mediterranean Theater of Operations, 550-1; "Eisenhower to  Alexander" March 23, 1943, The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower, Volume 2, Part IV, Chapter 9, " Planning Husky: 'As always, we have to think in terms of ships.'" (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1970), 1055-57.
Howe, et al., The Mediterranean Theater of Operations, 676; Atkinson, Army at Dawn,  443.   
Kelly, Howe, et al., The Mediterranean Theater of  Operations, 
Martin Blumenson, The Patton Papers: 1940-1945, Vol.2., 2 vols. (Boston: Houghton  Mifflin Company, 1974), 197-98; Howe, et al., The Mediterranean Theater of Operations, 553- 56; Atkinson, An Army at Dawn, 449; Hirshon, General Patton, 442.   
Albert Garland and Howard Smyth, The Mediterranean Theater of Operations: Sicily and the Surrender of Italy, The United States Army in World War II (Washington DC: Center of
Porch, The Path to Victory, 420; "Eisenhower to Patton" June 4, 1943, The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower, Volume 2, Part V, Chapter 10, "A Period of Tenseness", 1173-75; Garland and Smyth, The Mediterranean Theater of Operations, 59.
D'Este, Patton, 489; Hirshon, Patton, 364.   
Blumenson, Patton, Blumenson, The Patton Papers Vol. 2, 480; Essame,  Patton at Bay, 116.   
I began this process with a desire to gain a greater appreciation and understanding of operational art. After speaking with 
Dr. Mark T. Calhoun
General George S. Patton
I would be remiss if I did not publicly thank the people that supported me throughout this process. First, I would like to thank 
Dr. Mark T. Calhoun
SAMS
COL David Wood
The Allies agreed and tentatively planned D-day for Operation Husky in July 1943, with an invasion force consisting of the US Seventh Army (the Western Task Force) led by Patton, and   the British Eighth Army (the Eastern Task Force), led by Montgomery. Both task forces would remain under the direction of Alexander and the Fifteenth Army Group, again placing Patton under a British commander. Following the contribution of the II Corps in Tunisia one would have thought that the Combined Joint Chiefs would have considered giving the Americans a more prominent role during the invasion of Sicily and eventual capture of its key port of Messina, both in the command structure and the missions of each nation's forces. As it stood, the British would once again control the Sicilian campaign and serve as the main effort, with Montgomery's Eighth Army attacking along the east coast to take Messina, relegating Patton to the supporting role of protecting Montgomery's western flank yet again. 
39
The limitations of logistic support prevented Eisenhower from conducting rapid advances along his entire front; providing adequate supplies to allow any one commander to conduct sustained ground combat operations or execute deep thrusts towards Germany meant halting the rest of the front and offering an exposed salient for the Germans to attack. The risk of such an attack breaking through and allowing the Germans to envelop and destroy or capture a large Allied formation eventually led Eisenhower to implement the broad front approach along the Western Front. 
77
78
84
83
fight and win at all levels of war (tactical, operational, and strategic). Patton lacked this genius for war; he did not possess the ability to conduct operational art, connecting his tactical actions in time, space, and purpose to achieve the strategic aim. Doing so as part of a coalition and in a manner consistent with an operational approach that best suited both the theater strategy and the capabilities and limitations of those Allied organizations only further highlighted his weaknesses as a commander. Patton demonstrated skill as a tactician and an effective combat leader; however, history shows that he did not possess the attributes of an operational artist.