# ID: 8d912b7ad5bd4ca59a02e263a53ce4cb
# Title: Two shades of green: can the British Army's warfighting division fight and win without fossil fuels in 2050?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
This study explored how abandoning diesel for sustainability could affect warfighting ability and credible deterrence. It was optimistic in nature and attempted to find advantages in alternative power sources. The study found the reduced energy density of electrification or hydrogen compared to diesel forced compromise in platform capabilities across firepower, protection, and mobility. The study argued that future find and strike capability in the deep could mitigate the risks posed by fielding a lighter, faster, electric force in the close. However, the study concluded that an electric warfighting division is unlikely to prevail and win against a conventionally powered adversary. This was because of operational challenges in energy supply, storage, and movement. For example, the study calculated the battery equivalent of a 600,000-liter bulk fuel installation would weigh 6,700 tons, requiring hundreds of support vehicles to move. British and U.S. Army futures teams must focus on developing operational supply, storage, and movement solutions rather than the electrification of individual vehicles at the tactical level. The study also identified a significant finding for 3 (UK) Division and Future Soldier: A lack of realistic sustainment modeling in simulations appeared to exaggerate the impact of deep fires on WARFIGHTER. This correlated with an apparent disconnect between the logistical capacity available to 1st Deep Strike Reconnaissance Brigade under Future Soldier, and its artillery logistics demand. This merits further exploration.
v ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Firstly, I must thank my incredibly patient wife for her love and support, while looking after our small child and tolerating my basement-dwelling antics over the past seven months. With no military experience but an incisive mind, she's also asked some cutting and thought-provoking questions which have enhanced the study too.
Secondly, I wish to thank my committee. To Mr Allan Boyce for his boundless cheer, enthusiasm, and optimism. You kept me going more times than you realize! To Dr Jim Greer for being a calm and perceptive advisor, especially when I needed help to develop a research methodology. To LTC Murray Smith from the UK's Defence Concepts and Doctrine Center. As a good friend and mentor, he's jovially melted my brain and filled my whiteboard on more than one Saturday morning.
Thirdly to the Art of War Scholars, who have set an imposing standard I have endeavored to match. You have continually spurred me on throughout the past few months.
In a similar vein, Dr Nowowjieski has been instrumental in the development of this thesis. Calmly capturing the nascent ideas of an excited and convoluted mind, and helping me structure, refine and articulate what I wanted to say.
Finally, to the members of the unofficial international Officers' Mess at Fort Leavenworth. Your collective wit, insight and ideas have helped improve the ideas and concepts throughout this study, invariably over a beer on a Friday afternoon.  The decisive factor, however, will be the new types of weapons used and the progress achieved in their use and control. New methods must be discovered that are free of the trammels of military habit and custom of conservative modes of thinking and of all prejudice -General Hasso von Manteuffel writing for the US Army Historical Division, 1946   Background A British Army warfighting division will consume 800,000 liters of fuel per day during high-intensity conflict. 
1
3
1 Land Warfare Centre, Doctrine Note 20/01, Sustainment (Warminster, UK: Ministry of Defence, February 2020), https://akxonline.defencegateway.mod.uk/ sites/vault/BAeBBDoctrine/Doctrine%20Notes/19-12-215%20Sustainment%20Doctrine %20A5%20web.pdf.
2 "Small Nuclear Power Reactors," World Nuclear Association," last updated May 2022, https://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library/nuclear-fuelcycle/nuclear-power-reactors/small-nuclear-power-reactors.aspx.
3 Full quantitative analysis in Chapter 4. Calculated using the energy density of diesel, and the power output of a 440MW reactor over 86,400 seconds in a 24 hour period.
Climate change is a force majeure of unparalleled scale, which will affect the energy environment and emerging technologies. Tackling climate change and biodiversity loss is the UK Government's number one international priority. 
4
5
Climate change is a global issue reshaping perspectives on human interaction with the environment. Its political importance increases each year as electorates seemingly become more attuned and empathetic toward greener policies. Therefore, public sector organizations are under increasing pressure to lead by example and be environmentally conscious when operating and making decisions. This led to the British Government passing a net zero emissions law, binding government policy to bring all greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050. 
6
7
Given the scope of the Net Zero Strategy, the energy environment is inextricably linked to climate change. Currently, the United Kingdom consumes approximately 300-400 Terawatt Hours (TWh) per year. 
8
10
Creating environmental laws to reduce greenhouse gas emissions can spark innovation, especially if subsidies are used to reduce the cost of research and development. 
11
12
13
14
15
Shell,
16
17
18
19
20
Defence will be stronger if it keeps up with new, adaptable and efficient options. We are already at the forefront of the new and growing green military agenda, trialling [sic] new types of vehicles, fuels standards, energy storage and much more. 
21
22
23
Announced as part of the British Army's modernization program, Project Mercury assumes that electrification of the fleet is the best solution to post fossil-fuel energy supply and will explore options to implement the changeover. 
24
The key problem is that diesel fuel is energy-dense, easy to transport, and part of a fully integrated supply and distribution system. The technologies it fuels are mature and well understood by the user and maintainers of the army. If an environmentally friendly non-fossil fuel were able to outperform diesel in energy by mass and volume, the 
21
22
23
24
automotive industry and energy companies writ large would be aggressively integrating it into their businesses. Alternatives to fossil fuels are therefore not currently viable in cost or performance.
As there is no direct comparator to diesel fuel's system-wide characteristics, some capability compromises will likely be necessary in a future equipment program.
Conversely, there may be tactical or operational advantages in electrification beyond sustainability. History has shown how Revolutions in Military Affairs (RMA's) occur in clusters after seismic shifts in the political, economic and social system. Climate change, and its impact on energy and technology, is likely to cause a similar cluster of RMAs.
In 2019 CGS suggested that the British Army's current equipment program might be the last to run on fossil fuels. Current technological trends suggest an alternative energy source is unlikely to offer the same energy performance as diesel when new equipment must be developed. This would force change in individual platform design, which will affect the doctrine and organization of the future force.
While this study has been produced as a requirement of the Masters in Military Art and Science (MMAS) program at the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, its purpose is broader. It is written to help inform the British Army and wider Ministry of Defence. Its spelling and abbreviations follow American 'correctness', but style choices such as passive voice are deliberately aimed at a British reader.
More specifically, this study aimed to explore whether the character of today's conflict is wholly dependent on fossil fuels. This study did not assert that high-intensity warfighting is the most likely future scenario for the British Army. Warfighting is, however, the most challenging in terms of energy supply and demand. Can an oil divested warfighting division prevail and win against a conventional force using fossil fuels? The study sought to define the limits of technological possibility, and then assess whether the British Army can reduce emissions while improving its capability.
Ultimately, this study strove for a solution where the British Army can simultaneously divest fossil fuels and become more effective. It provided recommendations for the current British Army, Project Mercury, and potential areas of future research.
The following questions guided the study: This assumption was necessary because without it, the impetus for innovation and energy transformation would not exist, and the MoD's desire to become greener will diminish. This assumption was valid because the government has signed NZ2050 into law, and the opposition party (Labour) advocates an even more aggressive timeline to  In warfighting (also referred to as major combat operations), most of the activity is directed against a significant form of armed aggression perpetrated by largescale military forces belonging to one or more states or to a well-organized and resourced non-state actor. These forces engage in combat operations in a series of battles and engagements at high intensity, varying in frequency and scale of forces involved. The immediate goal is to ensure freedom of action at the expense of their opponents. The rhythm of operations is often high with high logistics consumption. Enemy armed forces may also use irregular forces and CBRN capabilities to support conventional forces' military objectives. Operating in a context where warfighting is the predominant theme may be further exacerbated, perpetuated or exploited by other irregular actors seeking to benefit from instability, whether through insurgency, terrorism, criminality or disorder. 
33
Energy density by mass. The amount of energy (in Joules) one kilogram of fuel contains, irrespective of volume.
Energy density by volume. The amount of energy (in Joules) one meter cubed of fuel contains, irrespective of mass.
Transition point. The point at which major equipment programs within the British Army are replaced. This is similar to the transition that saw the "Big five" introduced to the US Army in the twentieth century.
This study explored how an oil divested British warfighting division would need to evolve to remain a credible fighting organization. It primarily did this through document analysis and did not extend into human subject research for data collection or modeling/simulation for analysis. It also did not consider adversaries in the same level of detail. It aimed to identify the threats and opportunities that alternative fuels bring and proposed a concept for how these can best support the future force.
Limitations are imposed on the study and author. These include time available before a defined submission date and the ability to travel for research while also attending study full-time. There are four limitations identified in this study.
To ensure the thesis was publishable, it had to be unclassified. This limited the type of information that could be quoted or used for evidence in detailed arguments. UK publications primarily use two classification levels; OFFICIAL and OFFICIAL SENSITIVE. There is no unclassified designation below OFFICIAL. This study applied judgment to OFFICIAL material and did not reference or quote OFFICIAL SENSITIVE material. It also did not use U.S. Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) for the same reasons.
Using modeling or simulation to evidence findings from the analysis would strengthen the study but was not achievable within the timeframes of an MMAS thesis. This is explained in Chapter 3.
The study did not conduct interviews with subject matter experts across the British Army because it risks introducing external bias into the study. The collective thinking of how the British Army thinks and fights was derived from Operational Staff Work (OSW) and doctrine. This was explained further in Chapter 3.
This study did not predict how Russian or Chinese efforts to develop greener forces would compare with UK/US efforts. This is because any sufficiently detailed documentation on Russian/Chinese capabilities was likely to be classified. Without this detail, an objective comparison would be flawed.
Delimitations are reductions in scope chosen by the author. Delimitations help bound the problem and ensure the study balanced depth and breadth. There were seven delimitations identified in this study.
As the British Army's warfighting division, 3 (UK) was the most relevant organization to this study. Of course, force design might see a more diverse deployment from across the wider Army, but providing an effective analysis of what this might look like is an opportunity for future research.
This study did not focus on the impact of platform modernization on routine business in barracks. This is because it could confuse the analysis of warfighting, causing the study to be less focused than it otherwise could be. Problems such as adapting infrastructure and energy supply within the UK are already explored in depth by the Future Soldier concept. 
34
Challenges with energy density and fuel performance mean that electric/hydrogen aircraft are significantly behind land vehicles. 
35
This study did not analyze the challenges associated with multinational elements operating within 3 (UK) Div. For example, a Danish Battlegroup has exercised under a British brigade in recent years, and the UK-led NATO Enhanced Forward Presence 34 Ministry of Defence, "Future Soldier Guide," The British Army, November 25, 2021, https://www.army.mod.uk/media/14919/adr010310-futuresoldierguide_25nov.pdf. 
35
Although this study considered cost in its analysis and recommendations, it did not constrain its conceptual exploration solely to what could be affordable in 15 years' time, based on perceptions of today's economic climate.
Although focused on a British warfighting division, the study did not limit itself to purely British research and experimentation. For example, tests of electric armored vehicles in the US are just as relevant as ones in the UK because the strength of the UK/US alliance means that breakthroughs on one side of the Atlantic will reach the other side rapidly.
The strategically important locations of rare earth metal deposits, and the industries that refine them, are well documented and directly affect alternative fuel technologies. Today, China is a critical node within the global supply and demand system for metals such as lithium and cobalt. Western technological research is diversifying to neutralize this issue, with emerging research exploring sodium-ion batteries. Sodiumbased ideas use a metal from the same elemental group, but extract them from sea water rather than mining. The assumption in this study was that the metals required to build future platforms would be accessible. Thus, it did not consider a scenario where an inability to access rare earth metals prevents capability development.
This study aimed to add to the collective knowledge of those working in strategy, concepts, and doctrine roles within the MoD. 
Climate change and how states respond to it will be a defining characteristic of the 21st Century. The symbiotic relationship between the environment and politics will drive innovation and change in global energy supply, transforming business models and public attitudes to energy supply. Voters will actively consider how environmentally focused a political party's policies are. Voter pressure will drive a reduction in fossil fuel dependency.
The United Kingdom sees itself as the vanguard in adapting to this new strategic environment. It was the first state to bind its environmental policy to reach net-zero by 2050 in law. It has the political consensus,
39
The Ministry of Defence accounts for 50% of the British Government's emissions and is compelled to help the government lead by example. The MoD as a line of effort toward the Government's objective is outlined in the MoD's Climate Change and Sustainability Strategic Approach. This directly states the need to prepare capability development, force design, and mentality now.
CGS highlighted the implied effects of the MoD's approach: that the current equipment program might be the last to use fossil fuels. With some armored vehicles that have been in service for 60 years and the Challenger 3 Main Battle Tank expected to remain in service until the 2040s, alternatives for their replacements must be explored now. 
40
While effective anticipation of major societal changes and their consequences is almost non-existent in history, intellectually bracing for the storm of change is important to enable survival. Failing to analyze and prepare for significant change risks obsolescence. Obsolescence quickly leads to irrelevance, which is anathema to the British Government's vision of a "Global Britain." Chapter 2 explored the published research, studies, doctrine, and articles that pertain to this problem.
The literature review was divided into three parts. First, Chapter 2 reviewed how 3 (UK) Division currently fights. Doctrine, historical evidence, and simulation data from previous exercises showed how 3 (UK) Division maneuvers in space and time. For example, if a brigade typically only fights 150km over two days prior to an echelon change, it will have different platform requirements to a brigade that typically travelled 400km in two days. The study had to qualify how it fights today to explore how the warfighting division can find relative advantage in the future.
Second, Chapter 2 reviewed the alternative fuels available. When reviewing and comparing fuels, there are two essential criteria: energy density by mass and volume. These require explanation to ensure the reader understands the terms used throughout the remainder of the paper. With an understanding of these, research and literature on different types of fuels can be analyzed in context.
Third, this study explored broader futures concepts currently under development.
These mattered because this study's ideas had to nest within them to remain relevant to the Ministry of Defence. As such, the literature review captured what these concepts are. Throughout all three parts, it proved helpful to evidence ideas with historical vignettes. The study subsequently reviewed the literature surrounding twentieth-century land warfare.
A wide variety of sources contribute to an understanding of how 3 (UK) Division currently fights. In Operational Design terms, this represents the current state from which future concepts must evolve. This literature review focused on the doctrine and organization elements of DOTMLPF-P (Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leader development, Personnel, Facilities, Policies):
One natural place to begin looking for how 3 (UK) Division fights is the doctrine that it uses. The Army's capstone doctrine that broadly equates to U.S. Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 1-0 is the 2017 ADP Land Operations. 
41
Nested underneath ADP Land Operations is the British Army's warfighting doctrine. This comes in four parts. The first is Army Field Manual (AFM): Warfighting Tactics, Part 1, The Fundamentals. 
43
42
43
AFM Warfighting Tactics has three other parts, which cover different echelons.
Part 2 is Corps and divisional tactics. 
44
45
46
47
48
Two further documents would have been useful for understanding how the division fights: the Planning and Execution Handbook (PEHB), 50 and the Staff Officers Handbook (SOHB). 
51
The SOHB is classified as OFFICIAL SENSITIVE and was not directly used for this study. Instead, the open-source 1999 SOHB was used extensively. 
52
53
54
It is important to consider how much energy exists within one kilo of diesel. A comparison to the output of a typical exercise bike offers an effective visualization. A fit individual on an exercise bike will produce a power output of approximately 100 Watts.
They would need to keep cycling at this output level for five days without stopping to equal the 45.5MJ contained within one kilo of diesel. 
55
56
Alternative fuels, therefore, need to either match this performance or compromise on the weight or volume required. A plethora of research on alternative fuels is ongoing, with multiple papers reporting incremental progress towards the holy grail of hydrocarbon performance equivalency.
Figure 
1
56 Aritra Ghosh, "Possibilities and Challenges for the Inclusion of the Electric Vehicle (EV) to Reduce the Carbon Footprint in the Transport Sector: A Review," Energies 13, no. 10 (January 2020): 2602. fuels. Exploring synthetic bio-oil would have led to a study that explored synthetic drop in fuels, and their associated agricultural challenges. 
57
1
57 Dan Charles, "How A Biofuel Dream Called Jatropha Came Crashing Down," NPR, August 21, 2012, https://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2012/08/22/159391553/howa-biofuel-dream-called-jatropha-came-crashing-down. Table 
1
1
The energy density of lithium ion batteries is continuously improving, and has tripled since it was first introduced commercially in the 1990's. 
58
59
60
61
The US military is exploring the feasibility of small deployable nuclear reactors to provide 1-5MW of power. 
63
64
65
63 Aaron Mehta, "Portable Nuclear Reactor Project Moves Forward at Pentagon," Defense News, March 23, 2021, https://www.defensenews.com/smr/energy-andenvironment/2021/03/23/portable-nuclear-reactor-project-moves-forward-at-pentagon/.
64 David Kramer, "Pentagon's Battlefield Nuclear Reactor Plans Come under Fire," Physics Today, June 28, 2021, https://physicstoday.scitation.org/do/10.1063/ PT.6.2.20210628a/abs/.
65 Rolls-Royce, Nuclear Small Modular Reactors -Once in a Lifetime Opportunity for the UK (London, UK: Rolls-Royce, PLC, 2017), https://www.rollsroyce.com/~/media/Files/R/Rolls-Royce/documents/customers/nuclear/smr-brochurejuly-2017.pdf.
66 Member States, Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and Its Amendment (International Atomic Energy Agency Information and international law 67 surrounding the use of nuclear materials and associated responsibilities, such as security and protection.  maximizes interoperability. This is currently described in Joint Concept Note (JCN) 1/20 Multi Domain Integration. 
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
79
80
These range from expeditionary maneuver warfare concepts 
81
82
83
84
Progress in materials science that affects armor is available 
85
86
A divestment of fossil fuels is not the first major transition in operational energy. 
87
88
89
90
91
There is a plethora of documentation that describes how 3 (UK) Division is designed to fight, and how it conducted itself on recent exercises. These sources enable the study to create an understanding of how 3 (UK) Division fights in space and time.
There is a clear hierarchy of documents from strategic reviews such as Global Britain, 
The research methodology comprises four parts. Firstly, an explanation of the research method employed for data collection and analysis. Secondly, an overview of the types of sources used for data collection, along with criteria for relevance and credibility.
Thirdly, how the method will be applied to research questions during data analysis.
Finally it discussed ethical considerations and how the study has mitigated any identified risks.
This study used a Grounded Theory approach to develop a concept that answers the primary research question. A grounded theory seeks to build a new theory or concept from qualitative data, which provides the grounding or basis. It does not begin with a hypothesis to prove or disprove. One approach to developing a grounded theory is to use three phases of analysis referred to as open, axial and selective coding. 92 Open coding is the identification of potentially relevant information or data from whatever source is being researched. An example from this study was the operational range of a Challenger 2 Main Battle Tank (MBT). Document analysis of the Staff Officer's Handbook (SOHB) yielded this information, which was then allocated a code. There were a large number of these codes, which remain fragments of information without any form of grouping or categorization.
Axial coding takes these numerous fragments and groups them into categories.
This study double categorized data for the first secondary research question. Where appropriate, it also categorized the same open code for each secondary research question.
Categories can be bespoke, or an existing framework that is likely familiar to readers. 
92
This study used the eight components of the US Army definition of 'Combat Power' from ADP3-0 as its categories for axial coding, when exploring how 3 (UK) Division currently fights. The elements of combat power were chosen as the categories because they form an interlocking and comprehensive overview of how a formation fights. The operational range of a Challenger 2 MBT was grouped in the 'Movement and maneuver' category. There were inevitably links between categories beginning to appear, or dilemmas about which category a specific piece on information best sits within. These would necessitate new categories being formed. With all of the information categorized, the links between them were analyzed.
Selective coding is the integrative process that identifies links between categories, and uses them to develop a holistic perspective of the information as a whole. A core concept is derived from this holistic perspective, grounded in the data. The coding used for this study is attached in Appendix A.
The study relied primary on document analysis. These include published doctrine and concepts, detailed equipment manuals, and staff work from previous exercises. It also used peer reviewed scientific research papers and broader literature/commentary from journals. It did not use interviews for reasons outlined in the ethical considerations section below. All of the references explained in Chapter 2 form sources used for the study.
Finally, official future concepts such as JCN 1/20 Multi-Domain Integration 93 are relevant because any conclusions from this study must nest within the future they describe. Broader publications and ideas are also relevant as they can offer alternative perspectives and counterarguments to analyze.
Evidence of peer review in published material is the primary means of ensuring the credibility of sources, especially for the analysis of alternative fuels. The credibility of each item used in coding is within Appendix A. Official documents such as doctrine and concepts will be deemed credible, with more recent documents taking precedence over earlier ones if there is a contradiction. Documents and articles that do not evidence claims or assertions with sound logic or numerical reasoning do not have enough credibility to be included in the study.
Below is a visualization of how this study analyzed each of the three secondary    A similar process generated codes from climate change policies, scientific research, and doctrine categorized them. This was synthesized with the view of how 3 March 2021), https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ uploads/attachment_data/file/969402/The_Integrated_Review_of_Security__Defence__D evelopment_and_Foreign_Policy.pdf.
CHAPTER 4
The engine of a tank is no less a weapon than its gun.
-General Heinz Guderian
Moving on a single route with 100m between vehicles at 20kih 96 the Division occupies some 400km of road, takes 24 hours to pass a point, and needs some 150 square kilometres of mixed countryside to hide in when at rest.
-General Sir Rupert Smith, describing the British Armored Division he commanded in 1991
The analysis Chapter worked through each secondary research question in turn.
The final synthesis of ideas to produce a grounded theory is the centerpiece of the conclusion in Chapter 5.
Chapter 4 first analyzes how 3 (UK) Division fights, using the method explained in the methodology and the sources identified in the literature review. It axially coded information into the eight elements of combat power (Fires, Movement and maneuver, Command and control, Protection, Sustainment, Intelligence, Information, and Leadership). Some of these axial codes proved of limited use to answer the primary research question. As such, the length of analysis in each category varied significantly.
Command and control, protection, and leadership are not included in the pages below, because they proved of limited relevance through the remainder of Chapter 4. The 96 Kih is kilometers in the hour. It stresses an average speed over time, rather than maintaining a consistent speed irrespective of driving conditions. This is allegedly based on a soldier who believed 20kph meant they were not allowed to slow down for tight corners, hence the nuance in term. remainder of the elements of combat power are included, and have been positioned in priority order.
With 3 (UK) Division's style of fighting understood, the study moved to the next research question: It assessed whether electrification was the best alternative power source. It compared diesel, hydrogen and lithium-ion batteries across metrics outlined in the research methodology. It combined numerical reasoning with military judgement to affirm that electrification is challenging but preferrable to hydrogen.
Finally, the Chapter assessed future concepts, such as Multi-Domain Operations, 97 to understand how the future context for an electrified division. This analysis proved shorter than anticipated because future concepts did not appear to have the longevity to remain relevant in 2050. The analysis consequently focused more on the future operating environment of the 2040's as described in strategic documents such as Global Trends 2040, 
98
99
The analysis in this Chapter is assumes the reader is familiar with the division as an abstract echelon that sits above a brigade or regiment, but underneath a Corps. This assumption allowed the study to focus its analysis on 3 (UK) Division specifically. The Division is also undergoing a period of significant modernization outlined in "Future Soldier" (25 November 2021). This study used the Future Soldier structure rather than the 3 (UK) Division of 2021/22 to maximize relevance.
3 (UK) Division is the only warfighting division in the British Army. Its destruction in LSCO would have a dramatic impact on all three components of fighting power: moral, physical and conceptual. The British Army's small size compared to potential adversaries is nothing new. Since WW2, basic assumptions about fighting outnumbered characterized the Cold War, and became reality in Korea. Force preservation is therefore deeply engrained within the British Army's approach to fighting.
Approach which is "an indirect approach which emphasizes effects on the will of the enemy." 
100
This context is important because it underpinned the detail throughout this secondary research question.
One of the most effective ways to achieve the force preservation described above is to destroy enemy forces in the deep battlespace and present an anti-climactic close fight for maneuver brigades. This is not just the preserve of the Royal Artillery but includes air and maritime component capabilities too. Assets the Fires function leverages are also likely to be multinational. With UK participation in the US Warfighter exercises, procedural and technical interoperability with US forces is paramount. 
101
103
108
105
106 Jack Watling, "The Future of Fires: Maximising the UK's Tactical and Operational Firepower," (Occasional Paper, Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies, London, United Kingdom, November 2019), 6, https://rusi.org/ explore-our-research/publications/occasional-papers/future-fires-maximising-ukstactical-and-operational-firepower.
in the Royal Artillery and integrating them into the 1st Deep Recce Strike Brigade Combat Team. 
109
112
114
116
The doubling of deep fires regiments and organizational integration with recce elements highlights how convinced the British Army is that shaping the deep is something that is necessary, and worth the financial cost in spite of competing priorities.
Summarizing fires, two key themes have been identified. First, the importance of divisional fires to apply lethal effect in the deep is fundamental to how 3 (UK) Division fights. Second, conventional munitions in warfighting remain relevant, and the artillery logistics to support 3 (UK) Division's deep fight are significant. Combining these into one output, the energy demand of 3 (UK) Division's artillery logistics is critical to how it fights. Artillery logistics is subsequently explored in more detail in the sustainment section of this research question. 
116
The study had to analyze how 3 (UK) Division moves in time and space before the sustainment implications of artillery logistics could be considered. The distances that the division can move in a day determine the distances and throughput requirements for artillery ammunition. This, along with the movement of maneuver brigades is provided the basis for vehicular movement, and thus energy demand.
This study needed to develop a detailed sense of how 3 (UK) Division operates in space and time to understand energy supply and demand. There were several different ways to try and model this: simulations, history, and doctrine. This study analyzed all three.
First is to use modern simulation data from recent Command Post Exercises (CPX's) such as Warfighter 21/4. This has the advantage of being recent, with contemporary doctrine. MG Maria Gervais, who commanded the Synthetic Training Environment Cross Functional Team in 2018 accurately describes how the WARSIM software used for Warfighter exercises does not model sustainment accurately. 
117
Automatic simulated resupply prevented targeting of sustainment, negated throughput issues on routes, and allowed an excessive amount of artillery ammunition to move 100km across the battlefield in seconds instantly. This 'teleporting' ammunition could then be expended in the simulator without any regard for thermal management of the guns. 
118
The result is a simulation system that generates a disconnect between terrain, sustainment and maneuver which has most likely built a degree of hubris into what US and UK divisional planners believe is possible, especially with regard to operational reach and endurance of fires.
It is for this reason that the study took data from CPX simulations, but also used real world empirical maneuver that was bounded by the realities of sustainment and to a lesser extent, terrain. The best example for this is Operation Desert Storm in Iraq, 1991, for four reasons. First, the majority of the platforms used are still in service today, albeit upgraded. Second, numerous detailed sources are readily available. Third, relatively unconstrained terrain compared to Eastern European CPXs sees 1 (BR) Armored Division maximizing its operational reach, at the limit of real divisional level sustainment. Finally, the brigade's maneuver elements consisted of two armored brigades task organized with combat support elements,
119
120
121
122
CPX simulations offer an alternative insight into movement across space and time. The author was SO2 Engineers within 3 (UK) Division G35 Future Operations cell on Exercise Warfighter 21/4 and previous preparation training (Ex Cerberus). As such, he was heavily involved in the movement and maneuver planning and execution. From 121 Baker, "Operation DESERT SABRE," 24.
122 Sophie Weiner, "Why It's Impossible to Accurately Measure a Coastline," Popular Mechanics, March 3, 2018, https://www.popularmechanics.com/science/ environment/a19068718/why-its-impossible-to-accurately-measure-a-coastline/. memory and personal notes, the following open codes are relevant.On Cerberus, 3 (UK) Division conducted two rapid movements of 80-100km to seize key terrain suitable for a divisional defense. Both movements involved at least two maneuver brigades, and were completed within 24 hours. On Warfighter, 3 (UK) Division executed a movement to contact with two brigades forward, and a brigade in echelon behind each. They advanced 60km eastward from assembly areas near the Polish border to the river Neman within the first 24 hours, before conducting a deliberate divisional obstacle crossing between Alytus and Merkine. From these numbers one can establish that 3 (UK) Division needs to move brigades up to 100km within 24 hours, with the ability to conduct offensive, enabling or defensive action at the end of such a movement. This provides a baseline value which an alternative power source must be capable of supporting.
The division occupies a 15km frontage in the attack, and can defend an area 30km wide by 60km in depth. 
123
124
Summarizing movement and maneuver, evidence from history, CPX's and doctrine shows that 3 (UK) Division can and must be able to advance over 100km in 24 hours, while in contact. 100km seems like a significant distance to fight to those staff officers familiar with planning in the constrained terrain of eastern Europe or the caucuses, but Desert Storm provides an example where such distances are relevant.
Considering larger distances in less restrictive terrain is of more relevance to this study than more condensed operations in complex terrain because of the demands placed on sustainment are more challenging from a fuel perspective. General Sir Rupert Smith establishes the operational reach of maneuver brigades based upon the loop times of sustainment vehicles, assuming they only travel at night to increase survivability. 
125
The fires section above has identified a demand for wheeled vehicles to move substantial amounts of artillery ammunition. Movement and maneuver has shown that 3 (UK) Division could expect to advance 100km in a day. Both are important to this study because they form the basis of daily vehicular energy demand. Examining the sustainment capacity of the division is the natural corollary to these sections. It begins with useful statistics from Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2003, before using SOHB 1999 and "Future Soldier" to understand vehicle demand.
1st Marine Expeditionary Force Sustainment in Iraq, 2003   In Iraq 2003, the US Navy explored how to 'unleash' US combat forces from the tether of fuel. They discovered that over 90% of the Marine Expeditionary Force's fuel consumption came from wheeled vehicles, with only a small fraction being used by the heavier armored platforms. 
126
Taking a close look at its supply chain, one Pentagon study found that through 2009 more than three thousand troops and civilian contractors had been killed or wounded protecting convoys; 80 percent of those were transporting truck fuel. The United States would probably have lost more had the Taliban not earned so much money by letting fuel pass at a price, rather than attacking it. 
127
Finally, at intense rates with all of the Division in contact some 3000 tons are required each day. If we add on the Corps Artillery, who we might expect to be firing in support in these circumstances and a figure for the spares, main assembly and Engineer stores that might be required, then some 4,500 tons is required every day. Bear in mind this is all palletized at approx. 1 ton per pallet and you start to see the significance of your fork lift plant and the problems of breaking bulk. 
128
SOHB 1999 describes the composition of Close Support and General Support logistics regiments. 
129
Armored Division in 1999 had six squadrons, four of which were for artillery logistics. 
130
135
the operational range that logistics units can support the artillery across. Loading, unloading and breaking apart pallets of ammunition also consumes time.
Assuming that each battery has its own AMA/PAA, and that it takes 30 mins to load and unload at each end (for each loop), this study can develop a more accurate assessment of artillery logistic reach, and hence the demand from an energy supply perspective.
With the shorter ranges of conventional artillery, it is assumed that the two AS90 units will be operating in different parts of the battlespace. MLRS logistics for both deep fires units could however be co-located to create efficiency through economies of scale.
A more realistic distribution solution is depicted in Figure 
7
Even if artillery is firing from the Forward Line of Own Troops (FLOT) at the start of an operation, after a day of 3 (UK) Division's maneuver it could be 100km behind the FLOT. Even with new MLRS ammunition ranging 150km,
136
While bleak, this is also highly relevant to the study because it highlights the importance of using contractors to move materiel and fuel, as in Desert Storm. 
137
The introduction began with the statistic that a warfighting division would consume approximately 800,000 liters of fuel per day. 
138
The limitations of recent simulations prevent thorough stress testing of fuel supply in much the same way as they do for artillery logistics. There is only one semidedicated squadron to conduct fuel supply for the warfighting division. Within SOHB 1999 the ancestors of 10 QOGLR and 27 Regt RLC (10 and 27 Transport Regiments   RLC) each have a fuel squadron with 50 "22.5m 3 TTF." 
139
138
139 Land Warfare 1 Branch, Staff Officers Handbook, 124. 
140
141
The study now stops considering the materiel, movement and logistics of the division, and instead focusses on how it functions in terms of intelligence and information. These sections are most relevant during the final synthesis of ideas in Chapter 5. This is because 3 (UK) Division's ability to find and strike in the deep is used to mitigate compromises that emerge from adopting an alternative power source.
Intelligence At a national level, the United States and the United Kingdom have similar capabilities. Examples include the National Security Agency c.f. Government Communications Headquarters, and the Central Intelligence Agency c.f. the Secret Intelligence Service. Unified Action 142 in the US military, and Integrated Action 143 in the UK seek to leverage these non-military organizations to achieve military end states.
The difference lies in access to these capabilities because a smaller army benefits from fewer layers of management such as Corps and Combatant Commands. With only one warfighting division in the British Army, integrated action partners are much more concentrated, and employed at a lower level. This is reflected in doctrine, with the specialists 144 described at a Corps level in the US Army's FM3-94
145
146
142
143 Land Warfare Development Centre, ADP, Land Operations.
144 Specialists in the literal sense, rather than the U.S. Army rank.
Division can find and strike enemy targets in the deep with ease, its maneuver platforms might be able to operate with less armor, and thereby weight. This would reduce energy demand, and could make an alternative power source feasible. Effective and timely integration of national assets is therefore relevant to this study.
An alternative means of collecting intelligence is Ground Mounted Reconnaissance (GMR). Space or aerial Information, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) can be affected by weather, and cannot provide the finesse and detail of GMR. For example, a satellite is unlikely to produce the same detailed wet gap crossing analysis as an engineer reconnaissance sergeant on the ground. GMR subsequently has a role, and is unlikely to be obsolete in 2050. 
147
Summary of Secondary Research Question One 3 (UK) Division relies on deep fires to destroy enemy assets in its deep battlespace. Its maneuver brigades could advance up to 100km in a day. It lacks the logistical lift to move these distances, and continue to use deep fires in the deep. This means there is a dissonance between how 3 (UK) Division fights in simulations, and how it would mathematically fight in reality. As such, an increase in divisional logistic support is necessary for 3 (UK) Division's real operational effectiveness to match its performance in simulations. The study next considered whether electrification was the best alternative power source for the 3 (UK) Division described in the pages above.
Is electrification the best alternative power source for 3 (UK) Division in warfighting?
The word 'best' requires some clarification in order to answer this secondary research question. Best is relative to alternatives, not necessarily good in absolute terms.
There are several metrics to consider beyond just energy density by mass and volume.
While the previous research question was a macro view of how 3 (UK) Division fights, this research question focused on micro use cases for alternative power sources. It used sustainment and maneuver vehicles as its primary energy demand problems, based on the analysis from the previous research question.
Despite these platforms having vastly different usages, their energy supply is remarkably similar. For today's 3 (UK) Division it involves petroleum either shipped into theater, or refined in the Joint Security Area (JSA). 
148
Army's BFIs during Operation Desert Shield were each over three million gallons in size.
149
150
Alternative hydrocarbons, such as Liquid Natural Gas (LNG), are assessed as not meeting the intent to divest from fossil fuels for sustainability because they are still fossil-fuels, with the same emissions problem. Likewise, the development of Algae biooils was not be considered because synthetic fuel production is at a low Technology Readiness Level (TRL), 
151
152
153
Every criteria/metric listed in table 3 is allocated a color using the grading system in table 4. As well as explaining what the six criteria are, table 3 also doubles as a 'bottom line up front' for the following 14 pages of analysis.
Industrial Expertise and Capacity of Hydrogen
Hydrogen production already exists within the United Kingdom, largely within chemical factories and refineries. There is also a national strategy to increase hydrogen infrastructure throughout the twenty first century drastically. 
154
155
As a gas, hydrogen's energy density by mass is almost three times higher than diesel. While 1Kg of hydrogen would contain 140MJ of energy, it would also have a volume of 11,200 liters at room temperature 156 Significant compression is therefore essential to create a viable power source, with 10,000psi tank being the current industry 154 Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, UK Hydrogen Strategy, 8. 
155
156
= 11,200 liters. standard. 157
158
159
Compression or cooling of hydrogen during transport adds mass beyond that of the fuel. The only credible figures identified in the literature review offer 0.27MJ/Kg and 0.252MJ/L for a relatively small pressurized 10,000psi container. This study tripled these numbers to account for the fact that a large military vehicle has more space for containers, and there is an associated economy. Simply, the energy density of pressurized or liquid hydrogen in containers is lower than that of lithium-ion batteries. It therefore cannot be more efficient for operational movement than electrical solutions, even before cabling options are considered.
Similarly, a quick comparison of the energy densities for diesel and hydrogen shows they differ by an order of magnitude. Transporting compressed hydrogen by sustainment vehicles of the same size is therefore going to transport less than ten percent of the energy transported today. Vehicles can't feasibly become much larger because they need to fit on railheads and move under bridges. ASSESSED: RED.
Operational Supply of Hydrogen Unlike electrical power, there is unlikely to be a national hydrogen grid that can be exploited in a future conflict. Hydrogen must therefore be generated in theater, or transported from behind the Joint Security Area (JSA). Hydrogen is converted into electricity before driving a motor, and is therefore less efficient from a supply perspective.
161
If a 25% efficient diesel Challenger Main Battle Tank needs 61.6GJ in fuel, a 34% efficient hydrogen MBT would require 45.3GJ of energy. The tank and hydrogen required to contain this energy would weigh 56 tons, and occupy 59 meters cubed.
Hydrogen's relative inefficiency to electricity makes it even less viable as a solution for armored platforms such as MBTs. ASSESSED: RED.
The future cost of hydrogen production depends largely on commercial adoption and innovation. The UK Hydrogen Strategy predicts that hydrogen will support up to a third of the UK's energy demand in 2050. 
162
Electric vehicles have a high TRL, and are in-use around the world today.
Although these are primarily smaller vehicles at present, there are larger trucks being developed for transport/haulage companies. 
163
164
A typical British Army Bulk Fuel Installation (BFI) holds 600,000 liters of fuel. 166 1 (BR) Armored Division moved 7 million liters of fuel into its rear area before the beginning of Operation Desert Storm. Nicolaus Otto's internal combustion engine in 1876 was just 17% efficient, whereas a typical road car in 2013 was 30% efficient. 
167
This study assumed that the internal combustion engines powering warfighting platforms today are 25% efficient given their age. Formula One racing represents the best battery/electrical technology available today. Their electric motors are 96% efficient. 
168
Diesel has an energy density by volume of 38.675 megajoules per liter (MJ/L), 
169
170
169
170 "Lithium-Ion Battery," Clean Energy Institute, University of Washington, accessed November 1, 2021, https://www.cei.washington.edu/education/science-ofsolar/battery-technology/.
171 National Aeronautics and Space Administration, "Saturn V," Rocket Park, last updated September 16, 2011, https://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/rocketpark/ saturn_v.html.
Transporting the equivalent weight of two Saturn V rockets would require 400 EPLS. Sustainment analysis in the previous research question demonstrates that this would consume the entire division's vehicular lift capacity. Re-positioning such a battery would consequently require an operational pause for all of the division's sustainment effort. Ironically, these same vehicles would likely need to recharge from the battery to enable its movement. Storage by battery is therefore not feasible.
Battery technology is however continually improving. The sheer weight of batteries required means that the technology would need to improve by 1000% to require just 40 EPLS to move. From 1989
172
173
174
175
Electricity must move from wherever it is generated to where it is consumed. If operational storage of electricity is unworkable, then movement from generation to consumption is important. Electrical energy can primarily be transported in two ways; conventional sustainment using vehicles, or via high voltage cabling.
High voltage electrical cabling is used extensively in urban areas to provide power distribution. This includes underwater, subterranean and surface laid cable as well as aerial solutions using pylons. 
176
177
179
180
Conventional sustainment using vehicles will be less efficient than transporting diesel in Close Support Tankers (CSTs) purely because of energy density by mass. It is however still possible, and will directly benefit from technological development in civilian transport and logistics. The future CST might look a lot like the Tesla Semi of the 2020's. 
181
Operational movement of electrical energy is assessed as better than diesel because there are two options, both of which are viable. High voltage cabling has the throughput to meet the division's needs, and can interface directly with a national grid. ASSESSED: BLUE.
One choice for operational energy supply is solar power. Using the volume of diesel, its energy density and the relative efficiency of electric motors, one can calculate the energy requirement for the division in Joules. This is 8.04 TeraJoules (TJ). This, their maximum capacity for safety reasons.
186
These could be dispersed throughout the battlespace, but would require significant resources to protect. It is also likely to present a variety of nuclear proliferation issues with respect to international law, offers an information opportunity to an adversary, and generates the risk of nuclear material being lost to non-state actors during the conflict.
This study therefore assumes that the political appetite to deploy dozens of small nuclear reactors across a battlespace dominated by fires is non-existent.
Using some form of ship to shore electrical supply is not viable because the Royal Navy's fleet is not nuclear. The largest power plants in service are the two MT30 gas turbines powering each of the Queen Elizabeth Aircraft Carriers,
187
188
Summarizing energy supply, solar is not a feasible solution. The risk of a nuclear reactor going missing, or exploding is less politically palatable than simply continuing to use fossil-fuels. Nuclear is not the answer. Host Nation Infrastructure is vulnerable to cyber-attack and forces 3 (UK) Division to seize and protect predictable points geographically. This hands initiative to an adversary. ASSESSED: RED.
Using similar calculations to operational energy supply, the solar panel required to sustain one electric Main Battle Tank (MBT) would be 12.6m x 12.6m solar panel, and would take at least 20 hours to recharge. By contrast, the 1,592 liter fuel tank in a Challenger 2 MBT takes approximately seven minutes to fill from a Close Support Tanker (CST). 
189
MBT. 190
The Perkins CV12-6A V12 diesel engine 191 and transmission weigh approximately 3 tons. 
192
For lighter vehicles, compromises are not as stark. As explained in operational movement, the Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of electrified transport vehicles is significantly higher than for armored vehicles.
194
191
192
193
204
205
206
207
208
209
Therefore, the study concludes that 3 (UK) Division's ability to win depends on fossilfuels.
Finally, the study moves into recommendations. These are grouped into three categories: recommendations for the today's British Army, recommendations for Project MERCURY, and recommendations for future research.
From the First World War onwards, militaries have grown accustomed to unprecedented firepower, protection, and mobility. Current materiel solutions such as Main Battle Tanks and aviation owe their very existence to the performance of fuels that allow range, survivability, and lethality to coexist without relative compromise.
Chapter 4 calculated that electrifying a 75-ton Challenger MBT that can travel 500km without refueling would require a 22-ton lithium-ion battery that would take at least a day to recharge. This will rightly lead some readers to query whether electrification and 'tanks' are mutually exclusive. Abandoning heavy armor would be much simpler for electrification. But such a force can only win if enemy armor can be defeated either by light forces in the close, or fires in the deep. This study must conclude whether heavy armor is worth the effort of electrification to answer its title and primary research question. In simple terms, will the 'tank' of the twentieth century be obsolete by 2050?
There will always be a close fight, and concepts that argue long-range fires can achieve all of the lethality a force needs 212 fundamentally misunderstand the nature of war. Clausewitz's friction concept 213 aptly describes how neutralization in the deep cannot be guaranteed, which is a reality that sometimes materializes in simulations. 
214
215
It is necessary to abstract the uses of contemporary armor further to understand how to compromise across mobility, firepower, and protection. Maneuver warfare is ultimately about trying to gain superiority. A key element in generating superiority at a decisive point is surprise, which features as a principle of war in both the US Army 216 and the British Army. 
217
Fast, light, and lethal electric armor with limited survivability offers several thought-provoking corollaries. How fast, light, and lethal depends on the scale of compromise in platform design. This study explores this compromise to try and identify realistic parameters for future electric armor, quantifying range and survivability.
This study assumes a linear relationship between weight and range (halving the weight would double the range if everything else remained the same). With the space and mass available, an electrified 75-ton Challenger 3 MBT would only be able to travel 50km before running out of power. To achieve the 100km in a day that 3 (UK) Division planners would expect, an electric MBT would need to be approximately 40-50 tons, with 216 HQDA, ADP 3-0.
217 Land Warfare Development Centre, ADP, Land Operations. 
218 Clausewitz,
On War,
198.
220
Second, an electric 50-ton MBT would provide higher tactical mobility than contemporary MBTs. Reduced ground bearing pressure limits sinkage in soft ground.
Reduced weight allows for a broader range of existing gap crossings to be exploited. It 
It is nave to assume that ISR will ever be sufficient to provide the commander with a perfect understanding of the battlefield. That said, an analysis of current opensource technologies provides an impressive indication of what classified technologies may be able to achieve in 2050. Consider the threat of adversary conventionally powered armored forces facing friendly 50-ton electric tanks. Finding that enemy armor before it can overmatch lighter opponents is critical. One of 3 (UK) Division's advantages compared to an American division was its relative ease of access to national capabilities.
One national space-based capability that is highly likely to exist in 2050 is LiDAR mapping of the earth's surface. Aerial LiDAR techniques can already identify 70-year-old tank pits within heavy woodland. 
224
225
226
A future electric warfighting division fielding armor with less protection is going to be even more reliant on striking targets in the deep than today's division. In simulations, divisional fires achieve this with great effect. Future Soldier's increased focus on the deep is therefore a step in the right direction, but it must be supported by increased logistics and evidenced by more accurate simulations. Chapter 4 showed that artillery logistics shortcomings mean the division can no longer shape the deep effectively once targets are more than 210km from bulk ammunition storage in the rear. This is exacerbated by the lack of a Close Support Logistics Regiment (CSLR) to support 1st Deep Strike Recce Brigade, because this 210km figure assumes all of the divisional lift is allocated to artillery, and GMLRS-ER
227
Electrifying the warfighting fleet does not remove the requirement to sustain the force with water, rations, medical supplies and ammunition. Transportation of these by vehicles on the ground will therefore remain a necessity.
Fuel transportation could however be replaced by cabling. Taking inspiration from the 62-mile-long pipeline established to support 1 (BR) Armored Division in DESERT Storm, 228 power can be transported almost instantaneously via surface laid or even buried cables. One 400kV cable's throughput is enough to power the division. 90% of the Marine Expeditionary Force's fuel consumption in Iraq 2003 came from wheeled vehicles. 
229
A surface laid cable would radiate in the electromagnetic spectrum (EMS) 
230
The use of contractor support is also complicated by electrifying the warfighting division, as technical interoperability is significantly degraded. This is an area for future research.
The electrical equivalent of a 600,000-liter Bulk Fuel Installation (BFI) would be the same size as 32 40-foot ISO containers, and weigh 6,700 tons. This weight would take over 400 EPLS or SV 15T to transport. This would likely consume the lift capacity of the two logistics regiments supporting divisional level activity. Such an electrical 
229
230 "Electric and Magnetic Fields from Power Lines," U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, last updated November 27, 2018, https://www.epa.gov/radtown/ electric-and-magnetic-fields-power-lines.
storage installation would likely have to be pre-positioned or require an operational pause to move. As such, they would likely also be limited in number. As storage is so challenging, the ability to generate electricity dynamically to meet demand is more important.
Nuclear power is not the answer. A division would need at least two dozen of the 5MW reactors being developed for the US military. In the case of Joint Forcible Entry (JFE), this would involve forcibly proliferating nuclear material into another state. Each reactor would require significant protection to ensure it wasn't captured by irregular forces or criminals. Finally, despite shielding a nuclear reactor can still be detected from space, allowing an adversary to see every support area within the division's rear. 
231
The only remaining solution is to use Host Nation Infrastructure (HNI). It would prevent the British Army from being able to sustain an expeditionary conflict in austere locations. An electrified British warfighting division reliant on HNI would have been unable to land in San Carlos Bay in 1982 to recapture the Falklands. HNI is also vulnerable to cyber-attack, especially in the interconnected world described by Global Strategic Trends. 
232
From this conclusion, there are several recommendations for the future force.
Simulations used on command post exercises must accurately model sustainment.
One unintended but important finding relates to the use of simulations for experimentation. WARSIM does not accurately model sustainment, particularly for artillery logistics. If Future Soldier's decision to "privilege the deep fight over the close" 233 is based upon 3 (UK) Division's performance on simulations such as WARFIGHTER, there will be disconnect in the division's organization and equipment.
This study recommends 3 (UK) Division conduct a detailed quantitative comparative analysis of its Class I, III, IV and V consumption versus logistic capacity in warfighting.
1st Deep Strike Recce Brigade must have a dedicated Close Support Logistics Regiment (3 RLC must be retained). This recommendation is a direct corollary of the one above. This study calculated that 1st Deep Strike Recce Brigade would require a daily demand of 1,080 Rocket Pod Containers and 1,820 pallets of 155mm ammunition in warfighting. This appears to be beyond what 10 QOGLR and 27 RLC can supply, given the requirement to transport food, water, rations, other ammunition types etc. as well.
There is no logistics unit listed to support 1 st Deep Strike Recce Brigade. This report recommends that the British Army consider retaining 3 Regt RLC to support the brigade's deep fires logistics.
Focus on operational energy supply, storage, and movement. Recent experimentation to explore electrification has focused on individual vehicles. 
234
Operational energy supply for electrified warfighting. The critical vulnerability for an electric warfighting division is its energy supply. This study has highlighted the problem of operating in an austere or energy-denied environment, but has been unable to provide a concrete solution. This is an area that merits further research to understand the problem, especially vulnerability of host-nation infrastructure to cyber threat and whether a nuclear submarine can feasibly provide ship to shore energy supply.
Electric aviation: plot hole, or unmanned, lighter and easier in 2050? This study has focused on ground maneuver at the expense of attack aviation to minimize length.
Either aviation remains conventional and uses a separate sustainment chain (which is an evasion of the problem), or it has to reduce in weight by transitioning to smaller drones.
Both merit further analysis, which this study has been unable to include.
Are partner/contractor interoperability and radical modernization incompatible? For example, could a Danish conventionally powered armored battlegroup integrate into an electric British Brigade? This study hoped to analyze these implications but lacked the capacity to do so. Similarly, if contractors cannot refuel their vehicles through the force, how much support are they able to provide? Each journey that could have been one way has to become a loop, essentially halving their ability to project. tactics used by commanders and their staff. Abandoning fossil fuels, and relying on a different solution for operational energy supply, storage, and movement would invalidate many of these fundamental assumptions. Electrification is therefore likely to demand a reassessment of these fundamental assumptions, and could significantly evolve the character of conflict as a result. 
36
49 51 Land Warfare Centre, The Staff Officers' Handbook 2018 SOHB (Warminster, UK: Ministry of Defence, 2018).
Source: Created by author using sources as annotated: H2 (10,000psi); H2
Source: Created by author using sources as annotated: H2 (10,000psi); H2
129  
129  
Ministry of Defence, Climate Change and Sustainability Strategic Approach (Westminster, London: Ministry of Defence, March 2021), 1-15.
Laura Makin-Isherwood, "Army Urged to Phase Out Fossil Fuels in Bid to Attract Future Recruits," Forces Net, September 12, 2019, https://www.forces.net/news/ army/army-urged-phase-out-fossil-fuels-bid-attract-future-recruits.
Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, and The Rt Hon Chris Skidmore MP, "UK Becomes First Major Economy to Pass Net Zero Emissions Law," Gov.UK, June 27, 2019, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-becomes-first-majoreconomy-to-pass-net-zero-emissions-law.
7 Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener (United Kingdom: HM Government, October 2021)
.8  
Ibid.   9  Ibid.
Shell, "Shell  Accelerates Drive for Net-Zero Emissions with Customer-First Strategy," February 11, 2021, https://www.shell.com/media/news-and-mediareleases/2021/shell-accelerates-drive-for-net-zero-emissions-with-customer-firststrategy.html
.17  British Petroleum, "From International Oil Company to Integrated Energy Company: Bp Sets out Strategy for Decade of Delivery towards Net Zero Ambition," BP, August 4, 2020, https://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/news-and-insights/pressreleases/from-international-oil-company-to-integrated-energy-company-bp-sets-outstrategy-for-decade-of-delivery-towards-net-zero-
ambition.html. 18 Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, UK Hydrogen Strategy (United Kingdom: HM
Government, August 2021). 19 Ministry of Defence, Climate Change and
Sustainability Strategic Approach, 6.   20  Ibid.
Central Intelligence Agency, "Country Comparisons: Military Expenditures," The World Factbook, accessed April 11, 2022, https://www.cia.gov/the-worldfactbook/field/military-expenditures/country-comparison.
27 Fred Dews, "Joint Chiefs Chairman Dunford on the '4+1 Framework' and Meeting Transnational Threats," Brookings Now (blog), Brookings, February 24, 2017, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/brookings-now/2017/02/24/joint-chiefs-chairmandunford-transnational-threats/.
Ministry of Defence, "3rd (United Kingdom) Division," The British Army, last modified 2021, https://www.army.mod.uk/who-we-are/formations-divisionsbrigades/3rd-united-kingdom-division/.
  33  Land Warfare Development Centre, ADP, Land Operations.
Ministry of Defence, Future Operating Environment 2035 (Swindon, Wiltshire: Defence Concepts and Doctrine Centre, Ministry of Defence, 2015), https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/646821/20151203-FOE_35_final_v29_web.pdf.
Ministry of Defence, Global Strategic Trends -The Future Starts Today, 6th ed. (Swindon, Wiltshire: Defence Concepts and Doctrine Centre, Ministry of Defence, 2018).
A de facto two party system, both of whom are very much committed to reaching net zero by at least 2050, as discussed in the background.
"FV432 APC," Norfolk Tank Museum," accessed November 1, 2021, http://norfolktankmuseum.co.uk/fv432-apc/.
Land Warfare Centre, Army Field Manual (AFM) -Warfighting Tactics, Part 2: Corps and Divisional Tactics (Warminster, UK: Ministry of Defence, 2018).
Maj Simon Davies, 3 (UK) Division G35 Standard Operating Instructions, version 4.2 (Bulford: 3 (UK) Division, 2021).
Land Warfare Centre, Army Field Manual (AFM)-Warfighting Tactics, Part 3: Brigade Tactics (Warminster, UK: Ministry of Defence, 2018).
Land Warfare 1 Branch, Directorate General of Development and Doctrine, Staff Officers Handbook (Warminster, UK: Directorate General of Development and Doctrine, 1999), https://vsip.info/staff-officers-hand-book-2-pdf-free.html.
Bradley E. Layton, "A Comparison of Energy Densities of Prevalent Energy Sources in Units of Joules Per Cubic Meter," International Journal of Green Energy 5, no. 6 (December 2008): 438-455.
Patrick Molloy, "Run on Less with Hydrogen Fuel Cells," RMI, October 2, 2019, https://rmi.org/run-on-less-with-hydrogen-fuel-cells/.
Hannah Richie, "The Price of Batteries Has Declined by 97% in the Last Three Decades," Our World in Data, June 4, 2021, https://ourworldindata.org/battery-pricedecline.
Land Warfare 1 Branch, Staff Officers Handbook.
Land Warfare Development Centre, ADP, Land Operations, 79.
Land Warfare Centre, Army Field Manual (AFM) -Fires (Warminster, UK: Ministry of Defence, 2019).
HQDA, 7.   
Smith, "The Division," 37.    
Ministry of Defence, "Future Soldier Guide," 14.
MG Maria R. Gervais, "The Synthetic Training Environment Revolutionizes Sustainment Training," U.S. Army, August 23, 2018, https://www.army.mil/article/ 210105/the_synthetic_training_environment_revolutionizes_sustainment_training.
Lieutenant Colonel Matt Wilks, "Firepower! Lessons from 1 (BR) Armoured Division's Deep Battle," British Army Review Special Report -The Gulf War 1 (Winter 2020): 52-63.
Col Matt Baker OBE, "Operation DESERT SABRE -1st British Armoured Division," British Army Review Special Report -The Gulf War 1 (Winter 2020), 16, https://www.army.mod.uk/umbraco/Surface/Download/Get/17217.
Ministry of Defence, "Future Soldier Guide," 53.
Smith, "The Division," 32.    
Land Warfare 1 Branch, Staff Officers Handbook, 214.
Smith, "The Division," 44.   
Ibid., 74.   
Ministry of Defence, "Upgrades to Multiple Launch Rocket Systems Strengthen Deep Fires Capability," The British Army, accessed January 22, 2022, https://www.army.mod.uk/news-and-events/news/2021/03/mlrs-upgrade-agreement/.
Baker,
" 72.
Baker," 21.   
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 3-94, Armies, Corps, and Division Operations (Washington, DC: Army Publishing Directorate, July 2021), 121.
Land Warfare Centre, AFM -Warfighting Tactics, Part 2: Corps and Divisional Tactics, 31.
Alex Humphreys, "Preserving Formation Reconnaissance," Wavell Room, December 22, 2021, https://wavellroom.com/2021/12/22/realising-platform-agnosticrecce-excellence-preserving-our-formation-reconnaissance-capability/.
Baker," 68.    
Ministry of Defence, "Robert Scales Gulf War Papers, 22nd Support Command, Box 3, ARCENT/3rd Army Logistics Brief,"(PowerPoint, Iraq, February 11,  1991).
Baker," 21.   
Eric Wesoff, "Hard  Lessons from the Great Algae Biofuel Bubble," GreenTechMedia, April 19, 2017, https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/ lessons-from-the-great-algae-biofuel-bubble.
Joe Carroll, "Exxon at Least 25 Years Away from Making Fuel From Algae," Bloomberg, March 8, 2013, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-03-08/exxon-at-least-25-years-away-from-making-fuel-from-algae.
 153  As the end product is the same hydrocarbon chains that constitute oil, which still undergo combustion in the same way.
Reddaway, "Hydrogen: Help or Hype?," 17.   
Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, UK Hydrogen Strategy, 38.
"Tesla Semi," Tesla, accessed  March 1, 2022, https://www.tesla.com/semi.
James J. Zucchetto, John H. Johnson, Phillip S. Myers, and Thomas Jahns, "Mobile Electric Power Technologies for the Army of the Future," SAE Transactions 98 (1989): 1834-1846.
Daniele Stampatori, Pier Paolo Raimondi, and Michel  Noussan, "Li-Ion Batteries: A Review of a Key Technology for Transport Decarbonization," Energies 13, no. 10 (May 2020): 2638.
Ziegler and Trancik, "Re-Examining Rates of Lithium-Ion Battery Technology Improvement and Cost Decline."
Crabtree, Kcs, and Trahey, "The Energy-Storage Frontier."   
Borealis, Bringing Energy All Around.    
"Tesla Semi," Tesla.   
"Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)," U.S. Energy Information Administration, accessed December 20, 2021, https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php.
Rolls-Royce, Powering the Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers (London, UK: Rolls-Royce, PLC, 2014_, 6.
Rolls-Royce, "MT30 Marine Gas Turbine," accessed March 7, 2022, https://www.rolls-royce.com/products-and-services/defence/naval/gas-turbines/mt30marine-gas-turbine.aspx.
Based on informal conversation with a Lt Col from the Royal Armored Corps with extensive knowledge of operating in Challenger 2 MBTs.
"Supercharger," Tesla, accessed March 10, 2022, https://www.tesla.com/ supercharger.
"Tesla Semi," Tesla.   
Insider, "Crude Oil Price Today," Markets Insider, accessed March 4, 2022, https://markets.businessinsider.com/commodities/oil-price.
Crown Oil Ltd., "Fractional Distillation of Crude Oil Guide," Crown Oil, accessed March 4, 2022, https://www.crownoil.co.uk/guides/crude-oil-fractionaldistillation/.
201 Wass de Czege, Commentary on 'The US Army in Multi-Domain
Operations  2028", 17.   
Wass de Czege, Commentary on 'The US Army inMulti-Domain Operations  2028", 10.    
Ibid., 17.    
Ministry of Defence, Global Strategic Trends 135.
Ibid., 90.    
Ibid., 37.    
National Intelligence Council, Global Trends 2040, 55.    
Ministry of Defence, Global Strategic Trends, 147.   
"TMM-6," WeaponSystems.net, accessed March 18, 2022, https://weaponsystems.net/system/308-TMM-6.
"Russia Says It Is Changing Its War Aims in Ukraine," The Economist, March 28, 2022, https://www.economist.com/europe/2022/03/28/russia-says-it-is-changing-itswar-aims-in-ukraine.
"Finding Russian Tanks in Polish Forests," Rapidlasso GmbH, October 12, 2013, https://rapidlasso.com/2013/10/12/finding-russian-tanks-in-polish-forests/.
Xiaoli Sun," (Conference Paper, 2nd  Conference of Laser and Electro-Optics (CLEO), San Jose, CA, May 6, 2012), https://ntrs.nasa.gov/ citations/20120012916.
National Intelligence Council, Global Trends 2040, 59.   
Ministry of Defence, "Upgrades to Multiple Launch Rocket Systems Strengthen Deep Fires Capability."
Baker," 21.   
"ESA Satellite Technology Enhances Nuclear Monitoring," The European Space Agency, March 28, 2022, https://www.esa.int/Applications/Telecommunications_ Integrated_Applications/ESA_satellite_technology_enhances_nuclear_monitoring.
Ministry of Defence, Global Strategic Trends, 147.    
Ministry of Defence, "Future Soldier Guide."
Ministry of Defence, and Jeremy Quin MP, "Armoured Vehicles to Test Electric Technology," Gov.UK, August 20, 2020, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/ armoured-vehicles-to-test-electric-technology.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
Lessons often comprise an agreed historical perspective, the current received wisdom, the addition of some recent experiences, predictions about technological development, and an extrapolation about a possible future.
-MG (Ret) Jonathan Bailey, "Military History and the Pathology of Lessons Learned" Military leaders often distort and contort new evidence to sustain their views of the future as they wish it to be.
-MG (Ret) Jonathan Bailey, "Military History and the Pathology of Lessons Learned"
As this is a qualitative grounded theory, relevance is inherently subjective. In researching how 3 (UK) Division currently fights, its tactics and processes on the beaches of Normandy in 1944 have little in common with the Division's form and function today.
The rapid advances in technology, and the significant transformation outlined in "Future Soldier" also challenge the relevance of more recent conflicts such as Operation Desert Storm in 1991.
As this study looked at warfighting, relevant data about how 3 (UK) Division fights is limited to when it switched its focus from force generating for Afghanistan to becoming a warfighting headquarters in approximately 2015-2017. Therefore, this study only considered documents and articles describing how 3 (UK) Division fights were from 2017 and beyond.
In analyzing alternative power sources, there is a significant amount of research for the civilian transport industry and energy sector. For example, literature discussing hydrogen to power heavy-goods vehicles is much more relevant than information on large-scale industrial facilities to generate hydrogen within the UK. While both are clearly linked, the former more readily translates to a deployable warfighting capability.
Literature that provides key quantitative data for subsequent analysis is also relevant. An article on powering remote African villages is relevant, if it includes a peer reviewed figure for the energy density of a Lithium-Ion battery in 2021.
The principal ethical concern in this study was bias. Firstly, the author's personal bias based on experience of the organization in the primary research question. Secondly, external bias during data collection. Both were examined in detail below. The author's personal experience of 3 (UK) Division and the wider British Army could have created personal bias. This experience has created personal opinions based on detailed insight of 3 (UK) Division. But as distinguished journalist Andrew Marr noted when leaving the British Broadcasting Corporation, "If you don't have some opinions you aren't thinking." 94 These opinions were therefore useful to help focus research. The intent however was to build a strong thesis based on evidence rather than conjecture. The study has declared if opinion is used to connect evidence or synthesize information.
The author also completed a Masters in Physics, and therefore has a tendency to think using a positivist epistemological perspective. In simple English this means that truth is absolute, and full understanding it is aspirational. For Chapter 4 it means the style and tone revolved around trying to disprove theories, and only accepting that which remained. This was relevant because it shaped the assessment of sources and the style of analysis throughout the study.
Failing to understand the motives, interests and context of sources could have introduced bias to the study. The Integrated Review (IR) 95 has compelled every part of 94 BBC, "Andrew Marr to Leave BBC for LBC to 'Get My Own Voice Back,'" BBC News, November 19, 2021, https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-59348808. 
95
Finally, broader strategic publications and futures concepts were open coded. The information gleaned will then be axially coded into ADP3-0's eight elements of combat power, just like the research question exploring how 3 (UK) Division fights currently.
This was then synthesized with the previous research questions to generate a nested concept for how 3 (UK) Division might fight without fossil fuels in the future. combined with the intensity of sunlight can create a best case surface area for the solar panels required to power the division.
Assuming the sun is directly overhead as in the tropics, each square centimeter receives 137 millijoules every second. 182 With 10,000 square centimeters in a meter squared this equates to 1.37 kilojoules per meter squared, each second. There are 3,600 seconds in an hour, meaning a meter squared receives 4.9 MJ per hour. To gain 8.04TJ from solar power over 20 hours would require a solar panel the size of fifteen American football fields. 
183
It would also be easy to spot, and vulnerable to long range fires such as ballistic or hypersonic missiles. Ultimately it would be a critical vulnerability, and a soft target.
Nuclear power is another choice for operational energy supply which is frequently touted as a solution. 
184
185
199
Neither electrification nor hydrogen can match current diesel-based capabilities in terms of supplying energy to meet the demands of a warfighting division. Electricity appears to be the most suitable alternative power source for a warfighting division, although with significant changes to force and platform design. These will be explored in the final research question.
How would electric land platforms nest in broader future concepts?
The word domain, as used in MDO, does not describe the realm or context of air, land, sea, space, cyber and information operations. While no nation's armed forces have ever fought by domains, this pamphlet gives the impression that the future armed forces might. 
201
Describing the operational environment in 2050 is difficult, given how much can happen in 20-30 years. The 1992 predictions of force design in 2020 would have failed to consider the war on terror, the advent of smartphones, and the proliferation of the internet. Indeed the 1990 'Options for change' Defence review sought to capitalize on the 'peace dividend' of the Cold War ending. 
202
The doctrine used by a force is broadly designed around the capabilities it possesses. Equally, capabilities are developed to enhance military capability based on an understanding, from doctrine, of how that force will fight. There is therefore always a symbiotic relationship between capability and doctrine. Discussion of multiple domains and convergence therefore seems short sighted, because in a hyperconnected world working across 'domains' would be so engrained into people's thinking that it would be a part of society's future culture. This study therefore believed that warfighting in 2050 will not take place across 'multiple domains', but rather in a fused singular inseparable digital and physical environment.
A corollary of such an environment is its vulnerability. Host nation power infrastructure can be highly vulnerable to cyber-attack, effectively dislocating energy supply from the force. Attacks on power infrastructure are already happening, with Russia attacking Ukrainian infrastructure from 2014 onwards. 
211
A 'most-likely' scenario for warfighting sees 3 (UK) Division operating in an inseparable digital and physical environment, among significant numbers of civilians. A 'most-dangerous' scenario for warfighting sees 3 (UK) Division operating in an austere environment, devoid of host-nation infrastructure, against conventionally powered armored forces.
The analysis Chapter has identified how 3 (UK) Division fights in space and time.
It relies heavily on deep fires to shape the close fight, and years of simulations have 
211
It creates an increased reliance on space-based capabilities to find, and long-range precision fires to strike adversary armor.
In the rear storage of electrical energy is exceedingly difficult, which creates a dependence on dynamic energy supply to meet demand. Supply from host nation infrastructure cannot be relied on in an energy-denied environment. Solar and land based nuclear options are unfeasible. For expeditionary operations in austere environments, nuclear submarines may provide the only viable energy supply solution.
Ultimately, the character of today's conflict is founded upon fossil fuels. The internal combustion engine has unlocked possibilities in the twentieth century such as powered flight and motorization that continue to shape the fundamental assumptions of how to fight. These fundamental assumptions provide the instinct, planning data, and 