# ID: 8df3e24ee0da4572ba4e4b09319624ff
# Title: By, With, and Through: Capacity Building and the Canadian Armed Forces
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
In November 2017, the Government of Canada announced a new capacity-building mission in support of the United Nations. When considering the employment of the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) around the world, capacity building currently represents the vast majority of CAF operations. This raises two important questions. Why does the Canadian government favor capacity building operations? What drives the Canadian public support for international operations and does capacity building meet these expectations? This monograph argues that capacity-building missions are uniquely suited to meet the current government's intent and the expectations of Canadians for the use of the Canadian military. By understanding why the government and people favor one type of mission over another, the CAF's leadership can shape military advice on the employment of military forces, drive force generation requirements, and provide a most likely scenario for the development of training, doctrine, and organizational structures. To support this thesis, this monograph examines the government's intent for the CAF as stated in the foreign and defense policies. The monograph also examines how Canadians influence government policies through public support in terms of three concerns. The monograph concludes with why capacity-building best reconcile the Canadian government's intent while maintaining public support.
15.
will include a Canadian Training and Advisory Team (CTAT) to work with a partner nation before -and importantly, during -a deployment to enhance the partner nation's contribution to a given mission." 
2
3
4
5
Strong, Secure, Engaged, commonly called the "Defence Policy Review" (DPR). In these policies, the Liberal government distances itself from previous engagements because it feels that the former Conservative government lost touch with Canadian values and judges that Canadians do not generally support combat missions. 
6
7
8
5 Liberal Party of Canada, New Plan for a Strong Middle Class (Ottawa: Liberal Party of Canada, 2014), 68-69, accessed October 25, 2017, https://www.liberal.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/New-planfor-a-strong-middle-class.pdf.
6 Ibid. 
7
8
(OMLT) and the Police OMLT that trained the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) in Kandahar. It then became the sole focus of the Afghan mission in Kabul between 2011 to 2014 after a long and highly controversial debate in the Canadian Parliament.
The number of recent capacity-building missions raises two important questions. Why does the Canadian government favor these operations? What drives the Canadian public support for international operations and does capacity building meet these expectations? The answers are important since understanding why the government and people favor one type of mission over another allows the CAF's leadership to shape military advice on the employment of military forces, driving force generation requirements, and to provide a most likely scenario for the development of training, doctrine, and organizational structures. Better training, doctrine, and structures enable the CAF to be more effective in international operations. As this research will demonstrate, capacity-building missions are uniquely suited to meet the current government's intent and the expectations of Canadians for the use of the Canadian Armed Forces.
To support this thesis, the research will be broken down in three sections. The first chapter will examine the government's intent for the CAF as stated in the foreign and defense policies. The purpose is to dissect both policies to reveal the objectives for the use of military force overseas. Using academic papers, research polls, and reports on CAF operations, the second chapter will examine how Canadians influence government policies through public support. It will explain why Canadians will endorse missions when there are apparent national security concerns and clear military objectives. It will also examine why Canadians judge missions in terms of both risk of casualties and duration. The final chapter will demonstrate why capacitybuilding missions best reconcile the Canadian government's intent while maintaining public support.
documents, the Government of Canada provides strategic intent for the employment of the Canadian military as an instrument of national power
14
In 2017, the Canadian government made a deliberate effort to provide the CAF with a unified approach to national security objectives. The government achieved this in many ways.
First, it announced the two policies within twenty-four hours of each other, demonstrating a concerted synchronization effort. Second, the language in the two documents was consistent and each policy supports the other. For instance, the Foreign Minister wrote part of the forward in the DPR, which was the first time in Canadian history that both ministers of defense and foreign affairs cosigned a defense policy, indicating the close relationship between the two departments. 
15
16
The new policies outline Canada's views on failed and failing states, guiding the use of military force and signaling Canada's role in promoting global stability to protect national values and interests. Foreign Minister Freeland stated, "We can and must play an active role in the preservation and strengthening of the global order from which we have benefited so greatly. Doing so is in our interest, because our own open society is most secure in a world of open societies. And it is under threat in a world where open societies are under threat." 
17
We have a long history of working collaboratively with partners to prevent and respond to conflicts and crises abroad, including our support for peace and stabilization operations." Canadian government clearly believes that instability have a considerable impact on Canada's national security and Canada must step up to protect its interests and values.
The DPR reinforces the foreign policy statement by making the case to support international peace and security, conveying the links between national security and global stability, and to leverage the military as an instrument of national power. 
20
1
One of the ways to support global stability and a rules-based international order is through conflict prevention. The foreign policy highlights that force should only be used in last resort. 
22
20
Canada,
Strong,
Secure,
Engaged,
61. 21
23
To support international institutions, the foreign and defense policies emphasize the need to return to UN peace support operations. Canada has a strong record of participation in UN peacekeeping missions, which started in 1957 when Canadian minister Lester B. Pearson led the creation of United Nations Forces to end the "Suez Canal Crisis." For his efforts, he received the Nobel Peace Prize and earned the title of "Father of the United Nations Forces." 
24
25
26
27
28
29
Both policies express the importance of the relationship between Canada's national interests and the United States' national security and signal the need for Canada to maintain a strong relationship with its closest ally. 
30
First, Canada cannot solely depend on US military power to protect the nation. 
31
33
34
35
The fourth element of the policies is the need for the Canadian military to deter and defend against a wide range of threats. These include violent extremist organizations (VEO) and nation-states that defy the rules-based international order, such as North Korea, Russia, and Syria. 36 Minister Freeland named these threats in her speech: "The dictatorship in North Korea, crimes against humanity in Syria, the monstrous extremists of Daesh, and Russian military adventurism and expansionism also all pose clear strategic threats to the liberal democratic world, 
32
33
34
35
36
including Canada." 37 By unambiguously naming these four threats, Freeland expressed the Canadian government's direction to the CAF to be ready to counter them.
In responding to these threats, the DPR listed the three main objectives: "Strong at Home, Secure in North American, and Engaged in the World." 38 Considering these mission sets, the new defense policy provides strategic direction and guidance to the CAF by setting out the innovative framework of "Anticipate, Adapt, and Act" in responding to these threats. 
39
40
2
The Canadian government understands that its NORAD and NATO commitments require "a capable, professional, well-funded and well-equipped Canadian military" 42 to deter and defend Canada and its allies, while contributing to global stability. The Liberals will increase funding from Can$18.9 billion in 2016/17 to Can$32.7 billion in 2026/27, an increase of more than 70 percent of the defense budget. 
43
44
45
46
2
42
43
44
45
47
Overall, the new foreign and defense policies set out a number of objectives that the Government of Canada wants to achieve in pursuit of national objectives such as strengthening the global order through conflict prevention, a return to multilateralism, and the promotion of US national security interests. The government addresses the contemporary environment where instability affects national interests and how the government will employ the CAF to protect these interests. The government also provides the CAF with a new framework, "Anticipate, Adapt, and Act" centered on stability operations, while maintaining the flexibility to respond to highintensity intrastate conflict through a combat-credible force that can defend its allies. Another Understanding Links to National Security Today, it is hard to convince the population of the need to intervene in "wars of choice," where the intervening country is not acting in defense of the homeland or there are no substantial connections to national security. 
51
53
54
As in other democratic states, Canadian society struggles to accept interventions where military objectives are hard to define, even harder to achieve. 
55
56
Clausewitz's assertion was very applicable for Canada's mission in Afghanistan. Some academics argued that when the Canadian government changed the purpose and objectives of the mission, which varied considerably throughout the campaign, ranging from helping the United States after the attacks of September 11, 2001 to improve the lives of Afghans. 
57
58
59
60
61
In the turmoil of events in Afghanistan during the six years since 9/11, the nature and logic of Canadian engagement have not been well understood by Canadians. While public support for Canadian troops is strong, Canadians have been uncertain about Canada's evolving mission in Afghanistan. To put things bluntly, Governments from the start of Canada's Afghan involvement have failed to communicate with Canadians with balance and candour about the reasons for Canadian involvement, or about the risks, difficulties and expected results of that involvement.
The publication of the Manley report was a critical moment for the Conservative government, which was trying to get broad consensus for a mission extension in 2008. The lengthening of the Afghan operation nearly caused a loss of "confidence" in the Canadian parliament. 
62
63
64
65
66
69
70
71
72
73
66
67
68
69
75
76
where security was improved to enable reconstruction and development. 
77
79
80
74
75
76
81
82
Though Canadians widely support the CAF, they have demonstrated that their support is proportional to the cost of the mission, particularly in terms of casualties. As previously mentioned, Canadians have a special relationship with the military. Consequently, Canadians care for the CAF and oppose interventions where the risks of casualties are too high, particularly in "wars of choice" where Canada is not under imminent threat of attacks. Though vague objectives and ambiguous links to national security also contributed to diminished public support, research shows the number of casualties was the other key reason for the poor public opinion of the Afghan mission. 
83
84
85
81
82 Ibid, 69. 
83
84 CBC News, "Fewer Canadians 'Strongly Approve' of Afghan Mission: Survey," CBC News, November 9, 2006, accessed October 29, 2017, http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/fewer-canadians-stronglyapprove-of-afghan-mission-survey-1.605606. 
85
86
87
88
89
90
The length of an intervention is another factor that influences public support. Political and military leaders often underestimate the length and the cost of the intervention, causing public support to erode. 
91
93
94
To reduce the possibility of casualties during subsequent operations in Libya and Iraq, the Canadian government decided to limit the number of forces, particularly ground troops. The government believes that avoiding the deployment of the Army, often called "boots on the ground," reduces the risk of loss of public support for a number of reasons. First, compared to air and maritime assets that control their respective domains, land forces face the greater challenge of controlling territory and its people, which brings greater exposure to opposing forces and greater risks of casualties. 
95
96
97
98
99
The four key factors that shape public support all compel the government to consider how Canadians view military interventions. As demonstrated, it can make or break a government based on poorly defined national security interests and objectives, high casualties, or open-ended missions with limited chances of success. The relationship between the CAF and Canadians is strong and the government has learned the hard lesson that support for the CAF does not permit them to ignore what matters to Canadians. Canadians are unlikely to forget in the near future the high number of casualties sustained during missions such as Afghanistan. They also need to understand the objectives of using force and the cost in terms of risks of casualties and duration.
The government must then reconcile these factors with its own ideology and interests. Hence, the Canadian government must find a mission that will succeed abroad while being well perceived at home. Capacity building can achieve this.
In 2017, there were more fifteen hundred CAF members deployed on international operations, with nearly seventy percent of those conducting capacity-building operations. 
100
Training of host-nation security forces goes by many names. The CAF defines capacity building as "the process of increasing a host nation's ability to achieve self-sufficiency, typically through improved governance, security, human capital, development, and reconstruction." 
101
102
105
Fourth, the CAF can participate in UN efforts using its specific capacities such as expertise in peace support training, thus generating increased capacity for other UN-contributing nations. 
105
Building capacity has one key outcome: developing local security forces to provide their own security. As articulated in the phrase "by, with, and through," 106 this approach enables the training of local forces where they can counter threats such as VEO and expansionist states by themselves, with coalition partners, and through coalition assets. The consequence of building local security forces is that the host nation is better prepared to counter internal and external threats of illegally armed groups (IAGs). Therefore, by enabling local forces to extend their security presence in their own country, host-nation forces improve regional security, which in turn promotes global stability, one of the primary goals of the Canadian defense and foreign policies.
The other benefit of conducting capacity building is the prevention of conflict and the use of force as a last resort, two other objectives of the Canadian government:
Building the capacity of weakened states is a critical component of crisis and conflict prevention policies. Rather than aiming to eliminate global conflict, Western conflict prevention should attempt to strengthen the structures of governance, justice, and security in weak states. Fragile or unstable societies are thus to be empowered with the tools to deal constructively with the violent potential of future conflicts. 
107
106 "By, with, and through" is a Special Forces phrase adopted by Central Command (CENTCOM) Commander General Votel. See Linda Robinson, "SOF's Evolving Role: Warfare 'By, With, and Through' Local Forces," RAND Corporation, accessed December 14, 2017, https://www.rand.org/blog/2017/05/sofsevolving-role-warfare-by-with-and-through-local.html. This is particularly important if the local population views local forces as "corrupt, ineffective, politicized, or brutal." 108 By increasing their respect for the law of armed conflict, local forces gain the trust of the local population, helping to reduce the support to IAGs, especially during an insurgency. The CAF's operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo provides a good example of training local security forces where the goal is to strengthen the Congolese army, particularly in the respect of its own citizens. 
109
The fight against the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) or Daesh provides a compelling example of using Canadian military force only in the "last resort." In 2011, the United States and its allies left Iraq, which created a security void since the ISF did not have the capacity to maintain stability, allowing ISIS to capture large swaths of ground with near total impunity. 
110
111
112
113
114
115
The counter ISIS mission also demonstrates how Canada can share the burden by joining US efforts and strengthen its defense relationship with the United States. As mentioned above, the government increased the CAF contribution in 2016, providing unique capabilities such as the coalition's medical facility in northern Iraq and the Ministerial Liaison Team. 
116
118
119
120
We've done a very thorough analysis. We've been places where you could put a thousand troops and it will only have an impact on a small chunk of ground. What we're trying to do here is actually improve the missions… Some peacekeepers are actually part of the problem… Imagine a number of Canadian expert trainers training an entire [UN]  battalion to be able to be more effective. That has a much more significant impact. 
124
To further support multilateral institutions, the government has invested an additional Can$24 million in the Peace and Stabilization Operations Program, which includes a number of new projects to train UN senior leaders and peacekeepers. 
125
126
123
124
125
126 Government of Canada, Strong, Secure, Engaged: Canada's Defence Policy, 86.  courses, language, and skills training, focused on "democratic control over the armed forces, professionalism, and developing the capacity to undertake multi-lateral peace support operations." 
127
Capacity building also supports the last objective of the government's policies: the need to retain full-spectrum capabilities. By training for high-intensity conflict, the CAF maintains the expertise to conduct joint and combined operations. A military force can only be credible in training others if it is highly competent. By conducting training internationally, the CAF maintains its ability to conduct joint and combined arms, which in turn helps deter threats from state actors, another Canadian defense objective.
The mission in the Ukraine called "Operation Unifier" provides a good example of this assertion. After Russia annexed Crimea and invaded the Donbass region, the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence made a formal request for support to build the capacity of and train the Ukrainian Armed Forces (UAF). 
128
131
132
133
Operation Unifier also has the advantage of allowing the CAF to gain insight into how Russian military operates:
We brought back a lot of lessons learned from the Donbass region, a lot about how Russian-backed insurgents conduct their fighting. We learned about the tactics that are being employed there. These are great lessons for the Canadian Army, and it's a bit of a wake-up call to what NATO is calling hybrid warfare. In Donbass the Ukrainians are facing conventional tank-on-tank, insurgents, road-side bombs, electronic warfare, unmanned aerial vehicles, and we are able to get a window on that, and bring it back to Canada. 
134
135
131
For the government, capacity-building missions contribute to Canada's goals of strengthening global stability by enabling local forces to prevent conflicts from deteriorating, thus preserving global order. During these operations, the CAF contributes to US national security objectives through burden sharing as shown in Iraq and other countries fighting VEOs. The CAF participates in multilateral institutions in a meaningful way by improving the effectiveness of UN forces. Finally, the nature of capacity building provides advantages for the CAF since it drives the troops to be experts in their field so they can export this proficiency overseas. It also brings home lessons on state-actor capabilities, increasing the ability to gain insight on countering these threats.
As the previous chapter addressed, Canadians judge a mission valuable if it has clear objectives and links to national security. They start objecting to the operation when they consider it too costly in terms of casualties, especially if it drags on. Using recent operations, this section will illustrate how capacity building protects Canadians' expectations using the lessons of Afghanistan and Iraq.
Capacity-building missions provide clearer military objectives since training local forces to provide an exit strategy is easy for Canadians to understand. Prior to the mission extension in 2011, public support in Canada for the mission was at an all-time low. 
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
Furthermore, the counter-Daesh mission illustrates how the Canadian government is reducing the risks of casualties by not deploying ground troops to engage in front-line combat operations. When the Conservative government launched Operation Impact in Iraq, it declared that the mission did not involve "boots on the ground"
148
149
150
151
Capacity building also reconciles the government's objective to re-engage in UN peace support operations while considering Canadians' opinion of UN missions. During the election, the Liberal Party advocated that Canada should have a greater role in UN peace support operations, returning to its tradition of being one of the main contributors. 
152
153
155
156
The lack of consistency in public opinion is perhaps why the new Liberal government chose a capacity-building mission instead of traditional peacekeeping one, particularly since the latter mission involves greater risks of casualties. 
158
160
161
162
Overall, capacity building reconciles public expectations particularly in terms of objectives and risks. The government must balance appropriate action with the overall objectives and the cost of in terms of "blood and treasure," the ultimate challenge for the use of military force. Currently, there are more than fifteen hundred CAF members deployed on international operations and approximately a thousand of those members are participating in capacity-building operations. 
163
164
Canada joins the partners of the Global Coalition Against Daesh in congratulating Iraqis and Iraqi forces on the liberation of Mosul from Daesh control. We salute Iraqi civilians, soldiers and police, who fought side by side against the threats posed by Daesh. Their sacrifices have made their country safer and the region more secure. We also wish to thank the women and men of the Canadian Armed Forces who trained, advised and assisted the Iraqi forces throughout this battle and served selflessly.
-The Honourable Chrystia Freeland, Minister of Foreign Affairs; the Honourable Minister Marie-Claude Bibeau, Minister of International Development and La Francophonie; and the Honourable Harjit S. Sajjan, Minister of National Defence When considering the history of the Canadian military, capacity building is a relatively new type of mission for the CAF. Yet, members deployed on capacity building constitute approximately seventy percent of the total CAF commitments to international operations in 2017. 
165
When considering the list of missions illustrated in Figure 
2
Capacity building achieves all these government objectives while protecting public support. This type of operation allows the deployment of larger forces without exposing them to front line combat, risking a high number of casualties, which can erode public support. By training "by, with, and through" local forces, the CAF support the fight against VEOs without using a large number of "boots on the ground," thus avoiding the risks of close combat. The Canadian military also secures its exit strategy, reducing the chances of a protracted conflict with no end in sight, maintaining Canadian public approval. As shown through opinion polls of the mission in Iraq, training local forces is an objective that Canadians easily understand. Countering terrorists also contributes to protect Canada since it defeats those who instigate attacks against Canadians, which is an important preoccupation of the public given recent attacks on the homeland. Capacity building achieves these objectives all while reducing the cost of "blood and treasure."
Capacity building also brings advantages to the Canadian military itself. These missions help to maintain a combat-credible force by "raising the bar" for the CAF's training requirements. This in turn reinforces the rationale for conducting Level 5 live-fire and other high-end training since a "trainer" needs to be better than the "trainee" if capacity building is going to be credible.
By providing unambiguous requirements, the Army is able to protect funding for expensive, yet critical, live-fire training. Through training missions in the Ukraine, the CAF also gain insights against a peer competitor, Russia. In Iraq, the CAF safeguarded its reputation as warriors in the eyes of American and coalition forces. 
166
Yet, one question remains. If capacity building is a recent experience for the CAF, what are the chances that they will remain the focus for the military, particularly after the defeat of ISIS? The answer may lie in the quote above. In July 2017, Iraqi forces liberated Mosul, a major victory in the fight against Daesh, winning the praise of the Government of Canada as highlighted in the ministers' statement. In addition, the Canadian ministers demonstrated their pride in the CAF contribution. In the wake of the recent memories of the Afghan mission, this is an important "win" for the Canadian government and a source of pride for Canadians. Although the fate of Iraq is far from certain as other terrorist groups could surface, the coalition is fighting violent extremists in a very novel and effective way. From the start of the campaign against ISIS, the coalition chose capacity building rather than capacity replacement. The problem with capacity replacement is that it "fills the many gaps with outsiders who will sooner or later leave and return home." 168 By developing the ISF, the coalition will be able to leave and thus making capacity building so attractive to the Canadian government and people. This positive outcome is why these missions will most likely remain the focus for the CAF in the near future.
Capacity-building missions are not flawless and the CAF needs to factor many considerations before participating in these operations. First, the CAF must determine "what constitutes good enough?" when measuring the effectiveness of training local forces. 
169
167
168 Tamas,
Warriors and Nation Builders,
[72]
[73]
170
171
172
For the Canadian government and its people, "by, with, and through" missions are uniquely suited for reconciling the various expectations for the use of the Canadian Armed Forces since they provide a "win at acceptable costs." Task, 199-232.  
54  
54  
Traditional United Nations peacekeeping operations are defined as "an interim measure to help manage a conflict and create conditions in which the negotiation of a lasting settlement can proceed." See United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations, United Nations Peacekeeping Operations Principles and Guidelines (New York: United Nations Secretariat,
2010), 31, http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/ documents/capstone_eng.pdf.2  Trudeau, "Canadian Contributions to United Nations Peace Support Operations."3 Harjit S. Sajjan, interview by Evan Solomon, "CTV Question Period: Where Would Peacekeepers Go?" (video), CTV News, November 18, 2017, accessed December 6, 2017, http://www.ctvnews.ca/video? clipId=1264682.4  Capacity building includes provision of security, security sector reform (SSR), restoring essential services, improving police and prisons, support to governance, and economic development. This paper focuses on capacity building of host nation (HN) security forces, specifically the provision of security. See Canadian Department of National Defence, Canadian Army, Stability Activities   
The instruments of national power are "diplomatic, informational, military, and economic." For full definition, see Canadian Department of National Defence, Canadian Armed Forces Doctrine Publication A-PA-005-000/AP-006, Leadership in Canadian Forces: Leading the Institution (Kingston, ON: Canadian Defence Academy, 2007), 2-1.
In the 1964In the  , 1971In the  , 1987In the  , 1994In the  , and 2008   defense policies, only the Prime Minister or Minister of National Defence provided a forward. See Government of Canada, "White Papers," Parliament of Canada, accessed October 21, 2017, https://lop.parl.ca/About/Library/VirtualLibrary/research-forparliament-e.html.
  16  For the discussions on the importance of linking foreign and defense policies, see Sir Antony Acland and General Sir Harry Tuzo, "The Relationship Between Foreign and Defence Policy," The RUSI Journal 128, no. 2 (June 1, 1983): 3-6, accessed October 25, 2017. As in other western nations, the Canadian government does not always align foreign and defense policies. For examples of inconsistent Canadian foreign and defense policies, see David L. Bashow, "Reconciling the Irreconcilable? Canada's Foreign and Defence Policy Linkage," Canadian Military Journal 1, no. 1 (2000): 21.
Freeland, "Address by Minister Freeland on Canada's Foreign Policy Priorities."
Government of Canada, Strong, Secure, Engaged: Canada's Defence Policy, 105.    
In 1956, Great Britain, France and  Israel launched an attack on Egypt aimed at removing President Nasser. The United States had not been informed, and the Soviet Union threatened to use atomic weapons against the assailants. The "Suez Crisis" found its solution when the Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs Lester Pearson, who had served as President of the United Nations General Assembly in 1952, won support for sending a United Nations Emergency Force to the region to separate the warring parties. This gained him the Peace Prize for 1957. "Lester Bowles Pearson -Facts," Nobelprize.org, accessed October 17, 2017, https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/1957/pearsonfacts.html.
  25  Lucia Kowaluk and Steven Staples, eds., Afghanistan and Canada: Is There an Alternative to War? (Montreal: Black Rose Books, 2009), 281-
82.26  United Nations, "United Nations Peacekeeping -Troop and Police Contributors," United Nations, accessed October 21, 2017, http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/resources/statistics/contributors.shtml.
Walter A. Dorn, "Canadian Peacekeeping: Proud Tradition, Strong Future?," Canadian Foreign Policy Journal 12, no. 2 (2005): 23.
Freeland, "Address by Minister Freeland on Canada's Foreign Policy Priorities."
Craig J. Stone, "Growing the Defence Budget: What Would Two Percent of GDP Look Like?," Canadian Global Affairs Institute, March 2017, 4, http://www.cgai.ca/growing_the_defence_budget_what _would_two_percent_of_gdp_look_like.
Canadian Department of National Defence, "Defence Policy Review: Public Consultations," National Defence | Canadian Armed Forces, November 16, 2016, accessed December 12, 2017, http://dgpaapp.forces.gc.ca/en/defence-policy-review/index.asp.
Maire Sinha, "Canadian Identity, 2013," Statistics Canada, October 1, 2015, accessed October  30, 2017, http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-652-x/89-652-x2015005-eng.htm#a2.
Shadwick, "Public Opinion and Defence," 54.   
A vote of confidence is based on the Confidence Convention: "The convention provides that if the government is defeated in the House on a question of confidence, then the government is expected to resign or seek the dissolution of Parliament in order that a general election may be held," Brian O'Neal,
This paper does not assess or debate the long-term outcome of the wars in Iraq and Libya, rather argues that the enemy's conventional forces were rapidly defeated in less than three months. In addition, these conflicts did require ground forces to stabilize the country, where they fought illegally armed groups (IAGs).
Colin S.Gray, Always Strategic: Jointly Essential Landpower (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies  Institute, 2015), 12.
This argument is made in two books. See Gray, Always Strategic: Jointly Essential Landpower, 37; Antulio J. Echevarria II, Reconsidering the American Way of War: US Military Practice from the Revolution to Afghanistan (Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 2014), 149.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-07, Stability (Washington, DC:
Sophie-Charlotte Brune et al., Crisis and Conflict Prevention Strategies (Santa Monica, CA:  RAND Corporation, 2015), 4.
Combined Joint Task Force, "Updated Mission Statement Fact Sheet," Operation Inherent Resolve, July 7, 2017, http://www.inherentresolve.mil/Portals/14/Documents/Mission/20170717-%20Updated%20Mission%20Statement%20Fact%20Sheet.pdf?ver=2017-07-17-093803-770.
 112  Canadian Department of National Defence, "Operation IMPACT | Middle East."
CTV News Staff, "Fight against ISIS Continues, but  No Canadian Boots on the Ground: Harper."
Susana Mas, "Trudeau Says Canada Will Pull Fighter Jets against ISIS by Feb. 22," CBC News, February 8, 2016, accessed December 14, 2017, http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/justin-trudeaucanada-isis-fight-announcement-1.3438279.
  115  The capabilities deployed under Operation Impact in 2016 included intelligence, medical, counter improvised explosive device expertise, tactical aviation, command and control elements, and a Ministerial Liaison Team. See Canadian Department of National Defence, "Operation IMPACT | Middle
East."   116  Canadian Department of National Defence, "Operation IMPACT | Middle East."
Canadian Department of National Defence, "Operation NABERIUS | Niger," National Defence | Canadian Armed Forces, October 20, 2017, accessed December 28, 2017, http://www.forces.gc.ca/en/ operations-abroad-current/op-naberius.page.
United States Africa Command, "Flintlock," United States Africa Command, accessed December 28, 2017, http://www.africom.mil/what-we-do/exercises/flintlock.
Canadian Department of National Defence, "The Directorate -Military Training & Cooperation | DND CAF," National Defence | Canadian Armed Forces, July 26, 2013, accessed October 21, 2017, http://www.forces.gc.ca/en/training-international-policy/index.page.
Tim Dunne, "Operation Unifier: Canada's Military Training Mission in Ukraine," Canadian Naval Review 12, no. 3 (2016): 17.
Dunne, "Operation Unifier: Canada's Military Training Mission in Ukraine," 16.
Ibid., 19.   
CBC News, "Public Support for Afghan Mission Lowest Ever: Poll," CBC News, September 5, 2008, accessed December 28, 2017, http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/public-support-for-afghan-missionlowest-ever-poll-1.707644.
Clark Campbell and Bill Curry, "Harper's  Turnaround: PM Says He Felt He Had to Extend Afghan Mission," The Globe and Mail, March 26, 2011, accessed December 28, 2017, https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/harpers-turnaround-pm-says-he-felt-he-had-to-extendafghan-mission/article1259532/.
138 Misha Boutilier, "Canada's War in Afghanistan: Lessons Learned?," NATO Association of Canada, November 26, 2013, accessed October 30, 2017, http://natoassociation.ca/canadas-war-inafghanistan-lessons-
learned/.139  In August 2010, 39% of Canadians supported the mission in Afghanistan. In December 2010, that number rose to 48% after the mission extension. See Angus Reid Institute, "Majority of Canadians Still Oppose Military Mission in Afghanistan," Angus Reid Institute, August 10, 2010, accessed December 27, 2017, http://angusreid.org/majority-of-canadians-still-oppose-military-mission-in-afghanistan/; Angus Reid Institute, "Canadians Divided on Assuming Non-Combat Role in Afghanistan," Angus Reid Institute, December 13, 2010, accessed December 27, 2017, http://angusreid.org/canadians-divided-on-assumingnon-combat-role-
in-afghanistan/.140 Canadian Department of National Defence, "Casualty
Statistics (Afghanistan)."141CBC News, "Public Support  
for Afghan Mission Lowest Ever." 142 Marlene Leung, "Canadians Deeply Divided on Outcome of Afghanistan Mission: CTV Poll," CTV News, March 23, 2014, accessed October 29, 2017, http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/canadians-divided-
CTV News Staff, "Fight against ISIS Continues, but  No Canadian Boots on the Ground: Harper."
Steven Chase, "Canada's Iraq Mission Is Support, Not Combat, Top General Says," The Globe  and Mail, February 19, 2016, accessed November 20, 2017, https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/ politics/canada-on-iraq-support-mission-not-combat-defence-chief/article28813367/.
Mike Blanchfield, "Canada to End Bombing Mission against ISIS by Feb. 22," Global News,  February 7, 2016, accessed January 18, 2018, https://globalnews.ca/news/2503213/trudeau-to-lay-outcanadas-future-contribution-to-the-fight-against-isil/.
  151  Chase, "Canada's Iraq Mission Is Support, Not Combat, Top General
Says."152 Liberal Party of Canada, New Plan for a Strong Middle Class, 68-69.
January 18, 2018, https://www.un.org/press/en/2017/org1643.doc.htm.
Canadian Department of National Defence, "Operations."
There were nearly three thousand CAF members deployed between 2008 and 2011 in Kandahar. See Canadian Department of National Defence, "The Canadian Armed Forces Legacy in Afghanistan," National Defence | Canadian Armed Forces, February 26, 2014, accessed October 21, 2017, http://www.forces.gc.ca/ en/operations-abroad-past/cafla.page.
Canadian Department of National Defence, "Operations."
For instance, a CANSOFCOM member broke the world record for the longest confirmed sniper kill with a distance of 11,316 feet in June 2017, earning the praise of the US military. See Tom Rogan, "Why the Canadian Sniper Story Is Important," Washington Examiner, June 22, 2017, accessed January 2, 2017, http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/why-the-canadian-sniper-story-is-important/article/2626844; see also Matthew Diebel, "Canadian Sniper Shattered World Record, Killing ISIS Fighter From 2 Miles Away, Report Says," USA TODAY, June 22, 2017, accessed January 2, 2017, https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/ 2017/06/22/report-canadian-sniper-kills-isis-fighter-2-milesaway/418889001/.
There is strong research that supports the requirement to "accompany" in mentoring hostnation security forces during operations, which is much more effective than only training them in classrooms or "inside the wire." See Alex D. Haynes inHorn and Spencer, No Easy Task, 
  171  For instance, the coup d'état in Mali in 2012 illustrated how training local forces can go wrong, requiring capacity building to focus as much on democratic values and the rule of law as well as tactical operations. See Geoffrey York, "Training of Mali Soldiers Said to Lack 'Values, Ethics and Military Ethos,'" TheGlobe and Mail, March 26, 2017, accessed December 31, 2017,  https://www.theglobeandmail.comnews/ world/training-of-mali-soldiers-said-to-lack-values-ethics-andmilitary-ethos/
article7893675/.172 This is the case in Iraq where the coalition is training Kurdish forces upsetting Turkey and Iran. See Alireza Nader et al., Regional Implications of an Independent Kurdistan (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2016), accessed December 31, 2017, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/ RR1452.html.