# ID: 8e73c4f4c4b44f3a8b1ee14550b14326
# Title: Ready for the Home Game? The Surface Navy and Homeland Defense
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
Strategically, it will always be preferable for the United States to fight "out there" where the conflict is far away from the homeland. But, as the Russian and Chinese navies continue to develop longer-range capabilities and other threats toward the U.S. homeland grow, it is crucial to examine how well the surface Navy is prepared to defend the homeland. Given both the emerging threats from peer competitors, such as Russia and China, and the surface Navy's prioritization of forces abroad, this thesis asks whether the surface Navy is adequately prepared to defend against such future threats to the American homeland.
Through a qualitative analysis of relevant literature, this thesis concludes that the American homeland will be targeted by peer competitors during a future crisis or conflict. Based on credible threats to the homeland, the Navy will have to balance appropriately on prioritizing and allocating forces abroad and at home. The Navy will have to break away from the traditional maritime strategy of primarily only fighting abroad, and it will need to provide assistance to enhance a layered defense approach to effectively defend the homeland in the future. Thus, this thesis recommends establishing a national combined maritime and aerospace defense command to ensure that air, land, and sea forces are prioritized and allocated appropriately for the defense of the American homeland during crisis or conflict in the future.
Strategically, it will always be preferable for the United States to fight "out there" where the conflict is far away from the homeland. But, as the Russian and Chinese navies continue to develop longer-range capabilities and other threats toward the U.S. homeland grow, it is crucial to examine how well the surface Navy is prepared to defend the homeland. Given both the emerging threats from peer competitors, such as Russia and China, and the surface Navy's prioritization of forces abroad, this thesis asks whether the surface Navy is adequately prepared to defend against such future threats to the American homeland.
Through a qualitative analysis of relevant literature, this thesis concludes that the American homeland will be targeted by peer competitors during a future crisis or conflict. Based on credible threats to the homeland, the Navy will have to balance appropriately on prioritizing and allocating forces abroad and at home. The Navy will have to break away from the traditional maritime strategy of primarily only fighting abroad, and it will need to provide assistance to enhance a layered defense approach to effectively defend the homeland in the future. Thus, this thesis recommends establishing a national combined maritime and aerospace defense command to ensure that air, land, and sea forces are prioritized and allocated appropriately for the defense of the American homeland during crisis or conflict in the future.
A.
Strategically, it will always be preferable for the United States to fight "out there"
where the conflict is farther away from the homeland. But as the Russian and Chinese navies continue to develop longer-range capabilities and other threats toward the U.S.
homeland grow, it is crucial to examine how well the surface Navy is prepared to defend the homeland. Given both the emerging threats from peer competitors, such as Russia and China, and the surface Navy's prioritization of forces abroad, this thesis asks whether the surface Navy is adequately prepared to defend against such contingencies threatening the American homeland in the future?
This thesis also examines the following secondary questions: What are the Russian and Chinese maritime and missile capabilities that threaten the continental United States (CONUS)? What lessons can we learn from how maritime forces were prioritized and allocated in World War II (WWII)? With the current maritime force of the Navy and NORTHCOM's and NORAD's missions and responsibilities regarding homeland defense, how can the surface Navy balance prioritizing and allocating forces abroad and at home?
Although being forward deployed is an important element, as Peter Swartz states, when deterring adversaries and maintaining situational awareness as the "first line" of defense, forward deployment does not replace the need to ensure that forces at home, or the "second line" of defense, are prepared for an attack on CONUS. 
1
The "away game" strategy that has dominated American military thinking since the end of the Cold War is no longer sufficient. Adversaries do not intend to allow the American military to fight the war it wants to and deploy unmolested into a theater of conflict. America must, therefore, be prepared to fight the war that is coming, a war that is fought across command boundaries and on both sides of the oceans. 
2
Command's (USNORTHCOM) and North American Aerospace Defense Command's (NORAD) missions and responsibilities in terms of defense of the homeland to identify how the surface Navy should allocate and prioritize its forces abroad and at home during crisis or conflict. This thesis concludes that in the near future, to defend against the increased maritime and missile capabilities of Russia and China, a binational maritime defense command should be established, possessing both clear lines of command and control and a strong unity of command between the armed forces to defending the homeland.
This literature review covers three critical questions related to the primary research question: What are the Russian and Chinese maritime and missile capabilities that threaten CONUS? How were maritime forces prioritized and allocated in World War II? With the current force structure, how should the Navy balance the prioritization and allocation of maritime forces abroad against those designated for homeland defense? Answers to these 2 Terrence O'Shaughnessy and Peter Fesler, "Hardening the Shield: A Credible Deterrent and Capable Defense for North America," The Canada Institute, September 2020, 15, https://www.wilsoncenter.org/ sites/default/files/media/uploads/documents/Hardening%20the%20Shield_A%20Credible%20Deterrent% 20%26%20Capable%20Defense%20for%20North%20America_EN.pdf. three questions provide insight into answering whether the surface Navy is prepared for contingencies such as an attack on CONUS.
Are Russian and Chinese Maritime and Missile Capabilities a Significant Threat to CONUS?
The primary literature used in analyzing Russian and Chinese maritime and missile capabilities that threaten the homeland includes the following. First, by O'Shaughnessy and Fesler is, "Hardening the Shield: A Credible Deterrent and Capable Defense for North America." The two authors argue that the United States "is no longer a sanctuary" as a result of increased maritime and missile capabilities of adversaries and that the United
States is required to adapt accordingly. 
3
4
5
Throughout the 20th century and into the present, the Navy has focused on forward deployment. The Navy has always been focused on the "away game," with periodic attention given to the "home game," because the United States has benefited from the geographic luxury of having all significant conflicts occur across the Atlantic or Pacific.
As said by Swartz, "Homeland harbor and coastal defense has seldom been a primary 3 O'Shaughnessy and Fesler, 2.
4 Defense Intelligence Ballistic Missile Analysis Committee, 2020 Ballistic and Cruise Missile Threat (Wright-Patterson AFB: Defense Intelligence Ballistic Missile Analysis Committee, 2020), https://media.defense.gov/2021/Jan/11/2002563190/-1/-1/1/2020%20BALLISTIC% 20AND%20CRUISE%20MISSILE%20THREAT_FINAL_2OCT_REDUCEDFILE.PDF.
5 Janes, "Russian Federation -Executive Summary," Jane's Sentinel Security Assessment -Russia And The CIS, May 12, 2021, https://customer.janes.com; and Janes, "China -Executive Summary," Jane's Sentinel Security Assessment -China And Northeast Asia, May 5, 2021, https://customer.janes.com. mission of the U.S. Navy, and has never been a preferred one." 
6
During much of the 20th century, the Navy leaned toward a more forward, offensive defense strategy, but experts argue that this mindset and traditional analytical process must shift. Former USNORTHCOM commander, Terrence O'Shaughnessy, and former Deputy Director of Operations for NORAD, Peter Fesler, believe that an attack on CONUS is almost inevitable in the 21st century. 7 O'Shaughnessy and Fesler state, "With innovations in long-range missiles and foreign missile defense systems as well as a changing Arctic landscape, threats to U.S. national security are closer and less deterred than ever from attacking the U.S. Homeland." 8 Experts such as O'Shaughnessy and Fesler argue that the United States needs to break free from the "away game" strategic mentality that has dominated the American military's thinking process. 9 For the U.S. military to be prepared for contingencies such as an attack on CONUS, the military is required to assume that during the next conflict with an adversary, an attack on CONUS is likely to occur. O'Shaughnessy and Fesler believe U.S. adversaries in the 21st century will not allow the American military to continue to fight a war in historical away game fashion. 10 With the adversaries' ballistic and cruise missile capabilities to threaten CONUS, a flawed military strategy would be to rely solely on an "away game" approach. This understanding of the ever-growing threat capabilities of our peer competitors to threaten CONUS requires the incorporation of the surface Navy in not only forward deployed naval forces (FDNF) missions, but also coastal maritime surface warfare missions, coastal antisubmarine missions, and homeland missile defense missions. 6 Swartz, Forward-from the Start, 14.   7 O'Shaughnessy and Fesler, "Hardening the Shield," 4.   8 O'Shaughnessy and Fesler, 1.   9 O'Shaughnessy and Fesler, 15.   10 O'Shaughnessy and Fesler, 15.  Russian maritime and missile capabilities that threaten the American homeland are examined by the following. As stated by Janes' "Russian Federation -Executive Summary," the Russian Navy has developed increased capability to conduct extended deployments and operations in the Mediterranean through intermediate basing in Syria. 
11
12
13
14
15
16
30
The literature review has shown that naval experts and military leaders agree that the homeland is threatened. Improved maritime and missile capabilities of peer competitors have made it more credible that, during conflict, critical infrastructure in CONUS will be targeted. However, the literature does not provide much help to the surface Navy as it seeks to identify and develop solutions to counter the maritime and missile threat of peer competitors. This thesis seeks to help fill that gap, by addressing the following. First, to show that in the future, CONUS will be targeted by peer competitors during crisis or conflict. Second, the threat to the American homeland is significant and credible due to peer competitors' maritime and missile developments and capabilities. Third, the Navy has to get away from the traditional maritime strategy of primarily fighting abroad and begin to emphasize homeland defense properly. Fourth, the U.S. armed forces, specifically the Navy for the scope of this thesis, will have to balance appropriately on prioritization and allocation of forces abroad and at home. Lastly, this thesis recommends and addresses how a binational maritime defense command could assist to properly prioritize and allocate maritime forces to deal with increased maritime and missile capabilities of Russia and China.
Based upon an analysis of the above literature, this research concludes that the surface Navy is not adequately prepared to defend against contingencies against the American homeland in the future from peer competitors. Although the majority of surface combatants are multi-mission capable that can conduct both forward deployed and homeland defense mission, it is difficult to state that the current surface Navy has enough ships to accomplish missions abroad and at home. Also, with recent maritime and missile developments and increasing capabilities on the part of peer competitors, and without an established maritime defense command at the binational level, it is difficult to say whether surface forces will be allocated appropriately in the future to provide an effective layered defense capability of the homeland.
The research conducted for this thesis recommends that a maritime defense command is necessary at the binational defense command level, and that it should be integrated with the already existing NORAD. The addition of a maritime defense element to NORAD and establishing a binational maritime and aerospace defense command whose primary mission is the defense of North America will allow the command to not only conduct aerospace warning, aerospace control, and maritime warning missions, but also conduct maritime control missions with control over air, land, and sea forces.
This thesis follows a systematic and chronological approach to answer whether the surface Navy is prepared for contingencies such as an attack on CONUS. First, the threats to CONUS today are identified with specific focus on the maritime and missile developments and capabilities of Russia and China. Second, the manner in which the Navy prioritized and allocated maritime forces to address coastal threats to CONUS during WWII is examined. Third, an analysis is undertaken of the current status of maritime forces capable of conducting offensive and defensive warfare capabilities and of NORTHCOM and NORAD missions and responsibilities regarding homeland defense. Fourth, a determination is made as to whether or not the current organizational structure and mission of the binational defense command is sufficient to effectively combat against increased maritime and missile capabilities of peer competitors. Lastly, this thesis offers recommendations that could help the surface Navy maximize preparedness for an attack on CONUS.
Chapter I introduces the primary question of whether the surface Navy is prepared to defend against an attack on CONUS. Chapter II analyzes current maritime and missile threats to CONUS. Chapter III provides a historical account of U.S. maritime homeland defense during WWII in a chronological format. Chapter IV provides a summary of the surface Navy and current NORTHCOM and NORAD missions and responsibilities regarding the defense of the homeland. Chapter V summarizes the findings from the previous chapters to answer the primary thesis question and recommends establishing a binational maritime and aerospace defense command.
The traditional U.S. strategy of fighting an "away game," which depends on the homeland being a sanctuary from enemy attack, is being challenged today by the rapid developments of maritime and missile capabilities by Russia and China. This chapter will examine these rising threats. First, it will review the United States' traditional and longstanding view that the American homeland is a safe haven during crisis or conflict.
Next, it examines the advances in Russian and Chinese maritime and missile developments and capabilities, especially the recent developments of hypersonic weapons from peer competitors. Finally, it concludes that based on credible maritime and missile capabilities that threaten the homeland from peer competitors, such as Russia and China, the U.S. homeland will no longer be a sanctuary in future crisis or conflict.
The American homeland has become a strategic target within reach of our adversaries who envision that future conflicts will not be kept regional. These adversaries' plan in crisis or conflict is to employ horizontal escalation tactics. As stated by Morgan et   al. horizontal escalation "refers to expanding the geographic scope of a conflict." 
35
With Russian and Chinese political and military leaders stating their intentions to attack the American homeland during conflict, coupled with their current conventional capabilities, Russia and China have become a credible threat of challenging the traditional national strategy of the U.S. homeland serving as a safe haven during conflicts overseas while staying under the nuclear threshold.
LIKELIHOOD A paradigm shift is required regarding the American homeland as a sanctuary during times of conflict. The belief that CONUS is a secure base from which to launch conventional operations needs to shift to the belief that the homeland is and will be at risk of conventional weaponry during crisis or conflict with peer competitors. One can state that this paradigm shift is critical for the defense of the homeland. As stated in O'Shaughnessy and Fesler's "Hardening the Shield": "Adversaries will threaten the homeland through subversion and coercion and a range of systems, including long-range nuclear armed missiles, conventional precision strike systems, and systems designed to gain information advantage." 
38
37 O'Shaughnessy and Fesler, 2.
38 O'Shaughnessy and Fesler, 3.
competitors will likely be employed in the future to destroy critical infrastructure that directly affect the ability to mobilize the armed forces and defend the homeland.
The decline in the American strategy of fighting the "away game" is due to Beijing and the Kremlin desiring to not contain future conflicts with the United States at the regional level by pursuing horizontal escalation. required paradigm shift that future crisis or conflict with peer competitors, such as Russia and China, will place CONUS at risk of threats below the nuclear threshold.
The Defense Intelligence Ballistic Missile Analysis Committee states that Figure 
1
In the graphic, ballistic missiles are categorized by range, regardless of launch platform;
missiles with a range of 1,000 km or greater are classified as long-range ballistic missiles With the PLA's motivation to modernize their military, they are becoming a more capable and dangerous global power. The statement can be backed by how the PLA is restructuring from a ground-force centric military to a joint-force centric military similar to Russia and the US. 51 Also, the establishment of China's first overseas base in Djibouti in 2017 indicates their desire and intent to project power beyond their borders and firmly establish themselves as a regional hegemon in the Pacific. 52
The Russian Navy continues to develop capabilities to project power overseas. The successful development of the Kalibr-class conventional cruise missiles has given their navy strategic importance by being able to launch via sea, air, and land. The Kalibr-class 3M14T is a LACM with a max range of 4,000 km with the ability to be launched from much lower altitudes than a typical ballistic missile." 69 Additionally, the Defense Intelligence Agency states that the "combination of high speed, maneuverability, and relatively low altitude" creates many challenges for U.S. and allied missile defense systems. 
70
71
72
73
74
2023. 76
As previously mentioned, the PLA has restructured their military organization from a ground-centric military to a more joint-centric military like Western militaries. In pursuit of becoming a "blue water" navy, the People's Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) ships have routinely been operating around the Indian Ocean and deploying worldwide as far as Alaska, Australia, and Hawaii. These deployments demonstrate China's ability to sustain extended deployments and conduct operations outside the second island chain. 
77
78
79
The China -Executive Summary General O'Shaughnessy stated that:
The key advantages of a boosted hypersonic maneuvering vehicle are that it can radically change its trajectory to avoid missile defenses and have "gliding" capabilities that give an extended range over that of a conventional ballistic missile warhead. HGVs can more easily evade enemy defenses thanks to their incredible speed and low-altitude flight profile. 
93
94
95
The major takeaways from the chapter are as follows. The United States is not and will not be a sanctuary in crisis or conflict with the peer competitors. Russian and Chinese  As O'Shaughnessy and Fesler states, "In the words of General George Washington, 'To be prepared for war is one of the most effectual means of preserving peace,' and in this case preparedness comes in the form of the ability to defend the Homeland as part of a balanced strategy." 
101
States might be required to place more emphasis on their ability to defend the homeland, as opposed to focusing on only offensively deterring adversaries abroad. With Russian and Chinese advances in maritime and missile developments and capabilities, it is of vital importance more than ever to recognize that defending the homeland will be a difficult mission. By understanding that the United States will be under threat of peer competitors during crisis or conflict, one can begin to identify and develop solutions to counter future conventional threats to the homeland and build a balanced strategy of offensive and defensive measures to establish a stronger deterrent posture.
Historically, the Navy has always been a forward leaning force, embracing the paradigm that the U.S. homeland remained a sanctuary. This chapter provides an overview and analysis of maritime force allocations and priorities during WWII for coastal defense when addressed with applicable threats and events that influenced homeland defense. The applicable threats and events relevant to homeland defense are the following: the attack on Pearl Harbor, the Japanese I-Boat submarine threat, the German U-Boat submarine threat, the Doolittle Raid, and the Battle of Midway. For the purpose of this thesis, these events reflect significant decision points by the Navy to prioritize forwarding leaning posture versus coastal homeland defense. In terms of homeland defense from foreign powers, the Department of War played a more significant role when compared to the Department of the Navy. Overall, the Navy consistently maintained its forward deployed posture throughout the war and prioritized power projection over coastal defense even when the American homeland was in a state of panic, believing that an enemy attack on CONUS was imminent.
Almost immediately after the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the reinforcement of the United States' West Coast defenses, as stated by Siegel, became "one of the greatest priorities in the Department of War." 
102
103
It is important to highlight that prior to WWII, as stated by Swartz, the Navy continued to plan for "forward battle fleet operations" and that all aspects of the Navy were optimized for "distant operations." 
110
111
As stated by Swartz, "the U.S. Navy's vision stayed forward, focused first on the need to carry the war across the Pacific to the Japanese and, second to assist in fighting Germans and Italians across the Atlantic and in the Mediterranean." 112
The Japanese air raid on December 7, 1941, was devastating for the nation. The illusion that the United States was a sanctuary even through global conflict was challenged and shattered. As stated by Childs, "This struck our deepest pride. It tore at the myth of our invulnerability." 
113
114
The Doolittle Raid on April 18, 1942, produced significant positive effects on American civil and military morale after the depressing days following the attack on Pearl He further adds that the Doolittle Raid led to the galvanization of the Japanese "both to seek to prevent another attack on Tokyo and to undertake some measure of revenge against the continental United States." 
139
The importance and significance of accurate intelligence matched with proper prioritization and allocation of maritime forces was displayed at Midway. As stated by 137 Siegel, The Wartime Diversion, 23.   138 Siegel, 23.   139 Siegel, 23.
Morison, intelligence collected regarding the Japanese attack on Midway influenced some naval leaders in Hawaii to believe that it was a deception tactic to conceal their real objective of raiding or invading Oahu. 
140
Although there were civil and military concerns of a Japanese attack to CONUS Although there was intelligence gathered that a last-ditch attack on the East Coast from the Germans would occur prior to Victory-in-Europe (V-E) Day, it seemed unlikely.
However, the German U-Boat threat of carrying flying bombs and rockets targeting cities along the East Coast, led to the maritime force being concentrated along the East Coast and 142 Siegel, 32.   143 Siegel, 32.   144 Siegel, 32-34.   145 Siegel, 34.  mid-Atlantic. As stated by Siegel, Atlantic Fleet Commander, Vice Admiral Jonas Ingram positioned the Atlantic Fleet to "guarantee continued vigilance in coastal defense activity until V-E Day." 
146
Operation Teardrop was one of the only times throughout the war that the Navy prioritized and allocated a substantial maritime force to support the defense of the homeland. It displayed Navy's ability to shift priorities from fighting abroad to defending the homeland when national security interests at home were at large.
Overall, it may be said that in WWII the Navy seemed to be largely immune to diverting and reallocating maritime forces to support coastal defense operations when the American homeland was feared to be in danger. The Navy maintained its offensive nature and prioritized operations overseas, and for the most part this was an effective strategy. For example, maximizing and concentrating maritime force allocations for the Battle of Midway, rather than allocating forces to support coastal defense, led to the decisive victory at sea and crippled Japanese naval power tremendously after June 7, 1942. On the other hand, when significant homeland security threats did arise, such as when German U-boat activity increased off the East Coast late in the war, the Navy was able to adjust its force allocations to meet the threat. Siegel states that a key element of the Navy to preventing the surface fleet to reallocate in support of coastal defense was in "the ability of the principal military commanders involved to explain clearly to the political leadership the rationale underlying the preferred force allocation and the cost of altering that allocation." 147
During WWII, the belief that the United States was a sanctuary was accurate and the Navy's prioritization of allocating naval forces abroad was effective. However, in a future conflict with peer competitors, the belief that the United States remains a safe haven 146 Siegel, 34.   147 Siegel, 38.  and continued prioritization of allocating naval forces primarily abroad could result in disaster for effective measures in homeland defense.
What might have happened if Japanese and German submarines had the capability and capacity to effectively disrupt or destroy critical infrastructure of the American homeland, in the way that Russia and China are developing such a capacity today? If Japan and Germany were successful in targeting CONUS, how would the Navy have changed its force allocation and priorities? Such a change could have directly affected the results from the Battle of Midway and the Battle of the Atlantic, and could have turned the tides of the war in favor of the Japanese and Germans rather than the United States. Examining the WWII experiences in light of today's threats to the homeland suggests that if future maritime forces are primarily focused overseas, and coastal defense remains an afterthought, the result could be disaster and destruction of the American homeland. The next chapter will consider the implications of such a threat.
With the understanding that the American homeland will not be a safe haven or during future crisis or conflict with peer competitors, this chapter discusses the importance of balancing the prioritization and allocation of maritime forces to support both operations abroad and homeland defense. First, it offers a brief analysis of the Navy's current maritime force with both offensive and defensive warfare capabilities. Second, it demonstrates how NORTHCOM plans to counter the current credible threats to the homeland from peer competitors.
The chapter argues that as the maritime and missile capabilities of peer competitors such as Russia and China are continuing to advance, the threat environment of the homeland will become more complex and difficult for homeland defense systems to overcome. To counterbalance Russian and Chinese advances in maritime and missile capabilities, NORTHCOM and the Missile Defense Agency have developed a layered missile defense capability utilizing air, land, and sea forces to counter the current threats.
Next, this chapter analyzes NORAD, a binational command organization responsible for aerospace defense of North America and identifies a missing maritime capability that inhibits its ability to fully counter the maritime and missile threat that Russia and China currently present.
Although Ronald O'Rourke's CRS report on Homeland Security: Navy Operations O'Rourke's argument suggests that for the cruise missile threat to the American homeland today, a potential role for the maritime force would be to intercept surface ships or submarines of peer competitors that are armed with land-attack or anti-ship cruise missiles before the American homeland is within their weapons engagement zone (WEZ). 
152
153
Peter Swartz mentions how the prioritization and allocation of maritime forces in support of homeland defense ebbed and flowed from the 1950s through the early 2000s. 
154
158
Richardt states that "For America to defend itself, a layered defense and security network is required, spanning the maritime domain from overseas to the nation's coastline." 
159
160
After the attack on 9/11, as stated in the United States Office of Homeland USNORTHCOM emphasized the importance of balancing forces and resources forward deployed and in the homeland. With the threat environment of the homeland drastically changing since peer competitors are able to target critical infrastructure in CONUS, as stated by Richardt, the Navy's mission of "deterring and striking threats to America's homeland, from a distant, forward leaning, and offensive posture" might not be viable in the future. 
162
163
As stated by Patterson, "The Navy no longer has 600 ships, 500 ships, 400 ships, or even 300 ships." 
164
165
172
173
174
175
showcased their ability to incorporate HGV technology with current missiles through the display of their Hypersonic Medium Range Ballistic Missile, the DF-ZF, in 2019. 
177
Overall, NORTHCOM is responsible for defending the American homeland. As stated in "NORAD and USNORTHCOM Mission Directive 1," USNORTHCOM conducts "homeland defense, civil support, and security cooperation to defend and secure the United 172 Janes, "China -Executive Summary," 21.
173 Janes, 25.   174 Janes, 116.   175 Janes, 76.   176 Janes, 77.  As stated by VanHerck, NORTHCOM is working closely with the Missile Defense Agency toward a layered missile defense capability "that will allow for a more flexible and responsive defense of the homeland against both ballistic and cruise missile threats" in an effort to counterbalance peer competitor advances in missile technology. 
185
186
The lack of a Navy commander of NORTHCOM since 2016 could be a factor in the lack of emphasis that appears to exist toward incorporating the maritime component to NORAD, the established binational aerospace defense command.
The North American Aerospace Defense Command is a binational command in nature. As stated in "NORAD and USNORTHCOM Mission Directive 1," NORAD conducts "aerospace warning, aerospace control, and maritime warning in the defense of North America." 187 With the Commander of NORTHCOM also being Commander of NORAD, the command element of NORAD is at the same level or higher than that of a 
This chapter focuses on some key elements. With the size of the current U.S.
Navy's maritime force to include approximately 170 surface ships capable of conducting both offensive and defensive warfare operations, it is more important than ever for NORTHCOM to properly allocate the surface Navy to effectively conduct homeland defense missions. With the threat environment rapidly changing and peer competitors' continued development of maritime and missile capabilities, the Navy must find ways to tip the balance in its favor.
NORAD's binational command organization is beneficial to countering the oversaturation of the threat environment built by peer competitors in a multitude of ways.
NORAD has been successful in defending the American homeland from air threats since the 1950s through increased legitimacy, improved deterrence, and the ability for burden sharing forces between the United States and Canada. However, with increased maritime and missile capabilities of peer competitors, NORAD might not be enough in the future.
In the next revision and renewal process of the NORAD agreement, one recommendation is to include maritime control to NORAD's mission set. Next, the organizational structure should be changed to integrate the U.S. Navy and the Royal Canadian Navy and ultimately change the name from NORAD to the North American Maritime and Aerospace Defense Command or NORMAD.
The surface Navy is not adequately prepared to defend against future contingencies against the American homeland. To reach this conclusion, this thesis focused on several key factors. First, it examined the need for a paradigm shift in the belief that the American homeland will remain a sanctuary in future conflict with peer competitors. Second, it took a close look at increased maritime and missile capabilities of peer competitors such as Russia and China. Third, it analyzed force allocations and priorities of Naval surface combatants in relation to forward deployment or coastal defense during WWII. Lastly, it analyzed the current number of surface ships with both offensive and defensive warfare capabilities along with current NORTHCOM and NORAD homeland defense missions.
With Russia and China continuing to develop maritime and missile capabilities and technologies that threaten the homeland, one can argue that a clear homeland defense mission that includes air, land, and sea domains is required at the U.S. and Canadian binational level to successfully counter threats from peer competitors in the future.
Establishing a binational maritime and aerospace defense command will present the American homeland as an almost impregnable shield. Secondary impacts of establishing a binational maritime and aerospace defense command could be that the defense command is seen as a credible deterrent measure in the future.
This chapter provides a brief overview of the thesis so far to defend the point that the surface Navy is not adequately prepared for contingencies such as an attack on CONUS in the future due to emerging threats from peer competitors. It then transitions to providing a recommendation of establishing a North American Maritime and Aerospace Defense
Command or NORMAD to counter the increased maritime and missile developments and capabilities that potentially can more greatly threaten the homeland from peer competitors in the foreseeable future. The primary purpose for the recommendation of establishing of a binational maritime and aerospace defense command is to help alleviate prioritization and allocation concerns of the Surface Navy to maximize forward presence while maintaining a layered defense strategy of the homeland that includes the air, land, and sea domains. This chapter then concludes with questions for further research related to the establishment of a binational maritime defense command and how it will affect current surface Navy deployment cycles.
Chapter Two stressed that in future crisis or conflict, CONUS cannot be assumed to remain a safe haven while our armed forces are fighting an away game. The chapter also concentrated on maritime and missile capabilities of our peer competitors, such as Russia and China, that can threaten the homeland in crisis or conflict. It concluded with the need to have a balanced strategy of offensive and defensive measures to counter the threat of the homeland.
Chapter Three examined how the Navy prioritized and allocated surface combatants during WWII. It emphasized how the Navy prioritized and allocated forces to be forward deployed rather than on coastal defense of the homeland. A critical element to the successes at sea abroad for the Navy was because there were no credible threats to the homeland. This chapter concluded that with increased maritime and missile capabilities of peer competitors today, more focus will have to be placed on homeland defense from the Navy regarding the prioritization and allocation of forces abroad and at home.
Chapter Four provided a summary of the surface combatants in the Navy and the need for the Navy to emphasize maritime homeland defense missions in the future. It identified both NORTHCOM and NORAD responsibilities and missions in support of homeland defense. With increased maritime and missile capabilities from peer competitors, a layered defense capability of the homeland should include air, land, and sea. This chapter concluded by asserting the advantages of a binational command, such as NORAD, in aerospace defense of the homeland while indicating that it does not contain a maritime control function and capability.
With maritime and missile capabilities continuing to develop from peer competitors, such as Russia and China, the maritime domain will become more and more critical in countering and defeating threats to the homeland. With the belief that in the future, the maritime domain will become more critical in the success of homeland defense, thus, this research recommends the establishment of a North American Maritime and Aerospace Defense Command or NORMAD. As stated in the United States' "National Strategy for Homeland Security," issued soon after the attacks on 9/11, those attacks brought to the fore the need for the Department of Defense to establish USNORTHCOM, whose primary mission was to be responsible for the planning, organizing, and execution of homeland defense missions for the United States. 
194
195
199
200
With the current threat environment constantly changing due to peer competitors' development of new technologies and capabilities, the Navy might be required to prioritize coastal defense more so than in the past. With the current increased maritime and missile capabilities of peer competitors such as Russia and China, a maritime strategy that includes the prioritization of allocating maritime forces "away" rather than at "home" might not be a viable solution in the future. One solution to the fear of prioritizing and allocating maritime forces improperly to effectively defend the homeland is to establish a binational maritime and aerospace defense command.
The advantages of a binational maritime and aerospace defense command include increased legitimacy, improved deterrence, less pre-positioning and deployment required, and most importantly burden sharing. 
201
202
As Richardt states, "a command dedicated to maritime defense would detect, track, and monitor" maritime threats to the homeland. 
203
204
205
A binational maritime and aerospace defense command dedicated in the defense of North America could better establish clear lines of Command and Control to smoothly and rapidly transition from centralized planning of how to counter threats to the homeland to decentralized execution of deterring, denying, and destroying threats to the homeland. As stated by Vego, "Organizational flexibility is achieved by decentralizing command and control, delegating specific and well-defined functions and responsibilities, and rapidly deploying forces to meet specific situations. Without decentralized command and control it is difficult for a force to be effective when it is faced with a situation demanding quick and timely action." 206 Another benefit of a binational maritime and aerospace defense command would be to have Unity of Command over all forces engaged in defending the homeland. Unity of Command is critical in military operations because it allows the commander to direct all forces toward a common goal or objective thus maximizing effectiveness with a given force. As stated in "Joint Publication (JP 3-0)," "The purpose of  Lastly, in a future crisis or conflict with peer competitors in which CONUS will be threatened with conventional weaponry, how much will public opinion and public outcries for homeland defense affect force allocation of offensive forward deployed missions versus coastal homeland defense missions?
20  
20  
28
25  
25  
51 Janes, "China -Executive Summary," 25.
51 Janes, "China -Executive Summary," 25.
The With rapid development of the PRC's Command, Control, Communication, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) networks, the PRC is able to utilize their large inventory of anti-ship missiles (ASM) to follow the PRC's antiaccess/area denial (A2/AD) defense strategy within the First Island Chain. The threat of a capable PRC military to implement an A2/AD strategy raises concerns for U.S. forces that routinely operate within the First Island Chain. If U.S. FDNF are unable to operate effectively and disrupt the PRC, this could lead to negative second and third order effects for the defense of the homeland, because our FDNF are essentially the first line of defense of the homeland.
The With rapid development of the PRC's Command, Control, Communication, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) networks, the PRC is able to utilize their large inventory of anti-ship missiles (ASM) to follow the PRC's antiaccess/area denial (A2/AD) defense strategy within the First Island Chain. The threat of a capable PRC military to implement an A2/AD strategy raises concerns for U.S. forces that routinely operate within the First Island Chain. If U.S. FDNF are unable to operate effectively and disrupt the PRC, this could lead to negative second and third order effects for the defense of the homeland, because our FDNF are essentially the first line of defense of the homeland.
critical threats."
critical threats."
102
102
113 Marquis W. Childs, I Write from Washington
113 Marquis W. Childs, I Write from Washington
135 Warnock, The U.S. Army Air Forces in World War II, 10.
135 Warnock, The U.S. Army Air Forces in World War II, 10.
Peter M. Swartz, Forward-from the Start: The U.S. Navy & Homeland Defense : 1775-2003, (Alexandria, VA: Center for Naval Analyses,
2003), 8, https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA596760.pdf.
VanHerck.
Hope Hodge Seck, "Active Ships in the U.S. Navy," Military.com, June 23, 2021, https://www.military.com/navy/us-navy-ships.html.
Forrest E. Morgan et al., Dangerous Thresholds: Managing Escalation in the 21st Century (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, 2008), 18, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monographs/ 2008/RAND_MG614.pdf.
Defense Intelligence Ballistic Missile Analysis Committee, 2020 Ballistic and Cruise Missile Threat, 10.
Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations, DIA-11-1704-161 (Washington, DC: Defense Intelligence Agency, 2017), 43, https://www.dia.mil/Military-Power-Publications/.
Defense Intelligence Agency, 44.
Janes," 42.   
Janes," 31.   
O'Shaughnessy and Fesler, "Hardening the Shield," 8.
William Goss, "Air Defense of the Western Hemisphere," The Army Air Forces in WorldWar II 1  (1948), 298.   
Siegel, The Wartime Diversion, 24.   
Source: Bert Webber, Retaliation: Japanese Attacks and Allied Countermeasures on the Pacific Coast in World War II, vol. 6 (Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University Press, 1975), vi.
Source: Webber, vi.
Webber,[14][15] 
Siegel, The Wartime Diversion, 22.   
Samuel E.Morison, Coral Sea, Midway and Submarine Actions: May 1942
-August 1942
Siegel, The Wartime Diversion, 24.   
O'Rourke, Homeland Security: Navy Operations.   
Janes," 31.   
Defense Intelligence Ballistic Missile Analysis Committee, 2020 Ballistic and Cruise Missile Threat, 22.
"NORAD Agreement."
"U.S. Successfully Conducts SM-3 Block IIA Intercept Test."
Patterson, Defend the Approaches, 15.   
Nix, "Multinational Operations," 13.    
Nix, 14.    
Richardt, The Security and Defense of America's Ports, 19.    
"North American Aerospace Defense Command," North American Aerospace Defense Command, accessed November 14, 2021, https://www.norad.mil/Newsroom/Fact-Sheets/Article-View/Article/578770/ north-american-aerospace-defense-command/.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Operations, JP 3 (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2018), A-2, https://cle.nps.edu/access/content/group/05fb9d4b-620a-43c0-be4d-e6b8b34a59fa/JointPubs/JP%203-0%20JointOperations120170117chg1_20181022.pdf.
208 O'Rourke, Homeland Security: Navy Operations,
7.209 O'Rourke, 7.
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
States and its interests." 
178
This thesis finds that the American homeland will be targeted by peer competitors during a future crisis or conflict. The significance of the threat to the homeland is real and peer competitors' maritime and missile developments and capabilities make the threat credible. Based on these credible threats to the homeland, the Navy will have to balance appropriately on prioritizing and allocating forces abroad and at home. The Navy will have to break away from the traditional maritime strategy of primarily only fighting abroad, and it will need to provide assistance to enhance a layered defense approach to effectively defend the homeland in the future. Thus, this thesis recommends establishing a binational maritime and aerospace defense command to ensure that air, land, and sea forces are prioritized and allocated appropriately for the defense of the American homeland during crisis or conflict in the future.