# ID: 8ecc272551e44f8b8d01f61744ffb74c
# Title: Improving the Survivability and Lethality of an Infantry Rifle Squad Against a Near-Peer Enemy in the Year 2020
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
The U.S. military does not possess the technological superiority gap it once enjoyed in the past. Thus, the problem this paper will address is how to improve the combat effectiveness of the U.S. Army, asking whether it is properly organized and equipped to survive in a future near-peer conflict environment. Given that the infantry rifle squad is the basic building block of the Army, infantry squad organization is the focus of this study. This paper argues that given the characteristics of the near-future operating environment, future research must design a balanced and more robust infantry squad organization that can effectively operate within the electromagnetic spectrum. This cross-domain capability will be critical to the survivability and lethality of the infantry squads of the future. v
Since the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq, the U.S. military has trained and equipped to fight in irregular wars where both the air and sea domains were uncontested, and adversaries have not possessed large, advanced armies. However, potential near-peer enemies have significantly different tactics, techniques, and technological capabilities. The U.S. military does not possess the degree of technological superiority it once enjoyed.
Thus, the problem that this paper will address is how to improve the combat effectiveness of the U.S. Army, asking whether it is properly organized and equipped to survive in a future near-peer conflict environment. Given that the infantry rifle squad is the basic building block of the Army, the infantry squad organization is the focus of this study.
This paper argues that, given the characteristics of the near-future operating environment, future research must design a balanced and more robust infantry squad organization that can effectively operate within the electromagnetic spectrum. Enemy unmanned aerial reconnaissance platforms and electromagnetic tracking systems capable of locating and directing enemy artillery assets on friendly positions pose a significant threat to the infantry soldier. In addition, given the increased likelihood of operating in urban environments, which require more manpower and often result in greater casualties, it is imperative that the U.S. Army avoid the next near-peer conflict with the current ninesoldier squad organization, which is vulnerable to the effects of attrition. Equipping the infantry squad with the capability to jam enemy radio frequencies, disrupt enemy drone navigation and communication systems, geo-locate enemy signals, execute electronic deception, and map out the electromagnetic spectrum for actionable intelligence will all be critical for future engagements. Future research must determine how to incorporate these cross-domain capabilities at the lowest tactical level in order to increase unit independence, lethality, and survivability.
The period in which the U.S. military has enjoyed freedom of action in both the sea and air domains may end. Future combat against near-peer adversaries will not allow such luxuries. The United States' effective use of precision munitions, night vision optics, satellite navigation and other innovative combat systems demonstrated to the world a new and evolved way of fighting. Consequently, Russia and China, the two strongest U.S. nearpeer competitors, have downsized their older unit formations and modernized their forces to better confront this modern style of warfare.
1
In the 2017 National Security Strategy of the United States of America, the President of the United States highlights the military's global shift from a counter-terrorism focus to a "great powers" focus. 
2
Since the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq, the U.S. military has trained and equipped to fight in irregular wars where both the air and sea domains were uncontested, and adversaries have not possessed large, advanced armies. However, potential near-peer enemies have significantly different tactics, techniques, and technological capabilities.
Contemporary assessments have shown that the U.S.'s near-peer adversaries possess equal or even superior capabilities, in varying military domains. 
4
Army, asking whether it is properly organized and equipped to survive in a future nearpeer conflict environment. Given that the infantry rifle squad is the basic building block of the Army, the infantry squad is the focus of this study. This paper will evaluate historical studies conducted in inter-war transition periods in order to draw upon not only their conclusions but also the logic from which they based their new designs. This historical analysis may provide future research with valuable insight from which to derive the next infantry squad organization, given the near-peer threats we face today.
This study argues that, given the characteristics of the near-future operating environment, future research must design a balanced and more robust infantry squad organization that can operate effectively within the electromagnetic spectrum. Given the increased likelihood of operating in urban environments, which require more manpower and often result in greater casualties, it is imperative that the U.S. Army avoid the next near-peer conflict with the current nine-soldier squad organization, which is vulnerable to the effects of attrition.
Additionally, enemy unmanned aerial reconnaissance platforms and electromagnetic tracking systems capable of locating and directing enemy artillery assets on friendly positions pose a significant threat to the infantry soldier. Equipping the infantry squad with the capability to jam enemy radio frequencies, disrupt enemy drone navigation and communication systems, geo-locate enemy signals, execute electronic deception, and map out the electromagnetic spectrum for actionable intelligence will be critical for future engagements. Therefore, future research should determine how to incorporate these crossdomain capabilities at the lowest tactical level in order to increase unit lethality and survivability.
Since the conclusion of major combat operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, the U.S.
military has entered a period of transition as it prepares for the next conflict. Military and academic experts have thoroughly studied interwar transition periods to understand why some nations succeed and others fail at modernization. In their edited book Military Innovation in the Interwar Period, Williamson Murray and Allan Millett gathered scholars to study the key factors that helped or hindered the innovation conducted in the interwar period between WWI and WWII. Murray and Millett's purpose was "to provide insights into the nature of the processes involved in major innovation" and organizational change. 
5
6
military would not only need to design new organizational structures, tactics, and doctrine around the new technology, but thoroughly train the soldiers to the new way of fighting. 8
Murray and Millett also determined that a key factor in modernization was to understand the future security environment because it helped to discern how future wars would differ 
5
6 Murray and Millett, 3.
7 
Murray and Millett,
368. 8 Murray and Millett,
372.
However, understanding the future operating environment is not necessarily easy. Some might believe that we are always doomed to fight the next war as we fought the last war. In his book Winning the Next War: Innovation and the Modern Military, Stephen Rosen studies organizations that successfully modernized or failed to modernize their military. Rosen's study focuses on understanding the underlying causes that made these organizations successful. Rosen structures his research by comparing and contrasting various British and American organizations engaged in similar innovative research. Rosen then analyzes why one organization succeeded and the other did not. Rosen finds that interwar innovation or "peacetime innovation" drives "how military communities evaluate the future character of war, and how they effect change in the senior officer corps." 
10
In a contemporary society where technology has become increasingly specialized, professional military education and specialization will have a greater importance in the modernization process. Given the complexities of modern technology, professional military education is critical to improving soldier's survivability and lethality on the battlefield. In the book Preparing for War: The Emergence of the Modern U.S. Army, 1815-1917, J.P Clark found that given the influences of contemporary society, the U.S.
Army of the 1800's prepared for war differently than the U.S. Army of the Twentieth Century, which relied less on an individual's natural leadership abilities and more on 9 Murray and Millett, 406. 
10
11
Interwar transition periods are not new the U.S. military. Following Vietnam, the U.S. military found itself in a similar situation as it finds itself today. In the book Forging the Sword: Doctrinal Change in the U.S. Army, Benjamin Jensen, like the authors above, studied how the U.S. military innovated during interwar periods. In his book Jensen illustrates how General William E. Depuy, a World War II and Vietnam veteran, led the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) in the development of the new "Active Defense" doctrine. 
12
13
14
15
16
Perhaps it is time for the U.S. military to fundamentally reanalyze itself as it had following Vietnam. Jensen's ideational framework (Threat  Analysis  Concept  Doctrine) provides a clear sequential path for future research to follow. 
18
Rosen, Clark, Murray & Millett found that understanding the future nature of warfare to be an important factor in the interwar developmental process. However, understanding the past can also be beneficial to the developmental modernization process.
In "Enhancing Combat Effectiveness, The Evolution of The United States Army Infantry Rifle Squad Since The End Of World War II," Lieutenant Colonel (ret.) Timothy M.
Karcher states, "Typically, the Army would need to conduct costly studies and research to determine optimum unit organizations, but, fortunately, past studies provide potential conclusions, which are still relevant today." 
19
17
This research matters to the U.S. Army, given the vulnerabilities that exist in our current infantry formations. Today's infantry rifle squad faces significant challenges for surviving on the future battlefield. Given the increasing importance of light dismounted ground units capable of securing urban environments and other restrictive terrain, the survivability of the light infantryman will be critical to the future of the U.S. In order for the future infantry rifle squad to succeed, it must evolve to the enemy and the operating environment it will confront. vulnerability because they reveal friendly unit locations and make the emitting soldier a target to enemy kinetic attack. To the naked eye, a soldier may be invisible when wearing the proper camouflage and concealed behind vegetation. However, looking through the 'eyes' of the EMS, the same soldier can be easily found. Such vulnerabilities have not been an issue in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. However, in a future near-peer conflict environment these common vulnerabilities are significant.
In the book Learning to Forget: U.S. Army Counterinsurgency Doctrine and Practice from Vietnam to Iraq, David Fitzgerald argues that military leaders can draw on lessons from the past in order to serve the needs of the present. 
22
23
Chapter II will begin with an analysis of past U.S. Army studies that have had a significant impact on the infantry squad's organization. influence the future infantry squad organization. It will also discuss the implications of a battlefield proliferated with sensors and the growing use of the information domain to include the EMS. Next, the chapter will analyze the most likely contemporary threats that will be confronted in the near future and discuss the implications to the infantry rifle squad.
Chapter IV will conclude with key factors for future research to consider in the improvement of the infantry rifle squad. With clear developmental logic derived from past studies and a clearly defined future operating environment, this chapter will bring all this information together in order to provide insight into a more combat effective infantry rifle squad for the future. This chapter will highlight the key characteristics of the future operating environment and synthesize their effects on the factors of control, lethality, sustainability, and flexibility.
In this chapter, the study will analyze the methodologies and conclusions of five key historical infantry studies and five contemporary studies conducted between 1935 and the present day. The purpose of this historical examination is to highlight any relevant conclusions that may be applicable to today. This historical analysis will examine the logic and criteria that the Army used to maximize the squad's combat effectiveness. These findings will aid in the development of the future infantry squad organization. This chapter will also compare and contrast the conclusions of other contemporary studies that have recommended changes to the infantry squad organization.
We must first define the infantry rifle squad: According to the new Army Techniques Publication (ATP) 3-21.10 published in May 2018, an infantry rifle company consists of a company headquarters section, a mortar section, three rifle platoons, and a
Raven unmanned system (UAS) team (see Figure 
1
24
The infantry rifle squad is the basic build block of platoons, companies, and battalions. Karcher states in his study that, "One must determine what one wants this organization and its subordinate units to do, and its optimum organization. Starting at the bottom, and working the way to the top, the infantry rifle squad becomes the focus of this study." 
26
The infantry rifle company's mission statement is the guiding framework from which to base the new organizational design. Any conclusion or recommendation that falls outside of the doctrinal mission statement is not suitable option. Additionally, if the mission statement regularly changes it will make any new recommendation less valuable given the uncertainty of the future. ATP 3-21.10 states (emphasis added):
The mission of the infantry rifle company is to close with the Enemy using fire and movement to destroy or capture enemy forces or to repel enemy attacks by fire, close combat, and counter-attacks to control land areas, including populations and resources. The infantry rifle company Commander exercises Mission command, directs the operation of the company, and attaches units while conducting decisive action throughout the depth of the company's area of operations. Company missions, although non-inclusive, may include reducing fortified areas, infiltrating and seizing objectives in the enemy's rear, eliminating enemy forces remnants in restricted terrain, securing key facilities and activities, and conducting operations in support of stability tasks in the wake of maneuvering forces. Reconnaissance and surveillance tasks and security operations remain a core competency of the infantry rifle company, platoon, and squad.
27
By comparing the 2018 mission statement with an old 1962 infantry company mission statement we can assess how much the infantry company's mission has changed over time. The old 1962 Infantry Field Manual (FM 7-10) states that "the mission of the rifle company is to close with the enemy by means of fire and maneuver in order to destroy or capture him or to repel his assault by fire, close combat, and counterattack."
28
Although this research may also be relevant to other infantry models, this analysis will solely focus on the organization of the U.S. Army infantry rifle squad (light) assigned to an Infantry Brigade Combat Team (IBCT). Mechanized infantry organizations such as the Stryker infantry or the heavy Bradley Fighting Vehicle infantry organizations are beyond the scope of this study. This same limitation includes specialized infantry squads such as those that operate in the elite Ranger Battalions.
Additionally, given the uncertainty of the far-future operating environment (beyond 20 years), this study will focus on the near-term operating environment (within 20 years)
to avoid being bogged down in speculation of the ambiguous future. By using these time parameters, we assume that the near future technology will not change significantly and that the infantry rifle squad will use similar weapon systems that produce the equivalent amount of firepower as the systems of today. Using these assumptions will allow us to develop useful recommendations for the future. Additionally, this study will assume that there will be no substantial troop drawdown requirements within the next 15 years. Such drawdowns would limit the Army's willingness to grow an infantry organization and therefore limit our range of recommended options.
Next, one must define what it means to be combat effective. To assess combat effectiveness, there must be defined criteria from which to assess the strengths and weaknesses of an organization. This study will utilize four commonly used criteria from previous studies in order to assess the combat effectiveness of different infantry squad organizations. These four criteria are control, lethality, sustainability, and flexibility.
This study defines 'control' as the ease of a leader to manage his or her organization. Thus, the more people under a leader's supervision the less the leader is able to effectively control that organizational unit. This aspect of control plays a critical part in balancing the organization's leadership structure and its leader-to-led ratio (or the ratio of a leader to direct subordinate soldiers).
Next, this study defines 'sustainability' as the ability of a unit to be inflicted with casualties (attrition) and loss of equipment and still be capable of accomplishing its core tasks (maneuver, attack, & defend). Dupree and Homesly define sustainability as "the ability of the squad or team to function as a fighting unit despite normal attrition." 
29
'Flexibility' is the ability of a unit to conduct multiple tasks or the "ability to perform a variety of missions." 30 As noted previously, an infantry squad has a wide range of missions that include attack, defense, reconnaissance, and other operations in support of stability tasks. A flexible organizational structure would allow the infantry squad to not only conduct its primary core tasks of fire and maneuver, but also all the other tasks that fall within its mission statement.
Finally, the study defines 'lethality' as a squad's ability to inflict damage on an enemy with the use of firepower. The infantry squad's organic weapons and other enabling 29 Robert Dupree and Horace Homesly, A History of United States Army Squads and Platoons 1935-1967 (Fort Benning, GA: United States Army Combat Developments Command, 1967), 92. 
30
equipment generate squad firepower. As the number of weapon systems increase within a unit, the unit's overall firepower simultaneously increases. Similarly, an increase in the rate of fire (or destructive power) of an individual weapon system will simultaneously increase the lethality of the unit as a whole. Now the framework of the study is established, this paper will analyze the methodologies and conclusions of historical infantry studies conducted between 1935 and the present day to highlight any relevant conclusions that may be applicable to today. Using these four variables, this historical analysis will examine the logic and criteria that the Army used to maximize the squad's combat effectiveness, then compare and contrast their conclusions to aid in the development of the future infantry squad organization.
After WWII the U.S. Army conducted the 1946 Infantry Conference held at Fort
Benning, GA to improve the infantry's organizational structure used during the war (see  During WWII, the infantry rifle squad organization consisted of 12 soldiers: a squad leader, assistance squad leader, two scouts, one automatic rifleman (equipped with a BAR), one assistant gunner, one ammo bearer, and five riflemen. 
33
During this time, the infantry platoon was the lowest echelon capable of fire and maneuver.
The infantry squad would move as a single entity and suppress the enemy while another squad maneuvered or assaulted the enemy while being covered by another squad in the platoon. In theory, the squad leader would travel forward with the scout element to find the enemy. Upon finding the enemy, the squad leader would direct the suppression of the enemy with the squad automatic rifleman, which would enable another squad to assault the enemy position. 
34
33
the squad leader often became pinned down in front of his squad where he could not effectively control the other soldiers. 
35
Each of these control methods is limited in reach making it difficult to control eleven other dispersed soldiers even in favorable conditions. Another part of the problem of control was the inexperience of the squad leaders. General Omar Bradley stated in his testimonial, "I am sure that the squad is too large. With rapid promotion due to casualties you sometimes find yourself with people commanding squads who are having a pretty hard job commanding that large a squad." 36 General Bradley's comments highlight that a part of the issue of control was the inexperience of the conscripted junior leadership who often led squads due to the high level of attrition. Therefore, the conference determined that "one man can normally control no more than eight others by voice and hand signals in the field." 
37
38
39
35
Squads and
Platoons 1935-1967, 31. 36
37
38
39
Third, the committee found that the WWII squad did not possess sufficient firepower in comparison to their German counterpart. The analysis found that the German Light Machine Gun (LMG), and the SG44 assault rifle provided the German formations superior firepower. 
40
41
3
Three casualties and still be capable of fighting. 
46
48
49
50
51
4
46
47
48
49
50
51
Five years after the ASIRS study CONARC again initiated a study to analyze the composition of the infantry squad to maximize its combat effectiveness using the equipment available between 
1965-1970. 53
(OCRSP) study used a more objective analysis approach that attempted to minimize biases and other subjective interpretations. To achieve this, the competing squad organizations were modified only in ways that needed to be analyzed using a two-sided field tactical exercise. 
54
55
56
Regarding sustainability, the studies also produced similar findings noting that small squads cannot sustain casualties and retain the ability to fire and maneuver. 
57
5
60
61
62
63
6
67
68
Consequently, General William R. Richardson, the TRADOC Commander, affirmed the Army 86 nine-man infantry rifle squad, which is still in use to this day (see Figure 
7
8
73
squad automatic weapon and one grenade launcher. Doing this would free up more riflemen in the squad. Second, Melody believed that the two fire team structure within the squad should be eliminated and instead be reassigned an assistant squad leader to help with control. One key point in Melody's conclusion is that the squad would not be capable of fire and maneuver, but instead only fire or maneuver. 
74
72 Paul Melody, "The Infantry Rifle Squad: Size Is Not the Only Problem" (United States Army Command and General Staff College, 1990), 39. 
73
74
77
76
77
9
81
82
Rainey concludes that "technology should be leveraged rather than used as a justification for a reduction in size" 83 Therefore, the idea of downsizing the soldiers of an organization just because of an increase in the lethality of modern weapons systems may be a poor developmental method, given that adversaries will likely progress in lethality as well.
Thus, Rainey recommended the 12-soldier squad organization illustrated in Figure 
10
80 James E. Rainey, "Sharpening the Tip of the Spear: Is the Light Infantry Squad the Right Size for the Future Battlefield?" (United States Army Command and General Staff College, 1998), 6. 
81
82
83
85
Karcher analysis concluded four things. First, like many previous studies, Karcher found that the 11-soldier squad organization was far superior to the nine-soldier squad because it could "suffer 36 percent casualties prior to reorganizing into a single entity, as opposed to the nine-man squad that only required 22 percent casualties to require 84 Adapted from Rainey, 38; Soldier image taken from Infantry Platoon and Squad, ATP 3-21.8 (Washington, DC: Headquarters, Department of the Army, 2016), 1-13. 
85
87
Although Kamara does not provide exact organizational details, he recommends that the Army restore a modified version of the WWII infantry squad that includes a more robust scout reconnaissance team with an integrated drone, cyber, and electronic warfare capability. Kamara argues that this will improve the squad's ability to survive "high attrition combat" and help it operate more dispersed in the contemporary battlefield. 93
Analyzing the U.S. Army's historical studies conducted from 1946 to the present we find various consistencies in the assessment criteria used and the conclusions drawn.
Regarding the assessment criteria, in four of the five major studies, there are three key criteria consistently used in developing new squad organizations: control, attrition, and firepower (see Figure 
11
Second, these historical case studies claim that the optimum size of the infantry squad is somewhere between 11-15 soldiers. As the 1970s IRUS study found, any more than 15 soldiers would begin to degrade the combat effectiveness of the unit because it would be harder to control. Additionally, historical research does not conclusively argue whether the two-fire team squad organization is better than the three-fire team squad organization. Therefore, future research may consider evaluating the combat effectiveness of these two squad variations.
Attrition (or sustainability or staying power) is another key assessment criterion used by four of the five key studies. These studies have proven that the ability to sustain casualties in combat (or through routine administrative actions) is critical for a squad's survivability, lethality, and flexibility. With the exception to both the ROAD and AoE reorganizations that led to the decrease in the squad's size, every other study recommended a more robust squad capable of sustaining up to a 25 percent loss in manpower. Although the 1946 Infantry Conference also recommended a decrease in the squad size from 12 to nine, at that time the squad was not doctrinally meant to fire and maneuver. Thus, as the lowest tactical unit, the 1946 squad could be considered a very large modern day fire team.
The last key variable used by every study is 'firepower' or fire effectiveness.
Squads must possess comparable or greater firepower than their enemies in order to be combat effective. These studies have shown that a squad's firepower is an essential quality because it increases the squad's lethality or ability to suppress and destroy an enemy in close combat. This brief historical analysis has shown that a squad can possess many other characteristics but if the squad lacks lethality it cannot accomplish its core mission and thus becomes worthless.
Based on these findings we can conclude that any future study should include these three critical factors. Additionally, we can also conclude that future squad reorganization should not be determined by monetary or personnel constraints within the Army (as was the case with the ROAD and AoE reorganizations). Rainey wisely concluded, "Arbitrary decision based on personnel and budget concerns should not be allowed to take the place of detailed studies, field testing, and combat analysis." 94 Thus, objective scientific variables should hold more weight in determining the most combat-effective squad organization of the future.
These historical studies provide future research with key factors and developmental logic to consider in the creation of the new infantry squad organization. Following Jensen's ideational framework (Threat  Analysis  Concept  Doctrine), the next step in this study is to analyze the future threat. In the next chapter, this study will look to the future operating environment to determine key factors to consider in the development of the future squad organizational concepts. 
94
The purpose of this chapter is to determine the characteristics of the future operating environment and its implications to the future infantry rifle squad organization. The chapter will first examine academic predictions of future warfare to understand the challenges associated with speculating too far into the future. Next, the chapter will analyze the contemporary operating environment by inspecting the significant capabilities of potential near-peer adversaries and then conclude by examining the terrain in which the future infantry rifle squads will most likely fight.
Many professional military thinkers and renowned academic writers have speculated what the future near-peer conflict will look like. Researchers have analyzed historical scenarios in which nations evolved to meet new threats. In 1986, Frank Barnaby published the book titled The Automated Battlefield, in which he conceptualizes a future battlefield almost entirely automated. 
95
96
97
95 Frank Barnaby, The Automated Battlefield (London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 1986), 2. 
96
97 Jeremy Black, War and Technology (Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 2013), 265.
Similarly, Lawrence Freedman argues in his book The Future of War: A History, that most concepts and ideas developed by futurists in the past were wrong. In his analysis, Freedman uses a qualitative approach using case studies beginning after the middle of the 19th century to determine historical perspectives on what the future of warfare would look like. He then analyzes the difference between what actually happened and what was predicted to happen. Freedman notes that many previous concepts of future warfare were vastly over-exaggerated in lethality or effect.
98
Designing an infantry squad organization that can exploit the strengths and weaknesses of an adversary will significantly improve its survivability and lethality in future warfare. Therefore, this section will analyze America's near-peer adversaries and highlight their modern capabilities. Field Manual (FM) 3-0 defines a peer threat as "an adversary or enemy with capabilities and capacity to oppose U.S. forces across multiple domains worldwide or in a specific region where they enjoy a position of relative advantage." 
99
Therefore, this chapter will focus on the Russian and Chinese contemporary military capabilities that will most likely be encountered on the future battlefield.
The Russian military is a formidable force capable of creating multiple complex dilemmas for its adversary. A U.S. infantry squad confronting a Russian force is likely to encounter tanks, ground attack aircraft, drones (attack and reconnaissance), electronic attack assets, non-uniformed militias, information warfare effects, and most importantly long-range artillery. Given that many of these Russian threats are traditional systems (i.e., tanks, planes) the U.S. Army already has systems and capabilities to counter them.
Although not organic, the Javelin and Stinger missile systems provide the infantry squad with a sufficient layer of protection when placed along the enemy's most likely avenue of approach. Unlike the Ukrainians, which suffered from a lack of anti-tank-guided-missiles during their 2014 conflict with Russia, the U.S. military has the capability to confront these conventional Russian threats and thus will most likely not require significant reorganization in this area. 
100
101
103
101 Karber, 17. 
102
15 minutes after a drone flyover to attack a Ukrainian position resulting in the almost total destruction of two full infantry battalions. 
104
Over the last decade, the Russian military has made significant advances in its military capability. Since the invasion of Georgia in 2008, Russia has invested heavily in modernizing its Soviet-era equipment. 
105
106
107
104
105
106
own vulnerable communication networks and continues to invest heavily in the protection of its own communication systems. At the 2017 International Defense Exhibition & Conference Russia revealed a new portable multimode radio in which they claim to be impervious to jamming or direction finding. 
108
The implications of the Russian electronic attack capability to the contemporary infantry rifle squad are significant. The current light infantry rifle squad does not possess the capability to counter this Russian electronic threat. In many cases, the lowest U.S.
Army electronic warfare support teams reside at the brigade level or higher. Our near-peer adversaries can exploit this gap in capability. The U.S. military has become accustomed to a robust communications network that connects multiple enabling systems. According to the 2016 SITREP quarterly review "The single most important thing to note is that Russian electronic warfare forces have the capability to degrade or defeat U.S. Ground Force C4 capabilities, including GPS/Position-Navigation and Timing (PNT) capabilities, and air defense and fires radars -all U.S. Army spectrum using emitters from fires control systems to SATCOM radios to cell phones are targeted and can be affected." 109 With a disrupted communications network, the current infantry squad will not be able to request medical support or fire support assistance in a safe and timely manner. Removing the infantry squad from these supporting enablers significantly decreases its survivability and lethality on the battlefield.
Another vulnerability of the infantry squad is its electromagnetic signature. The average infantry soldier emits one or more electronic signals making themselves vulnerable to Russian observation and attack. These vulnerabilities include radios, GPS systems, watches, and even cell phones. On the battlefield of the future camouflage and face-paint will not be enough to conceal infantry squads from the enemy. These vulnerabilities will 108 "Russian Armed Forces Deploy a New Radio System," OE Watch 7, no. 3 (April 2017): 50.
109 Laurie M. Buckhout, "Modern Russian Electronic Warfare," SITREP, Quarterly Review of C4ISR Technology Advancements, 2016, http://www.leonardodrs.com/sitrep/q1-2016-the-invisible-fight/modernrussian-electronic-warfare/#_ftnref1. force infantry soldiers to power off electronic devices and use them only when the benefits outweigh the risks. The dispersion of infantry squads will become more important but simultaneously more difficult assuming the degraded communications on future battlefields. These conditions will force squads to place more emphasis on understanding the commander's intent.
Similar to Russia, China significantly reduced the size of its armed forces beginning Russians will more likely employ their systems more effectively given their combat experience.
Another unique difference between the Russian and Chinese threats is China's cyber capabilities. Given that China produces 90 percent of the world's printed circuit boards, China is in a unique position to exploit the infantry soldier through the cyber domain. 
112
Terrain is a significant factor to consider when designing the next infantry squad  conditions, small squad organizations are often unable to observe every possible angle of enemy attack within their platoon assigned sector. Urban terrain is also manpower intensive because medical and logistical support assets (air and ground) are often unable to get to the infantry squads deep inside the city due to tall structures or building rubble. This terrain forces infantry soldiers to carry casualties and supplies to viable extraction points further than in other types of terrain. Therefore, an infantry squad organization operating in an urban battlefield will have a greater need for soldiers than in any other terrain.
Second, urban environments inhibit the use of the electromagnetic spectrum. Joint Publication 3-06 states, "Terrain in urban environments can impede a land force's ability to send and receive data directly to satellites. This can impact global positioning system receivers and inhibit their ability to provide accurate data."
121
122
The Battle of Sadr City shows that there are also significant opportunities to exploit electromagnetic operations to find and kill or capture adversaries. Nevertheless, U.S. forces have not operated in an urban environment where the adversary can exploit or disrupt communications since World War II. This may not be the case in the future, even against non-state adversaries. 
123
Given the uncertainties of the mid-term and long-term future, the contemporary operating environment provides a greater prediction for the near-future battlefield. In the future near-pear conflict the infantry rifle squad is likely to be confronted by conventional threats it has not encountered in over four decades. The Russian-Ukrainian conflict has proven that the era of tank warfare has not ended. Infantry squads supported by Javelin teams and Stinger teams must be capable of destroying modern enemy tanks, planes, and helicopters. On the future battlefield, long-range artillery will continue to be the "king of battle" through its devastating effects on light units. Trenches and foxholes will again be vital to protecting infantry soldiers from the dangers of long-range artillery fire. More importantly, it will be critical for the infantry rifle squad to possess the capability to deny the enemy sensors (aerial drone or ground sensor) the ability to communicate targets to the supporting enemy artillery systems. The current infantry squad organization is blind to the electromagnetic spectrum. The current dismounted infantry rifle squad does not possess the electronic support capability to map out the electromagnetic environment for greater situational awareness on the battlefield. The future infantry squad organization must include the ability to observe and affect the electromagnetic spectrum in order to leverage it to its advantage. Thus, providing electronic warfare capacities down to the squad level in the future operating environment will significantly improve the infantry squad's lethality and survivability on the battlefield. 
This historical analysis has shown that size is a key factor in optimizing the combat effectiveness of an infantry rifle squad organization. An infantry squad's size directly correlates to the variables of control and sustainability. As the size of an infantry squad grows it becomes more capable of mitigating the negative effects of attrition; however, the squad simultaneously becoming more and more difficult to control. Inversely, the smaller the squad organization becomes, the easier it is to control, but the less it is able to effectively fire and maneuver.
Given the high probability of the infantry rifle squad operating in dense urban environments, which require more manpower and result in a greater amount of casualties, it is imperative that the U.S. Army avoids the next near-peer conflict with the current nine soldier organization. Historical research has shown that the current nine-soldier infantry rifle squad is vulnerable to the effects of attrition. 
125
124
125
126
127
128
In the future operating environment, the infantry squad leader's ability to control the squad will be disrupted not only by enemy electronic attack but also by the environmental factors relating to the urban environment. Large heavy building structures, enemy jamming systems, GPS spoofing capabilities, and an environment proliferated with competing civilian radio frequencies will disrupt the squad's ability communicate and navigate on the future battlefield. These factors will significantly degrade the squad's ability of control. ASIRs 1-to-5 leader-to-led ratio is a key parameter that future infantry squad designs should continue to consider.
In the future environment, the infantry squad cannot solely rely on modern command and control systems. In this communication contested environment, the time proven techniques of hand-and-arm signals, voice communication, signal flares, markers, and other non-electronic movement control measures will prove invaluable to the infantryman's ability to control. Until a radio system is designed that can provide safe and secure communications in this type of operating environment infantry squads will often have to rely on these older time-proven techniques. However, although these time-proven techniques are impervious to electronic attack they are limited in range. Future squad organizations must consider these limiting factors. As the enemy will not be capable of jamming all communications everywhere at once, they will likely prioritize the use of their electronic attack assets along key avenues of attack or the defense of key terrain. Therefore, infantry organizations must be capable of operating effectively in both contested and noncontested electronic environments. Infantry concepts, which dictate small-dispersed squads over wide areas, must consider the challenges of controlling such a formation when communications are being jammed or disrupted on a routine basis.
Regarding Given the limited amount of resources, the squad cannot possess every capability.
However, future research should consider reviewing the rifle squad's organic organizational equipment in order to design a more flexible infantry organization. The more an infantry rifle squad is able to operate independently, the better it will be on the future battlefield. This can be achieved by providing each fire team with electronic attack and support capabilities. An infantry squad that possesses the ability to jam enemy drones without having to request support from a brigade electronic warfare team is more lethal and survivable. Additionally, in a communication-degraded environment, infantry squads will be limited in their ability to coordinate for indirect fire, air defense, anti-tank, and other supporting enablers. Thus balancing each infantry squad's fire teams with critical enabling capabilities (i.e., electronic attack, defense, & support) will increase its overall flexibility but also its lethality and survivability on the future battlefield.
Following the conclusion of major combat operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, the U.S. military has entered a unique transition period. Once again, the U.S. military is looking forward to the future operating environment to better prepare itself for what is to come. To retain a lethal and survivable force the U.S. Army must evolve its organization and tactics as determined by threat and environmental factors. The infantry rifle squad, as the basic building block of platoons/companies/battalions, is the key area of focus from which future research should focus.
On the future battlefield with an opposing near-peer adversary, the infantry rifle squad will confront numerous threats across every domain. The infantry squad must be capable of defeating conventional threats it has not had to face in over four decades.
However, unlike previous conflicts, the future near-peer enemy will significantly leverage new innovative tactics and technologies to include drones and electromagnetic platforms.
General Raymond A. Thomas, the head of United States Special Operations Command stated, "Right now in Syria, we're in the most aggressive E.W. environment on the planet from our adversaries…they're testing us every day." 
130
Given the lack of electromagnetic capabilities, the current infantry squad is vulnerable to enemy observation and attack. Therefore, future research should apply historical lessons learned and logic from previous Army studies as well as modern conflicts to determine the optimal infantry squad organization of the future. infantryman's role in future conflict will be important. The survival of our great nation depends upon our ability to train, equip, and prepare our future infantrymen to confront our forthcoming near-peer enemies.
19 Timothy Karcher, "Enhancing Combat Effectiveness, The Evolution Of The United States Army Infantry Rifle Squad Since The End Of World War II" (Thesis, U.S. Army
19 Timothy Karcher, "Enhancing Combat Effectiveness, The Evolution Of The United States Army Infantry Rifle Squad Since The End Of World War II" (Thesis, U.S. Army
53  
53  
Major Hassan Kamara, a member of the Army's Future Studies Group and the Army's Modernization Task Force, wrote a journal article in the 2018 Military Review titled, "Rethinking the U.S. Army Infantry Rifle Squad" in which he argues that "changes in war, military affairs, and human society since the 1940s, as well as projections about future war, sufficiently invalidate many of the foundational arguments, facts, and assumptions that generated the legacy nine-person infantry squad, and justify institutional reevaluation and reform."
Major Hassan Kamara, a member of the Army's Future Studies Group and the Army's Modernization Task Force, wrote a journal article in the 2018 Military Review titled, "Rethinking the U.S. Army Infantry Rifle Squad" in which he argues that "changes in war, military affairs, and human society since the 1940s, as well as projections about future war, sufficiently invalidate many of the foundational arguments, facts, and assumptions that generated the legacy nine-person infantry squad, and justify institutional reevaluation and reform."
114 John Keegan, A History of Warfare, 1. ed (New York: Vintage books, 1994), 253.
114 John Keegan, A History of Warfare, 1. ed (New York: Vintage books, 1994), 253.
Anthony Cordesman and Joseph Kendall, Chinese Strategy and Military Modernization in  
2016: A Comparative Analysis (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies, 2016), https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/161208_Chinese_Strategy_Military_ Modernization_2016.pdf; Lester W. Grau and Charles K. Bartles, The Russian Way of War: Force Structure, Tactics, and Modernization of the Russian Ground Forces (Fort Leavenworth Kansas: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2016).2 Donald Trump, "National Security Strategy of the United States of America" (The White House, December 2017), 2-3.3 David E. Johnson, "The Challenges of the 'Now' and Their Implications for the U.S. Army," RAND Corporation, 2016, https://www.rand.org/pubs/perspectives/PE184.html.
Sydney J. Freedberg, "Army Cyber Accelerates; Electronic Warfare Lags," Breaking Defense, February 10, 2017, https://breakingdefense.com/2017/02/army-cyber-accelerates-electronic-warfare-lags/.
Army Techniques, Publication No. 3-21.10 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 2018), 1-14.
25 Source: The Infantry Rifle Company, FM 3-21.10 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 2006), 1-11.
Karcher, "Enhancing Combat Effectiveness, The Evolution Of The United States Army Infantry Rifle Squad Since The End Of World War II," 4.
[1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
Rifle Company, Infantry, Airborne Infantry, and Mechanized Infantry, FM 7-10 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1962), 4.
Infantry Field Manual: Rifle Company, Rifle Regiment, 131.   
Combat Development Experimentation Center, 2-4.
Lawrence Freedman, The Future of War: A History, First edition (New York: Public Affairs, 2017), 1.
Operations, Field Manual (FM) 3-0 (Washington, DC: Headquarters, Department of the Army, 2017), 1-9.
"Global Security" (Global Security, 2011), https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/russia/ aircraft-ecm.htm.
Joint Urban Operations 3-06, 2.
Joint Urban Operations 3-06, 5.
Gian P. Gentile, Reimagining the Character of Urban Operations for the U.S. Army: How the Past Can Inform the Present and Future, Research Report, RR-1602-A (Santa Monica, Calif: RAND Corporation, 2017), 155.
Thomas Gibbons-Neff, "How a 4-Hour Battle Between Russian Mercenaries and U.S. Commandos Unfolded in Syria," New York Times, May 24, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/24/world/ middleeast/american-commandos-russian-mercenaries-syria.html.
T. R. Fehrenbach, This Kind of War: The Classic Korean War History, 1st Brassey's pbk. ed  (Washington, DC: Brassey's, 1998), 427.   
I would like to thank my thesis advisor, 
Professor Leo Blanken
Professor Douglas Borer
Zooey Lober
George Goncalves
Dudley Knox Interlibrary Loan Services and Restricted Resources Services
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
Army has an opportunity to optimize the current infantry squad organization to the battlefield of the future by leveraging the effects of terrain to its advantage. Thus, understanding the characteristics of the terrain of the future battlefield is critical to achieving this success.
According to the 2018 United Nations (UN) World Urbanization Prospects, 55 percent of the world's population lives in an urban environment. 
116
2050. 117
Military doctrine characterizes urban combat as an attrition-style combat, which inflicts a large toll on manpower and resources. Analyzing the 2013 U.S. Joint Urban Operations 3-06 we find two key characteristics of urban combat impactful to the infantry squad: First, urban operations are more manpower intensive. 
119
120
Historical studies have shown lethality to be a key factor in determining the combat effectiveness of infantry squad organizations. Infantry rifle squads must possess equal or greater firepower (rate of fire + destructive power) than the near-peer adversary to achieve suppression effects. The current organic weapons load-out of the infantry rifle squad, which includes the squad automatic weapon (M249) and multi-use weapon (M320), provide the squad with sufficient firepower to both suppress and maneuver against a lightly armed near-peer adversary. However, in the future near-peer operating environment with modern tanks and planes it will be imperative that company Javelin and Stinger missile systems provide integrated support to the infantry rifle squad to effectively counter the near-peer air and armor threats. Without these integrated weapon systems, the infantry squad organization would be vulnerable and fall into the same dilemma in which the Ukrainians found themselves against the Russians in 2014.
Next, future research needs to study how to improve the infantry rifle squad's lethality by giving it a more robust electromagnetic capability that is organic to the squad.
Given the robust electromagnetic and drone capabilities of the current near-peer adversaries, the current infantry rifle squad organization is lacking in its potential lethality and survivability. Equipping the current infantry rifle squad with lightweight man-portable electronic warfare systems significantly increases its lethality and survivability against a near-peer adversary. These electromagnetic systems would allow the dismounted infantry squad the capability to jam enemy radio frequencies, disrupt enemy drone navigation and communication systems, geo-locate enemy signals, electronic deception, and map out the electromagnetic spectrum for better situational awareness and actionable intelligence. One method may be to integrate electronic receivers and transmitters already existing on the typical infantry soldiers (i.e., squad radio and GPS) into a single system.
Although the U.S. Army is currently researching how best to organize and equip the future force with greater electromagnetic capabilities using new prototype systems,