# ID: 8f1e43079b1142d28793a0b3eebb461b
# Title: America's Transitional Capacity: War, Systems, and Globalization
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
The ideas of peace, freedom, basic level of human rights, and free markets abroad are deeply rooted in America's foreign policy objectives. The United States selectively uses its military as a means to implement these ideas abroad. However, the American way of war creates extremely complex challenges for the transition period between dominating an enemy force, and creating a stabilized free and prosperous host nation. There are no set principles or checklists for transitional periods or even a set point in time where all operations transition from the dominate phase to the stability phase. Unlike World War II, operations in Iraq failed to successfully transition from Phase III dominate operations to Phase IV stability operations. During this "golden hour" of transition, coalition efforts failed to increase Iraq's internal governmental control due to a lack of comprehensive interagency and intergovernmental planning before the war started. Unintended side effects of certain unsynchronized operations and decisions inhibited the transitional period and the ability to maintain control in later phases.
This research focuses on America's military strategy and operational approach in Germany during World War II and in the 2003 Iraq War. The research uses two different concepts to analyze each war. The first applied concept is systems theory. This theory shows how actions taken during Phase III dominate operations affected Phase IV stability operations. The second theory applied is globalization. Research examines how the United States sought to create interconnected globalized institutions in order to facilitate regional security and peace during the stability period.
Unlike World War II, operations in Iraq failed to successfully transition from Phase III dominate operations to Phase IV stability operations. During this "golden hour" of transition, coalition efforts failed to increase Iraq's internal governmental control due to a lack of comprehensive interagency and intergovernmental planning before the war started. Unintended side effects of certain unsynchronized operations and decisions inhibited the transitional period and the ability to maintain control in later phases.
Following Phase III operations, the United States must be able to support the new host nation's efforts to build internal institutions that maintain control and security while simultaneously connecting it to the globalized world. This means that the military must be capable of accomplishing its mission during Phase III in such a way that it facilitates the transition to Phase IV. In order to accomplish this, the United States military must identify better ways and means to approach the various systems within a country before, during, and after conflict. These new methods must be able to create "shock and awe" effects during both the dominating and stability phases due to the limited time in the transitional period. Besides modification within the military, this new approach may require drastic change in the interagency process and require senior leaders to complete joint positions outside of their assigned departments. After over 200 years of shifting from war to peace, America's turbulent transitions in Iraq and Afghanistan demonstrate the need for a more adaptable military construct capable of building interconnected globalized systems that create stability. America's history reveals its tendencies towards applying force as a way to achieve its strategic objectives. During the 1940s, the United
States transitioned from war to stabilizing peace with Germany and Japan while simultaneously creating democracies, globalized economics, and international institutions to achieve mutual security. However, America's history of war, expansion, and stabilization goes further back than its more recent role as a world leader.
The United States is a nation-state forged from war. A successful revolution separated America from the colonial British Empire. Even before the United States declared independence on 4 July 1776, American had already begun the process of transitioning from war to the task of building a democratic government with unique values and aspirations. Shortly after independence, the original Thirteen Colonies pushed to expand American hegemony westward.
Each period of expansion involved transitioning from conflict to stability, and then finally to civilian control. The growth was not without its share of hardships, conflict, and sometimes shameful actions by all parties involved.
During the Westward Expansion between 1776 and 1890, America sought not to colonize the lands held by Native Americans, but to subsume the land into its ever-expanding empire. 
1
2
3
were not completed sequentially. The main point is that there was a period of conflict followed by a period of stability. By 1912, the nation-building efforts of the pioneers created a united nation of 48 states. However, even before the unification was complete, America enacted policies to spread its ideas and values to other nations around the world. 
4
5
6
7
8
Since the Spanish-American War, politicians have used military force as a way of promoting American ideas numerous times. This hard power use of military capabilities remains unchanged today. The 2010 United States National Security Strategy (NSS) continues to promote the expansion of the same ideas held in 1898 of peace, freedom, and free markets abroad. 
9
This monograph does not claim that all future American conflicts aim to promote these same ideas, nor does it imply that America should use the military as its primary means of 
6
Herring,
634. 7
8
diplomacy. There are a vast number of alternative methods for making American ideas and way of life more attractive to foreign governments. America's diplomatic, economic, and information efforts must be incorporated into all planning efforts during every phase of a military operation or engagement. Subsequent phases have causal links to all actions from previous phases. The idea is that Phase III and Phase IV are inseparable during planning and required a collective interagency plan to facilitate a successful transition. The second idea is that Phase IV consists of rebuilding host nation capacity and control in an interconnected globalized manner. The scope of this paper is limited by these two philosophies when war, otherwise known as Clausewitzian diplomacy, is applied.
The first philosophy is if America destroys another nation, it is America's responsibility to rebuild it either unilaterally or through a multinational coalition. Colin Powell's arguments when he tried to deter the invasion into Iraq encompassed this philosophy: "Once you break it, you are going to own it, and we're going to be responsible for 26 million people standing there looking at us."
10
The second philosophy, one shared by Thomas Friedman and Thomas Barnett, is that reconstruction efforts overhaul the country in a globalized manner. The argument is that economic globalization promotes interconnectedness that facilitates lasting peace. 
11
Second, actions conducted by the United States prior to and during Phase III affect the transition process and required actions during Phase IV. Therefore, the research in this monograph focuses on the important and under-studied aspect of transitions in warfare.
Chapter 2 covers four different aspects that surround the complexity of war. The first section provides a definition for strategy and the various levels of strategy. America's national policy, grand strategy, and laws shape the military during peacetime and war. They play a role in shaping the doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership, personnel, and facilities (DOTMLPF) of the military. The DOTMLPF framework determines the capabilities of the military, the employment of the military, and the military's capacity to transition between phases. 
12
13
12
13
14
Chapter 3 provides historical examples of the military's strategy during war and the stability operations that followed. Using Alexander George's case study methodology, the two cases used in this monograph are World War II and the 2003 Iraq War. 
15
The purpose of this monograph is to examine the United States' approach to war through the transition and follow-on stability operations as it seeks to create lasting stability around the world. The focus is on the transition between Phase III and Phase IV. The basis for this study is how military ways and means support the National Security Strategy in an interconnected era of globalization. As the world's only superpower, the United States maintains an unprecedented role in global affairs, international connectivity, and regional stability. Globalization will continue to define America's role and position around the world.
The concept of globalization entails six interrelated systems described in Joint Publication 2-01.3 as political, military, economic, social, infrastructure, and information (PMESII). 
16
17
1
16 U.S. Department Of Defense, Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operational Environment. Joint Publication 2-01.3 (Washington, DC: 16 June 2009), II-44. It is worth acknowledging that there is a current debate about religious extremist organizations. The debate centers on classification of activities inside a state or if they form non-state actors. This debate is outside the scope of this paper. Religious activities fall under the social system in which the U.S. is involved. The military transitions from the dominate phase to the stability phase once it has achieved its objective. The intent of the stability phase is to build systems that facilitate the continuation of peace and economic growth. Although Joint Doctrine describes Phase IV as the stabilize phase, stability operations are present during all five phases. Appendix B shows notional balance of offensive, defensive, and stability operations during each phase. Political policy will determine when the United States moves from Phase IV into Phase V. Once military diplomacy is no longer required, a political decision is made to transition to civil control.
Military planners develop the ways that the military uses to achieve political objectives.
The important point here is that planners can only develop ways to achieve political success by using the available means at the time. Secretary of Defense (SECDEF) Donald Rumsfeld put it, "You go to war with the Army you have. They're not the Army you might want or wish to have at a later time." 
18
The President of the United States publishes the National Security Strategy on average of every three to four years. 
19
Congressional and military staffs formulate different strategies in order to shape and control the future. The strategies later serve as an explanation for actions taken by America and the decisions made. For instance, the current strategic guidance helps to answer why stability operations are vital to American national interest, and why they continue today. Using past strategies as a guide, one can answer questions such as how does the NSS guide foreign policy The literature review provides a basic understanding of U.S. strategy and of the theories used to create these strategies. This typology is necessary to analyze each case study. These theories include systems theory, complexity theory, liberal institutionalism, globalization, and economic entanglements to maintain peace, America's role in a globalized world, and why America should continue to retain the role of world leadership. Within each of these theories lies an approach to military domination during war that facilitates transition to a stable peace.
There are as many interpretations of the word strategy as there are different levels in which society and governments apply the term. The civil sector has strategies for business, economics, and even marketing. Within the United States government, there are national, grand, joint, military, and operational strategies. Carl von Clausewitz defines strategy as the, "the use of engagements for the purpose of war."
21
22
In today's global society, international policies apply military means to peacekeeping operations with the purpose to prevent conflict. 
23
24
25
These different levels and documents are in part why the military seeks to destroy part of an enemy's PMESII systems during Phase III to win wars, knowing they have to rebuild them in Phase IV to achieve a lasting peace. Below is a list of theorists and their definitions for the term strategy and the level at which they apply.
Grand Strategy: Everett C. Dolman states, "A plan for attaining continuing advantage.
For the goal of strategy is not to culminate events, or to establish finality in the discourse between states, but to influence states' discourse in such a way that it will go forward on favorable terms."
26
27
Strategy: Hart defines this level as, "the art of applying military means to fulfill the ends of policy." 
28
Military Strategy: The U.S. military doctrine describes the purpose of military strategy, "is to link military means with the political aims in pursuit of continuing advantage." 31 At this level, the military determines how it shapes its force so that it has the capacity to achieve the stated political aims. This level of strategy plays a key part in how the military determines its DOTMPLF framework.
Operational Strategy: Dolman states, "The purpose of operational strategy is to contest or gain command of the medium (land, sea, air, space, information), which allows the tactical and political aims to remain at odds logically but to converge practically." 32 Operational strategy is the practical adaptation of the means to achieve the political objective. Baron de Jomini connects operational strategy with tactics when he defines grand tactics as, "the art of posting troops upon the battle-field according to the accidents of the ground, bringing them into action and the art of fighting upon the ground, in contradistinction to the planning upon the map." 
33
30
31
For the sake of clarity, the four levels of strategy apply in the following ways. America's Grand Strategy employs all elements of diplomacy, information, military and economics (DIME) for a whole of government approach to achieve the desired political objectives. Strategy entails the political use of military means to achieve a political aim. Military strategy determines the development, structure, and preparation of military forces during peacetime. Operational Strategy is the tactical application of military means, over time and space, to achieve a political aim.
American policy and strategies will continue to dictate how the military shapes and applies their capabilities around the world. Current strategies cover military operations from political alliances to unilateral operations aimed at defeating Al Qaida. 
34
35
34
35
United States' Role in the World and Its Strategic Guidance American foreign policy continues to evolve with the world around it. Different policies and strategies were necessary at certain times to protect American interest and sustain ascension. 
36
Walter Mead describes some of these foreign policies and strategies, aligning them to prominent statesmen in American history. He outlines four basic ways that Americans approach world affairs: Jacksonian, Jeffersonian, Hamiltonian, and Wilsonian. 
37
36
38
The second school of thought is that of the Jeffersonians, which seeks to protect American interest at home and argue against international agreements. 39 This concept sees attempts to spread democracy, global systems, and international alliances as poor policy. 
40
41 38 Ibid.,
336. 39
40
41
42
However, history since World War I shows that the United States is heavily involved in international relations and nation-building operations. McDougal calls this new era after World War I the "new testament" period of spreading freedom, democracy, and international norms of human rights. 
43
One can argue this new testament way of thinking is the reason why the United States remained in Iraq and Afghanistan. The underlying reason the United States went to war was to secure its safety against future aggression, but staying to spread of freedom, democracy, and international norms of human rights was based on ideology. However, America struggled in its most recent attempts to achieve new testament principles in Afghanistan and Iraq. The struggle came in the Publication 3-07. (Washington DC: 29 September 2011), III-1-60. Joint Publication 3-0 outlines stability tasks during all phases of an operation. Joint Publication 3-07 outlines the responsibility for Department of Defense as it pertains to stability operations; security, humanitarian assistance, economic stabilization and infrastructure, rule of law, governance and participation. Each one of these areas has a corresponding international institution in which military forces could help facilitate ties. 
42
Mead's third school of thought is that of the Hamiltonian doctrine, which focuses on the economic primacy of the United States by linking business and trade with government institutions. 
44
45
The last concept of foreign policy is that of the Wilsonians, who believe that it is America's moral obligation to spread freedom and democracy around the world. 
46
These institutions seek to promote democracy, prevent war by finding alternative outlets, and alleviate human suffering. Amartya Sen supports the Wilsonian philosophy by pointing out that 
44 Mead,
131. 45
46 Mead,
47
48
49
Mead argues that with the end of the Cold War and the major security threat of that period now irrelevant, the rate at which American foreign policy shifts between these schools of thought has increased. 
50
51
48
49
50 Mead,
52
Over time, the priority of American interest has shifted between international order, security, and economic growth. Following World War II, U.S. interest focused on the creation of international systems such as the United Nations (UN), the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). During the Cold War, American foreign policy focused on nuclear deterrence and containment of communism while facilitating the spread of democracy and capitalism. In contrast, during the 2012 U.S. Presidential debates the political focus was on America's economic recovery and growth. 
53
53
54
The United States Government is capable of accomplishing a multitude of foreign policy objectives simultaneously through the application of various forms of power. Joseph S. Nye adds to the dictionary's definition of power when he states, "power is the ability to influence behavior of others to get the outcomes one wants . . . as the possession of capabilities or resources that can influence outcomes." 56 He describes three types of power within a nation. The first type for America is military power under government control that uses coercion, threats of force, or the use of force to achieve political aims. 
57
58
Economic power is the second power defined by Nye. This power also uses coercion, but includes sanctions and payments as a means to alter one's behavior. 
59
The power of international corporations is one of key arguments of in Thomas L. Friedman's book, The Lexus and the Olive Tree. 
61
The application of economic power to encourage growth becomes extremely important following Phase III operations. The difficult aspect becomes rebuilding, or in some cases building from scratch, a nation's economy destroyed during a period sanctions and major combat operations. Ideally, the World Bank, IMF, United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and DOS have the responsibility for post-conflict economic development. However, these institutions often lack the required resources and capacity to conduct such large-scale operations, and the military lacks the doctrine, education, and force structure to do it efficiently. 62 59 Nye, 31. 
60
61
62 Robert E. Litan, "The Road Ahead -How Do We Get There?" Entrepreneurship and Expeditionary Economics, http://www.kauffman.org/uploadedFiles/Enterpreneurship/ International/expeditionary-economics-summit-panel-3.pdf (accessed 18 December 2012).
Sustained economic growth requires a careful balance between the state, the market, and the society.
Soft power is the third power defined by Nye and is the main argument of his book. Soft power is the ability to get others to want what you want through attractiveness and seduction. 
63
64
65
63
64
65
Ferguson argues that American's soft power does not extend into the areas where there is significant cultural difference. Nor does it extend into areas where political control prevents it and, therefore, is not a viable means of power. The problem arises when the United States sends its military forces into culturally different regions, such as Iraq in 2003, to change the country from a dictatorship to a democracy with only hard power capabilities. The United States military must have capabilities to project soft power since it is the largest and most visible actor during Phase III and IV operations. The military's soft power capabilities must align with the national policies and other departmental strategies of American foreign diplomacy.
The NSS is the capstone document that provides guidance on how the U.S. is to maintain continuous advantage within international diplomacy, security, information, and economics. 
66
67
68
66
67
68
69
In 2012, the DOD published its strategic defense review, Sustaining U.S. Global Leadership: Priorities for the 21st Century Defense, in order to set new priorities for the U.S.
Military. 
70
71
Inside this military strategy, SECDEF Leon Panetta outlines three approaches to countering security threats: monitoring the activities of non-state threats worldwide, working with 69 Ibid., v-vi. 
70
71
72
73
The overarching theme of this strategic directive for the Armed Forces is to make the U.S. and its allies safer and more prosperous at a lesser financial cost. The directive describes eight principles to shape the Armed Service for 2020 so it can economically accomplish the missions stated earlier. 
74
75
73
75
76
The Defense review also emphasizes the importance of combining American efforts with its allies and partners to achieve greater control over ungoverned territories. 
77
78
76
Control in this context means the ability to exercise restraint or direction, and dominate, command with the ability to maintain a monopoly on the use of violence. The level of control achieved by those in power correlates to the level of security they maintain. In his piece, "The Logic of Violence in Civil War," Stathis Kalyvas outlines several different methods to gain control and the following benefits once control is achieved. 
79
80
Violence as a means of coercion is a method to gain control during war, but it connects to how someone applies violence and the means in which it is applied that enables control. The rules for the use of force during war are less restrictive than those during peacetime occupation. Force or the threat of it is often necessary to defeat the enemy and maintain control of the population during combat. This is not always the case during counterinsurgencies or irregular warfare operations.
There is often a higher level of violence during Phase III. Therefore, people are more likely to abide by rules laid down by those who are applying violence. However, after completion of hostilities, the use of violence cannot be the only means of maintaining control and security, especially in a counterinsurgency operation. According to a 2007 RAND study, security is the first priority when transitioning from combat to stability operations. 
81
82
The DOD defines as systems as, "a functionally, physically, and/or behaviorally related group of regularly interacting or interdependent elements; that group of elements forming a unified whole." 
83
84
After defining what a system is, Jervis goes on to provide a way to understand a system. He states, "A systems approach shows how individual actors following simple and uncoordinated strategies can produce aggregate behavior that is complex and ordered, although not necessarily predictable and stable." 
85
83
84
85
Joint Publication 3-0, Operations outlines a system perspective approach as a way to think of the operations environment as interacting systems of political, military, economic, social, information, and infrastructure. 
86
In Douglass North's article, "Institutions," he points out that institutions place constraints on systems and create additional complexity both within and between systems. He defines institutions as, "humanly devised constraints that structure political, economic, and social interaction." 87 Luckily, there are methods, although not guaranteed, to achieve the desired goal to help comprehend the complexity of systems. Peter Senge provides two fundamental ways of seeing a system: seeing patterns of interdependency, and seeing into the future. 
88
86
87 Douglass C. North, "Institutions," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Issue no. 1 (Winter), 1991, pp. 97. 
88
89
A detailed breakdown of the social system within the PMESII framework illustrates the interrelationship between the systems. In Jamshid Gharajedaghi's book, Systems Thinking, he describes the dimensions identified within the multi-minded social system. The first dimension he describes is the generation of wealth and its distribution within society. 
90
91
However, democracies and dictatorships are not the only two forms of governmental options. Karl Marx considered wealth as an aspect of the economy, which in turn formulated the underlying causes of social realities. Through Marx's viewpoint, it is easy to see how wealth links 89 U.S. Department of the Army, Operations. Army Doctrine Publication 3-0, (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 11 October 2011), 1-9. 
90
91 Minxin Pei, "Economic Institutions, Democracy, and Development," http://www.carnegieendowment.org/1999/02/26/economic-institutions-democracy-anddevelopment/3i9 (accessed 18 December 2012).
social system with economic and political systems. Marx went even further by interrelating economic and social systems with the political system, which formed the Communist government of Russia in the early nineteenth century. Communism interrelates all three systems, so if a given military destroys the Communist government during Phase III operations, they essentially destroy the other two systems connected to it.
Gharajedaghi also linked the social system to three other systems within the PMESII framework: the generation and dissemination of (social) truth within a society links to the system of information; the formation and institutionalization of (social) values intertwines both economic and political systems; and development and duplication of (social) power can arguably interrelate with political, military, and economic systems. 
92
The implication of these interrelationships is the unpredictability of how a change in one node or variable of the social system not only affects that system, but the other five systems connected to it. 
93
94
92
93
94 North, 97.
understand the system by simply observing its individual parts; a term he calls reductionism. 
95
For the purposes of this research, there are two theories as to how systems operate. Chaos theory describes how systems with deterministic behavior (having determined outcomes) sometimes produce widely diverging outcomes, making deterministic systems ironically unpredictable. Chaos theory is outside the scope of this paper. The second theory is that of complexity. Complexity is defined by the interaction between variables or nodes that affect the overall system. The amount of complexity depends on the type and number of connections.
Systems can exhibit complexity, chaos, or a combination of both depending on the system, the nodes and the variables involved against the outcome it produces. 
96
97
Bertalanffy describes as open systems, "a system which exchanges energy with the outside environment from both import and export methods." 
98
95
96
97
98
99
According to Naveh, systems have two types of feedback, which he calls positive and negative feedback. 
100
Negative feedback is the systems resistance to or adaptation from the outside environment.
Negative feedback within a system is what creates side effects. These side effects could become positive feedback into other systems because of the two systems interconnectedness. This interconnectedness creates complexity for military planners trying to target one aspect of a system without causing side effects to another.
The Naveh approach focuses on the military system. He outlines three different methods to affect the military system through an approach he calls, "operational shock." 
101
102
103
99
100
101 Ibid., 16-19.The first method is achieved through conducting a penetration of the enemy's outer defenses, penetrating in depth, and disrupting the cohesion between the various nodes within the military system. The third method is massing forces on the center of gravity, which prevents the system from achieving its original aim. 
102
103
for war is often to alter the adversary's political system to align closer with American national interest, not to destroy all the systems within a nation. Numerous American military operations between the end of World War II and Libya in 2011 resulted in changes to multiple systems.
However, not all of them were intentional. 
104
The NATO operation in Libya is a classic example of interconnected systems. The destruction of Omar Kadafi's military forces enabled the resistant movement to overthrow his regime, demonstrating the interconnectedness between political, military, and social systems. This was the intended purpose of the operation. However, an unintended side effect to the conflict affected Libya's economic system. Libya's oil exports suffered severely for seven months following the conflict. 
105
106
107
108
One of the first concepts the NSS points out is how globalization has intensified security threats. The concept of globalization is critical to understand in order to grasp the interconnectedness of governance, economics, military, social, information and infrastructure systems. Globalization vastly increases the complexity of transitioning from Phase III to Phase IV operations. Phase III operations often destroy stabilizing political institutions and global economic ties, as portrayed in Figure 
1
These interconnected globalized systems may not be present inside the country prior to U.S. involvement. Alternatively, destruction of the systems may be an intentional act as part of a combined military strategy. Regardless of these aspects, many theorists believe that globalization and institution building are what achieves lasting peace. 
110
Thomas Friedman explains the theory of globalization in that it connects politics, the environment, transportation technologies, geopolitics, social aspects, and economics within each country. 
111
112
Live better," printed on the outside. The bag appeals to American interest in both saving money and saving the environment by using the same bag every time an individual shops. However, China manufactured the bag and shipped it to America, incorporating the interest of the oil industry by using fuel in its manufacture and transportation. Environmentalists argue that the side 
110
111
112 Ibid., 248. effect of burning fossil fuels to create electricity in Chinese coal plants to produce the bag and then shipping the bag increases global warming. This example helps explain interconnectedness and side effects, but it does not help explain the driving force behind globalization.
Ferguson calls the American Empire the political counterpart to economic globalization.
He states, "If economic openness -free trade, free labor movement and free capital flows -helps growth, and if capital is more likely to be formed where the rule of law exists and government is not corrupt, then it is important to establish not only how economic activity becomes globalized but also -by what mechanism -economically benign institutions can spread around the world." 113 In many ways, the National Security Strategy subscribes to this theory. Economic openness is a way to create greater global stability. Ferguson's theory bases on the assumption that it is too socially and economically costly to go to war with other interconnected globalized nations.
It is because of this connectivity that nations tend to solve their problems through peaceful means in order to maintain economic development and prosperity. Friedman's conflict deterrence theory assumes that by connecting politics, environment, geopolitics, and economics within every country around the world that it would achieve a lasting peace. He states, "No two countries that both had McDonald's had fought a war against each other since each got its McDonald's." 114 However, he excludes civil wars and border skirmishes, which are many of the peacekeeping operations the UN finds itself involved in today. There is a current international discourse over the security impact of globalization. In some ways, the war between Georgia and Russia in 2008 proved the theory wrong since both countries possessed a McDonald's. This 
113 Ferguson,
184.
119
120
The second argument of critics target Barnett's claim that all gap countries can be globalized. Jared Diamond argues a different point in that economic expansion and technology evolved from environmental conditions. 
121
119 U.S. Army TRADOC G2, TRADOC Intelligence Support Activity -Threats, TRISA's Top 10 Potential Operational Environments, (Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, 30 January 2012) , 12. 
120
121 Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs and Steel, 2nd ed. 5 vols. (New York, New York: W.W. Norton and Company, Inc., 2001).
Barnett counter argues that globalization will happen through a combined effort of multiple nations over a period of several generations, but acknowledges certain periods of conflict are inescapable before getting there. He realized from his Russian studies that it took over 40 years for the U.S. to achieve economic defeat of the Soviet Union. He attributed this defeat to the ideas of free market capitalist. 
122
123
Chinese and Indian entrepreneurs are simply more used to investing in places with bad infrastructure, weak governments, and inhospitable climates." 124 However, this combined economic globalization effort requires new national strategies from the United States, China, and India.
Freidman also discusses a country's willingness to accept aspects of a globalized society, which interlinks nations to achieve peace. He argues that in order for a nation to prosper they must accept what he calls "the golden straitjacket" of a globalized political-economic environment. 
125
122
Bush (New York: Berkley Trade, 2010), 112-3, 229-30. 123
124 James Joyner, "America and the World After Bush: Economics and Globalization," New Atlanticist, http://www.acus.org/new_atlanticist/america-and-world-after-bush-economicsand-globalization (accessed 3 December 2012). economic prosperity, appealing to a Jacksonian school for foreign policy. 
126
127
Military leaders have substantial input as to what the Joint Force of 2020 will look like and its employment. However, they do not control the strategic objective of current and future mission. American political leaders are the ones who make these decisions. Since the end of the Cold War, the U.S. has led multinational military interventions in multiple different countries for a variety of different reasons. If political objectives were known in advance, clearly defined, and remained constant it would amplify military proficiency. However, the sheer number of unknowns caused by side effects from interconnected systems negates this utopia for military planners.
The political objectives causing U.S. military involvement change before, during, and after the war. National sentiment, international legitimacy, and economic crisis shift political objectives over time. The discourse between new testament and old testament schools for American foreign policy continues to affect the military and operational strategies. The argument centers around the amount of hard power positive feedback required to win a war followed with the amount of soft power necessary to sustain the peace and create lasting stability. Which side of the debate one subscribes to will determine what means are built for the military to employ.
The NSS is the guiding document in which the military bases its strategy. The NSS prescribes future objectives of American security, prosperity, values, and international order. The 126 Ibid., 108-9. 
127 Huntington,
68,
185.
According to a 2007 RAND study, military operations that include nation building have become increasingly longer in duration, lasting between five to ten years. 
128
The complexities of a globalized system make achieving political goals of freedom and expanding democracy a challenge for military planners. The links between the American PMESII framework and similar frameworks within the International community and targeted entity enhance creative tension for military leadership. The difference is between knowing that any change to one node has side effects on other nodes,and knowing the exact change or changes needed for each node to achieve the desired objective. Military decision makers should keep these concepts in mind when developing the force of 2020 to ensure it has the capabilities and capacity to defeat the enemy during war, but also to rebuild the required institutions for sustained peace afterwards.
During World War II and the 2003 Iraq War, the United States used its military force as a means of diplomacy. The strategic aim behind both missions was to replace a brutal totalitarian leader and with a democratic government. During Phase III, the United States military destroyed certain aspects of the German and Iraqi military, political, and social structure in order to achieve its objective. After winning each war, America transitioned to a long period of Phase IV stability operations. Each war offers unique insights into the impacts that Phase III had on follow on operations.
The United States underwent a drastic change in its social, economic, and geopolitical status between World War I and the end of World War II. By the end of 1919, many American turned inward and reverted to what McDougall defined as old testament principles of isolation and avoidance of international entanglements. Although the United States did not have a comprehensive National Security Strategy like the ones published today, it did have similar policies that guided its foreign relations. The reigning idea in the 1930s was to stay home and protect the United States within its borders. One approach was to stay out of international entanglements that might drag the United States into war. Presidential policies focused on America's economic growth and expansion. American's foreign policy relied heavily on what Nye describes as soft power. Several policies promoted domestic programs aimed at achieving American self-reliance. 
129
The Great Depression in the 1930s hit the United States extremely hard. Americans were no longer willing or had the means to intervene in world events such as the Japanese conquest of Manchuria in 1931 or Germany's invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1938. 
130
129 Herring, 484. 130 Ibid., 491-98, 513. political end in 1927. 131
132
133
Historians debate whether Hitler's rise to power would have been possible without the global Great Depression of the 1930s. While much of the world struggled in economic despair in 
131
132 Charles DeBenedetti, The Peace Reform in American History (Bloomington, IN.,  1980), 122-33. 
133
134
135
136
By late 1939, President Roosevelt began to seek alternatives to the isolationist policies enacted over the past decades. He was able to push through a "peace bill" that lifted the arms embargo to belligerents. 
137
Army and Navy. 138
Similar to the lack of a comprehensive national security strategy, there was no national military or national defense strategy that guided the Department of War from 1918 to 1940. Each Service developed systems across the DOTMLPF framework that met their service's needs. The Army focused on combined arms warfare with emphasis on mechanized cavalry. 
142
143
144
Army. 145
Officer studies centered on the requirement to mobilize national industry during times of war.
The mobilization of the entire nation was necessary if the Allies hoped to be successful during World War II.
In the two years prior to 1941, the American military and political systems began to prepare for war. The expansion of Japanese Empire in the Pacific Ocean and the Nazi Germany in Europe gave President Roosevelt great cause for alarm. He understood the lessons from World War I and the concept behind total war. 
146
147
The Japanese attacks on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941, coupled with Hitler's declaration of war, brought the United States into a two-front war. America had multiple allies on both the Pacific and European Fronts. Even before the United States entered the war, Roosevelt sought to build a forum that would promote political discourse between nations. In 1939, he supported Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles's plan to create an international organization 
146
148
The U.S. entered the war aligned with the Allied Powers of Great Britain and the USSR. America's first strategic decision was to make the European Theater its first priority. 
149
However, due to the slow mobilization process, American planners did not believe the crosschannel invasion was possible until 1943 or 1944. As Collin Gray pointed out, war is waged by logistics. 
150
149
150
151
During the first two years of the war, the Allies attempted an air interdiction campaign against the German industrial web to cripple its economy with the expectation that it would have side effects on the social and political unity to continue to the war. 
152
However, this early campaign proved to be ineffective due to a lack of available means used against a well-buffered German economic system. As more resources became available and the Allies achieved air superiority, the Allied forces shifted their operational strategy in accordance with Douhet's principles.
The next plan was to destroy specific German industry involved in making war materials.
The bombing concept aimed to destroy the industrial capacity, but once again, Germany was able to apply enough negative feedback to balance the system. 
153
By mid-1944, Allied bombers had achieved air superiority over Germany and were bombing all five of Douhet's prescribed targets. Arguably, the Allied bombing of logistical transportation hubs proved to have the greatest impact. 154 By May 1945, Allied bombers dropped over 1.3 million tons of bombs, destroyed 40 percent of the urban areas inside seven of Germany's largest cities, and killed over 305,000 civilians. 
155
156
Robert Pape and Colin Gray both make the argument that Hitler was the center of gravity for Nazi Germany. 157 Hitler's control of the political and social systems kept Germany fighting through the spring of 1945, even after it was clear to everyone involved that Germany would lose the war. Shortly after the death of Hitler, Nazi Germany would agree to an unconditional surrender. Unlike the end of World War I, by the end of this war the Allies achieved complete annihilation of the German political, social, and military systems. 
158
159
155
156
157
158
159
German social, economic, and infrastructure systems remained untouched. This was not the case by the end of World War II in 1945.
Throughout the war, Allied forces were slowly destroying Germany's PMESII capacity.
During the war from 1942 until 1945, the Allies devastated the German military machine and then abolished it completely shortly after the end of the war. The social system felt not only the impact of both military and civilian casualties, but also the psychological effects from the strategic bombings and losing the war. In addition, the social system had to absorb an extreme influx of over ten million German-speaking refugees from Eastern Europe. The Russians, French, British, and Americans occupied Germany and controlled their internal politics. Under the legacy of the shelved Morgenthau Plan, German economy suffered through a five-year period of industrial disarmament. 160 This is the transition point, as shown on Figure 
1
By the summer of 1944, America's strategic aims for the end of the war became clear: unconditional surrender of the Nazi Party; full occupation of Germany by Allied forces; complete denazification of the government; the establishment of an open democratic system; dismantlement of the German military and industrial war capabilities; and a reeducation of the German citizen. 161 However, America's grand strategy expanded beyond just their involvement in Germany. The United States sought to remove spheres of influence and create an environment of mutual security throughout Europe. 
162
161
162
168
The second challenge in post war Germany was to reestablish its social structure. By the spring of 1945, Allied forces achieved a troop level of one soldier to every ten German civilians. 
169
170
Reinvigorating the German economy was the third challenge facing military leaders in Germany after the war. Reconstruction plans varied between France, Britain, and the United 168 Dobbins, After the War, 28.
States. Reconstruction plans conflicted even between the United States governmental departments. Military planners drafted the Handbook for Military Government in Germany, which outlined a soft approach to restoration. 
171
171
172 Ibid., 19.
173 Dolman, 6. 
174
175
The Office of the President of the United States published the 2002 U.S. NSS with the hindsight of the 11 September 2001 attack on the United States, and the anthrax scare the following week. This grand strategy coupled with President Bush's policies shaped the military's approach to the war in Iraq. President George W. Bush's opening sentence in the NSS concluded that freedom, democracy, and free enterprise were the only sustainable model for national success. 
176
177
In the NSS, President Bush went on to address the dangers of foreign governments that harbor and support terrorism. He prescribed action through the utilization of the best intelligence and then proceeding with deliberation. He stated, "History will judge harshly those who saw coming danger but failed to act." 178 President Bush was referring to weapons of mass destruction, both nuclear weapons and chemical weapons, used on the civilian population through terrorist attacks. In his view, action is the only means to secure peace and security. History is unclear whether President Bush was referring directly to Iraq in regards to action at this point, but immediately following the 9/11 attacks President Bush pushed to find any bit of intelligence linking Saddam to the attacks. Even without direct intelligence or evidence of a connection from Iraq to 9/11 attacks, President Bush initiated war planning for regime change for Iraq in November 2001. 
179
180
178
179
180
181
182
Although the grand strategy on paper was clear, President George W. Bush and SECDEF Donald Rumsfeld took a different approach to the war in Iraq. Both individuals believed that a small, light, highly mobile, and lethal military force could quickly win any war. Following combat operations, a new democratic government would assume control of the country within three months. They somehow overlooked or missed the fact that industrialized economic democracies, established through the rule of law that are interconnected to the globalized network cannot be created in a three-month period.
A second issue is that the American military strategy and governmental systems did not address or prepare the American society for long-term stability operations and long deployments overseas. The requirements were outlined in the 2002 National Security Strategy. Ferguson makes the argument that most American executives, educated elites, as well as military forces 
181
182
183
184
The military strategy when American invaded Iraq in 2003 was remarkably similar to the military strategy in place before the Gulf War in 1991. The idea was that the U.S. Joint Military Force converges to deter and defeat an enemy force on the battlefield. Interestingly, the majority of the requirement for land-based operations falls within the Army's domain. This force structure design places most of the burden of occupying a country after war on the Army. Similar to the Joint Force, the U.S. Army in 2003 was designed, equipped, trained, and focused mainly to conduct the major combat operations. The Army's 2001 Field Manual 3-0, Operations, described the Army's war fighting focus to include full spectrum operations during war, conflict, and peace. 185 However, only two mission tasks come out of the three paragraphs that define the role of the Army during peacetime: prepare all aspects of the DOTMLPF for war, and help shape the international security environment through peacetime military engagements. The military strategy because of Saddam's refusal to comply with United Nation's mandates. The connection between international sanctions and systems degradation in Iraq further demonstrate the interconnection between systems and the effects that the restriction of globalization have on to a nation. The sanctions coupled with Saddam's war against Iran bankrupted the country. Iraq was still on the decline in 2003 when the Americans and British launched military operations. After receiving the notification for war, the Ba'athist party began to destroy certain governmental ministries to further hinder any coalition reconstruction effort after the war. It would be the responsibility of the military to reverse this governmental, economic, and infrastructure decline of Iraq during Phase IV operations.
Niall Ferguson and others outlined the reasons why the United States opted for war as a means of diplomacy in Iraq. 
188
189
These six reasons held little support outside a select group of America's allies. Unlike America's involvement in World War II, the war in Iraq consisted of an exceedingly small coalition of international supporters. President Bush used his most trusted international diplomat, itePK:313105,00.html (accessed 29 November 2012). 
188
189
Unlike the Allied bombing campaign in Germany during World War II, most of Iraq's infrastructure was off limits for targeting purposes. This policy spared the oil refineries, electrical, and transportation systems from destruction by U.S. forces. However, complexity theory shows that changes in one node create side effects on the other nodes and systems. Coalition forces did not destroy the critical infrastructure directly. The destruction of the regime coupled with the coalition's inability to maintain control of the population devastated the infrastructure.
The purpose of the war was to change the Iraqi government system, specifically to remove Saddam from power. The military achieved this purpose within the first month of the war. By April 15, several military leaders believed the war was over. 
197
Rumsfeld even went so far as to cancel follow-on forces, namely the 1st Cavalry Division, which was set to deploy on April 21. 
198
199
197 Gordon and Trainor,
459. 198
The Iraqi Army went from a force of over 150,000 Soldiers before the war to fully dissolved afterwards. In addition to the loss of personnel, Allied forces destroyed much of the Iraqi Army's Soviet equipment. This limited Iraq's ability to use its military forces to assist with security operations for the post war. Army Field Manual (FM) 3-24, Counterinsurgency, highlights the importance of Host Nation security forces to establish control, a security force that American pressure caused to dissolve. 
200
1
As the security situation and essential services continued to decrease, coalition attempts to inform the public were negligible. Bombing raids destroyed phone networks, television, and radio networks in order limit Saddam's ability to communicate with his military forces, the same systems that coalition forces needed to communicate with the Iraqi people. 
201
202
With the wrong type of feedback going into the Iraq social system, an insurgent growth became the side effect. The insurgency continued to grow, and the situation in Iraq continued to decrease over the next four years because of the inefficiencies of all three levels of strategy.
There was other positive feedback going into the system that targeted other systems besides communication. The amount of force placed on the Iraqi security forces caused them to dissolve shortly after the dominate phase ended. This dissolution negated any possibility of their use in the security effort during the stability phase. 
203
204
Minimal planning went into Phase IV for Iraq from both the DOS and the DOD because of President Bush's and the SECDEF dislike for nation-building operations. Their influence on 202 Ibid., 472-3. As Condoleezza Rice stated, "the concept was that we would defeat the army, but the institutions would hold everything from ministries to police forces." 211 It does not take a complete understanding of globalization or systems theory to understand cause and effect relationships.
The plan failed to account for the fact that when a tyrant-emplaced government is defeated, a power struggle, especially within an ethnically divided society, will soon follow.
209 LTC Steven W. Peterson, "Central But Inadequate: The Application of Theory in Operation Iraqi Freedom," http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/GetTRDoc?AD=ada441663&Location= U2&doc=GetTRDoc.pdf (accessed 18 December 2012), 10-1. Also see 
Gordon and Trainor,
146. 210
212
There was no unified command for Civ-Mil operations in Iraq, even though both Bremer and the new military commander, LTG Rick Sanchez, both worked for the SECDEF. Rumsfeld retained the decision-making authority back in Washington instead of at a headquarters in Iraq. 
213
The United States foreign policy sought to tie each of these systems together, not only within Germany, but also throughout Europe and America itself, immersing its foreign policy in Wilsonian philosophy. In addition to the changes created inside Germany, there was an increase in the global strength of the United States at the end of the war. The level of commitment that America was willing to expand, coupled with its rise in power, enabled its achievement of success.
Phase III operations in Iraq ended with a different set of circumstance. There was no formal surrender by Saddam Hussein. Iraq did not have an advanced economy, and what economy it had was deteriorating under UN sanctions. Sunni, Shia, and Kurdish lines divided Iraqi's social system. In addition to the different conditions between Iraq and Germany, the United States was different from what it had been in 1945. America no longer held 50 percent of the world's GDP. In 2003, it held military and political commitments around the world to include an ongoing war in Afghanistan and peacekeeping mission in Kosovo. War planning for Iraq focused on winning the war, which it did magnificently. However, it failed miserably at winning the peace. Rumsfeld issued planning guidance for the war in Iraq that resembled the Jeffersonian philosophy. The idea was to protect America by defeating its enemies abroad with the smallest force possible and bringing the force back home as quickly as possible. Nation-building operations dragged the U.S. further down, not necessarily militarily but arguably though loss of political capital and economic decline.
The argument here is not to claim that there was no post war planning for Iraq. Jay Garner claimed that the DOS, DOD, Treasury, USAID, and even the Department of Agriculture each had a post-war plan. 
224
225
226
224
225
226
Several books that comprehensively cover nation-building operations state there is a "golden hour" directly following Phase III operations. 
227
228
Will the stability force have some type of educational or professional background in the particular system they are trying to establish in the host country? Can a force that is not under an enlistment contract be expected to remain in immature security environments until progress can be made? In addition, the agency or organization put together must have the capability and capacity to achieve the U.S.'s Grand Strategy. The changes within the American government and military since World War II only further complicate interagency and nation-building operations.
As a byproduct of the professional military force, the military switched from a conscript army, having general officers with professional backgrounds outside the military, to a volunteer professional force with career officers. This change cut down on the level of expertise and experience senior leaders had outside the military system. Another major change to DOD came with the Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986. This act required officers to obtain three years of joint service before promotion to general officer.
Although this act improved the military's internal working environment, it did little to increase experience outside the military system. Of the 63 three and four-star general officers in the U.S. Army, today, none have served three years on joint assignments outside the DOD. 
229
Although the DOS has a vast amount of expertise in systems outside the military, the internal culture does not lend itself to an adaptable culture capable of facilitating the transition from combat to stability. 
230
229
230
Many theorists believe that nation building will be the type of operations that will occupy U.S. forces for the next 20 years. 
231
No longer is the DOD working in a seemingly unconstrained resource environment.
Budget cuts will force DOD to relook its current force structure and methods to achieve its strategic objectives. 
232
In order to effectively transition from Phase III dominated operations to Phase IV stability, the military must adapt aspects within the DOTMLPF framework to better recognize the impacts that Phases 0 through Phase III have on the country's PMESII systems; establish a better understanding and working relationship with other governmental departments outside the military to rapidly facilitate transition; and adapt its means to increase the ways available to political decision makers to achieve their desired goals. The DOD must take a greater role in facilitating interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational cooperation in order to achieve the grand strategy outlined by the President.
The United States' new testament philosophy has shown that it prevents conflict and improves collective security, which is why the basic concepts remain as the foundation in its grand strategy. With stability comes improved economic development through trade, which can improve the quality of life in developing nations. The military must work with its intergovernmental partners and international allies to save resources and give legitimacy to any future operation. However, no organization or service within DOD is properly structure to synchronize the creation of globalized institutions as outlined in the National Security Strategy. Nation building, it appears, is the inescapable responsibility of the world's only superpower. 
233
George C. Herring, From Colony to Superpower: U.S. Foreign Relations since 1776 (New York: Oxford University Press,
2008), 41-60, 145-8, 172-174.   
Andrew J. Bacevich, American Empire: The Realities and Consequences of U.S. Diplomacy (Cambridge, MA/London, 2002), 203.
The Confederation Congress adopted on 13 July 1787, the Northwest Ordinance, officially titled "An Ordinance for the Government of the Territory of the United States North West of the River Ohio," prescribed six articles required of a district before it could become a state. Confederation Congress, "An Ordinance for the Government of the Territory of the United States North West of the River Ohio," Library of Congress, http://www.loc.gov/rr/program/bib/ ourdocs/northwest.html (accessed 8 December 2012).
Herring, 
Walter McDougall, The Constitutional History of U.S. Foreign Policy: 222 Years of Tension in the Twilight Zone (Philadelphia, PA: Foreign Policy Research Institute, September 2010) http://www.fpri.org/pubs/2010/McDougall.ConstitutionalHistoryUSForeignPolicy.pdf (accessed 10 November 2012), 5.
Colin Powell, "Ideas and Consequences" (Lecture, Aspen Ideas Festival, Aspen,  Colorado, July 2007), http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2007/10/ideas-andconsequences/306193/ (accessed 9 December 2012).
  11  Thomas P.M. Barnett, The Pentagon's New Map: War and Peace in the Twenty-First Century (New York: Berkley Trade, 2005); Thomas L. Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2000).
Friedman, 250.    
Alexander L. George and Andrew Bennett, Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2005), 61-73.
Friedman, xvii-xxii.   
Thomas E.Ricks, Fiasco: The American Military Adventure in Iraq, 2003
to 2005
U.S. Department Of Defense, Joint Operation Planning. Joint Publication 5-0. (Washington DC: 11 August
2011), xi. JP 5-0 states, "The National Security Strategy (NSS) is a comprehensive report required annually by Title 50, USC, Section 404a. . . . Although the NSS is an annual requirement, it typically is not updated for several years at a time and may be superseded by other strategic documents and policy statements."
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976), 177. See also 75, 128,
Clausewitz describes war as nothing but a duel on a larger scale. He defines war as: "War is thus an act of[physical]  force to compel our enemy to do our will . . . means of war; to impose our will on the enemy is its object." He later defines engagements as fighting, with the object of fighting to destroy or defeat the enemy.22  ThomasMahnken and Joseph A. Maiolo, eds., Strategic Studies: a Reader (New York:  Routledge, 2008), 421-5.   
United Nations, "United Nations Peacekeeping," United Nations, http://www.un.org/ en/peacekeeping/ (accessed 7 November 2012). In 2012, the United States was involved in seven of the sixteen United Nations peacekeeping operations around the world. The mission of these peacekeeping forces maintains a similar theme: protection of human rights, implementation of the rule-of-law-structures, and strengthen governmental institutions.
Clausewitz, 
Sun Tzu, The Art of War (New York: Barnes & Noble Classics, 2003), 15. "Hence to fight and conquer in all your battles is not supreme excellence; supreme excellence consists in breaking the enemy's resistance without fighting."
Everett Carl Dolman, Pure Strategy: Power and Principle in the Space and Information Age (New York: Frank Cass, 2005), 6.
B.H. Liddell Hart, Strategy, 2nd ed. (New York: Praeger Publishers, Inc., 1974), 322.    
Hart, 321    
Clausewitz, 177.   
Walter R. Mead, Special Providence: American Foreign Policy and How It Changed the World(New York: Taylor & Francis Books, Inc., 2002), xvi-xviii.   
Stathis N. Kalyvas, The Logic of Violence in Civil War (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 111-45.
Ibid., 111.   
James Dobbins et al., The Beginner's Guide to Nation-Building (Santa Monica, CA:  Rand Publishing, 2007), xxiii.
U.S. Department of the Army, Counterinsurgency Operations, Field Manual 3-24, (Washington DC, December 2006).
Since WW II, the threat of or actual employment of American military forces has directly or indirectly resulted in regime changes during WW II Germany, Japan, France, Italy, and Austria; the undesired outcome ofVietnam in 1975; Thailand in 1962; Grenada in 1983;  Panama in 1989; Nicaragua in 1990; Haiti and Bosnia in 1995; Kosovo in 1999; Afghanistan in  2001; Iraq in 2003; and Libya in 2011.    
U.S. Energy Information Administration. "Libya." http://www.eia.gov/cabs/libya/ pdf.pdf (accessed 27 November 2012).
Ibid., 1-3.
Scott Stewart, "Mali  Besieged by Fighters Fleeing Libya," STRATFOR Global Intelligence, http://www.stratfor.com/weekly/mali-besieged-fighters-fleeing-libya (accessed 27 November 2012).
Senge,. Naveh also describes a similar concept of cognitive tension as it applies to the operational level of war. Within this context, he describes it as the dichotomy required to preserve a controlled disequilibrium between the national strategy and the tactical mission.
Joint Publication 3-0, Operations, GL-14.
Freidman, 105.   
Dobbins, The Beginner's Guide, iv.   
Colin S.Gray, War, Peace and International Relations: an Introduction to Strategic  History (London: Routledge, 2007), 129-33.    
Naveh,[4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18]. Also see Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure: Recognizing and Avoiding Error in Complex Situations (Reading, MA.: Basic Books, 1997), 74-6. Although they do not apply their theories directly to case studies in World War II, the idea behind well buffered systems is that they are resistant to positive feedback. These systems are able to withstand large amounts of input and still manage to maintain their intended purpose.
Kalyvas, 
Herring, 519.    
Ibid., 520.   
Alexander M. Bielakowski, "Mechanization in the Interwar U.S. Cavalry." Excerpt from U.S. Army Cavalry Officers and the Issue ofMechanization, 1916-1940. PhD diss., Kansas  State University, 2002. 1-13.    
Giulio Douhet, "Aerial Warfare,"  The Command of the Air, USAF Warrior Studies, Washington, DC, Office of Air ForceHistory, 1983, 1-8.    
Matheny, 
Ibid., 
Brewer, 88.   
G. John Ikenberry, After Victory: Institutions, Strategic Restraint, and the Rebuilding of Order After Major Wars (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001), 169.
Robert A. Pape, Bombing to Win: Air Power and Coercion in War (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1996), 256-9.
Robert A. Pape, 
Ibid., 276.   
Dobbins and Rollie Lal, America's Role in Nation-Building: from Germany to Iraq, xvii.
Ibid.,[9][10][11][12][13][14][15] 
Ibid., 188.    
Office of the President, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: The White House, September 2002), iii.
Ferguson, 202.    
Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor, Cobra II: the Inside Story of the Invasion and Occupation of Iraq (New York: Pantheon, 2006), 3-5.
U.S. Department of the Army, Operations, Field Manual 3-0 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 14 June 2001), 1-3. This manual was the capstone guide to military operations during the 2003 war in Iraq. There are several updates to the manual since this one was published.
Department of the Army, "WWII -European-African-Middle Eastern Theater," Center for Military History, http://www.history.army.mil/books/wwii/Occ-GY/ch12.htm (accessed 18 December 2012).
Michael R.Gordon, "The Strategy to Secure Iraq Did Not Foresee a 2nd War," New York Times 19 October
U.S. Department of the Army, Counterinsurgency, 5-1.
Gordon and Trainor, 
Dobbins, After the War, 114, 121.    
Ibid., 122.   
Helmuth von Moltke, Moltke On the Art of War: Selected Writings (New York: Presidio Press, 1995), 91.
George Bush, "President Discusses Beginning of Operation Iraqi Freedom," The White House, http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/ releases/2003/03/20030322. html (accessed 7 March 2013).
Dobbins, The Beginner's Guide, 15, 50.    
The surge force entails a whole of government or whole of nation approach. The exact details and make up of this force is outside the scope of this monograph. However, Thomas Barnett provides an outline for what he calls the "system administrators" force.Barnett, Blueprint  for Action, 
John A Nagl, Institutionalizing Adaptation. Center for a New American Security, Online, http://www.cnas.org/node/130 (accessed 02 August 2012).
Joint Force 2020, 4.
Dobbins and Lal, America's Role in Nation-Building, xv.   
Source: Department of Defense, Joint Publication 3-0, Joint Operations, (Washington: Headquarters, Department of Defense, 11 August 2011), V-36.
I want to start by thanking by beautiful wife April and two wonderful children for supporting me throughout my military endeavors. You are my strength and source of inspiration.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
conflict also partially negates other popular theorists, like Thomas Barnett, in regards to the link between globalization and peace. Thomas Barnett's book, The Pentagon's New Map combines security, economic, political, and culture factors to help predict the future areas of war and peace. His argument integrates the works of Thomas Friedman and Samuel Huntington. 
115
The first category he described is the "functioning core," also referred to as the core, which is an interconnected globalized area where future peace is likely. 
116
117
118
115
116
117
118
Congress, creating a conscript army without a declaration of war. 
139
With the American population set on neutrality and isolation, President Roosevelt knew he needed to prepare America's social system for total war. Many American's believed that if the United States were to become involved in Europe, it would lead to bigger government, the dismantling of New Deal reforms, and a crackdown on civil liberties. These concerns were secondary to the concern that a war would cause economic hardship and produce high causalities. 140 Although Jervis's theory on interconnections between different parts a system had yet to be published, Roosevelt understood the interconnection between politics, social concerns, and information campaigns. To address these social concerns, Roosevelt created the Office of Government Reports, the Division of Information at the Emergency Office of Emergency Management, and the Coordinator of Information. 141 These agencies missions were to prepare the American civilian population for war. The propaganda machine sought to explain the American way of life. It took large-scale global problems and translated into how they would affect each individual's life.
As President Roosevelt prepared the nation for war, the Department of War was preparing for a fight on two fronts. To get a complete understanding of the military strategy used to prepare for the war, one must look at the period between the wars. There was an abundance of military innovation during the interwar period between World War I and World War II, much of 139 Robert K. Griffith Jr., The U.S. Army's Transition to the All-Volunteer Force 1968-1974 (Center for Military History, United States Army, Washington, DC, 1997), 7.
140 Susan A. Brewer, Why America Fights: Patriotism and War Propaganda from the Philippines to Iraq (New York: Oxford University Press, USA, 2009), 91. 
141 Brewer,
93.
In order to meet his aims, he employed a whole-government approach to handle post war responsibilities.
Both the President and the military understood the terms of unconditional surrender. The approach was to create a military organization designed to handle stability operations. In August The first post-war challenge was to address the new political order after the collapse of the Nazi regime. Allies argued that one of their most critical objectives was "the preparation for an eventual reconstruction of German political life on a democratic basis." 
167
163
186
187
186
187 World Bank, "Iraq Country Brief," http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/ COUNTRIES/MENAEXT/IRAQEXTN/0,menuPK:313115..pagePK:141132..piPK:141107..theS Secretary of State Colin Powell, in a failed attempt to gain additional supporters for the war in Iraq during a UN visit. 
190
Chalabi. 191
In 1998, as the Commander and Chief of the United States Central Command, (CENTCOM) GEN Anthony Zinni developed CENTCOM OPLAN 1003-98 for operations in Iraq that required a minimum of 385,000 Soldiers, while other estimates were as high as 450,000. 
192
193
190 Ricks,
[90]
[91]
[92]
[93]
[94]
Gordon and Trainor,
107,
President and SECDEF believed that with less than 125,000 troops over a six-month period the Americans could easily win the war. 
194
195
196
The SECDEF and GEN Franks continued to negotiate the number of troops needed to win the war and those needed for follow-on operations. In the end, the SECDEF won, and GEN Franks promised a "shock and awe" campaign in Iraq with the troops levels that were authorized.
The promised campaign achieved military victory in a short amount of time with an extremely small military force. It also promised to rapidly transition from Phase III to Phase V civil control in under three months, allocating only a short period for Phase IV. The important aspect to understand is that, unlike World War II, only two other Army Divisions had deployment orders to support follow-on operations. The troop strength in Germany built up over a four-year period to achieve the 1:10 ratio, whereas in Iraq, the plan assumed that the same Divisions could progress 
194 Gordon and Trainor,
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
The United States entered World War II without a comprehensive National Security Strategy and subordinate Defense Strategies as we think of them today. However, President Roosevelt understood the requirement to prepare the nation's political, social, and industrial systems for war. His preparation captured the essence of Count Helmuth von Moltke's statement, "even a single error in the original assembly of the armies can hardly ever be made good again during the entire course of the campaign." 214 After the United States declared war, it began the systematic destruction of German systems. Allies started with a strategic bombing campaign, and then switched to occupying land forces. These land forces were trained and prepared to conduct a long intensive occupation period that would eventually return Germany to a powerful ally during the Cold War.
The United States' National Security Strategy in 2003 encompassed many of the Wilsonian principles such as freedom and democracy. President Bush stated the purpose of the Iraq war was, "to disarm Iraq of weapons of mass destruction, to end Saddam Hussein's support for terrorism, and to free the Iraqi people." 
215
Rebuilding these systems was the focus of the military for the next seven years.
The United States' Grand Strategy remains engrained in the new testament philosophy described by McDougall. The 2010 National Security Strategy expands America's role to promote security, prosperity, values, and international order. 
216
217
218
216
Strategy-2010, v-vi. 217
218