# ID: 9152b84db6aa462080501e142d3763d8
# Title: Expecting Different Results: How to Train Multi-Domain Capable Divisions
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The US Army must adjust its large-scale training exercises to achieve initial operating capacity for Multi-Domain Operations (MDO) by 2028. MDO represents a significant shift from how the US Army has operated since 2010, and therefore exercises must adjust to prepare large units for MDO. The monograph answers the following questions: What are the similarities between the Interwar Period, and 2020-2030? How were Interwar Period exercises (and subsequently current exercises) planned, and administered? How does MDO differ from previous operating concepts? And, can the US Army achieve initial operating capacity for MDO in 2028 by incorporating lessons identified from Interwar Period exercises into current exercises? Analysis of historical texts, doctrine, journal articles, other research, and fictional books informed the synthesis presented. Conclusions include; the current decade is similar to the Interwar Period. Conceptually training exercises follow the same path they did almost eighty years ago. And, the US Army built MDO with different assumptions than previous operating concepts. Three potential areas of improvement are: increasing the use of the live environment, extending exercise duration, and providing commanders more flexible authorities within the space and cyber domain during exercises.
15.
-US Army Field Manual 21-5 (1941)   Bob could not believe what he saw; he had to do a double-take on the TV sitting over the bartender's head. It was clearer, but no more believable the second time around. In broad daylight, a company's worth of T-32 tanks and People's Liberation Army dismounted infantrymen moved through the wreckage of Camp Humphreys. 
1
Another thing Bob knew is that this was not the celebration he intended when he got to the pub that evening. Bob Garcia officially found out that morning, around the same time the first cyber-masked missiles impacted the joint operations center on Camp Humphreys, he was on the US Army's promotion list for Lieutenant Colonel next year, 2037. He and his wife had gone out for a few drinks to enjoy the announcement. He usually would have celebrated at home, but they had just landed in Denver two days before as they were in the middle of their move from Camp Humphreys to Fort Carson, so their current home was a hotel near the base.
Bob started trying to make sense of things as he watched the newscast. The reporter's voice faded into a distant buzz while his mind raced. He was trying to anticipate what might happen next. He knew that there was no way the United States would let this kind of attack stand without response and that given the repeal of the Authorization for the Use of Military Force a few years ago, the President would likely ask Congress for a declaration of war against China.
Based on their covert agreement, a war with China meant war with Russia, and the attack against US servicemembers represented grounds for invoking NATO's Article 5. He did not believe nukes would be an option, at least not right away. China obviously had Russian support, and those two allies and the nature of the attack meant both countries thought they could defeat the US and NATO without using their nuclear arsenals. Bob could barely believe it; he almost said it loud enough for his wife to hear but managed to keep it under his breath, "It's the start of World
But what did this mean for him and his family? He knew that the job he was moving to was on the 4th Infantry Division Staff at Fort Carson, and based on their recent redeployment from Europe, they would likely not be one of the first units to respond to this attack. So, he would be on the sideline, at least to start. The US Army would likely need to expand rapidly to field enough units to fight the Russians and Chinese. They required eighty-nine divisions to defeat the Axis powers during WWII, this war would likely need more. Bob briefly considered if there would be a draft, then figured that was irrelevant, he was already in the service, and his oldest daughter was only twelve, too young for conscription. His thoughts then turned to what expansion meant for his career. As a recent selectee for Lieutenant Colonel, he knew his opportunities for battalion command were now all but guaranteed. But he quickly remembered his year at the US Army's School of Advanced Military Studies, and what he read about the US Army's expansion in WWII during which officers had jumped ranks precipitously. Eisenhower was a Colonel in 1941, and a five-star General by the end of 1944. He remembered reading about similar trends in WWI and the American Civil War. Would Bob see his own exponential climb through the ranks?
Was he ready to command a brigade or, more alarming, a division? These questions are difficult to answer regardless of their context. The idea skipping echelons in command, skipping over the stepping stone of battalion command for a much larger formation like a brigade or division has potentially serious implications. However, it is not rare in US history, especially in situations like those described above. The reality is that in a world where these events can happen the US Army must not only prepare its mid-career officers and noncommissioned officers for positions of increased responsibility, but must also prepare those organizations through rigorous and realistic training.
The answer to Bob's questions does not have to be no. As mentioned in the preceding narrative, the US Army conducted rapid expansion to meet the needs of large-scale ground combat operations (LSCO) in the past. 
2
2028. 3
To determine that the US Army can adjust current large-scale exercises this monograph answers the following questions: What are the similarities pertinent to the training of divisions and above between the Interwar Period, and 2020-2030? How were Interwar Period division level maneuvers and exercises planned, and administered? How are current division level maneuvers and exercises planned, and administered? How does MDO differ from previous operating concepts? And finally, the primary research question, can the US Army achieve initial operating capacity for MDO in 2028 by incorporating lessons identified from the methodology of Interwar still used the term throughout. Given that both documents are current US Army doctrine at the time of writing this paper, they are used inter-changeabl-y and defined using the same acronym (LSCO).
3 Multi-Domain Operations are "Military activities conducted across multiple domains and contested spaces to overcome an adversary's strengths by presenting them with several operational or tactical dilemmas through the combined application of calibrated force posture; employment of multidomain formations; and convergence of capabilities across domains, environments, and functions in time and space to achieve operational and tactical objectives." US Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), Pamphlet (PAM) 525-3-1, The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028 (Washington, DC:  Government Printing Office, 2018), GL-7. The US Army unveiled this operating concept in December 2018, with a goal of achieving "initial operating capacity" by 2028, and "full operating capacity" by 2035. The concept is based on warfighting domains or "An area of activity within the operational environment (land, air, maritime, space, and cyberspace) in which operations are organized and conducted. (modified joint definition)." For the purposes of this monograph, "large-scale training exercises" or "large-scale exercises" refer to US Army training that occurs with a division or larger as the training audience.
Analysis of historical texts, US Army doctrine, journal articles, other students' research, and some fictional books, mostly obtained through the Combined Arms Research Library at Fort Leavenworth, informed the synthesis presented below as the answer to those questions. Of particular significance are books that discuss the interwar period and WWII by Christopher Gabel, and Peter Schifferle, and Walter Kretchik. The research staff at Fort Leavenworth graciously provided access to Interwar Period doctrine, past and present journal articles, and other students' research that aided in confirming analysis and furthering the synthetic process.
This work is important because, as research has shown, MDO represents a significant shift from how the US Army has operated since 2010, and therefore it must adjust its exercises to prepare divisions and above for MDO. To ignore these findings potentially puts America's blood and treasure at unnecessary risk that likely leads to calamity in future conflicts, regardless of their limited or total character. This risk is not a new one, just about every American generation has participated in some form of armed conflict. However, what is different is that current US Army leaders have more information about the past from which they can learn. While the Interwar Period may seem a random choice for comparison, it was selected with care, for the reasons specified below.
Analyzing the past can provide, and in many cases has provided, the ability to anticipate things in the near future. The assumption behind this methodology is that one can recognize a 4 Often used to discuss the period between WWI and WWII, this monograph uses the term "Interwar Period" more narrowly to denote the period between 1938-1941. This is specifically because it is the period during which the US Army conducted large-scale exercises prior to entering WWII. Between  1919 and 1938, training at the division level was not feasible based on the size and composition of the US Army. For elaboration see page thirteen. period of enough relevant similarities to the current situation. Additionally, forecasters must identify the critical differences between two scenarios, and evaluate whether they are of consequence to their area of study, if not they may treat the two situations as analogs. The world is a complex and adaptive system and as such, not two points of time can ever be entirely the same. Anyone who has walked down the block knows that while someone can stand in the same geographic location more than once, the passage of time and inherent nature of entropy make it impossible to recreate all of the same conditions. Armed with this conceptualization, and the knowledge that 1938 was the first time the US Army conducted live maneuvers at the Division level before the declaration of war, it makes sense to first look there for potential similarities to the current era. 5 Upon more in-depth analysis, other similarities become apparent, namely; US Army organizational changes, incorporation of somewhat new domains and technology, and the desire to ensure the next war is of a different character than the last.
In 1939, General (GEN) George C. Marshall adopted the triangular division format, a significant structural and organizational change from the square division that fought WWI. The Army built the square division based on the necessities of attrition style warfare as embodied in the stabilized front of the Western Front. The square division consisted of four line-infantry regiments that contained three line-infantry battalions, supported by centrally controlled regimental heavy weapons (mortars and machine guns), as well as other centrally controlled division enablers (artillery, engineers, heavy mortars). Based on lessons from WWI, the US Army developed the triangular division based around three line-infantry regiments also consisting of three line-infantry battalions, in which those battalions and their subordinate companies controlled their own heavy weapons, but still received support from divisionally controlled 5 Jean R. Moenk, "A History of Large-Scale Army Maneuvers in the United States, 1935-1964,"  (Fort Monroe, VA: Continental Army Command, 1969), 23. The next section explores the circumstances behind why 1938 is the first time the Army conducted live Division or larger maneuvers prior to the declaration of war.
enablers. The Army specifically designed the triangular formation to fight differently from the square organization. 
6
7
The US Army spent significant effort during the Interwar Period figuring out how to use new technology in its desired method of waging war. Namely, the tank, two-and-a-half-ton truck, airplane, frequency modulating radios, and radar were of vital interest. All of these items had made an appearance during or shortly after WWI, the best method to employ these platforms were the topic of professional debate, as is evident in the thousands of professional journal articles and historical studies of the time. 
8
While this line of effort directly tied to the transition from the square to the triangular formation, it is essential to note that neither one drove the other. The desire to fight a different kind of war than one of the stabilized fronts like those found on WWI's western front drove planners first to conceptualize the new methodology, then design the best formation incorporating available technology. The incorporation of new technology in warfare is constant across time. However, the Interwar Period offers a more direct similarity to the current era because the US Army was attempting not only to incorporate new technology, but it also saw the addition of a new domain.
Inherent with the US Army's latest operational concept, MDO is the official recognition of the cyber and space domains. The identification of these two domains, along with the increasing rate of technological advancement, drove the US Army to stand up Futures Command (AFC) in 2018.
The mission of AFC is to "modernize the way [the US Army] does business…. [they] want to make sure Soldiers have what they need, before they need it, to protect tomorrow… today." 9 As a result, their focus is manifold, but the fact that Future Command exists shows that much like during the Interwar Period, the US Army is committed to identifying not only how to best incorporate new technology and domains, but also, how they fit into a different conceptual framework of warfare, than the one most recently used. 9 Full text "At Army Futures Command, we believe in utilizing the best expertise, whatever the source, to create innovative solutions faster and better. We're on a quest to modernize the way the Army does business by creating a space of endless possibilities to explore, develop, and test new methods, organizations, and technologies. Above all else, we want to make sure Soldiers have what they need, before they need it, to protect tomorrow… today." "Who We Are," US Army Futures Command Website, accessed January 18, 2020, https://armyfuturescommand.com/. Clarification in brackets added by author.
After the gross waste of human life that took place from 1914 to 1916 along the western front in WWI, none of the countries involved wanted to fight in the same manner ever again.
Despite having her teeth ostensibly removed by the treaty of Versailles, Germany felt the most incentive to identify a new manner of warfare that would allow them to rectify the wrongdoings to which she was subject. 
10
11
12
13
14
13
14 US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Unified Land Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2011), 1-2. The framework of unified land operations (simultaneous execution of offense, defense, and stability operations) initially defined in the 2011 version of ADP 3-0 underpins the US Army's conceptualization of LSCO as presented in the 2017 version of FM 3-0. These notions carry over further into TRADOC PAM 525-3-1 and the description it offers of multidomain operations. The US Army adopted the BCT 2020 model circa 2010. This design ensured BCTs possessed the combat power to meet the requirements of unified land operations. employed were of necessity. Neither organization wanted nor anticipated fighting their war in the manner which they pursued. Before 1914, the US Army focused on defending and policing the homeland and its associated protectorates, its concept of warfare was one of movement, not of stagnant trench lines. Similarly, the pre-9/11 US Army intended to fight the next war using combined arms maneuver and executed its initial offensive into Iraq using that framework. 
15
The similarities mentioned above between the Interwar Period and current era for the US Army do not mean the two periods as entirely analogous. There were critical differences in either case. As previously discussed, the Interwar Period US Army possessed two clearly identifiable future enemies, Germany and Japan, for almost two years before entering WWII. The current US Army lacks such luxury; the 2018 National Defense Strategy identified four countries and one non-state group as national level adversaries, but rightly so, offered no prioritization or ranking of most dangerous adversary. 
16
15 Kretchik,
US Army Doctrine,
[118]
[119]
[120]
[121]
[124]
[125]
[126]
[127]
[258]
[259]
[260]
[261]
[262]
[263]
[264]
[265]
[266]
Another fundamental similarity between the two time periods of focus is the need for a US Army trained at the division level or higher. The German invasion of Poland in 1939 made it apparent to US military leaders that a mobilization plan was necessary to prepare for the inevitable. In the current context, the US Army believes it necessary to field multiple trained divisions, and potentially corps or field armies to defeat a near-peer adversary in LSCO, while leveraging effects across multiple domains. Regardless of the probability of that scenario, it is the one that US strategic leaders have chosen to pursue. As a result, the US Army must do as it has always done and meet the demands of the nation. Significant effort has gone into restructuring the military education system(s) to prepare individual leaders for the requirements of LSCO. In 2019, the command and general staff school transitioned from a focus on preparing mid-career officers to serve at the brigade level to the division level. As the US Army continues to educate individuals on how to wage war in the framework of MDO and LSCO, they must also evaluate how to use training environments to provide an adequate test of its application. Given the similarities between the Interwar Period and the current era, it is possible to find potential approaches through comparative analysis in how both versions of the US Army train at the division level and higher.
To best evaluate changes that are necessary to division training exercises between 2020 and 2028, it is essential to understand the planning and administration of past exercises. Given the similarity between the Interwar and current periods established in the last section, this section aims to determine the aspects critical to the success of large-scale Interwar Period exercises regarding the achievement of their purpose. This section also attempts to derive key similarities between past and present methodology regarding the planning and administration of large-scale exercises, or likewise, identify key differences. By achieving that understanding, it becomes possible to deduce whether or not the current model for conducting large-scale training is likely to produce the desired results.
Large-scale maneuvers conducted during the Interwar Period were an anomaly in their own time. After demobilizing from WWI, the US Army was unable to conduct field training above the brigade level due to the limited size of the standing active force. However, during the second half of the 1930s, as tensions in Europe increased leading up to the 1939 German invasion of Poland, President Roosevelt exponentially increased the US Army's total size. Between 1938 and 1941, the authorized size of the US Army grew from 165,000 to 1,400,000. 17 As a result, senior commanders in the US Army capitalized on the opportunity to train at the division, corps, and field army level. This situation represented the first time in its history that the US Army could conduct "genuine" corps and army level exercises on home soil before a declaration of war. 
18
19
Before analyzing the training doctrine and umpires, it is helpful to understand the broader context of why the US Army preferred maneuvers over other training methods. After demobilization following WWI, before attaining the ability to conduct maneuvers above the brigade level, the US Army used command post exercises (CPX) to test higher-level staffs. 
20
21
18
19
22
As troop levels increased, field army commanders independently sought opportunities to train their organizations above the brigade level. Third Army was the first to conduct successful maneuvers, doing so twice in 1938. 
23
27
38
39
40
To control the maneuvers and log observations, GHQ selected over 2000 umpires from across the US Army from units not identified to participate. 
41
42
38
39
Maneuvers of 1941, 45. 40
41
42
43
LTG McNair saw the 1941 maneuvers as an overall success. Part of that success was the fact that they exposed shortfalls and failures in the training, doctrine, and leadership of the units that participated. 
44
45
Within the following year, the US Army would add two million men to its ranks. 
46
43
Maneuvers of 1941, 48. 44
45
46
53
54
57
58
58
61
Another significant change to large-scale exercises over the past eighty years is the amount to which they are virtual and constructive. The 1941 GHQ Maneuvers pitted two live Field Armies against one another. 62 As of 2019, MCTP conducts Division WFXs without a single subordinate brigade in the field. Instead, they feature digitally simulated brigades represented by response cells of "puckers." 
63
61
62
Maneuvers of 1941, 64. 63 US Army TRADOC, REG 350-50-3, Mission Command Training Program, 39-40.
64 "The Joint Warfighting Assessment," Joint Modernization Command, accessed December 8, 2019, https://home.army.mil/bliss/index.php/units-tenants/joint-modernization-command. 
65
Technological advances have changed how the US Army executes these exercises, but the reality persists that the overall concept is unchanged. Even so, it is possible that changing the overall concept behind US Army training is not necessary. The methods in use are proven; they build proficiency in both individual and unit tasks and provide an arena that allows for the application of doctrine as it currently exists. The question moving into the next decade is whether the shift to a new doctrine of MDO requires a similar shift in how the US Army conducts large-scale unit exercises.
As previously mentioned, the US Army officially unveiled its future operating concept, MDO in December 2018. Framed as a significant change from the previous concept, Unified Land Operations, MDO incorporated five domains of warfare, land, air, sea, space, and cyber, whereas Unified Land Operations focused solely on land. 
67
68
Though not explicitly stated, the US Army wrote TRADOC Pamphlet (PAM) 525-3-1 (2018) with LSCO in mind. Army Doctrine Publication 3-0 Operations (2019) identified that "large-scale ground combat operations are sustained combat operations involving multiple corps and divisions." 
71
72
The US Army in MDO 2028 also presented the first US Army operating concept to receive support of the remaining Joint Forces. As of February 2020, the US Navy, US Air Force, and US Marine Corps all recognize MDO as the paradigm under which the US Department of Defense intends to fight its future engagements. As mentioned above, MDO was not the first US Army operating concept to understand and articulate the need for other elements of the joint force to enable successful combined arms maneuver in the land domain. However, even though previous concepts encompassed this understanding, the US Army failed to generate the consensus necessary to synchronize joint concepts. The outspoken acceptance of the three other sister services indicates that MDO broke that trend. 
73
In its preface, GEN Stephen Townsend, Commander TRADOC, identified that the MDO concept was the first of a four step concept to "evolve we organize and integrate the (US) Army as part of the Joint Force." 
74
76
MDO provides a theory for the US Army, and its sister services to operate within as they prepare for the complexity the future holds. And though its application through the tenets of calibrated force posture, multi-domain formations, and convergence remain debated, the concept is different from the past two concepts. Especially when viewed as one that assumes the future demands capability for LSCO executed within a dynamic and interoperable joint force, that must modernize to fully prepare for either of the former requirements. As a result, the US Army must dedicate effort to evaluate if its large-scale training exercises meet what it anticipates the future entails.
Having successfully analyzed the supplemental research questions identified on page four, it is now possible to synthesize the findings to provide an answer to the primary research question addressed by this study. As the US Army begins its journey down the path to realizing MDO capability it must evaluate whether or not current training methodologies provide the appropriate opportunities for units and individuals to learn and develop the skills necessary to be successful applying the concept on the battlefield. Based on research conducted on Interwar Period exercises, current exercises, and if MDO is truly something different, a few conclusions are apparent. First, the US Army is currently in a situation similar to its Interwar Period counterpart, especially when considered through the lenses of reorganization, modernization, and changes in operating concepts. Also, conceptually training exercises follow the same path they did almost eighty years ago. Despite this similarity in framework, reliance on technology and necessities of limited conflict fought by modular teams have led current exercises to become reduced in scope than those of the Interwar Period. Additionally, the MDO concept, though still the topic of much debate, is built with different underlying assumptions than previous operating concepts, and therefore is something not quite revolutionary, but definitely a significant evolution. When compiled, these conclusions make an obvious case for the US Army to adjust certain aspects of their large-scale exercises to provide the right catalyst for true learning organizationally and individually. Some critics may argue that MDO is a flawed concept, and therefore the US Army should not pursue learning its application. The future may prove them right, the next conflict the US Army partakes may not require, or may even invalidate the idea of MDO. Similar critics existed during the Interwar Period, and in some instances, they were also correct. However, the US Army's success in WWII did not come from the fact that it entered the fight with the right concept of how it could be won. Instead the fact that it had units trained to learn from their mistakes, however painful, and resilient in the face of battlefield fog and friction underpinned total victory. 
77
Given the reduction in scope of current large-scale exercises compared to those of the Interwar Period, the US Army is in a position where it must adjust their construct, or risk failing to achieve its goal of MDO capable divisions and corps by 2028. By creating large-scale exercises that serve as educational opportunities for their participants (both units and individuals)
the US Army provides mid-career leaders the foundations of understanding, experience, and knowledge necessary to command at higher echelons. Men like President Dwight Eisenhower, GEN George Patton, GEN Walter Kreuger, and LTG J. Lawton Collins learned immensely from 77 A large military industrial complex unaffected by enemy contact, mobilized economy and populous, and early preparation also helped. their experiences in Louisiana and the Carolinas in 1941. It is imperative, that if the US Army believes MDO is the wave of the future, that they provide the same opportunity for the current generation of leaders like MAJ(P) Bob Garcia.
The question hung somewhere between Bob's brain and his gut for about three minutes as he evaluated his answer. He thought back to his first assignment after his year at the School of Advanced Military Studies, as a member of the 1 st Cavalry Division staff, he participated in a WFX, where his division "invaded" a hostile nation that had mixed Russian and Chinese capabilities. Bob spent most of the exercise planning what happened between the arrival of the entire division in country and its relief on the front lines about two months later. Because of his assignment as a School of Advanced Military Studies graduate, Bob was one of few individuals who had seemingly unfettered access to the Division Commander, so he had been able to witness what questions the general asked of her staff, and how she used the information they provided to make timely, and relevant decisions. Though the exercise only focused on the first four weeks of combat, Bob was able to see how the division commander had successfully blended the Corps Commander's guidance with the reality her subordinate brigades faced to accomplish the Division's mission nested within the Corps, Field Army, and Theater Commander's intent. He took part in similar exercises during his time on the Eighth Army staff in Korea. Though he had only had a few repetitions with those types of training, he felt comfortable.
But then he thought back even farther through his career, he had always felt comfortable working at echelons above his rank. Not because he thought himself a superior officer, Bob had worked arduously to gain the status he now held, but rather because the Army had deliberately prepared him for the mantle of increased responsibility. When he was a student in the Reserve Officer Training Corps, Bob remembered some of his instructors complaining about exercises, and how they never had time to learn from their mistakes, try new techniques, experiment with how to integrate new technology, or how the computer simulation programs made large formation movements seem so easy. Fortunately, that had not been Bob's experience. His first division-level exercise, in which he was a Company Executive Officer, had been almost entirely live, though dispersed, with realistic indirect fires simulations, and sustainment friction. His company spent about six weeks of actual time in the field, broken into intervals to facilitate equipment maintenance, and allowing himself, the Company Commander, and the First Sergeant to try different methods and see which ones worked best. It was this new approach to large-scale exercises that helped Bob feel comfortable rising through the ranks. He knew that no matter what crazy climb up the chain of command his career was about to make as a result of the horrible news from Pyeongtaek that he stood prepared.
There is no doubt that the US Army faces a great challenge in revising how it trains divisions and corps. However, much like MDO as an operational concept the changes do not have to be revolutionary. The concept of command driven, objective based progressive training does build task proficiency for both individuals and units, as the US Army has continuously proved for the last eighty years. As a result, the US Army only has to look for changes to how they conduct such training.
As mentioned in the introduction, the US Army entered this decade (2020-2030)   intending to transition to MDO as an operating concept. Additionally, as highlighted in the section titled "Is MDO Different?", MDO is different from how the US Army has operated over the past ten years. With these facts in mind, it is possible to offer potential changes to the planning and conduct of large-scale exercises to ensure the US Army meets its goals. Though not stated explicitly in TRADOC PAM 525-3-1 The US Army in MDO (2018), the document implies the inherent large-scale nature of MDO throughout. Often outlining that it is conceptual underpinnings that exist at the division level or higher. 
78
The US Army has already initiated increases in the use of the live environment during large-scale exercises. DEFENDER 2020, aligned under both US European Command and US Indo-Pacific Command, is scheduled to run through the spring and summer of 2020 and has identified a training audience that ensures a division equivalent each to marshal and deploys from home station to the US European Command area of responsibility. 80 Subordinate brigades have 78 US Army TRADOC, PAM 525-3-1, 15-46. Chapter 3 outlines how the army intends to conduct MDO in pursuit of Joint Force objectives. The document discusses the application of the tenets of MDO across time and space, outlining in detail how echelons from Theater Army down to Brigade converge, or leverage the convergence of multi-domain effects. The paragraph that discusses brigade convergence emphasizes their ability to converge is limited, and rather they exploit opportunities at points in time or space where larger units have achieved convergence 79 "Interval" exercises are a concept proposed by this monograph. Similar to a track workout, they consist of an exercise iteration followed by a "recovery" or "rest" period of similar duration. The intent is for the "recovery/rest" period to enable unit after-action reviews, reflection on those reviews, identification of solutions to address shortfalls or exploit on success. Additionally, this period provides units the opportunity to re-fit their personnel and equipment as well as rehearse to fine tune any changes to their SOPs prior to beginning another exercise iteration, of equal duration and scale to the first. For elaboration see figure 
1
Nevertheless, to ensure realism, it is necessary to maximize the amount of live participation in large-scale exercises.
The increase in training audience size and the corresponding size of exercise support organizations is likely to have significant fiscal, physical, and emotional impacts on the US Army. It is not feasible, based on current active strength and competing operational requirements to put a full division in the field every month for ten out of the twelve months in a year, as done with the current MCTP WFX throughput. Instead, with increased live participation, the US Army must also decrease the frequency of large-scale exercises. The fact that the Army only conducts 81 A potential source for OC/Ts is the 1000+ majors and captains attending the resident Command and General Staff Officer Course at Fort Leavenworth. The school is focused on educating officers on current doctrine, and if timed correctly could integrate students as OC/Ts as both an academic requirement and educational opportunity.
JWAs once a year signifies that the US Army already recognized this reality. However, by conducting fewer large-scale exercises, the US Army can extend their duration. Transitioning from a ten-day-long exercise to a three or four-week exercise allows for greater exposure to the cascading effects of friction and enemy presence on the battlefield. Extending the duration of current exercises continuously is but one of the methods by which the US Army could expose their higher-level staff to increased friction and enemy presence.
Another approach to this concept is rather than a continuous longer duration exercise, have the same training audience conduct multiple linked iterations within the same scenario. For example, a division could conduct operations for two weeks, followed by two weeks to recover, conduct a thorough assessment, introspective reflection, rehearse functions in which they were deficient, and potentially develop new methods to create effects on the enemy. Following this pause, send the division back into the field, picking up where they left off for another two weeks of exercise. The training unit could adjust the number and duration of iterations as required based on the operational requirements and training objectives of the organization. However, leaders must keep in mind that too many or too-lengthy intervals may be just as detrimental as too few.
This "Interval" exercise would require the training audience and exercise support units to remain singularly focused for an extended period compared to the more conventional continuous style model currently employed in large-scale exercises. Figure 
1
82
82
83
As a result, most units conduct WFXs biannually, thus creating a system where individuals do not remain in the same positions for multiple large-scale training exercises. Increasing the amount of learning per exercise, through a model like "interval" exercises, would be of great benefit to individuals who would then gain more experience earlier in their career, preparing them for positions of greater responsibility. This additional experience could also assist them in positions of authority teaching their junior officers how to cope with new responsibilities, as is often the model found in unit run leader professional development programs. Regardless of the method used to lengthen large-scale exercises, the US Army must also ensure the exercises help units develop new and sound tactics, techniques, and procedures under the conditions of the anticipated operating environment.
83 Donald A Schön, Educating the Reflective Practitioner (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1987), 114-117. Schön argues that to fully take advantage of learning through coaching individuals must imitate what their coach demonstrated, who then provides critical feedback. Following this feedback students must reflect then reflect on their initial reflection, using a "ladder of reflection." Schön further argues with more iterations of a given practice students eventually gain the ability to reflect in action and as a result selfcorrect. Schön's work is meant specifically for instruction on design, but his theory is transposable to the application of military arts. A certain amount of experimentation is necessary as the US Army further refines how it intends to conduct MDO across different organizations. Much like interwar period use of armored divisions, the best method to identify sound tactics, techniques, and procedures for employment is to put new technologies and organizations into a simulated combat environment. As previously mentioned, the most rapidly growing of the five recognized domains are space and cyber. As the US Army fields new equipment, personnel, and units that operate within those domains, they must also integrate them into their large-scale exercises. By involving these capabilities in the exercises, the US Army is underwriting experimentation in their employment. In the spirit of experimentation, the US Army should also vary the extent to which these capabilities are involved, in quantity, and authorization for their employment. By allowing commanders of different echelons to employ and control effects in the cyber and space realm, the US Army can create leaders who understand the impact those capabilities have. This experimental model allows for a better understanding of how to employ those systems in actual combat scenarios, and allow planners to anticipate better the actual effects they possess. Armed with that knowledge, US As a result, the US Army is currently attempting to discern what LSCO looks like in the information age. Simultaneous to this aim, the US Army is amidst the transition from the BCT to the division as their "chief fighting unit." As they identify the latest character of warfare, they must also evaluate the methods by which they prepare divisions for it. In the context of these current Army initiatives, leaving large-scale training exercises unaltered may be a case of doing the same thing and expecting different results. 
85
This is a fictional estimate of the next model Russian main battle tank following the current version, the T-14 Armata.
Christopher Gabel, The US Army GHQ Maneuvers of 1941 (Washington, DC: Center of Military  History, 1991), 9-11. The reality is that the US Army wanted to fight a different style of war than that of a stabilized front, and recognized that the square division was not optimized for a system of mobile warfare.
"The division is the foundational maneuver element." US Army TRADOC, PAM 525-3-1, 44. "Divisions are the tactical unit of execution for a corps." US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), 2-13. The idea that divisions are the primary maneuver unit within the United States Army has become prevalent throughout doctrine since the adoption of the LSCO into the 2017 version of FM 3-0. As of 2020, this change prompted the restructuring of the basic table of organization and equipment for the division headquarters.
James S. Corum, The Roots of Blitzkrieg (Lawrence, KS: University Press ofKansas, 1992), 4- 10, 30-32, 37-43.  Corum clearly illustrated Germany's motivation to avenge the "stab in the back" that many Germans saw as the main reason for their loss of WWI. Additionally, he discusses the fact that Germany was in the unique position to learn lessons from both the Western and Eastern Fronts, which meant they could integrate them into a new form of tactics focused on speed, mobility, and firepower.
 11  Gabel, The US Army GHQManeuvers of 1941, 8
-9, 12. In 1940 US military officials were not aware that they would have the benefit of almost two years to develop a successful counter to German tactics. However, they did take advantage of the fact that they could observe the application of German tactics and organizational structures prior to having to face them in armed combat. As a result, protective mobilization began in earnest onSeptember 8, 1939  when President Roosevelt declared a "limited national emergency." Though the enactment of the protective mobilization plan occurred prior to the fall of France in the summer of 1940, that event did eventually prompt the US to enact its first peacetime draft on September 16, 1940.12 Walter E. Kretchick, US Army Doctrine: From the American Revolution to the War on Terror (Lawrence, KS: University Press ofKansas, 2011), 124-128, 134-135, 138-151. Kretchik established  the connection between GEN Pershing's concept of "open warfare" and ideas proposed by Emory Upton and Arthur Wagner in the late 19 th century. These ideas were codified in the US Army's 1914 Field Service
Moenk, "A History of Large-Scale Army Maneuvers in the UnitedStates, 1935States,  -1964," 2, 42," 2, 42.; Peter J. Schifferle, "Anticipating Armageddon: The Leavenworth Schools and United States Army MilitaryEffectiveness, 1919-1945" (Doctoral Dissertation, University of Kansas, 2002), 43; Gabel, The US Army GHQ Maneuvers of 1941, 14-17. It is important to note that the active force never truly achieved these authorized end strengths. President Roosevelt partially accomplished such rapid growth by activating units and individuals from the national guard, organized reserves, and initiating the draft, thus establishing the Army of the United States. As a result of the short-term nature of activations and conscript requirements, towards the end of 1941 a majority of the US Army was about to stand down. Overall, of the ninety US Army divisions actually formed to fight WWII, only twenty percent were part of the Regular Army.
Schifferle, America's School for War: Fort Leavenworth, Officer Education, and Victory in  World War II,[6][7]
[8]
Moenk, "History of Large-Scale Army Maneuvers in the UnitedStates, 1935States,  -1964," 23.   ," 23.    
Moenk, "History of Large-Scale Army Maneuvers in the UnitedStates, 1935States,  -1964," 23-41.   ," 23-41.    
Mark T. Calhoun, General Lesley J. McNair: Unsung Architect of the US Army (Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 2015), 214.
Moenk, "History of Large-Scale Army Maneuvers in the UnitedStates, 1935States,  -1964," 42-43.   ," 42-43.    
Gabel, The US Army GHQ Maneuvers of 1941, 19.   
Gabel, The US Army GHQ Maneuvers of 1941, 10-12, 24-33, 53-60.   
A domain is defined as "An area of activity within the operational environment (land, air, maritime, space, and cyberspace) in which operations are organized and conducted. (modified joint definition)." US Army TRADOC, PAM 525-3-1, GL-4.
Mark A. Milley, Foreword to PAM 525-3-1, The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028 by US Army TRADOC (Washington DC: Government Publishing Office, 2018), i. The foreword goes on to
US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Operations (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), 1-2.
Fawcett, "History of US Army Operating Concepts and Implications for Multi-Domain Operations," 21-23.
Grant J. Smith, "Multi-Domain Operations: Everyone's Doing It Just Not Together," OTH Journal, June 24, 2019, accessed January 20, 2020, https://othjournal.com/2019/06/24/multi-domainoperations-everyones-doing-it-just-not-together/.; Will Spears, "A Sailors Take on Multi-Domain Operations," War on the Rocks, May 21, 2019, accessed January 17, 2020, https://warontherocks.com/2019/05/a-sailors-take-on-multi-domain-operations/. These two articles, written by members of the US Ari Force and US Navy, respectively, demonstrate that the MDO concept has permeated both their forces. Ostensibly, inclusion within them both, denotes tacit acceptance within the US Space Force and US Marine Corps.
74 US Army TRADOC, PAM 525-3-1, iii.
In this instance, the interwar period denotes the more common usage, between 1919 and 1941, that better encapsulates the timeframe during which the US Army sought ways to employ the listed capabilities.
Christina Sterbenz, "12  Famous Quotes that Always Get Misattributed." Business Insider, October, 7, 2013, accessed December 10, 2019, https://www.businessinsider.com/misattributed-quotes-2013-10. Though often attributed to Albert Einstein, Rita Mae Brown first published this definition of insanity in her 1983 novel Sudden Death.
I could not have accomplished this task without the unwavering support of my lovely wife, 
Chelsea. She
NAME(S) 
AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
the incorporation of technological developments over the seventy-five years between the publication of each document, ideas that seem modern in FM 7-0 (2016) have conceptual ties with those present in FM 21-5 (1941).
One example of this is presented in FM 7-0's (2016) discussion of training environments, categorized as live, virtual, or constructive. FM 7-0 defined training environment as "comprised of conditions, supporting resources, and time that enables training tasks to proficiency." Chapter two elaborated on the need for units to use a combination of live, virtual, and constructive training environments to enhance realism and maximize the use of time. That section went on to define live training as "executed in field conditions using tactical equipment. It involves real people operating real systems." Units conduct virtual training "using computer-generated battlefields in simulators with the approximate characteristics of tactical weapon systems and vehicles." Lastly, constructive training "uses computer models and simulations to exercise command and staff functions. It involves simulated people operating simulated systems." The manual explicitly stated units from the platoon to corps echelon can use all three methods. 
55
56
55 US Army FM 7-0, Training to Win in a Complex World, 1-10, 2-16 -2-18. 
56
discourses, as of early 2020, have dissected and analyzed the methods suggested in TRADOC PAM 525-3-1 (2018). 
69
The MDO concept does represent a significant change in the US Army's approach to warfare from the concepts employed over the preceding twelve years. 
70