# ID: 91c73a2856f5414d9cfa3b4845b72e6e
# Title: Combat with the God of war: a comparison of Russian cannon artillery from 2000 to 2016 using a DOTMLPF framework
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
Limitations are inherent restrictions in the study that the researcher cannot control or influence; they are acknowledged study design weak points.
Delimitations are deliberate restrictive choices made by the researcher; they are self-imposed limitations to establish a refined scope of research.
A significant limitation of this study is much of the data pertinent to this thesis is classified, but the paper itself must remain unclassified for distribution purposes, so the researcher did not conduct any classified research.
The classification creates a major issue when it comes to Russian artillery employment.
Therefore, Russian employment described in this thesis is identified through tactical application during wars and conflicts Russia participated in from the dates analyzed in this thesis, with the exception of Syria.
A delimitation will be focusing only on cannon artillery from the U.S. and Russian armies, not on rocket systems or other fires.
However, the thesis will examine improvements of artillery pieces and the use of cannon artillery to include: target identification, adjusting fire, and how troops were organized tactically to employ cannon artillery.
All aspects of DOTMLPF concerning Russian cannon artillery is analyzed throughout this thesis apart from facilities.
Although Russia does not use DOTMLPF framework for its military, Russian artillery in this thesis is analyzed through an American perspective to allow a comparative analysis.
Another delimitation will consist of time.
Technology changes frequently so the thesis needs an endpoint.