# ID: 91c73a2856f5414d9cfa3b4845b72e6e
# Title: Combat with the God of war: a comparison of Russian cannon artillery from 2000 to 2016 using a DOTMLPF framework
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
While the United States Army's artillery branch transitioned to fight a counter-insurgency fight for over 15 years, other militaries' artillery arms were in a transition as well. The use of U.S. artillery was limited in the conflicts of Iraq and Afghanistan. Meanwhile, Russia fought in Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine, all using artillery, the so called "god of war," as the centerpiece of their tactical and operational approach. Russia used lessons learned from each of these conflicts as well as the United States' conflicts in adapting their use of artillery. This thesis is a comparative study of Russian cannon artillery from 2000 to 2016, and what the United States Army, and more precisely, the artillery community of the United States Army, should learn from what the Russians implemented. Although this generation of warfare is perceived as new
new systems in their tactics. The U.S. military has lost its advantage and should relearn their artillery skills to prepare for the future possibility of fighting a peer/near-peer competitor. In order to prepare for a future conflict, a baseline should be set to determine how artillery will be used in conflicts of the twenty-first century. One possibility to establish a baseline is by conducting a comparative study to answer the question: "What were the changes in Russian cannon artillery from 2000 to 2016 when examined within the framework of Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership and Education, Personnel, Facilities (DOTMLPF)?"
To derive an answer to the primary research question: "How did DOTMLPF change in Russian cannon artillery from 2000 to 2016 a few secondary questions should first be answered. Understanding the secondary questions provides a logical approach to understanding Russian artillery integration and how it may impact on U.S. Army artillery by utilizing the DOTMLPF framework.
The secondary questions to be answered in this thesis are:
1. What was Russia's approach to the use of cannon artillery in 2000? 2. What was Russia's approach to the use of cannon artillery in 2016?
3. What does Russian experience with the use of cannon artillery since 2000 tell other militaries about how they will use it in the future?
The following definitions and terms provide greater granularity in the context of this thesis. The intent is to provide a common understanding of core concepts presented to the reader in the framework of this thesis.
Cannon Fire: Artillery fired from a rifled cannon, self-propelled and towed, either offensive or defensive in nature. Cannon fire does not include rockets, missiles, or mortars.
Decisive Action: Decisive action is the continuous, simultaneous combinations of offensive, defensive, and stability or defense support of civil authorities' tasks. Full Spectrum Operations: in 2008, was the "Army's core idea about how to conduct operations on land-its operational concept. Full-spectrum operations entail the application of combat power through simultaneous and continuous combinations of four elements: offense, defense, stability, and civil support." 
3
4
Limitations are inherent restrictions in the study that the researcher cannot control or influence; they are acknowledged study design weak points. Delimitations are deliberate restrictive choices made by the researcher; they are self-imposed limitations to establish a refined scope of research. A significant limitation of this study is much of the data pertinent to this thesis is classified, but the paper itself must remain unclassified for distribution purposes, so the researcher did not conduct any classified research. The classification creates a major issue when it comes to Russian artillery employment. Therefore, Russian employment described in this thesis is identified through tactical application during wars and conflicts Russia participated in from the dates analyzed in this thesis, with the exception of Syria. A delimitation will be focusing only on cannon artillery from the U.S. and Russian armies, not on rocket systems or other fires. However, the thesis will examine improvements of artillery pieces and the use of cannon artillery to include: target identification, adjusting fire, and how troops were organized tactically to employ cannon artillery. All aspects of DOTMLPF concerning Russian cannon artillery is analyzed throughout this thesis apart from facilities. Although Russia does not use DOTMLPF framework for its military, Russian artillery in this thesis is analyzed through an American perspective to allow a comparative analysis. Another delimitation will consist of time. Technology changes frequently so the thesis needs an endpoint.
Therefore, this thesis will focus on the time period from 2000 to 2016, with only a brief snapshot of 1999 to illustrate how policies came to be in 2000. When discussing the Russian-Chechen War, the researcher will focus on the Second Russian-Chechen War which took place from August 1999 to April 2009. Finally, examining cannon artillery, allows this thesis to focus on the tactical use of artillery, but will examine national and regional level documents which led to developments of artillery systems and the tactical use of cannon artillery on the battlefield. Although Russian cannon artillery is considered self-propelled howitzers, towed howitzers, mortars and anti-tank systems, the researcher will not take mortars or anti-tank systems into account for the purpose of this thesis.
Research cut-off date for this thesis is August of 2017.
The United States Army, is in a state of transition as doctrine moves from Full Spectrum Operations to Unified Land Operations which focuses on Decisive Action. The transition is due to the threat of a peer or near-peer competitor, most notably, Russia, China, North Korea, and Iran, as the big four. Russia, as one of the big four, uses artillery as the focal point of their military. The United States military has enablers such as artillery, which support maneuver, while in the Russian military, "maneuver supports artillery. Artillery is the decisive finishing arm for the Russian army,"
5
The significance of this thesis is its reflections upon the implications of changes in Russian artillery for the United States artillery branch. The branch's adaptation is especially imperative as many artillery officers' knowledge and skills for supporting maneuver with fires have eroded over the past fifteen years. The lack of skills, if not reversed quickly, will erode the trust of maneuver forces as well as diminish the effectiveness of support. There is no better time than the present to learn from ourselves and a potential enemy to implement lessons and concepts into the force. Technology changes rapidly and once implemented into a formation, it can increase the effectiveness of a military. However, the military may become over reliant on the new technology which creates problems if an adversary has a countermeasure to defeat it. Additionally, while the United States has focused on COIN operations for over fifteen years, its adversaries have learned new ways to attack and defend against the U.S. military. This thesis is unique because it will compare a near-peer threat prior to the so-called "Global War on Terror" to the recent past using the DOTMLPF framework.
The United States military needs to be proactive in its ability to adapt to possible wars in the future. Artillery skills are perishable and should be trained consistently within combined arms in order to provide responsive fires on the future battlefield. Currently the U.S. military is behind in the tactical employment of artillery. The U.S. artillery branch needs to work diligently to rebuild its skills and to learn from other countries to improve these skills.
The next chapter explores relevant literature organized by DOTMLPF in the areas of Russian artillery, Russian TTPs, the Russo-Chechen War, the Russo-Georgian War, and Ukrainian conflict in the Donbas to describe the comparison between Russian cannon artillery from 2000 to 2016:
1. What was Russia's approach to the use of cannon artillery in 2000?
2. What was Russia's approach to the use of cannon artillery in 2016?
3. What does Russian experience with the use of cannon artillery since 2000 tell other militaries about how they will use it in the future?
A systematic approach to answering the secondary research questions is useful in the comparative study of the primary research question, "What were the changes in Russian when compared with case studies of Russia's approach in its use of cannon artillery in Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine. Finally, after analyzing how Russian cannon artillery has progressed, the paper will examine its potential impacts on the United States Army artillery branch. While other studies such as the Russian New Generation Warfare discuss improvements in Russian artillery and provide some recommendations, it does not compare Russian artillery prior to the so-called "War on Terror" to current conditions and it does not use a DOTMLPF framework.
Since artillery is the main weapon system of the Russian military, one has to relate this to the country's practice of deterrence. Analyzing how Russia approaches war using cannon artillery is critical to understanding the Russian military as a whole. In July 2014, the Ukrainian Army moved several mechanized brigades into a position near the Russian border to prevent the illegal movement of military equipment across the frontier to rebels in eastern Ukraine. Early on the morning of 11 July, soldiers at the position noticed a drone orbiting above them for some time. Not long after the drone disappeared, rockets fired from 9A52-4 Tornado multiple launch rocket systems began landing on one of the brigades. The barrage lasted four minutes. Rockets carrying a mixture of high explosive, cluster, and thermobaric munitions smothered the unit's position. Cannon rounds followed the rockets with devastating effect. The Ukrainian soldiers took appalling losses. One battalion was virtually destroyed, and others were rendered combat ineffective due to heavy losses in vehicles and personnel. Casualties quickly overwhelmed army and local medical facilities. In the days that followed, rocket and cannon strikes continued, disrupting the Ukrainian Army's ability to defend that region of eastern Ukraine. 
12
11 Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), ix. multiple battalions ineffective, but caused only a few casualties compared to the number of rounds fired. In addition to the new FM 3-0, other research, studies, and articles have been published to conceptualize the artillery tactics in Ukraine. One study is the Russian New Generation Warfare by the Asymmetric Warfare Group which is a handbook for U.S. Army formations to increase awareness of Russian tactics, near-peer capabilities, and current U.S. non-material solutions to mitigate the threat posed by Russian proxies. 
13
14
As the United States Army transitions from Full Spectrum Operations to Unified Land Operations, the emphasis of doctrine links high-intensity conflict to the threat of a peer or near-peer competitor. Therefore, the enemy should be understood in order to build a foundation to allow creative and critical thinking, and gather the lessons learned from friendly and enemy tactics/operations to further develop U.S. and allied forces.
The Army has been in a COIN fight in Afghanistan and Iraq for over fifteen years. Numerous lessons learned came from these campaigns, both for U.S. doctrine and for our adversaries. Russia have implemented changes to its organization and introduced new technology that the U.S. used in Iraq and Afghanistan, but in a new way. The Russian Army has restructured their army around the brigade to operate in a broad front.
A motorized rifle (mechanized infantry) or tank brigade has four maneuver battalions, four artillery battalions, two air defense battalions, a logistics battalion, a maintenance battalion, a signal battalion, an engineer battalion, an electronics warfare company, an UAV company, a Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical company, and a medical company. 
15
Critical and creative thinking are the basis for the Army Design Methodology to understand, visualize, and describe complex, ill-structured problems and develop approaches to solve them. 
16
Similarly to how the Russians have developed new Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs) through the U.S. experience, the U.S. Army can adapt based on the lessons learned from the Russian conflicts in Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine. While the conflicts in Chechnya and Georgia may appear to be decisive victories, Russia made numerous mistakes that the U.S. Army can exploit. It would not be prudent to assume Russia would fight against America in the same way they did in each of the above conflicts, but it is probable they would build upon their experiences.
During the Cold War, the United States invested heavily in understanding the only other superpower in the world. The focus of the U.S. military shifted after the fall of the Soviet Union to the Middle East, which is evident since every major conflict the U.S.
was involved in occurred in that region since 1991. While the U.S. fought in the Middle East, Russia regained its global reputation by attacking Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine.
Once again, the United States is paying attention. The evidence is clear from how the NSS has changed its language and tone towards Russia and the increase in reporting and research from the Second Chechen War to Ukraine.
The next chapter presents the research methodology for assessing the comparison of Russian cannon artillery from 2000 through 2016.
Chapter 4 furnishes answers to the following secondary research questions:
1. What was Russia's approach to the use of cannon artillery in 2000?
2. What was Russia's approach to the use of cannon artillery in 2016?
3. What does Russian experience with the use of cannon artillery since 2000 tell other militaries about how they will use it in the future?
A sequential and systematic approach to answering the secondary research questions is useful in answering the primary research question, "What were the changes in Russian cannon artillery from 2000 to 2016 when examined within the framework of DOTMLPF?" Ultimately, in chapter 5, the answer to these questions should help answer the final question: What recommendations can be identified to counter or defeat Russian artillery? CHAPTER 3
The speed, accuracy and devastating power of American Artillery won confidence and admiration from the troops it supported and inspired fear and respect in their enemy.
- 18 Russians define doctrine as preparing the entire nation for war economically, politically, agriculturally, morally, militarily, and industrially which has strategic implications. Russian doctrine is used in this thesis to describe Russian best practices or employment in order to fit the DOTMLPF framework and the U.S. concept of doctrine.
Training of Russian artillery soldiers focuses on the ZAPAD exercise in 1999 and how it has translated into new best practices and TTPs. Furthermore, an analysis of what training followed due to lessons learned through Russia's conflicts in Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine demonstrate where Russia found gaps in their soldier's abilities to use artillery to overwhelm their enemy.
Materiel will be depicted using descriptions, charts, and pictures to show Russian cannon artillery systems and their capabilities from 2000 to 2016. It will also show the evolution of these cannon systems in each of the conflicts from Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine. Chapter 5 explains the ramifications of cost benefits of U.S. PGMs to Russian PGM and the effect if Dual-Purpose Improved Conventional Munitions are removed from the U.S. Army arsenal.
Leadership and Education will be derived from articles again written by Grau and   Bartles describing how officers are the "backbone" of the Russian artillery military and the kind of training the officers receive prior to entering their unit.
Personnel in the Russian artillery units will be explained through the evolution from conscripts to contract Non-Commissioned Officers using Foreign Military Studies Office articles and the Russian New Generation Warfare study. The intent of the Russian military shows an evolution from solely an officer-centric organization to relying more and more on Non-Commissioned Officers, much like the western world.
The years between 2000 and 2016 coincide with the implementation of Russian military policy under President Putin which led to the increase in activity, reformation, and recapitalization of its military effort including conflict with its former Soviet Union states. Conflicts in Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine provide concrete case studies of the outcomes of the efforts pushed to improve the capabilities of Russian artillery and lessons learned therefrom. During the same time period, the United States, which neglected any Russian military threat in the 1990s, after the fall of the Soviet Union, was focused on a COIN fight in both Iraq and Afghanistan during the so-called "Global War on Terror" campaign. In 2016, the United States shifted its focus from a COIN-centric military of Full Spectrum Operations to Unified Land Operations and began to look again at deterring Russia in Europe.
Russia was suffering from an economic crisis when it attacked Chechnya in the First Russo-Chechen War. The cost of oil increased during the Second Chechen War, which allowed Russia to put its economy on a good footing and to also take measures against former Soviet states to prevent them from joining NATO. Russia fought in Georgia in 2008 and began a conflict with Ukraine over Crimea and the Donbas region to prevent such an encroachment of NATO states and prevent the loss of their key Black Sea Fleet bases. Another benefit of the increase in oil prices was Russia could upgrade its artillery. This is identified with the production of the 2S35 and Global Navigation Satellite System (GLONASS)-enabled munition. One can learn much from an adversary through their triumphs and failures over a timeframe as well as learn from one's own triumphs and failures. Historically, the United States has not gone to war with the country(ies) it has planned to fight but should continually strive to be prepared for such a war with a near-peer adversary.
Research indicates that the years between 2000 and 2016 were formative years in the transition of Russia artillery from decentralizing its artillery, the use of UAVs to support forward observers, and looking to the future to increase materiel capabilities.
Knowing that Russia uses artillery as the focal point of its army lends one to believe that it is important to study this transition to understand how to combat this threat. The United States Army is also in a state of transition as it lessens its commitment in the Middle East and returns to training for large-scale, high-intensity conflicts. In chapter 4, the researcher strives to answer the secondary questions of, 1. What was Russia's approach to the use of cannon artillery in 2000?
2. What was Russia's approach to the use of cannon artillery in 2016? phase IV stability operations began, artillery became less and less important. Depending on which Regional Command in Afghanistan a unit was serving, cannon artillery may or may not have been used to great extent. If artillery was employed, it was most likely as counterfire in reaction to incoming rockets or mortars. In contrast, the Russian military was involved in three regional conflicts since 2000: Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine. In each of these conflicts, Russia used cannon artillery consistently. While the skills of the U.S. army artillery began to diminish due to lack of use, the Russian artillery's skills improved. Therefore, it begs the question, what was Russia's approach to the use of cannon artillery in 2000 compared to 2016? Through analysis of the Second Chechen War, the Russo-Georgian War, and the Ukraine conflict, this thesis will strive to answer those questions.
The study of an adversary's doctrine can identify strengths and weaknesses in their ability. Some areas of artillery doctrine to focus on are the positioning of artillery, in reference to maneuver forces as well as firing positions, how artillery is employed offensively and defensively, and what are the possible future updates based on TTPs used in combat. Although Russian "doctrine" is difficult to acquire through unclassified means, the U.S. military conducted extensive research on Russian artillery during the Cold War, which produced a U.S. understanding of Soviet (Russian) tactics. With the fall of the Soviet Union and the rebuilding of an army, it can be assumed that Russian artillery in 2000 was used in much the same matter as it was during the Cold War era.
In preparation for a high-intensity conflict Russia's gun positions normally were laid out at right angles to the axis of advance. The batteries deployed in a straight line, a half circle, a lazy "W," or a "V" formation with equal intervals between guns. to reduce emplacement/ displacement time 19 (see figures 1 and 2). Although vulnerable to counterbattery fire and air attacks, the Russians continue to favor this Soviet-style disposition to conduct manual gunnery quicker where enemy counterbattery fire was relatively weak. The reduced computation and mission time enables batteries to complete missions and relocate more quickly, thereby reducing their exposure to enemy fire and compensating somewhat for the vulnerability inherent in the formation. 
20
20
21
22
The intent of offensive artillery fire in the Russian army is to mass as much cannon artillery as possible on a target by using several batteries or battalions on a single target(s). Cannon artillery in a defense is used like a barrier, or curtain, with sectors of fire much like an infantry unit deploys its rifles and crew-served weapons. The standard reaction time for an artillery battalion is first rounds down range within two to three minutes, with the standard to adjust fire within another two minutes. The standard to 21 HQDA, FM 100-2-1, 9-12. 
22
23
This provides a baseline to the employment of Russian artillery tactics (doctrine) used during the Russian-Chechen War. In 2000, Russia was looking to focus more defensively and looking to improve their military through new procedures to develop and train against a decreased threat. "The doctrine was driven by a need to mass fires into concentrations to defeat a large number of armored targets on the battlefield. Battalion groupings are considered to be the optimal size to create the right balance between firepower, responsiveness, and flexibility." 
24
25
24 Chris Bellamy, Red God of War: Soviet Artillery and Rocket Forces (London: Brassey's Defence Publishers, 1986), 186.
In the Russo-Georgian War of 2008, Georgia was not prepared for a conventional engagement with Russia. 
29
30
31
33
destruction fires further demonstrates the Russian reliance of artillery on the battlefield.
Data from the Ukraine conflict show that artillery is producing 85 percent of casualties on both sides 34 especially when cannon artillery is used in a direct-fire mode.
Specifically, the 2S1, 122mm, has been used as both an assault gun and as an anti-tank weapon. Typically, cannon artillery is two to six kilometers behind the front lines, 
35
32 Asymmetric Warfare Group, Russian New Generation Warfare, 18.
33 Ibid.
34 Philip A. Karber, "'Lessons Learned' from the Russo-Ukrainian War" (Historical Lessons Learned Workshop, Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and U.S. Army Capabilities Center (ARCIC), 8 July 2015), 17. 
35
Russia uses UAVs to observe and shift artillery. Russia is able to mass fires on targets in ways not previously used or seen prior to this conflict. In Eastern Ukraine, Russian Forces have demonstrated their ability to direct and adjust fires with their drones.
Ukrainian forces have repeatedly seen a systematic approach by the Russians to acquire a target with a UAV. A high-altitude UAV will identify a Ukrainian target. It will then pass off that target to a lower altitude UAV to determine the target coordinates. Then the Russians will adjust their fire with the UAV based on the initial artillery strikes. The total time for this process can be as little as 10 to 15 minutes. 
36
37
39
Past and current tactics used by Russian artillery remain more or less consistent, from 2000 to 2016. The need to use artillery to prepare the battlefield until maneuver forces can deploy uninhibited is the way Russia has always used artillery. It can be assumed that Russia will continue to use artillery in the same way in the future. An exception is PGMs will augment direct fire artillery through echelonment of fires in urban operations. There are two main differences currently identified in the employment of Russian artillery practices in 2000 through 2016. First is the decentralization of the command and control system learned in the Second Russian-Chechen War. The second, learned through the Russo-Georgian War and demonstrated in Ukraine is the use of UAVs to identify targets and adjust fires on the target.
Organization of an army changes depending on the threat to give the army an advantage against its adversary or to better command and control a formation. For example, the United States Army transitioned from a Corps-based military to a Brigadebased military during COIN operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. With the transition, Division Artilleries were replaced with Fires Brigades. In recent years, and with the new FM 3-0, the U.S. Army has brought back Division Artilleries and the Corps is now the highest level of tactical command. During the Second Russian-Chechen War, Russia compiled a "heavy artillery group" from multiple sources, including artillery elements from the permanent readiness units created between the Chechen wars. Each ground force company commander had an artillery or mortar battery attached for direct support, and also had additional units on-call for general support. 
40
40
In 2016, Russia spent approximately $640 billion on improving their ground combat forces to include increasing their number of self-propelled howitzers by 2000 guns. 
41
42
4
Russia has also invested heavily in UAV technology to provide better target acquisition on the battlefield. This effort shows that Russia is attempting to better integrate multiple warfighting functions much like a Brigade Combat Team of the United States Army.
41 Amos C. Fox, "Russian Hybrid Warfare and the Re-Emergence of Conventional Armored Warfare: Implications for the U.S. Army's Armored Force," eArmor (July-September 2016), accessed 18 January 2018, http://www.benning.army.mil /armor/earmor/content/issues/2016/JUL_SEP/3Fox-Russia16.pdf. 
42
43
44
Much like Chechnya's fight, in Ukraine, Russia has decentralized its artillery to the maneuver battalions. Since the end of World War II, most armies have placed their artillery fire support at the brigade (U.S. and NATO) or regimental (USSR) levels.
However, in the Donbas, the Russians are permanently assigning (not cross-attaching) artillery batteries to mechanized and tank battalion groups. 
45
46
47
Since 2000, Russia has increased its artillery training in PGMs and the synchronization and integration of fires through annual exercises. Much like the United States Army conducting major exercises in places like Korea to learn and adapt, Russia conducts major annual exercises, one of which is called ZAPAD. The ZAPAD, which means "west," can lead to a change in their military operations, tactics or strategic approach. ZAPAD-99 in June of 1999, which consisted of 50,000 troops, was set in the Baltics and the scenario was one of a NATO-launched attack against Russia and its allies. 
48
49
Critical to any operation is the integration of artillery on the battlefield. The First Chechen War demonstrated an inability of Russian forces to coordinate joint operations between ground and air forces due to lack of training, 50 which remained consistent during the Second Chechen War. With the development of BTGs, Russia is striving to fix the issue of integrating and synchronizing fires in a joint operation.
A lesson learned by Russia during the Second Russian-Chechen War was to only deploy "career soldiers" to the front line while less-trained conscripts would remain further behind the forward line of troops. Also, learning from their experiences in the 48 Jacob W. Kipp, "Russia's Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons," Military Review (May-June 2001): 
27-38. 49
50
First Chechen War to the Second Chechen War, Russian artillery and targeting became more enemy focused rather than terrain focused. To further integrate and synchronize artillery, Russian forces introduced upgraded Pechela-IT UAV as a part of the Story-P UAV reconnaissance system. This system allowed Russian commanders to obtain realtime aerial-reconnaissance data on guerrilla positions. Better communications and reconnaissance allowed Russian forces to locate mobile groups of fighters and to restrict supplies of weapons and ammunition to the guerrillas from outside Chechnya. 
51
The benefit of using UAVs to support military operations was relearned after the problems faced in Georgia. The inability to synchronize artillery and air assets was 2015 to 2016 when the price stayed below $50 a barrel. 
54
53
55
13
Russia learned though urban combat in Chechnya and Georgia and broad fronts in Ukraine, that it can no longer depend solely on the skills of its officers. In 2000, a major difference between U.S. artillery and Soviet/Russian artillery is the responsibility of the battery commander. The battery commander in the Soviet/Russian artillery is much more centralized, located at the observation post to observe targets, help with computations, and keeps in contact with the maneuver forces. 
64
65
66
67
68
67
68
Although a military success, the leadership of Russian artillery officers during a high-intensity conflict in Georgia proved poor. Russia was clearly superior to Georgia in regards to number and employment of artillery systems, and in which the speed of deploying forces, however, initial engagements were inconclusive. 
69
Similar to readiness as the number one priority for the United States Army, readiness was key for Russia in the initial engagements in Ukraine. The leadership was able to deploy their troops quickly which allowed actions to be taken against an adversary which was not ready to fight. The decentralized control also allowed more flexibility and initiative by junior leaders to achieve initial tactical success.
The Russian military tends to focus on artillery to compensate for the quantity of their personnel. President Vladimir Putin, in 2000, decided to downsize the Russian military stating that the country could not afford to pay the three million personnel currently employed by the military. 
70
70
Russian Artillery Lessons Learned from the Russo-Ukrainian Conflict As in most wars, artillery is the number one casualty-producing weapon system in the Russo-Ukrainian Conflict. Not only does artillery provide indirect fire, but, as in the Second-Chechen War, direct fire artillery provided fast, accurate fires. The terrain in the Donbas is particularly conducive to direct-fire artillery and is widely employed by both the Russians and Ukrainians. Russia decentralized control of its artillery, not like mission command in U.S. doctrine, but rather in direct support at the maneuver battalion level.
Through the description of how cannon artillery was used by the Russians in Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine, one can derive an answer to the secondary research question: What does Russian experience with the use of cannon artillery since 2000 tell other militaries about how they will use it in the future? The battalion tactical group proved to be an effective organization in its use of artillery. However, unlike the U.S. military, the number of artillery pieces in the Russian army provides enough flexibility to assign batteries down to the maneuver battalion and frequently company level. This flexibility allowed Russia to effectively engage targets with massed artillery throughout a wide area. Russia showed its capability early in Ukraine with overwhelming results.
These results were also due to Russia fighting an enemy who was not prepared for war.
Russian military actions taken in Chechnya, Georgia, and especially Ukraine are more limited in nature due to the political repercussions these conflicts could cause. It should also be noted that these actions were taken against former Soviet states in which two had political aims to join NATO. These types of conflicts are likely to occur in the future if NATO continues to expand into Russia's "near abroad". The political factors of Russia attacking a former Soviet state is very different than if it became a US/NATO war with Russia. Russia would not be as restrictive, and the tactics would be much more like the Zelenopillya example using much more artillery and massed fires. In Zelenopillya, Ukrainian vehicles were an easy target, parked in a motor pool-like fashion. Russia attacked these using high-explosive fuzes, the most basic and most jam-proof fuze, to attack the target. Russia is aware of Western countermeasures and, where appropriate, will continue to use artillery techniques which will not be defeated by modern technology.
Artillery is an arm equally formidable in both in the offensive and defensive.
-Antoine-Henri Jomini, Your Dictionary History does not repeat itself but it often rhymes.
-Mark Twain, "History Does Not Repeat Itself but It often Rhymes as Mark Twain Noted
What is Old is "New"
This thesis has demonstrated that all militaries are similar in that they fail to address the lessons learned from one war or conflict to the next. Many tactics learned by Russian artillery troops were known from previous conflicts but were not imbedded in Direct fire is discussed in field artillery publications, but the focus is strictly on using it in a defensive mode in relation to final protective fires. Focusing only on defensive direct fire ignores an offensive capability that other militaries have proven to be useful. Russia has demonstrated the benefit of using direct fire artillery in every conflict thus far, showing that direct fire is quicker and more beneficial in urban combat.
Current publications fail to adequately address mission command in operations devoid of satellites and GPS. Mission command is the bedrock of a successful artillery branch. Mission command is much easier when communications are working well, and tactical operations centers are within close proximity. Once GPS becomes disrupted and lieutenants and staff sergeants are left alone on top of an observation post without a way to communicate to higher headquarters, mission command is truly tested. The U.S. Army artillery is too reliant on satellites and neglects the training to operate in an environment without these tools. The concept of laying a battery using distant aiming points such as the sun or the stars has become a lost art. Considering the implications of degraded communications lead some to consider less understood branches like electronic warfare that could be integrated into artillery tactics.
Electronic warfare and cyberspace are very different but are combined into FM 3-12: Cyberspace and Electronic Warfare Operations. Electronic Warfare could be used to great extent within the artillery community to help defeat UAVs or limit having to operate in a degraded mode. The integration of electronic warfare within artillery could help counter adversaries and their attempts to disrupt GPS, a tool artillery has become far too accustomed to using in today's fight.
Doctrine provides the baseline for all changes within the artillery branch. Direct fire provides another way to engage targets offensively that might otherwise not be used.
Mission command should be used as intended to provide commander's intent and allow the mutual trust of junior leaders to fight even while degraded. Finally, integration of other warfighting functions could help enable artillery in new ways but should be analyzed through doctrine to test the theory.
The organization of U.S. Army artillery needs to be re-examined further in order to determine the best way to fight future adversaries. The Russians decided that the artillery battalion was not necessarily the best unit size to support urban combat, and in many cases attached gun batteries to infantry battalions in a direct support role. 
73
U.S. artillery already changes it organization for combat for such events as gap crossings to employ all artillery assets in a fight. Therefore, with less of a need to mass fires, and the accuracy of U.S. PGMs, the artillery organization for combat could shift to direct support batteries, which may prove beneficial in urban situations.
The reliance on GPS demonstrated a decreased need for survey within artillery battalions. However, if GPS is jammed and units have to fight degraded, survey becomes important to find a unit's position on the ground. The overreliance on GPS allows soldiers to become lazy in basic skills like map reading and land navigation. This overreliance also lessens the proficiency of artillery soldiers to understand site-to-crest, piece-to-crest, and the use of graphical scales and tabular firing tables. Another aspect to help provide protection against degraded artillery tactics is the incorporation of electronic warfare into artillery units. Electronic warfare could protect artillery pieces from becoming jammed. Failure of GPS could result in the inability to meet the five requirements for accurate, predicted fires because in degraded mode the gun position is unknown. 
73
Most senior leaders decided to move forward observers back to artillery units to allow for more focused training. Although the ability to train forward observers became easier, the move challenges the integration of forward observers with maneuver outside of field training. A way to lessen the challenge could be to integrate training schedules where forward observers act as liaisons to serve as stewards of the profession to build relationships and train maneuver soldiers in calling for fires.
Organization of artillery in a future fight is unclear. However, some options that could be explored are changing artillery organization for combat in relation to urban combat, realigning survey, assigning electronic warfare within artillery units, and using forward observers as liaisons to integrate the maneuver warfighting function. 
Improving materiel for artillery increases the capability of the weapon system, whether the materiel is the weapon system itself or equipment to support the weapon.
Russian artillery focuses its efforts on heavier munitions that outrange U.S. artillery. This 74 Jonathon Bailey, Field Artillery and Firepower (Hampshire, UK: The Oxford Military Press, 1989), 73. disadvantage of distance makes the need for counter-battery radar more relevant today than ever before. Russian artillery also uses anti-tank munitions to use artillery in direct fire mode to increase its effectiveness. For U.S. heavy cannon artillery, the M109A6 and M109A7 do not use direct fire telescopes that were used in previous M109 series. Rather, soldiers within a M109A6/7 can identify a target visually through the gun tube which is inherently inaccurate. Russia has also demonstrated the benefit of using UAVs to support observation for artillery. Currently, the U.S. only uses one Raven UAV per fire support team to support observation for artillery. U.S. counter-battery radars are outranged by Russian artillery weapon systems and the Russians have the ability to use laser-guided or GPS-guided projectiles. U.S. artillery soldiers need to be able to prevent these munitions from reaching their designated target. Ukrainian artillery commanders suggest that the objective in counterbattery fire is less the destruction of the opposing artillery than disruption of its fire missions by forcing it to move. 
75
76
75 Bailey,
Field Artillery and Firepower,
73. 76
An alternative to the ability to use direct fire other than GPS should be examined further to allow heavy cannon artillery to use direct fire in a degraded mode. Currently, if GPS is jammed on a Paladin, the weapon system is less effective to fire in direct mode. This potentially puts soldier's lives at risk if they had to fire degraded without a better alternative that was once available. Furthermore, providing anti-tank munitions to artillery should be examined further to allow a more lethal effect if needed.
UAVs proved beneficial for Russian forward observers in Ukraine. The concept was learned through hard lessons in the Russo-Georgian War. The United States Army should take note from these lessons as well. While one Raven is available for a Company Fire Support Team, it may prove beneficial to use cheaper, "off-the-shelf" UAVs to every forward observer in a unit. This provides an extension of sensor-to-shooter for every observer rather than only one per team. Not only would more UAVs be beneficial to acquire targets at the company-level, but forward observers could now be used to observe named areas of interest to further develop the targeting cycle at the battalion and brigade levels.
In order to provide an advantage to the U.S. artillery soldier, materiel should be analyzed further to leverage more capability. Russia has demonstrated advantages through direct fire, munitions that travel farther, and UAVs to extend their ability to acquire targets. While the U.S. may be limited in range due to the need to stay expeditionary, direct fire with more lethal munitions and putting UAVs in the hands of every forward of observer can mitigate the disadvantage in artillery ranges.
The greatest strength of the United States Army is the professionalism of its soldiers and leaders. Leaders of the army are the ones who will put each of the items mentioned above into practice. In order to allow this to happen, artillery lieutenants need to learn each of the following key positions: Fire Direction Officer, Platoon Leader, and Fire Support Officer so as these officers are well-rounded as they continue their careers.
When deployments in Iraq and Afghanistan were common, most lieutenants only had experience in one or two of these positions before receiving an expedited promotion to captain. The second order effect of expedited promotion and fighting a counterinsurgency created a knowledge gap in an entire generation of officers. The new generation cannot afford to have the same issues. Winning a war today starts with maintaining standards and discipline, with a clear understanding of basic artillery tactics. Soldiers need to get "back to basics" to shoot, move, and communicate in digital and electronically degraded conditions. Standards need to be held high by leaders to prevent the hard lessons Russia relearned in Chechnya and Georgia.
Recommend that further research be conducted to analyze each of the Army Warfighting Functions and Joint Functions relating to how to counter Russia as well each of the top four adversaries discussed in FM 3-0. The researcher believes this should be a continuation study that would create Field Manuals much like FM 100-2-1 where the United States understands its potential enemy fully and military professionals are prepared in the event of an outbreak of war. Only by looking outward towards the enemy, can one truly understand what is needed internally to counter or get ahead of problems.
In 1991, the once global superpower, the Soviet Union, crumbled without a shot being fired. President Putin gave a speech in 2005 stating, "we should acknowledge that the collapse of the Soviet Union was a major geopolitical disaster of the century." 
77
While the 2S19 Msta-S is the current artillery piece of choice for the Russian military and will most likely continue to be upgraded and used on the battlefield, its successor, the 2S35, could be out as early as the year 2020. The 2S35 is supposed to be able to shoot 70 km 78 (U.S. counterbattery radar range) at a rate of fire of 15 to 20 rounds per minute, which doubles the current rate of fire of any of the artillery systems Russia currently fields. The 2S35 will also outrange and fire faster than the U.S. M109A6 Paladin, which shoots 30 km at a rate of fire of six rounds per minute. The United States was in the middle of an acquisition process to develop a self-propelled howitzer that could shoot 10 rounds per minute over 40 km, called the Crusader, but it fell by the wayside in 2002. Ironically, many characteristics of the 152 mm 2S35 Koalitsiya-SV mirror the specifications of the U.S. Army's proposed 155 mm Crusader design such as extended range projectiles, an automatic loader and dedicated armored resupply vehicle. 
79
78 James Anderson, "Russian Artillery: Adapting Ancient Principles to Modern Paradigms, Part 2," OEE Red Diamond 8, no. 11 (November 2017): 26. 
79
Russia and other adversaries have learned from America's wars in the Middle East. Russia, of the four main U.S. adversaries, is the only one to actually experience combat in the recent past. Therefore, the United States military and NATO partners should learn from Russia's wars. The U.S. and NATO partners should understand that urban terrain weakens technological advantages. If the U.S. and its allies take note of how Russia uses its artillery, they can improve and possibly deter any future engagement with Russia.
The difference between "Lessons Recorded" and "Lessons Learned" is institutional attitudes toward learning. If the artillery community continues to just write down lessons rather than learn from them, there will be a steep price to pay if the United States ever has to fight a peer or near-peer adversary, especially one that uses artillery as its main effort. Through innovative thought, better technology, and relevant doctrine, U.S. artillery can support maneuver and ultimately defeat any threat that may present itself in the future. This is a common goal everyone in the military should understand and ultimately work to achieve. Russia learned many lessons written in blood in unconventional and conventional wars in Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine. The United States has been out of the conventional realm for some time now and cannot afford to learn those same lessons in blood. The U.S. should take the time to learn from the lessons of the Russians and implement them into a U.S. framework, so the United States military does not have to suffer casualties to improve.
Rapid fire is a method of conducting artillery fire whereby the weapon is fired as quickly as possible while not exceeding its maximum rate of fire and not sacrificing accuracy. When the command for rapid fire is given, each individual weapons crew begins to fire independently when ready. Systematic fire is a method of artillery fire where every round (salvo) is fired on command at a set interval. This method is used for firing on observed targets during registration (individual rounds) or when the unit is firing a destruction mission (salvos). Systematic fire is used against unobserved targets in the course of fire assaults * of a given duration, during controlling fire *, and during harassing fire, usually alternating with rapid fire. The tempo of systematic fire against observed targets depends on the capabilities and equipment of the observer, whereas the tempo of fire against an unobserved target is determined by the amount of time allotted for the expenditure of a given amount of ammunition. The tempo of systematic fire is constant during a fire assault but may be intermittent for harassing fire. Systematic fire may be fired by a single weapon, a firing platoon, or an entire battery. On receiving the mission, the firing unit also receives a rate of fire and an ammunition expenditure requirement. Counterbattery fire is the use of artillery to accomplish the suppression and/or destruction of enemy artillery batteries located in screened firing positions. (The Soviets no longer officially use this term but state that the concept it represents is still valid and necessary.) Combat with enemy artillery is one of the Soviet Army artillery's most important missions because it enables Soviet ground forces to achieve fire superiority on the battlefield. However, combat. with enemy artillery today requires more than counterbattery fire. It now requires the destruction of the enemy command and control centers as well as his artillery and requires the cooperation of the other combat arms and combat aviation Maneuver by fire is the shifting of a unit's fire from one target (or group of targets) to another without changing firing positions. This is a combined arms concept in which the artillery plays a critical role. It is used to mass fires on the most important enemy objectives and troop formations to destroy them in a short period of time or to redistribute fires to destroy several targets simultaneously. Maneuver by fire also may be used to shift the main combat effort from one direction to another. In the offense, maneuver by fire is used in the depth of the enemy's defenses to suppress enemy strongpoints, to repulse counterattacks, and to cover by fire the attacking unit's tanks. In the defense, maneuver by fire is used to destroy the enemy as he deploys to attack; repulse the attack; support a counterattack; protect gaps in the defenses, including gaps created by enemy nuclear strikes; seal off enemy penetrations; render assistance to neighboring units; and support a unit that is defending all directions. Wide use of maneuver by fire helps compensate the defending unit for having fewer weapons and enables the defending commander to achieve fire superiority at the critical time in decisive sectors. Plans for maneuver by fire are normally a part of the defensive fire plan. In such planning, artillery units are assigned several supplementary sectors of fire covering areas along the supported unit's flanks and the gaps between units. In conducting fire with direct aiming (often confused with "direct fire"), the gunner of the artillery weapon can aim the piece using direct visual contact with the target. An artillery gunner who can sight directly on the target will usually engage it with direct fire, but because of the target's range or characteristics of the weapon, he may engage it with indirect fire. A mortar crew, for example, could sight directly on a target but would have to engage it with indirect fire. The Soviets write at great length about direct aiming advantages like the reduction in mission time and a drastic reduction in ammunition expenditure. Direct fire is recommended against targets at relatively short ranges (under 1 ,200 meters). Indirect fire with direct aiming is considered feasible at ranges out to 3 kilometers and perhaps farther, depending on the weapon sighting equipment and visibility. 
80
6 The Russian Way of War is a comprehensive study by Dr. Les Grau and Charles Bartles from the Foreign Military Studies Office located at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. Both are well-renown experts in the field of Russian war and tactics. Field Manual (FM) 100-2-1, The Soviet Army: Operations and Tactics from July of 1984, provides a baseline knowledge of Soviet tactics and organization during the Cold War and provides an unclassified view of how Russia used artillery in Chechnya. The National Security Strategies (NSS) of the United States and Russia describe the focus of each country on potential global threats and explains deterrence strategies in preparation for a conflict that may or may not happen. The NSS further examines what internal and external factors lead to military development. The researcher will show how the United States NSS relates to the European Command Military Strategy to formulate a baseline with which to focus the importance of artillery to Russia's deterrence policy.
Source: Walter Williams, "Threat Update Krasnopol-A Laser-Guided Projectile for Tube Artillery," Federation of American Scientists, accessed 23 March 2018, https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/row/krasnopol.htm.
Source: Walter Williams, "Threat Update Krasnopol-A Laser-Guided Projectile for Tube Artillery," Federation of American Scientists, accessed 23 March 2018, https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/row/krasnopol.htm.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP)
3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2016), 3-1.
U.S. Department of the Army, 2008 Army Posture Statement, accessed 19 April 2018, https://www.army.mil/aps/08/information_papers/transform/Full_Spectrum_ Operations.html.
HQDA, ADRP 3-0, 3-1.
Asymmetric Warfare Group, Russian New Generation Warfare Handbook (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Center for Army Lessons Learned, 2017).
The International Institute for Strategic Studies, accessed 19 February 2018, iiss.org.
Arms Control Association, "Russia National Security Strategy," 1 January 2000, accessed 20 December 2017, https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2000_01-02/docjf00.
Gen Philip M., Breedlove, USAF, United States European Command: Theater Strategy (Germany: Headquarters, United States European Command, 2015), 5, accessed 20 December 2017, www.eucom.mil/media-library/document/35147/useucom-theaterstrategy.
Center for Strategic and International Studies, "Olga Oliker, Senior Adviser and Director, Russia and Eurasia Program," accessed 19 February 2018, https://www.csis.org /people/olga-oliker.
Ibid., 1-3.
Asymmetric Warfare Group, Russian New Generation Warfare Handbook, cover.
TRADOC Threats, OEE Red Diamond 8, no. 8 (August 2017): cover.
Lester W. Grau and Charles K. Bartles, Russian Way of War: Force Structure, Tactics, and Modernization of the Russian Ground Forces (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2016), 101.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 6-22, Army Leadership (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), 5-1.
The Military Balance, "Russia," The Military Balance 100, no. 1 (2000): 110, 22 January 2009, accessed 17 December 2017, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 04597220008460142.
Olga Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994
-2000:
Svante E. Cornell and S. Frederick, eds., The Guns of August 2008: Russia's War in Georgia (New York: M.E. Sharpe, 2009), 164-165.
Hakan Karlsson, "Competing Powers: U.S.-Russian Relations 2006-2016" (Swedish Defense University, 12 September 2016), 50, accessed 21 March 2018 www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1119554/FULLTEXT02.pdf.
Cornell and Starr, The Guns of August 2008, 168.   
Grau and Bartles, Russian Way of War, 52.   
Grau and Bartles, Russian Way of War, 53.   
Brad Marvel, "The Snow Dome, Part 2: Russian Artillery Tactics and Systems," OEE Red Diamond 8, no. 8 (August 2017): 7.
Ibid.   
Karber, "'Lessons Learned' from the Russo-Ukrainian War: Personal Observations."
Grau and Bartles, Russian Way of War, 241.   
Ibid., 114.    
Cornell and Starr, The Guns of August 2008, 179.   
HQDA, FM 100-2-1, 9-12.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
The worse the troops, the greater the need of artillery.
-Napoleon Bonaparte, Quote Fancy
Similarly, Russia fields some 650 122 mm 2S1 Gvozdika SPH and 550 of its towed D-30 version. Alongside these, Moscow continues to field some 950 2S3 Akatsiya 152 mm SPHs. Frontline professional units tend to use the Msta-series artillery pieces, with older systems largely serving in second-string conscript units. 
58
Of interest are the types of munitions used in Russian artillery. The Krasnopol Laser-guided munition, which was present during the Cold War, was used in Chechnya to implement precision into its formation. Next in the development for Russian artillery is a GLONASS (GPS)-enabled 152mm shell, which should enable the Russian military to achieve more precision engagements of targets. This munition is supposed to be available at the same time as the 2S35, in the year 2020. Reportedly, the cost of each shell would only be $1,000, which is a big difference in cost compared to the M982 Excalibur round which is around $80,000 per round, 
59
60
59
60 BAE Systems, "U.S. Army Selects BAE System to Develop Advanced Precision Guidance Kits for Artillery Shells," 30 January 2018, accessed 21 April 2018, million to 865,000, a decrease of 365,000 personnel in three years' time. 
71
Russian Artillery Lessons Learned from Second Chechen War Russia learned from actions in the Second Chechen War that massed artillery remains effective, decentralized control enables subordinates and increased timeliness of fires, artillery remains the only all-weather fires asset, and secure communication is key to successful combat. Precision-guided munitions are great for preplanned targets, but to get both a physical and psychological effect, massing artillery onto targets is a valuable technique. Decentralized control is common for the United States Army, but this was a fairly new concept for Russian artillery with roots in Afghanistan. Previously, all aspects of coordination of fires were conducted by the officers corps. By allowing for decentralized control, junior officers could call for fire quicker with better effects. The development of a professional non-commissioned officer corps will devolve more http://carnegieendowment.org/2000/12/13/prospects-for-military-reform-in-russia-event-249. 
71
72
The next two lessons from the Second Chechen War are not necessarily artillery specific, but critical in terms of using artillery. First, as most military members know, artillery is an all-weather weapon. Russia learned that an overdependence on Close Air Support inhibited operations. The military would plan to use airframes for targets rather than artillery, but when bad weather ensued, there was not an alternate plan to target the enemy. Finally, command and control are essential to a successful operation. A lack of personnel trained in radio communications and a disregard for time-consuming encryption and decryption allowed Chechen soldiers to call artillery and Close Air Support on Russian formations using Russia's own radios and nets to create fratricide.
The biggest takeaway from the Russo-Georgian War was combined armsmaneuver is still the most efficient way of conducting military operations. However, much like the war in Chechnya, an overreliance of Close Air Support proved costly.
Russia identified how useful UAVs could be through observations of the United States in Iraq and Afghanistan and decided to incorporate them into their own arsenal. However, to remain cost effective, the UAVs Russia uses are not expensive attack platforms like the U.S. Predator. Rather, they are cheaper, effective forward observation platforms that