# ID: 965686e1839a468b99fbf547db163aed
# Title: At the Vanguard
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
Russia's 2014 aggression against Ukraine, Moscow's subsequent efforts to destabilize and divide Western allies, and its continued military modernization prompted a marked shift in NATO's security posture. For much of the post-Cold War period, the NATO Alliance focused predominantly on cooperative security and crisis management operationstwo of NATO's three core tasks-in and around Europe, as well as in Afghanistan and later Libya. In the months and years following the Ukraine crisis, leaders across the Alliance acknowledged the need to strengthen NATO's deterrence and collective defense, the third core task, vis-à-vis Russia. 
1
Combat airpower constitutes an important line of effort in bolstering NATO's deterrence and defense in a range of potential scenarios against a near-peer competitor. In this report we assess the evolving capability and readiness of European air forces to contribute to a high-intensity theater conflict and identify specific issues that allied forces could address to position themselves as central contributors to NATO's deterrent posture at the vanguard of any foreseeable combat air campaign. Drawing from interviews, an expert roundtable, and relevant literature, we conclude that trend lines lead in the right direction. Acquisitions of new combat aircraft-if accompanied by investment such as enhanced radars, advanced and longrange munitions, and secure communications links-will enhance deterrence and defense. Continued attention to increasingly sophisticated training and exercises will also be needed to maximize the value of fifth-generation aircraft, of which European nations will possess several hundred by the mid-2020s. And with additional budgetary and policy attention to increasing readiness, European allies have the opportunity to significantly enhance combat airpower over the coming decade.
The research reported here was completed in May 2020 and underwent security review with the sponsor and the Defense Office of Prepublication and Security Review before public release. Human Subject Protections (HSP) protocols were used in this study in accordance with the appropriate statutes and Department of Defense (DoD) regulations governing HSP. Additionally, the views of the sources rendered anonymous by HSP are solely their own, and do not represent
xii European Contributions to NATO's Future Combat Airpower while, have observed the development of NATO's post-Cold War airpower capabilities and remain keenly aware of its potential to achieve devastating strategic and operational effects, including in the early stages of a conflict.
While NATO has traditionally relied heavily on U.S. airpower, ongoing modernization among a number of European air forces, 
4
The question of this research effort was, "What is the evolving capability and readiness of European air forces to perform select combat air missions in a high-intensity theater conflict?" Relatedly, the project explored how an increase in capability could affect adversary planning and the challenges and opportunities that European air forces could address to position themselves as central contributors-that is, at the vanguard-to NATO's deterrent posture and any foreseeable combat air campaign.
While NATO airpower could be applied to a broad range of allied operations, we focus specifically on maximalist conditions: highintensity operations that would require rapid and large-scale application of airpower, conducted in the European theater. Our analysis is based on an Article 5 declaration and full contributions from all 
4
5
Russia enjoys a relative advantage in rapidly deployable ground forces in regions close to Russian borders, notably the Baltic states and Poland. However, Russian strategy documents, statements, and actions indicate particular concern about the depth and speed provided by NATO's advanced platforms and munitions, which could serve to blunt Russia's ground advantage. Furthermore, observations of Western targeting practices over the past two decades have raised Russian concerns about the vulnerability of Russian ground forces, military bases, and critical infrastructure, as well as political leadership, to NATO's combat air capabilities. Although the perceived extent of NATO's relative airpower advantage is unclear, Russian defense analysts evaluating the combat potential of Western military aircraft have historically considered qualities such as firepower, mobility, survivability, and command and control, as well as a platform type's contributions to units and larger formations. These are all areas where the increase in capability resulting from NATO's modernization efforts will become more pronounced in the next five years. Extensive Russian investment in integrated air defense systems (IADS) underscores the significance with which Russia views the air domain a central dimension of its military planning.
xiv European Contributions to NATO's Future Combat Airpower Second, European air forces currently possess fleets with relatively limited capabilities for conducting the most-demanding missions expected in a high-intensity conflict and of most concern to Russia. Currently, the European allies considered in this report maintain about 1,900 combat aircraft, fewer than 100 of which are fifth generation. European air forces made substantive contributions to previous allied and coalition air operations across the spectrum of combat air missions, but typically in less contested operating environments. During the opening phases of a conflict with Russia, vulnerability to advanced ground-based threats would constrain the roles of most fourth-generation and so-called fourth-generation-plus platforms. While limited in a highly contested environment, these aircraft could still perform defensive counter-air missions over national airspace or other strategically significant locations, long-range (outside of advanced IADS range) missile strikes with precision-guided munitions (PGM), and electronic warfare (EW) attacks. As long as an extensive IADS threat persisted, more advanced platforms such as the Rafale or Eurofighter could theoretically perform strike missions inside the threat zone in conjunction with fifth-generation platforms, although this approach could yield unacceptable attrition. If the threat posed by adversary air defenses were reduced, fourth-generation aircraft could begin to conduct a broader range of traditional roles such as offensive counter-air or close air support to ground forces. Another complication likely to stress NATO planners-particularly in light of the demise of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty-will be the need to reserve enough sorties for protection of national airspace, air bases, and other sensitive sites from cruise and ballistic missile attack.
Third, European acquisition of fifth-generation fighters will improve NATO's capacity for operations in a high-intensity conflict with Russia, though new capabilities are needed above and beyond the platform itself. By 2025, the seven F-35-acquiring European allies will, in aggregate, possess more than 200 F-35s stationed in Europe. 
6
7
7
8
Fourth, a high degree of interoperability and integration between European fifth-generation fighters and NATO's other air and joint forces is required to maximize the Alliance's combat potential. As both Western and Russian analysts have observed, the combat potential of an individual aircraft is, in part, a function of its ability to work effectively within a broader formation. Fifth-generation platforms have the potential to serve as a force multiplier across a combined force, improving the performance of other platforms by enhancing their situational awareness. Fourth-generation fighters-many able to wield greater firepower than their stealthier fifth-generation counterparts and still projected to account for about 70 percent of NATO's inventory by 2030-will still constitute an important element of airpower. It is reasonable to assume that the Russian military would seek to disrupt this synergy during a conflict, particularly in light of recent Russian investments in EW capabilities.
Already, allies have undertaken initial steps to establish common tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) for incorporating fifthgeneration assets into combined operations through targeted exercises as well as preliminary synthetic training systems that link fourth-and fifth-generation aircraft. Recent training and exercises have emphasized operations in contested environments and prioritized missions such as SEAD, a skill set new to most European air forces. Important progress has been made, though it has been limited by policy and technological constraints to real-time information sharing among platforms and between allies.
Over the coming years, the need to familiarize aircrew across the Alliance with combined operations integrating fifth-generation aircraft will increase as the F-35 comes online. Major European air forces without fifth-generation capabilities, such as France, have ample opportunity to participate as full partners by joining in the development of emerging operational concepts. Additionally, air forces require clear policy guidance for fifth-generation interoperability and information sharing, secure and reliable communications links, and additional resources for combined training in denied and degraded environments.
Fifth, even as many allied governments pursue procurement of advanced combat platforms, all European air forces still struggle to maintain high levels of readiness. To be operationally relevant during a theater conflict, NATO's air forces must maintain a sufficient number of available aircraft, munitions, and aircrew. Currently, most European air forces maintain around half of their existing fleets or less at mission-capable status, with some allies falling below that mark. For many fourth-generation fleets, rising maintenance costs from platform age, operational wear and tear resulting from a high operational tempo, and challenges associated with spare parts pipelines serve as significant constraints to aircraft availability. Early challenges within the F-35 program-in particular, implementing an envisioned global spare parts pooling concept and overcoming malfunctions of the autonomic logistics information system (ALIS)-could limit the benefits from xviii European Contributions to NATO's Future Combat Airpower European investments in the platform if left unaddressed. European investments in PGMs, including standoff weapons, deepen the allied arsenal and, if sufficient in quantity, would allow for a more sustained contribution to a collective defense operation should the need arise. Finally, insufficient airspace for exercises and the number of pilots and skilled maintainers represent limiting factors for most allied air forces.
Over the coming decade, European air forces will be increasingly capable of playing a significant role at the outset of a high-intensity collective defense operation. In particular, current and planned acquisitions of fifth-generation aircraft and their use within combat ISR, SEAD, and counter-land roles could fundamentally change the way that NATO conducts air operations, improving survivability and lethality and enabling greater European involvement across some of the mostdemanding mission sets. Drawing from these findings, the following recommendations are designed to inform European investments, the implementation of JAPS, and other forms of multinational collaboration that make the most of emerging technology.
and other platforms to complement the F-35's unique capabilities. In order for the F-35 to maximize its impact across a conflict, the following investments should be made by allies to improve the survivability, firepower, and connectivity of existing platforms:
• Upgrade fourth-generation aircraft radars. In particular, an AESA radar system for Eurofighter Typhoon fleets would enhance survivability during a high-intensity conflict. • Continue to stockpile munitions, including new options such as the Joint Strike Missile and recently developed or expected anti-radiation missiles. Using mechanisms such as the NATO Air-to-Ground project (known as A2G-PGM) as well as collaboration with European industry, allies should continue to expand their PGM arsenals with particular attention to anti-armor weapons and air-to-ground missiles with ranges between 100 km and 1,000 km, including anti-radiation mis-siles that provide fourth-generation aircraft a SEAD and strike capability from standoff ranges. • Ensure that fourth-generation aircraft, as well as ground and maritime systems, can receive targeting information from the F-35 in a timely and secure manner. Since NATO communications are a likely focus of Russian electronic attack, they must be robust and sufficiently redundant in the context of jamming and other interference. 2. Prepare fifth-generation fleets across NATO to undertake operations within the range of Russia's most sophisticated air defenses. Maximizing the impact of European F-35 purchases for collective defense will require that fleets are capable of contributing to challenging missions in the initial phases of an air operation. To enable this contribution, NATO air forces should initiate the following:
• Include the SEAD mission in training and exercises beyond the initial training program at Luke Air Force Base in the United States. This will necessitate trainer aircraft that closely simulate the capabilities of the F-35 as well as realistic threat emitters and electronic jammers, among other features. • Develop operational concepts for locating, tracking, engaging, and destroying moving armored formations in contested environments, and ensure training and exercises provide adequate opportunities to rehearse blunting large-scale ground offensives. • Hone international cross-maintenance practices to facilitate distributed operations and reduce predictability with flexible aircraft servicing that enables forward refueling and rearming. 3. Institute routine combined training and exercises for multinational formations, including with the F-35. The introduction of fifth-generation aircraft alters existing NATO concepts of operation and creates the need for closer synergy among aircrew. To improve operational cohesion over the coming decade, NATO air forces should institute the following:
• Train on a regular basis as often as practicable-ideally quarterly or even monthly-in combined multinational formations that include fifth-and fourth-generation systems. Initiatives can draw from the experiences of the long-standing  4. Commit to a greater level of public objectives and transparency for combat aircraft availability. Data on the missioncapable rates of European air platforms are not generally publicized. Public agreement by NATO leaders on standard availability objectives could provide renewed political and budgetary focus on efficient and adequately funded maintenance and sustainment. The recent U.S. nadir of an average overall 70-percent mission-capable rate might offer a reasonable NATO-wide objective. This report identifies the following actions to improve availability levels:
• Invest in measures to improve current limiting factors such as spare parts shortages and lengthy maintenance timelines within both the F-35 program and fourth-generation fleets. • Continue to address malfunctions within the F-35 ALIS logistics system. • Continue to develop a predictable and transparent system for spare parts allocation across the F-35 global spares pool.
to allow U.S. and European air forces to enhance collaboration for training and operations. At present, unclear and sometimes unnecessary restrictions on information sharing and planning stifle cooperation among air staffs and reduce their ability to adequately prepare for high-end multinational operations. In particular, senior-level attention will be needed to • release an updated F-35 interoperability policy that identifies guidelines on information sharing within the consortium in a way that balances legitimate security needs without unduly restricting multinational cooperation • facilitate collaboration among U.S., European, and NATO planners to synchronize TTPs and concepts of operation, perhaps through the establishment of standing liaisons at the squadron and/or group levels.
Recent and anticipated investments in combat air capabilities and increased emphasis on training and preparation for high-intensity missions are likely to improve European contributions to a notional collective defense scenario over the coming decade. These developments could also enhance deterrence-an objective at the forefront of NATO's agenda since 2014-by making it more likely that Europeans would be able to impose extensive military costs on Russia in response to aggression against a NATO member. One common scenario considers a calculation by the Russian government that Russia could leverage a regional imbalance in ground forces to occupy some slice of NATO territory, employ air defenses to stave off allied air forces, present a fait accompli similar to that seen in Crimea, and politically divide NATO by calling for negotiations. 
10
Russia's 2014 aggression against Ukraine, subsequent efforts to destabilize and divide Western allies, and continued military modernization prompted a marked shift in NATO's security posture. For much of the post-Cold War period, the Alliance focused predominantly on cooperative security and crisis management operations -two of NATO's three core tasks-in and around Europe, as well as in Afghanistan and later Libya. In the months and years following the Ukraine crisis, leaders across the Alliance acknowledged the need to strengthen NATO's third core task, deterrence and collective defense, vis-à-vis Russia. 
1
2
1 NATO, Strategic Concept, 2010
, p. 1. 2 NATO, "Warsaw Summit Communiqué," July 9, 2016.
3
4
While NATO has traditionally relied heavily on U.S. airpower, ongoing modernization among a number of European air forces, including through the introduction of fifth-generation aircraft, could offer an essential contribution to transatlantic defense, enhance deterrence, and provide commanders much-needed combat power and flexibility in the event a conflict ensues. 
5
In light of these developments, and recent unpublished RAND research on Russian air defense planning highlighting the need to examine European combat air capabilities, this report examines European allies' combat air capabilities in the context of NATO's collective defense in the 2020s.
This chapter summarizes the project's research approach and how RAND reviewed Europe's current combat air capabilities, projected their evolution, and arrived at a series of issues that might be addressed to strengthen deterrence and collective defense in relation to Russian leadership and armed forces that have come to respect NATO's airpower.
This research project assessed the evolving capability and readiness of European air forces to contribute to a high-intensity theater conflict. Relatedly, the study sought to identify specific issues that European air forces could address to position themselves as central contributors to NATO's deterrent posture and at the vanguard of any foreseeable combat air campaign. To consider the implications of recent and projected developments for a potential adversary, we examined Russian perspectives on evolving NATO combat airpower to extrapolate mission areas of likely significance to Russian decisionmakers and planners.
While NATO airpower could be applied to a broad range of allied operations, this study focuses specifically on maximalist conditions: high-intensity operations that would require rapid and largescale application of airpower, conducted in the European theater. The analysis is based on an Article 5 declaration and full contributions from all members. It does not assess political will or Alliance cohesion, a matter addressed elsewhere, but rather focuses on a review of capabilities. 
6
If deterrence is to be enhanced, a potential adversary needs to understand and respect NATO capabilities. In this regard, Russia's outlook on NATO's combat air capabilities may provide new opportunities to strengthen defense and deterrence. NATO's relative advantage in the air domain has long been a source of concern to the Russian leadership, prompting extensive Russian investments in air defense systems, among others. This study drew from an analysis of Russian strategic literature, senior leader statements, and recent operations to extrapolate which NATO combat air capabilities and missions may be of greatest concern to Russian planners in the context of a notional conflict with NATO.
This report considers the combat air contributions that non-U.S. NATO members could make to a NATO collective defense operation, now and over the coming decade. Specifically, we assess the capability of select European air forces to contribute to NATO operations in a highintensity theater conflict.
To scope our analysis, we addressed potential European contributions to two of the four airpower roles identified in NATO doctrine and the JAPS: counter-air and attack. These two airpower roles were selected based on our review of the emphasis placed on these roles by Russian planners and decisionmakers, as well as project scoping discussions that revealed these issues to be of interest to the U.S. Department of Defense. While the remaining roles of intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) and air mobility represent critical dimensions of an overall response, this project focuses on those roles that require contact with adversary forces and form the core of a nation's airpower capability. 
7
9
10
NATO describes the second air role addressed in this studyattack-as lying "at the heart of air power's capacity to create influence by changing behaviors or the course of events." 
11
12
We do not consider nuclear-related mission sets because of the limited information on this topic in the public domain, although fighters capable of performing a dual-capable aircraft role are included in the inventory considered.
We conducted documentary research, interviews, and roundtable discussions with subject matter experts from the United States and select European air forces and NATO commands. 
14
1
The first, force structure and technology, centers on a review of fighter aircraft and munitions inventories belonging to operational forces, including key subsystems and add-ons subsequent to original procurements. Our review of this factor incorporated emerging operational concepts being considered by Western air forces as a result of ongoing procurements and expected technologies, particularly fifthgeneration aircraft that offer joint forces a potentially unparalleled capa-14 Additionally, RAND organized a workshop in Washington, D.C., to explore plans and developments among European air forces in the context of the new Joint Air Power Strategy. This event included presentations by officials of seven allied governments. bility to provide real-time situational awareness and take timely action within a highly contested battlespace.
The second factor, readiness, incorporates those elements necessary to successfully operate combat aircraft, including equipment availability, recruitment and career progression of qualified personnel, and provision of training and relevant exercise opportunities. In considering this factor, part of the research effort explored the likely impact of the fifth-generation-enabled operational concepts.
We elected the two overarching factors based on a recognition that introducing high-end technology cannot in itself transform a nation's capabilities without corresponding efforts to ensure readiness. As depicted in Figure 
1
We do not assess the contributions that the remaining NATO nations could make, nor do we consider basing, access, or supporting  capabilities. Combat air missions fundamentally depend on supporting (e.g., mobility, ISR) and joint (e.g., space and cyberspace) capabilities that, while critical, remain beyond the scope of this effort. We also limit our analysis to NATO members commitments, notwithstanding that key partners could contribute to an Alliance operation. 15
This report does not provide a definitive assessment of requirements for individual European air forces or NATO as a whole-this would necessitate extensive modeling and simulation and access to classified technical information. 
16
We make two major assumptions that merit explicit mention here. The first is that fifth-generation capabilities-for this study, chiefly the F-35 program-will continue to mature and anticipated technologies will be developed without substantial, mission-critical, and/or unmanageable delays. Second, we assume Europe's acquisition and development of this capability-if managed carefully-will contribute to deterrent effects in NATO's relationship with Russia. We revisit the implications of this assumption in the concluding chapter.
This report is designed to inform allied government decisionmakers on the prospects, challenges, and opportunities of an evolving European combat airpower capability in relation to NATO's objectives of deterrence and collective defense. It is organized across seven chapters. Chapter Two provides an overview of recent and current NATO airpower developments and relays what national air forces have been tasked to do through their respective levels of ambition. Chapter Three addresses Russia's perspectives on NATO airpower and identifies its concerns about a potential theater-wide conflict. Chapter Four reviews current and projected force structure and technology while Chapter Five and Chapter Six review equipment availability and training, respectively. Other aspects of readiness, also covered in Chapter Five, are recruitment and retention, training and exercises, maintenance and spare parts, and basing infrastructure. Finally, Chapter Seven combines insights from force structure and technology and those about readiness to provide an overall depiction of capability and relays findings and recommendations.
This chapter describes aspects of the post-Cold War evolution of airpower in Europe. It begins by exploring European contributions to two NATO operations fought predominantly in the air: Allied Force (1999) against Serbia and Unified Protector (2011) against Muammar Gaddafi's Libya. Next, it reviews steps NATO has taken, including within the air domain, to improve its defense and deterrence posture in response to a changing European security environment. The chapter concludes with an overview of the level of ambition and areas of emphasis within each of the European air forces covered by this study.
Combat airpower has played a significant role in allied and coalition operation over the course of the post-Cold War period. In particular, technological advances in precision-guided munitions (PGM), stealth, and standoff weapons, beginning with the 1991 Gulf War, often made airpower a preferred instrument for decisionmakers. Positing that NATO was increasingly "addicted to the air power advantage," one Norwegian Air Commodore has highlighted the extent to which rapid post-Cold War technological developments made the offense superior to defense in air warfare, offering that the West has gained "new possibilities for strategic attacks against multiple target categories of a nation state (military units, leadership, and critical infrastructure)." 1 Figure 
2
European allies have represented an important part of this progression, contributing to air operations throughout the post-Cold War period. Operations Allied Force and Unified Protector provide useful examples to examine as two NATO operations fought predominantly in the air domain, with participation from a broad range of allied air forces.
In March 1999, NATO initiated a major offensive military campaign in an effort to coerce Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic into ending ethnic cleansing in Kosovo and removing Serbian forces from the prov-  ince. 
2
3
4
5
2
6
2
3 Peters et al., 2001, p.
Assessment, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MR-1365
-AF, 2001
, p. 20. 6 Lambeth, 2001, p. 20. 7
8 Peters et al., 2001, p. 20.
9
10
11
12
13
15
16
18
19
20
Italy, the third-largest European contributor of aircraft, also provided Tornado IDS and AMX fighters for defensive combat air sorties. 
21
22
23
25
26
The conflict saw a marked increase in the use of PGM compared with previous campaigns: About 35 percent of munitions were precision, predominantly from the U.S. arsenal. 
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
The 2011 intervention in Libya highlighted both the potential strengths and limitations of modern European airpower. For the first time since the Suez crisis, British and French forces led a military operation in the Maghreb, joined by a small contingent of NATO and non-NATO partners. The intervention represented a new model in which the United States deliberately sought to "lead from behind," undertaking only 27 percent of the overall sorties. 
36
33
34
35
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
37 Mueller, 2015, p. 121
38
39
40
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
51
52
53 Mueller, 2015, pp. 168, 176
54
55
56
The 1999 Kosovo and 2011 Libya conflicts provide context on European contributions to NATO air operations. Neither operation was at the scale or intensity that a conflict with a near-peer adversary would likely entail, and neither reflects changes that have taken place in European militaries over the course of the past decade. However, the operations highlight some of the traditional relative strengths of allied air forces, as well as considerations that might arise in a larger allied operation. 
54 Mueller, 2015, p. 197
55
56 Mueller, 2015, p. 268;
Kinacioğlu and Gürzel, 2013.
2
Over the course of the dozen years between the two conflicts, most European air forces had acquired PGM and, by 2011, a number were willing to employ them to valuable effect. The air forces of the United Kingdom, France, and Italy demonstrated their long-range strike capabilities through the deployment of conventional cruise missiles against targets inside Libyan borders. However, after each conflict, NATO highlighted PGM as enduring shortfalls in summit-level declarations.
Both adversaries-the Serbian and the Libyan militaries-were able to employ air defenses against NATO using older Russian-made SAMs. In both cases, SEAD operations were a critical dimension of the response-Germany and Italy conducted SEAD throughout the operation in 1999, while the United States conducted the majority of SEAD missions in 2011. During both conflicts, the French air force accepted operational risk in the face of adversary air defenses.
Multinational interoperability presented challenges during both conflicts. Issues such as incompatible data links, procedures for intelligence sharing, and the inherent difficulty of employing tactical formations with platforms and pilots from multiple nations taxed air planners and required extensive workarounds. Yet the case of the Dutch employing U.S. air designator pods also reveals that NATO air forces can and do innovate to make the most out of available capabilities. This is enabled by a foundation of routine multinational training and exercises and the maintenance of common, or at least compatible, doc-trine and tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs), a point addressed more extensively in Chapter Six.
Finally, although this report focuses on military capabilities rather than political decisionmaking, it was notable that European contributions to both conflicts were significantly influenced by political considerations. For Kosovo, the NATO Alliance was able to achieve consensus about the Allied Force mission, but disagreements about targeting slowed decisionmaking and left some U.S. policymakers Additionally, the 2014 Wales Summit emphasized increased defense spending across the Alliance, with a resultant increase of European allied defense budgets from $272 billion in 2014 to $313 billion by 2018. 
59
58 Mariusz Fryc, "From Wales to Warsaw and Beyond: NATO's Strategic Adaptation to the Russian Resurgence on Europe 's Eastern Flank," Connections, Vol. 15, No. 4, 2016; and NATO, "NATO Response Force (NRF) Fact Sheet," 2018. 
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
77
NATO leaders have also sought to further improve readiness and deployability to ensure that the Alliance would be able to employ "the right forces in the right places at the right time" across domains. 
78
79
The ambitions and emphases of national air forces vary across the Alliance. This section, drawing from a review of national budgets, doctrine, and recent operational history, offers three broad categories in which to consider the European air forces reviewed. These groupings, as depicted in Figure 
2
Given the quality and quantity of aircraft in their armed forces, the two European nations that contributed most significantly to NATO air  operations discussed in this chapter-France and the United Kingdomare in a category of their own. France's strategic ambition has manifested in its air force investments and operations, potentially making it, in the eyes of some analysts, the NATO ally with the greatest will and capability to contribute significantly and aggressively to NATO collective security threats. 
80
For France, the concept of strategic autonomy is central to its approach to airpower. France's 2017 Strategic Review of Defense and National Security, which explicitly acknowledges that "the threat of a major conflict is once again a possibility," emphasized the need for strategic autonomy or "the capability to decide and act alone to defend its interests." 81 Also in 2017, the French air force unveiled a new strategic "Flight Plan" to ensure it was powerful in its capabilities, audacious in its innovation, agile within a new environment, and connected, both to partners and to French society. 
82
83
80
85
86
87
88
The RAF represents a core element of the United Kingdom's fighting force. One scholar has noted that airpower likely dominates any British contribution to future state-to-state conflicts. 
89
90
86
87 Brustlein, 2017, p. 39.
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
The next subset of air forces is postured for contributions to NATO or coalition air operations, with more limitations in capability, capacity, and/or readiness than France and the United Kingdom. While some of the F-16 nations could also be categorized as medium, we defer discussion of these to the subsequent section.
Although the German military budget is the second largest in Europe, it lies far below the 2 percent of GDP threshold sought by NATO allies. Politically, German military ambition might best be understood through the lens of the country's post-World War II orientation, which includes one pacifist theme ("never again war") and another multinational ("never alone"). The German Luftwaffe, accordingly, has tended to contribute to nonkinetic missions in support of multinational operations, including ISR and transport, as well as SEAD, its primary kinetic focus. In this vein, Germany has made a commitment to NATO to provide an airborne electronic jamming capability by the mid-2020s. 
96
96
,
3,
358  DK,
4,
760  GR,
4,
844  BE,
4,
921   P O ,
1 1 ,
9 7 1   NO,
7,
179   N L ,
1 2 ,
4 1 9   SP ,
1 3 ,
1 5
97
98
99
102
103
104
Spain's 2003 Strategic Defense Review sets the Spanish air force's ambition of contributing two combat aircraft squadrons, with support elements, in two different theaters as well as support elements to a third theater. 
105
106
107
108
Keohane, 2017. 105
107 NATO, "Defence Expenditure of NATO Countries (2012-2019)," June 25, 2019.
108 NATO Air Power Roundtable, RAND Corporation, Arlington, Virginia, June 11, 2019.  discussed in Chapter Six, Spain and Italy may be attractive candidates as hosts to a more robust allied air training apparatus.
Poland's military ambition is viewed through the lens of the perceived security threat posed by neighboring Russia. The Polish air force maintains a relatively new F-16 fleet, allowing it to conduct a range of attack and air defense missions. 109 However, the geographic proximity of Poland to Russian IADS and current absence of Polish SEAD capability would leave Warsaw most likely unable to control nearly half of its national airspace during a conflict with Russia. 
110
112
The air force of Greece seeks to be a credible regional force with the ability to maintain air superiority over Greek airspace, support joint national joint operations, and support multinational operations abroad. 
113
114
115
116
118
119
120
121
Smaller European air forces with fourth-generation combat fleets predominantly composed of F-16 fighter jets could also make significant contributions to NATO operations but rely heavily on a coalition structure. For these air forces, the primary mission is defense of national or regional airspace, with varying ambitions to support formations in multinational peace and stability operations. 
122
123
120 Anrig, 2014, p. 64. 121
124
125
2
European combat airpower represents an important military dimension of NATO's reorientation to once again address the potential for Article 5 threats to member states. In the past, European air forces made tangible, operationally significant contributions to NATO campaigns, albeit with a range of limiting factors. Institutionally, NATO's recent updates to policy and doctrine have sought to enhance the Alliance's posture and capabilities in order to improve deterrence and, if necessary, ensure collective defense. Within the air domain this has included a new strategy, the JAPS, that underscores the central role of airpower to address current and evolving threats. Individually, many European air forces are modernizing their airpower capabilities as they recover from fiscal challenges imposed by the 2008 economic crisis to address evolving threats. Subsequent chapters consider Russian perceptions of NATO airpower and explore recent developments in the force structure and readiness of European air forces. 
In order to understand the contributions of NATO's combat air capabilities to deterrence, it is important to consider how they may be perceived by a potential adversary. Drawing from an analysis of Russian official strategy documents, military science journals, senior leader statements, and recent operations, this chapter reviews Russian perceptions of NATO airpower through the lens of current and historic themes in Russian military analysis. Our observations suggest several NATO combat air capabilities, missions, and qualitative features that the Russian military likely identifies as central to NATO's airpower and that thus may be of greatest concern to Russian planners in the context of a notional conflict with NATO. These insights offer important context for discussions in subsequent chapters of current trends in the force structure, technology, and readiness of European allied air forces. The analysis in this chapter is derived from open source information and documents, including Russian sources previously translated by RAND. 
1
3
1 Much of this chapter benefits substantially from research conducted for RAND by Clint Reach, Jim Williams, Vikram Kilambi, and Mark Cozad. See Russian Assessments and Applications of the Correlation of Forces and Means, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-4235-OSD, 2020.
Repeated attacks and varying levels of success in protecting the homeland lie at the core of Russia's defensive ethos. The nature, consequences, and frequency of military conflicts in the region are almost unprecedented, host to some of the largest armies, biggest battles, and worst losses of life in history. Perhaps best described in Russia: The Story of War, "near-constant warfare and invasions since the medieval period [have] reinforced Russia's self-image not only as a besieged Orthodox bastion of exceptional strength, but as a great power destined to be the savior of humanity."
2
As a result, war-a constant amid turnover and ambiguity-saturated Russian culture and has become the country's enduring common denominator. The belief that no other nation has faced such persistent challenges to its existence for centuries, particularly from the West, forms the basis of Russia's "besieged fortress mentality," a trepidation that predates militarized airpower. 
4
5
Most sources suggest that deep strikes in the homeland or air attacks on fielded forces were at the forefront of Soviet concerns throughout the Cold War. 
6
8
Today, persistent concerns about domestic vulnerability to air strikes continue to represent a central dimension of pervasive Russian narratives around existential external threats. Russian leaders often cite concerns that reflect the besieged fortress mentality in their public remarks.
9
10
11
12
13
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russian military scholars and practitioners have continued to closely observe Western air campaigns. Russian political and military leaders believe Western airpower poses an especially distressing threat. Several sources discuss Western combat air tactics and capabilities employed in the First Gulf War (1991), the conflict in the former republic of Yugoslavia (1999), the U.S. War in Iraq ( 
2003
2011
1. emergent and refined capabilities, specifically the advent of PGM and the Alliance's increased use of EW in the air domain 2. the combination of depth and speed enabled by developments in NATO forces' long-range strike capabilities and combat platforms 3. a distinct pattern in Western target prioritization.
A brief review of Russian operations during this period also reveals several indications that the Kremlin has taken concrete steps to prepare its air and air defense forces to counter or mitigate threats posed by these capabilities in a notional conflict with the West. The few examples of Russian leaders' statements presented in this section are not exhaustive but do demonstrate that Russia's views of Western airpower are relatively consistent from the lower-level analyst to the highest level of Russian leadership, including President Vladimir Putin.
Over the past two decades, Russian analysis of NATO air operations repeatedly raised concerns about Western technological developments and their combat implications. 
14
NATO's use of short-and long-range PGM frequently appears in Russian military writings and statements. 
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33 29
34
35
36
37
Russia's long-standing quest for strategic depth, once provided by Warsaw Pact territory, no longer stands as an effective defense against an attack on the Russian heartland. The advent of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) during the Cold War introduced the real prospect of Western strikes on the Russian homeland, in a way virtually immune to even the most sophisticated defense measures. 
38
34
35
36
37
38 Linton Brooks, Francis J. Gavin, and Alexei Arbatov, "Challenges of the Nuclear Era: The Russian Perspective," February 2018; Congressional Research Service, "ICBM: Early Developments," Washington, D.C., May 26, 1997.  tional bombers and other systems took longer to reach their targets, assuming they could penetrate air defenses. Today, Russian analysts and military leaders alike have come to view the increased speed of modern combat aircraft and weapons and their proximity to Russia, combined with existing and enhanced long-range strike capabilities, as a serious threat.
During NATO operations in Iraq (1991) and Kosovo (1999), Russia witnessed how the strategic scope and depth of the battlefield increased with the employment of long-range precision munitions, launched primarily from air-and sea-based platforms. 
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
Russian military officials and analysts have underscored a Western preference for precision strikes against high-value targets, generally defined as prompt global strikes, in order to avoid a more traditional ground fight. 
52
53
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
On September 20, we launched a special operation in Syria involving long-range strategic and army aviation. . . . For the first time, mass scale strikes with high precision-air and sea-based cruise 
54
55
56
57
58
59
Following deep strikes in Russian territory and SEAD, Russia would expect the West to also conduct air interdiction of key lines of communication and resupply. This expected shift creates a planning challenge for Russia because it cannot simply defend critical infrastructure but must also account for its potentially more vulnerable, and clearly more dispersed, supply lines. Russia would also have to plan for means to defend its fielded forces since any NATO counterattack 
58
Throughout the Cold War, the Soviet Union used a method called correlation of forces (COF). COF was an analytical concept for measuring the state of competition between the Warsaw Pact and NATO using quantitative political, economic, and military indicators. 
60
61
62
63
64
3
Post-Cold War Russian observations of the U.S. way of war have shifted the emphasis to war waged predominantly from the air and sea, "supported by a large number of long-range precision munitions, a highly capable C4ISR system, and air-based electronic warfare capability." 
65
Soviet and Russian approaches to COFM calculations over the years have attempted to quantify combat potential through different formulations designed to assign values to platform subsystems/capabili- 
64
65
• firepower • survivability • maneuverability • command-and-control capability. 
66
66
67
Russian military analysis has focused on finding common benchmarks for the importance of not only weapons and platforms but also combat formations. Articles have reinforced the importance of calculating the combined capabilities of an air formation since the combined formation capabilities may be greater than the sum of the individual parts. 
68
A combat formation as opposed to an individual weapon or piece of military equipment is a complex combat system that contains a determined amount of similar-type and different-type weapons and military equipment, a subsystem of combat C2 [command and control] and material-logistics support. The presence of these subsystems gives the combat formation a new synergistic quality that increases the combat capability of the combat formation in comparison with a simple collection of weapons and military equipment. 69 
67
68
Overall, this chapter suggests that Russia is likely to be most concerned about emerging capabilities that would improve NATO's ability to suppress or destroy air defense or to penetrate deep into Russian territory. Russian analysis and public statements regarding the Western use of airpower reveal several recurring themes. First, Russian planners and military leaders may fully expect the United States and NATO to use a high percentage of precision-guided munitions in an initial attack. 
70
71
Based on their analysis of previous NATO campaigns, Russians may perceive a high likelihood that Western air forces would also conduct air interdiction strikes against targets that allow resupply of frontline forces as well as frontline forces themselves, including armored formations. Furthermore, Russian activity in Syria to defend bases and 
70
72
Our review of Russian correlation of forces and air defense analysis also indicates that Russian planners will likely carefully review both the quantity and quality of platforms and weapons possessed by NATO, as well as how they are grouped in formations. The available data place a heavy emphasis on the importance of the quality of NATO platforms and weapons, especially precision deep-strike weapons such as cruise missiles. Russian literature on the combat potential of weapon systems suggests that Russian analysts may consider at least four qualitative features when assessing NATO platforms: survivability (or protection), firepower (or strike), maneuverability (or mobility), and command and control. NATO's planned modernization of combat aircraft is likely to have an impact on Russian thinking about these areas, including in regard to long-range firepower and the targeting and situational awareness aspects of command and control. Collectively, Russian analysis may also consider how a given NATO platform contributes to a military formation more broadly. For example, if a formation includes a mix of legacy capabilities paired with an advanced platform such as the F-35, Russian estimates will likely give the overall formation greater weight. While not an exhaustive review and based solely on publicly available materials, this examination provides a contextual foundation for subsequent discussions about the force structure, technology, and readiness of NATO air forces. 
72
Defense budget cuts following the Cold War and again in the aftermath of the 2008 Great Recession forced European militaries, including air forces, to undertake dramatic reductions in force structure. The number of combat aircraft in European inventories fell considerably, and fewer modern aircraft were procured than initially anticipated. 
1
2
3
4
This review of force structure and technology compares existing and projected combat aircraft inventories for the coming decade, orienting around capabilities available in 2020, reflected or assumed in defense plans for 2025, and envisioned for 2030. We identified this ten-year window as the time period for analysis primarily since this is when nations in the F-35 program will acquire the majority of their inventories while others, notably France, are projected to undertake modernization initiatives that, while not providing fifth-generation-equivalent capabilities, are nevertheless critical to collective defense. 
5
This study focuses on combat aircraft, but European militaries possess a number of other forces capable of delivering effects in the air domain that warrant brief mention. Other capabilities include ground-based air defenses (GBAD) and, to a lesser extent, naval cruise missiles for land attack. 
6
For air defense, European air forces and in some cases armies maintain GBAD capabilities for protection against suspicious or hostile aircraft, cruise missiles, and increasingly drones. 7 Prominent systems include the Patriot (with PAC-2/3 missiles) and SAMP/T (with Aster 30 missiles). The Norwegian Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile System (NASAMS), widely exported and designed to fire the AIM-120 advanced medium-range air-to-air missile (AMRAAM), represents arguably the most sophisticated platform to counter short-and medium-range threats from the ground. 
8
7 Systems that counter cruise missiles may also provide limited protection against ballistic missiles, though ballistic missile defense (BMD) continues to be a major challenge for NATO. The Alliance's BMD mission is focused on defending against the relatively limited Iranian threat, not Russia. For more on this issue, see for example, Ian Williams, "Achilles" Heel: Adding Resilience to NATO's Fragile Missile Shield, Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 5, 2019.  the AMRAAM-Extended Range (ER). Furthermore, a new longrange missile will be procured in the long term to operate alongside the NASAMS. 9
For strategic attack and other forms of strike, NATO's naval cruise missiles offer a standoff capability of significant concern to Russian planners, but this dynamic relates primarily to U.S. Navy forces. While several European navies possess this capability, their quantity of naval combatants and munitions would most likely translate to a marginal contribution during a sustained high-intensity conflict. The April 2018 trilateral operation (U.S., UK, and France) to carry out strikes in retribution for the Syrian's regime's use of chemical weapons may be representative in this regard. According to news reports, the United States employed 57 naval cruise missiles in a land attack role, the French fired three, and the United Kingdom did not employ longrange naval fires. 
10
Fourth-generation fighter aircraft emerged at scale in the late 1970s. 
11
The F-16 has been a foundational airpower capability for some of Europe's more advanced militaries, including Belgium, Denmark, Greece, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Turkey, and, well after the 9 Jane's, "Norway: Air Force," World Air Forces database, December 5, 2019. 
10
11 Key characteristics commonly associated with this generation include the Doppler radar, fly-by-wire technology for operating without manual controls, digital avionics, enhanced maneuverability and speed, and varying levels of stealth and sensor fusion. Alessandro Marrone and Michele Nones, eds., Europe and the Future Combat Air System, Instituto Affari  Internazionali, March 2019, p. 15.  end of the Cold War, Poland. Indeed, multinational cooperation on this aircraft goes back to its very origins when the United States and four European nations established the F-16 Multinational Fighter Program consortium, a then-unprecedented effort to jointly manufacture, sustain, and operate a fighter aircraft in support of gaining efficiencies through scale, facilitating European technological maturation, and supporting NATO's interoperability for decades to come. 
12
13
Other U.S.-made fourth-generation aircraft found in European fleets include the F/A-18 Hornet and the AV-8B Harrier, which is capable of short take-off and vertical landing (STOVL). The F/A-18 Hornet was operated by the Spanish air force and the AV-8B Harrier by the Spanish and Italian navies (and, previously, the UK Royal Navy) from aboard aircraft carriers and big-deck amphibious ships. Fourth-generation aircraft developed by individual European nations or multinational consortiums include the Mirage 2000, Tornado (with the ECR variant designed for SEAD missions), and Gripen-A/B/C/D, as well as the more recent Eurofighter Typhoon, Rafale, and Gripen-E. 
14
Over approximately the past 20 to 25 years, industry has introduced key technologies that contribute to what some commentators term "fourth-generation-plus" capabilities that, when integrated onto 12 U.S. Air Force, "F-16 Fighting Falcon," fact sheet, September 23, 2015; "Lockheed Martin F-16 Fighting Falcon," Jane's All the World's Aircraft, May 15, 2019.
13 F-16A/Bs received the AM/BM designation following the Mid-Life Upgrade. For a more complete breakdown of the Mid-Life Upgrade, see "History/The Beginning: Reason for the Mid Life Update," F-16.net, undated.
14 While none of the nations examined in this study possess the Gripen, the recently developed Gripen-E may be competitive on the international market as a platform comparable to the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet, Rafale, and Eurofighter. See, for example, Gerard O'Dwyer, "Industry Bids Are in for Finland's' $13 Billion Fighter Race," Defense News, February 1, 2019.  a fourth-generation aircraft, provide advantages for operations in demanding environments. One technology that stands out as highly relevant to the scenarios envisioned by both U.S. and Russian strategists is the active electronically scanned array (AESA) radar. An AESA radar can "detect, track and identify greater numbers of targets much faster and at much longer ranges" than a passive electronically scanned radar (PESA). 
15
16
17
18
19
16
October 31, 2019;
and Jennings, 2018. 18
19
Another aspect of fourth-generation technology to consider is the extent of air-to-ground capabilities resident in NATO air forces. Under the banner of Project Centurion, the UK Royal Air Force has upgraded its Tranche 2 and 3 Typhoon fleets to be suitable for land attack missions with add-ons that include a laser designation capability, the latest-generation Litening III targeting pod, and the integration of new munitions, including the Storm Shadow cruise missile for deep strike. Spain, on the other hand, has dedicated its Typhoons to an air defense role, relying on its F/A-18 fleet for strike, including with the Taurus KEPD 350 long-range cruise missile. Leaving the Typhoons in a specialty air defense role may present certain advantages, including budgetary, but provides less flexibility for high-intensity conflict. Germany falls somewhere in between: according to IHS Jane's, the first Luftwaffe Eurofighter squadron became multirole-capable (with an air-to-ground capability) in 2017, while the timeline for the remaining three squadrons will depend on resource availability. 
20
The 13 European nations examined currently possess 1,700 fourth-generation aircraft, a number that will decrease to 1,500plus and 1,300-plus by 2025 and 2030, respectively, as F-16s and other systems are phased out and fifth-generation capabilities come online. Important modernization initiatives are underway or expected, including continued procurement of the newest Rafales. The overall number of Typhoons may not change significantly, but less capable Tranche 1s and 2s will gradually be replaced by newer Tranche 3s, though in the case of the United Kingdom, this modernization may not keep up and could result in reduction of overall inventory. 
21
Outstanding concerns include timelines associated with Germany's aging Tornados, 22 including the SEAD-capable ECR variant, and Spain's ability to maintain an F/A-18 fleet suitable for high-intensity operations as well as its plans for replacing the aging AV-8B. Another 
21
22
area of high interest to the development of NATO's joint airpower capabilities concerns plans for Turkey's indigenous aircraft industry and Ankara's consideration of the Russian-made Su-35 aircraft as a followon to its controversial purchase of the S-400 air defense system.
23
Fifth-generation aircraft-for Europe, only the F-35 
24
Stealth is coupled with enhanced maneuverability and an array of self-protection and radar-jamming capabilities that enable the aircraft to penetrate air defenses with a lower likelihood of detection, complete a mission, and survive for a period of time in the opponent's weapons engagement zone. 
25
26
27
28
As depicted in Figure 
4
Of our assumptions listed in Box 4.2, the most aggressive may be the United Kingdom's acquisition of 90 F-35A aircraft by 2030. If the Royal Air Force sees a reduction in the quantity of aircraft procured, or the acquisition takes until the early-to mid-2030s to complete, our lower-bound projection of 350 would be the most likely number of F-35s in European inventories by 2030.
An additional consideration for military planning centers on the quantity of F-35Bs that comprise the total: between 20 and 40 percent,  depending on the year examined. STOVL functionality and the ability to operate from ships requires inherent system trade-offs: While the F-35B can operate on carriers and use shorter runways, it has a smaller weapons bay and less fuel capacity than the F-35A, limiting its range without aerial refueling. More broadly, in a conflict, F-35Bs will to one extent or another also be required for defense of the aircraft carriers and amphibious ships from which they operate, meaning potentially fewer sorties available for strategic attack and counter-land operations. 
29
European air forces generally possess highly capable munitions, though with some capability gaps in select national inventories and, as detailed in Chapter Five, variation in terms of quantity of available stockpiles needed for a major conflict.
30
Europe's air forces maintain an array of short-range, beyond visual range, and standoff range (generally at least 100 km) air-to-air missiles.
With the exception of France, European air forces possess the active radar-guided Air Intercept Missile-120 AMRAAM, or AIM-120, the most ubiquitous beyond visual range weapon of its kind in Western inventories and compatible with nearly every fourth-generation aircraft and the F- 
35. 31
32
For short-range air-to-air employment, the infrared-guided (IR) AIM-9 Sidewinder I and imaging infrared-guided (IIR) AIM-9X Sidewinder II are widely operated in Europe, fitting most fourthgeneration aircraft and, in the case of AIM-9X, the F-35. Most nations have acquired the AIM-9X Block 2, which incorporates lock-on-afterlaunch (LOAL) technology and a data link that enables engagement beyond visual range. Similar options include the French-made R550 Magic-2, AIM-132 advanced short-range air-to-air missile (ASRAAM) operated by the United Kingdom; and the more widely proliferated IRIS-T. The MICA also functions within visual range. Table 
4
The AGM-64 Maverick is a widely proliferated PGM for close air support and air interdiction missions, with most air forces operating an AGM-64D or newer versions capable of operations in night and adverse weather. The French AASM and UK's Brimstone II offer similar capabilities. 
33
For ranges that exceed 100 km, counter-land operations capabilities are limited to fewer nations. Derived from the Harpoon antiship missile, the AGM-84 SLAM-ER (Turkey) offers a standoff range of up to several hundred kilometers. 
34
35
36
37
4
European nations possess modern bombs as well as older versions retrofitted with guidance kits and other upgrades. Table 
4
mode but this makes it more likely the aircraft would be detected. Recent work to reduce the size of air-to-air missiles may provide fifthgeneration platforms with more firepower when in stealth mode, although it is unclear that similar progress has been made for airto-surface missiles. 
42
43
• In the "alone-and-unafraid mode," the F-35 can serve as an "advanced aircraft that will be able to perform the traditional role of a tactical strike fighter more effectively than ever before."
This mode enables operational persistence with limited reliance on links to air operations centers and intelligence collection and 
42
For maximum effectiveness, this mode requires secure, highbandwidth communication links between the F-35 and other air and joint systems. 
45
45
46
47
48
49
46
47
48
49
4
In light of Russian investments in advanced air defense systems, the SEAD mission stands out as one of the critical elements for the opening hours and days of a campaign. Nations are procuring fifthgeneration aircraft such as the F-35 in part to obtain a credible SEAD capability against advanced SAMs at the onset of hostilities.
Fourth-generation aircraft also offer SEAD capabilities for situations short of when the most threatening portion of an adversary's IADS network remains functional. Several experts highlighted that "not all SEAD is the same." Based on our research we have disaggregated SEAD into three levels:
• Level 1 SEAD occurs in the early hours and days of a campaign in the face of the most advanced integrated air defenses. This mission can be accomplished by fifth-generation aircraft able to survive inside the weapons engagement zone, although fourthgeneration and joint assets positioned on the outside will be critical to ensuring enough fires are massed. Other methods in consideration by several air forces include using swarming UAVs for targeting coupled with ground-based fires. • Level 2 SEAD takes place against shorter-range SAMs and longrange SAMs that are not fully integrated as the conflict progresses and the adversary's IADS are degraded. This mission could be accomplished by EW-capable combat aircraft such as the Tornado ECR (and potentially future Typhoons) firing anti-radiation missiles. • Level 3 SEAD applies to isolated SAMs expected on the battlefield after the majority of IADS are destroyed or degraded. This level of SEAD could be performed by fourth-generation-plus aircraft, at least for discreet periods of time within zones of interest. Advanced technologies such as AESA radar could very well be required to offer commanders an acceptable level of risk.
In addition to SEAD, defensive counter-air will be an important mission area for European air forces as they seek to protect populations, infrastructure, and key NATO and national facilities from adversary attacks using theater strike weapons such as air-and ground-launched cruise missiles. Under these circumstances, commanders would need to balance the use of their fleets across missions to ensure survival of bases. Ground-based air defenses such as NASAMS are projected for some nations but not all. And defenses against salvos of ballistic missiles are limited, at least in the near term. For defensive counter-air missions outside the threat range of Russian IADS, the F-35 offers few relative advantages to advanced fourth-generation fighters. The Eurofighter, for example, is highly capable co-air platform that would likely perform well against comparable Russian aircraft, particularly as the Typhoon begins to carry the Meteor beyond visual air-to-air missile. 
50
51
Across combat air missions, a major consideration centers on the degree to which F-35-acquiring nations elect to develop their air forces for the alone-and-unafraid configuration versus the combat ISR mode. To maximize the impact of the overall fleet of aircraft, combined training that integrates fourth-and fifth-generation capabilities will be critical, as well as secure links and stockpiles of long-range precision missiles that can allow fourth-generation platforms to strike from outside the air defense range. Additionally, even with the F-35's low observability, dispersal concepts will need to be developed and resourced. 52
This study's focus is on combat aircraft and the missions most likely to be at the center of a collective defense scenario involving Russian aggression. It does not argue that other joint airpower roles are irrelevant or of lesser value. Indeed, mobility, ISR, and specialized aircraft for electronic warfare and C2 also constitute foundational requirements for a major war. Other essential capabilities include space assets and unmanned aerial vehicles. For European allies, to one extent or another, these capabilities represent well-recognized shortfalls: the United States would need to provide a preponderance of capability across the other joint airpower roles.
But that is not a new dilemma. What is new is the promise of fifth-generation technology. The approximately 300 to 400 aircraft positioned in Europe have the potential to change Moscow's COFM calculus and enhance deterrence. Should deterrence fail, European combat air forces will be better positioned to provide leading-edge counter-air and attack capabilities-fighting, that is, at the vanguard.
During a high-intensity theater conflict against Russia, time would be of the essence, and the ability of European aircraft already in theater to rapidly engage in combat would be critical. Fifth-generation platforms capable of operating within the range of an advanced SAM threat would be particularly significant at the vanguard of a response, while a critical mass of fourth-generation aircraft and their superior firepower could hold adversary ground forces, air defenses, and other key targets at risk. 
1
2
Although several allies are phasing out their fourth-generation fighters over the course of the next decade, many of these aircraft will remain in active inventories and comprise the core of the Alliance's capability into 2025 and beyond. Indeed, by 2030, fifth-generation aircraft will only make up about approximately 30 percent of the total inventory of the 13 European nations examined. In addition, many of these existing platforms suffer from maintenance and sustainment challenges. It will be important for allied governments to ensure combat air fleets are maintained at a level that would allow for prompt and meaningful availability.
The percentage of available combat platforms can be a sensitive question. For the United States Air Force, which publishes highlevel readiness figures annually, overall aircraft "mission capable" rates dropped from 77 percent in 2012 to 70 percent in 2019, despite initiatives from senior U.S. defense leaders to halt the slide. 
3
5
The U.S. Department of Defense distinguishes between "mission capability," which measures the percentage of time that aircraft are safe to fly and able to perform at least one tasked mission, and "full mission capability," which measures the percentage of time for which aircraft are fully capable of accomplishing all tasked missions. 
4
5
6
The United Kingdom's RAF maintains one of the higher rates of overall platform availability. Like the United States, the United Kingdom provides public reporting on its aircraft maintenance and sustainment. According to one British Freedom of Information report, about 67 percent of the overall RAF fleet was operational in 2018, with similar availability for its Eurofighter Typhoon inventory.
7
8
10
11
As of 2017, the French Ministry of Defense cited a 44-percent overall aircraft availability rate, down from 55 percent in 2000. 
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Four factors that contribute to aircraft availability are aging platforms, spare parts, operational tempos, and constrained budgets.
Within many European air forces, the increasing strain of maintaining legacy platforms limits aircraft availability. For Italy, the mounting 14 Jacek Siminski, "Polish Parliamentary National Defense Committee Discusses the Future of the F-16s and Prospects of Acquiring 5th Gen. Jets," The Aviationist, March 28, 2017. 
15 Siminski, 2017. 16
17
18 Garrett, 1989. 
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
20
23
24
25
26
27
29
30
Spares shortages within the multinational Eurofighter program (UK, Germany, Spain, and Italy) have at times had adverse effects on Typhoon readiness: A 2011 UK National Audit Office report on the Eurofighter program declared "shortages of spares and long timescales for equipment repairs on some of these contracts" and noted the need to cannibalize parts from some of the fleet's Typhoons to make others usable. 
33
34
35
36
37
For a number of European allies, high operations tempos have increased maintenance costs and equipment wear beyond anticipated levels. 
39
40
41
42
37 Winter, 2018;
and Andrea Shalal and Susan Fenton, eds.
38 "German Ministry of Defense, 2019. 
39
40
41
42
43
44
Ultimately, limited defense budgets prompt difficult decisions about internal prioritization, as air forces seek to introduce new equipment while maintaining the availability of existing platforms. A 2019 report critiquing the RAF could well have been written about many of NATO's air forces. Budget constraints, it argues, have left the RAF unable to meet current operational requirements while also maintaining a sufficient level of readiness to respond quickly to a major security crisis and modernizing to prepare for future challenges. 
45
5
Larger defense budgets could ease the pressure on this juggling act to the extent air forces receive their share of any increases. In the meantime, particular attention will need to be devoted to some of the common availability challenges identified in this chapter-including aging platforms, spare parts pipelines, and operational strain. These fleets, which comprise the quantitative bulk of NATO's air forces, will need to be maintained to ensure adequate availability rates even as national expenditures are dedicated to acquiring and operationalizing new platforms such as the F-35. As indicated above, the availability of combat aircraft varies significantly among allies, among platforms within a national fleet, and even over time as spare parts shortages, upgrades, or other maintenance difficulties temporarily reduce overall combat readiness. However, if European ministries of defense sought to maintain an average of 70 percent of their combat air fleets at missioncapable status-the level of the U.S. Air Force at the recent nadir of its platform availability-this could improve Europe's contribution to deterrence.  Maintaining Future Fifth-Generation Fleets
As seven European air forces transition to the F-35, maintenance of fifth-generation fleets presents new challenges. Aircraft availability has been problematic for the United States, the primary F-35 user. According to a Department of Defense report, less than half of the U.S. Air Force's 148 F-35s were mission capable in 2018. 
46
47
48
49
For European F-35 partners, sustainment will be facilitated by the introduction of regional maintenance and sustainment centers. This approach creates a new paradigm in which Italian F-35 pilots must 
46
50
51
52,
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
The F-35 program has also introduced the Global Asset Management (GAM) system for pooling of spare parts. Under typical arrangements, each country purchases its own spare parts. A new architecture in which the F-35 Joint Program Office manages a pool of spare parts, to be distributed globally via regional centers, is intended to lower costs compared with the existing hub-and-spoke approach. 
60
5
To date, the GAM system's approach has met with regulatory hurdles on both sides of the Atlantic, including regulations restricting import and export activities and international weapon control laws. 
61
62
October 12, 2019
. 58 JAPCC, 2018, p. 101. 59
60
Nones, Gasparini, and Marrone, 2009, p. 76. 61
62
63
64
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
65
71
In light of the multinational nature of the F-35 program, concerns about national sovereignty have limited the sharing of information among program partners. The autonomic logistics information system (ALIS) supports F-35 operations, mission planning, supply chain management, and maintenance. In the ideal situation, data provided by ALIS would allow the F-35 Joint Program Office (JPO) and Lockheed Martin to assess aircraft health and anticipate when and where maintenance and spare parts are needed, reducing the time that jets remain on the ramp. 
74
75
71 Lorell and Pita, 2016, p. 49. 72
77
78
79
77 Andrea Shalal, "European F-35 Fighter Jet Users Push to Drive Down Operating Costs," Reuters, September 10, 2018. 78 U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2019.
79 Tim Ripley, "UK MoD Admits Unplanned Outages of F-35 Support System," Jane's, August 28, 2019. parts. 
80
81
Another issue frequently raised regarding U.S. F-35s and likely to also affect European militaries is the high cost per flying hour. According to congressional testimony, operating costs for the F-35 are currently about $39,000 per flight hour, which the U.S. Air Force seeks to reduce to $25,000 by 2025. 
82
83
Overall, recent approaches to F-35 sustainment and spare parts have the potential to create a more agile, unpredictable allied fleet that could impose additional strains on adversary planning and operations. However, until the growing pains that the new program is experiencing are adequately addressed-including spare parts shortages, logistics 80 U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2019. system inefficiencies, and maintenance timelines-the low aircraft availability will detract from an otherwise formidable element of NATO's combat air capability.
In addition to maintaining operationally ready platforms, NATO air forces will also need to continue to invest in munitions stockpiles. While PGM have become the munitions of choice for many NATO countries in recent operations, even the most capable and well-resourced European air forces have continued to face challenges replenishing their PGM stocks while engaged in protracted conflicts abroad. 
84
85
86
Since the 2011 Libya operation, many European allies have taken steps to modernize, replenish, and maintain their air-launched munitions stockpiles. The common decision to invest is likely a product of several convergent factors. At a minimum, allies need to replenish their stocks to sustain current operations. Looking ahead, procurements stand to improve and ensure NATO's combat readiness, a requirement prompted by the renewed concerns about Russian aggression in Eastern Europe and the NATO Readiness Initiative. 
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
5
Restrictions on the U.S. FMS program, through which NATO members purchase most of their PGM, have presented a perennial challenge for allies seeking to increase their stockpiles. 
94
95
92
93
94
96
97
98
99
101
[S]ignificant amount of flexibility to Allies with regard to sharing their stockpiles of precision-guided munitions. It will further enable the Alliance to address a capability and interoperability gap in this area and support some European allies while reducing reliance on the United States when it comes to air-to-ground operations. 
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
During a longer conflict, indigenous PGM production capacity would prove important as stockpiles were depleted. Even the United States has struggled to sustain stockpiles during longer operations: By the ninth week of Operation Enduring Freedom in 2001, U.S. forces had expended about half of the approximately 10,000 JDAM kits in their inventory. 
111
113
114
115
116
In recent years, NATO allies-and the United States in particularhave stressed the need to increase spending on defense modernization and acquisition. During this time period, allied air forces have made important military investments in new aircraft and PGM that could prove critical in a major conflict. As this chapter has highlighted, a renewed focus within the Alliance on stockpiling PGM, as well as new arrangements for pooling spare parts and munitions, certainly contributes to a more ready and effective European combat air capability.
The Alliance has also sought to improve the readiness of its armed forces more broadly, including through the NATO Readiness Initiative. This goal also has budgetary implications. As this chapter has indicated, European air forces may struggle to maintain platforms that are strained from rigorous deployment, in need of scarce parts, or nearing the end of their operational life. These challenges all detract from the combat readiness of the aircraft and thus their availability and readiness during a conflict. Addressing this phenomenon requires high-level attention and budgetary commitment. Setting a public goal for fleet-wide, combat-capable status-perhaps at the 70-percent lower bound of recent U.S. Air Force readiness-could provide a tangible objective that would measure the output of platform availability rather than a budgetary input. To help achieve this objective, European allies could also move toward more consistent and transparent readiness information.
Any major conflict with a near-peer adversary would require deep stocks of relevant munitions. NATO has emphasized the need for PGM acquisition over the past two decades and most recently since the 2011 Libya operation. The recent establishment and implementation of the A2G-PGM project represents an innovative step in this regard; European governments have also made notable national-level investments to build stockpiles. Allies will need to continue to improve platform and PGM availability levels to more credibly deter a large-scale conflict in the European theater.
This chapter has identified areas for emphasis as Europe strives to improve the availability of its combat air platforms. In particular, spare parts supplies appear to be a significant limiting factor, particularly for the national Eurofighter fleets as well as for the less-established Joint Strike Fighter program: Secure pipelines should be prioritized as a readiness requirement. For the F-35 program, clearer rules for the GAM program would improve the transparency of spare parts allocation while an ongoing overhaul of the ALIS system may enhance efficiencies across the fleet. The program's GSS, which could prove critical during a theater war in Europe, should be thoroughly stress-tested to ensure that a sufficient number of national personnel in each location are able to provide a reliable maintenance and sustainment option for all F-35 users in peacetime or otherwise. More broadly, continued purchases of PGM, whether on a national or multinational basis, will help ensure that stockpiles are sufficient for at least the initial phases of a major conflict.
Overall, this chapter's insights suggest that investments in new platforms such as the F-35 must be balanced with a simultaneous financial commitment to ensuring that European combat fleets remain available and adequately armed should the need arise.
Despite advances in remotely piloted platforms and highly capable weaponry, humans remain essential to the application of airpower, at least for the time frame of this report. Thus, in addition to investments in purchasing and maintaining the necessary aircraft and munitions, air forces must be able to train and retain an adequate pool of personnel prepared to operate piloted platforms and perform high-intensity combat missions. The ability of allied pilots to work together across nations and across platforms is also critical to the collective combat potential of the force. Ideally, integrated training and exercises among fourth-and fifth-generation fighters could prepare pilots to leverage the strengths and mitigate the limitations of each platform. As discussed in Chapter Four, one example could include F-35 pilots flying closer to threats to provide SEAD and to serve as sweep-escort for fourthgeneration fighters carrying greater payloads. 
1
Across a number of European air forces, budgetary constraints have contributed to shortfalls in personnel, and particularly pilots. As of April 2019, the RAF was reportedly 331 personnel (18 percent) below its pilot needs, following increased fast-jet aircrew requirements in the 2015 SDSR. 
3
4
5
8
9
3
4
5
6 NATO Air Power Roundtable, 2019; Jane's, "Spain: Air Force," October 14, 2019. 7 Jane's, "Spain: Air Force," October 14, 2019. 8 Jane's, "Italy: Air Force," World Air Forces database, June 10, 2019.
RDAF currently maintains about 50 pilots to man its 30 operational F-16s-a number viewed by the Danish Ministry of Defense as adequate for the Danish level of ambition. 
10
For many air forces, including the RAF, salary levels lower than comparable civilian opportunities have hurt recruitment and retention. 
11
12
The problem intensifies in a good economy when airlines are hiring and decreases in times of stagnation or recession. While retention seems likely to remain an issue in the near term, it could be less of a problem in an economic downturn.
Some air forces such as the RDAF have sought to address retention challenges through new terms of employment: Danish pilots agree to a longer service commitment after pilot training and receive increased pay to more closely rival civilian pilot salaries. 
13
14
15
10 Schaub and
Michaelsen, 2018, p. 17. 11 IISS, 2019, p. 86.
13
14
16
18
19
20
21
16 NATO Air Power Roundtable, 2019.   17 
NATO Air Power Roundtable, 2019. 18
19
20 Flanagan et al., 2020
The collective skills of an air force's pilots may arguably be as significant to victory as the platforms themselves. As one European military expert recalled, while the inheritance of East German pilots at the end of the Cold War may have nominally increased the ranks of German pilots by several dozen, stark differences in East German training levels limited their ability to contribute. 22
Training often adapts to reflect anticipated operational realities and, in recent years, NATO has shifted to account for different circumstances. Following Allied Force in 1999, NATO air forces adapted air-to-ground strike training from low to medium altitude, reflecting the tactics employed during that conflict in response to Serbian air defense capabilities. 
23
24
25
22
Anrig, 2011, p. 167. 23
25 Schaub, 2015.
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
While combat pilot training is largely standardized across NATO, some variations occur at the national level. 
33
34
35
36
37
While a few European nations retain a national entry-level training establishment, many NATO fighter pilots pursue their early phase of fighter training through the ENJJPT venue, an international under-34 NATO Air Power Roundtable, 2019. 
35 Interview, August 27, 2019, 36
39
40
41
42
39
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
Multinational training at Luke AFB contributes to future fighter interoperability in a number of ways. As with ENJPPT, the program forms international linkages at the basic level, allowing pilots from differing nations to build mutual trust and familiarity in the early phases of their careers. Because they operate inside a training "bubble" with training software rather than country-specific and often sensitive mission data files, Norwegian, Italian, or Dutch pilots are able to fly one another's planes as well as U.S. platforms. 
59
60
61
62
59
60
63
64
65
As NATO combat pilots progress in their careers, most have an opportunity to attend the Tactical Leadership Program (TLP), a training center formed with an MOU among ten NATO nations: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, United Kingdom, and United States. TLP's mission is to "increase the effectiveness of Allied Tactical Air Forces through the development of leadership skills, mission planning, briefing, tactical flying, and debriefing skills, and conceptual/doctrinal initiatives." 
66
67
68
69
70
• Plan and execute air interdiction using targeting and threat analysis. • Introduce close air support, strike control and reconnaissance, and time-sensitive targeting. • Conduct offensive combat air and degrade enemy airfield in a medium-threat environment. • Plan and execute operations using targeting/threat analysis in a high-threat environment with advanced air defenses. • Expose participants to interaction with friendly surface-based air defenses. • Suppress and degrade enemy IADS in a medium-to high-threat environment. 
71
71
72
73
74
Beyond multinational training opportunities, NATO combat pilots also conduct much of their annual training requirements on a national basis. NATO sets a standard of 180 flying hours per year for a combat pilot, with 40 of those hours permitted in a simulator. 
75
76
73
74
75
76
June 5, 2019. 77
For the French air force, a combination of budgetary constraints, operational exigencies, and military export support requirements have strained pilot training. French fighter pilots averaged 150 hours in 2015. 
78
79
80
81
82
83
85
79 Pierre Tran, "French Pilot Training Suffers at Expense of Rafale Sales Support," Defense News, November 3, 2016. 
80
82 Tran, 2016. 83
84 Huggler, 2019.
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
101
102
94
95
96
97
98
99
100 Government of the United Kingdom, "DTE East," undated. 
101
102 "Pembrokeshire," public information leaflet, UK Assets Publishing Service, undated. coastline and may risk revealing particularly sensitive fifth-generation capabilities. 
103
104
105
106
107
111
To enhance interoperability and maximize the benefits derived from synthetic training, simulators could be linked to allow pilots from across the Alliance to operate in a shared environment and with common scenarios. Although the infrastructure to create links for combat air simulators across Europe does not does currently exist, it may be worthy of further exploration and investment. One sophisticated 2018 simulator exercise, Spartan Alliance, linked simulators on several Italian air bases with the German Luftwaffe and the U.S. Air Force Warrior Preparation Center in Ramstein, Germany. 
112
113
114
The 2018 Brussels Summit highlighted NATO's efforts to "ensure the Alliance's political and military responsiveness, including through more regular exercises." 
115
116
117
118
Previously, Alliance exercises had predominantly focused on stabilization missions, reflecting the operational requirements of the post-Cold War period. 
119
A lot of our airmen have had experience deploying downrange to places like Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria, which gives them familiarization with employing their weapons systems against a real enemy, but those operations have been conducted in a very permissive environment with uncontested air superiority and freedom of movement in all domains. 120 the past 20 years, and we need to think about it differently. This includes how we train and prepare the crew." 121 NATO's Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR) issued a clear message in his 2019 Annual Guidance on Education, Training, Exercises, and Evaluation (SAGE 19): "I have instructed my staff to put large scale, high-intensity, all-domains warfare against a near-peer adversary at the very heart of all our training from now on, and I am prepared to assume some risk in other areas to achieve this." 
122
Larger-scale exercises can offer participants an important opportunity to practice operating in a complex multinational operation. Of the larger exercises within NATO, the U.S. flag exercise "Red Flag" represents the most challenging. 
123
Current Red Flags reflect the guidance of the U.S. National Defense Strategy to prepare for potential conflicts against near-peer adversaries. Red Flag 19-1, conducted  denial. 
124
125
126
127
128
131
132
133
135
136
137
133
134
138
139
140
141
142
Smaller exercises seek to focus on individual tactics and procedures that are critical for specific missions. For example, the 2016 Serpentex exercise, led by France over the Island of Corsica, included aircrews and joint terminal attack controllers from over ten NATO air forces to exercise air and land integration, including close air support, air interdiction with dynamic targeting, strike coordination and reconnaissance, and live ordnance operations. 
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
March 23, 2018. 146
Exercises have begun to incorporate fifth-generation aircraft. From May to July 2019, a U.S. Air Force TSP that included a squadron of F-35s from Hill AFB offered new opportunities to exercise the integration of fourth-and fifth-generational platforms in Europe. Over the course of the summer, the TSP offered opportunities for U.S. F-35s to engage in training with a range of allies, including at the TLP in Spain, the Fighter Weapons Instructor Training program in the Netherlands, and with individual German fighter units. 
154
155
156
157
158
153 NATO Tigers, "Tiger Meet-2019," website, undated. 
154 Interview, Washington, D.C., September 12, 2019.
156
157
158
159
160
Interoperability at the 2018 and 2019 Point Blank exercises built on the 2017 Atlantic Trident exercise, which brought together U.S. F-22s and F-35s, British Typhoons, and French Rafales to exercise basic fighter maneuvers, DCA and OCA operations from Langley-Eustice AFB in Virginia. 
161
162
A number of exercises seek to demonstrate allied readiness in order to support rapid mobilization during a time of crisis. Several of these are joint exercises, addressing the readiness of joint capabilities across the NATO Response Force (NRF), including its spearhead Very High Readiness Joint Task Force (VJTF). In order to meet stringent NATO certification standards, national units must train and exercise for between six and 18 months to integrate and standardize their procedures before assuming the role of an NRF high-readiness unit. 
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
Guidance from NATO's SACEUR reflects the need for increased training and exercises to prepare for high-intensity missions against nearpeer adversaries. Overall, training and exercise trends appear to reflect this growing realization. Today's NATO combat pilots are increasingly trained to operate in contested and degraded environments, moving away from the crisis management model that defined much of the post-Cold War period.
169 Tony Garner, "Ice Warriors," Eurofighter World Magazine, May 13, 2019. 
170
171 Garner, 2019.
173
Among several priority areas, there is dedicated focus on SEAD with fifth-generation fighters, which could prove critical in the early phases of a conflict with Russia. F-35 pilots are developing and honing their skills through training received at Luke AFB, Red Flag, and NATO's TLP program. Periodic exercises such as Tiger Meet also exercise SEAD skill sets. The limited number of fourth-generation platforms able to conduct SEAD means that few NATO pilots have SEAD experience, making the new emphasis on these skills particularly important. Advanced threat emitters are required to maximize F-35 SEAD training. TLP in Spain reports that it is updating its threat emitters, which may offer important future training opportunities for NATO F-35 pilots. In December 2018 the U.S. Air Force awarded a $450 million contract for delivery and maintenance of the Joint Threat Emitter (JTE), a mobile air defense EW threat simulator that accurately replicates SAM and anti-aircraft artillery threats for training purposes. 
175
Other missions also reflect the new challenges that NATO air forces could encounter during a high-intensity theater conflict. France's nuclear strike exercise in 2019 notably required the Rafale to fly against simulated air defense threats. Allies participating in U.S. Red Flag exercises conducted missions including defensive counter-air and strike in an environment that included advanced IADS, adversary air forces, active electronic attack, and communications jamming. New DCA scenarios, such as those in Astral Knight 2019, rehearsed defending allied territories against cruise missiles.
In order to maximize the operational impact of European F-35 purchases as well as the value of integrated exercises, the United States and NATO allies will need to develop guidance for F-35 interoperability across NATO fleets. Currently, aircrew are constrained by the nature and modes of information they are able to share with counterparts from other air forces. The United States and other NATO air forces will need to refine guidelines that define F-35 interoperability and indicate desired levels of compatibility across the Alliance. A highlevel F-35 interoperability policy could address a range of issues, including whether nations could operate on the same MADL system, software compatibility, the nature of information aircrew could share, and whether aircrew could brief and debrief in each other's secure facilities.
To further improve NATO combat air capability, allied training could pursue a dedicated training program focused on the integration of multinational fourth-and fifth-generation fighters. Individual national training schedules could be more closely integrated through the establishment of "routine Alliance training conferences . . . to identify interoperability training opportunities among individual Allies' training schedules." 
176
177
178
179
180
Across NATO, allies are increasingly turning to synthetic training as a cost-effective way to provide realistic simulations of high-intensity combat. This trend is likely to persist as European militaries train on F-35 simulators, particularly given the $39,000-per-flight-hour price tag associated with the F-35. To the extent that they are technically and financially feasible, linkages among NATO simulators that would allow allied pilots to train together against a common scenario could pay dividends for future interoperability.
A NATO Air Warfare Center could offer one venue to facilitate regular and financially sustainable multinational air training in Europe. 
181
182
183 181 JAPCC, 2016
, pp. 198-199. 182 JAPCC, 2016, pp. 198-199. 183
Since 2014, NATO has sought to strengthen deterrence and reinvigorate warfighting competencies, but the air domain has received relatively scant attention, at least among policymakers. High-profile adaptations such as enhanced Forward Presence and the Very High Readiness Joint Task Force took on a land-centric character, while the more recent attention on anti-submarine warfare and the North Atlantic portend an increased level of interest in maritime issues. More recently, however, NATO's 2018 Joint Air Power Strategy, a recognition that airpower will be critical to implementing the NATO Readiness Initiative, and the introduction of fifth-generation aircraft has begun to shift this dynamic.
Consider a potential conflict from the Russian air planner's perspective. Russia possesses approximately 1,250 combat-capable fighter aircraft. Fifth-generation procurements by the Russian Federation Air Force are experiencing major technical and industrial hurdles. Notwithstanding several years of an increased exercise tempo, readiness remains a major concern. Now, looking at the NATO order of battle, the planner sees 1,900-plus non-U.S. aircraft and hundreds of U.S. aircraft positioned in Europe and the Middle East. With key modernization ongoing, including the acquisition of F-35s by European allies, each of the factors typically considered in Russian COFM analysis appears to be growing less favorable. Modern aircraft with long-range munitions, if in sufficient quantity, can hold a wide array of targets at risk. The F-35's combat ISR mode enables revolutionary targeting and situational awareness that can enhance the effectiveness of larger air and joint formations. Allies are also beginning to invest more in personnel, training, and equipment availability. Taken together, these developments could impart major doubt about Russia's ability to achieve its politicalmilitary objectives in a theater-wide conflict.
Our examination of the recent past and trajectory of European airpower, as well as Russian perceptions on the topic, suggests several findings and recommendations concerning the evolution of Europe's air forces and the opportunities and challenges that they confront. In particular, five overarching findings emerge, with an associated series of recommendations.
Russia enjoys a relative advantage in rapidly deployable ground forces in regions close to Russian borders, notably the Baltic states and Poland. However, Russian strategy documents, statements, and actions indicate particular concern about the depth and speed provided by NATO's advanced platforms and munitions, which could serve to blunt Russia's ground advantage. Furthermore, observations of Western targeting practices over the past two decades have raised Russian concerns about the vulnerability of Russian ground forces, military bases, and critical infrastructure, as well as political leadership, to NATO's combat air capabilities. Although the perceived extent of NATO's relative airpower advantage is unclear, Russian defense analysts evaluating the combat potential of Western military aircraft have historically considered qualities such as firepower, mobility, survivability, and command and control, as well as a platform type's contributions to units and larger formations. These are all areas where the increase in capability resulting from NATO's modernization efforts will become more pronounced in the next five years. Extensive Russian investment in IADS underscores the significance with which Russia views the air domain a central dimension of its military planning.
Looking ahead, NATO's increased capability may deter Russian offensive action or force Russian planners to adjust their own operations or force structure. It also seems likely that any Russian offensive operation would attempt to destroy or ground NATO air forces and long-range weapons at their source-their bases or naval vessels. If NATO can demonstrate the existence of credible forces that can adequately defend NATO bases and infrastructure, this may influence Russia's assessment of effectiveness and probability of success. Based on these factors, NATO force structure and training actions before a conflict in these areas (deep strike, SEAD, and DCA) are the ones most likely to deter Russia from engaging in an offensive strike on NATO.
Second, European air forces currently possess fleets with relatively limited capabilities for conducting the most-demanding missions expected in a high-intensity conflict and of most concern to Russia. Currently, the European allies considered in this report maintain about 1,900 combat aircraft, fewer than 100 of which are fifth generation. European air forces made substantive contributions to previous allied and coalition air operations across the spectrum of combat air missions, but typically in less contested operating environments. During the opening phases of a conflict with Russia, vulnerability to advanced ground-based threats would constrain the roles of most fourth-generation and so-called fourth-generation-plus platforms. While limited in a highly contested environment, these aircraft could still perform defensive counter-air missions over national airspace or other strategically significant locations, long-range (outside of advanced IADS range) missile strikes with precision-guided munitions and electronic warfare attacks. As long as an extensive IADS threat persisted, more advanced platforms such as the Rafale or Eurofighter could theoretically perform strike missions inside the threat zone in conjunction with fifth-generation platforms, although this approach could yield unacceptable attrition. If the threat posed by adversary air defenses were reduced, fourth-generation aircraft could begin to conduct a broader range of traditional roles such as offensive counter-air or close air support to ground forces.
Another complication likely to stress NATO plannersparticularly in light of the demise of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty-will be the need to reserve enough sorties for protection of national airspace, air bases, and other sensitive sites from cruise and ballistic missile attack.
Third, European acquisition of fifth-generation fighters will improve NATO's capacity for operations in a high-intensity conflict with Russia, though new capabilities are needed above and beyond the platform itself. By 2025, the seven F-35-acquiring European allies will, in aggregate, possess more than 200 F-35s stationed in Europe. 
1
2
In the opening days of a notional conflict, the F-35's stealth and sensor fusion will enable unprecedented situational awareness and the potential to acquire and service targets at rapid tempos. This will be impactful across the range of combat air missions, including SEAD in the early hours and days of a campaign and conducting counterland operations to delay, damage, and destroy enemy maneuver forces. These missions could be accomplished by the F-35 directly or with the F-35 performing a combat ISR role and securely passing targeting data to other air and joint platforms.
As capable as they are, fifth-generation fighters operate as part of a broader system of platforms and capabilities. Some nations are acquiring world-class fourth-generation-plus aircraft, though others have yet to commit to recapitalizing their fleets in the 2020s. Uncertainties remain as to which nations will invest in AESA radar technology, advanced and long-range munitions, and secure communication links, among other important capabilities. The degree to which European air forces acquire these technologies will directly impact their ability to contribute to the range of combat air missions expected in a high-intensity conflict. At the same time, reliance on the F-35 for combat ISR functions previously performed by longer-range, ISRdedicated standoff aerial systems (e.g., RC-135W River Joint, E-8 Sentinel, and E-3 Sentry) raises the question of capacity and prioritization alongside other demands such as SEAD, counter-land operations, and air defense.
Fourth, a high degree of interoperability and integration between European fifth-generation fighters and NATO's other air and joint forces is required to maximize the Alliance's combat potential. As both Western and Russian analysts have observed, the combat potential of an individual aircraft is, in part, a function of its ability to work effectively within a broader formation. Fifth-generation platforms have the potential to serve as a force multiplier across a combined force, improving the performance of other platforms by enhancing their situational awareness. Fourth-generation fighters-many able to wield greater firepower than their stealthier fifth-generation counterparts and projected to account for about 70 percent of NATO's inventory by 2030-will still constitute an important element of airpower. It is reasonable to assume that the Russian military would seek to disrupt this synergy during a conflict, particularly in light of recent Russian investments in EW capabilities.
Already, allies have undertaken initial steps to establish common tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) for incorporating fifthgeneration assets into combined operations through targeted exercises as well as preliminary synthetic training systems that link fourth-and fifth-generation aircraft. Recent training and exercises have emphasized operations in contested environments and prioritized missions such as SEAD, a skill set new to most European air forces. Important progress has been made, though it has been limited by policy and technological constraints to real-time information sharing among platforms and between allies.
Over the coming years, the need to familiarize aircrew across the Alliance with combined operations integrating fifth-generation aircraft will increase as the F-35 comes online. Major European air forces without fifth-generation capabilities, such as France, have ample opportunity to participate as full partners by joining in the development of emerging operational concepts. Additionally, air forces require clear policy guidance for fifth-generation interoperability and information sharing, secure and reliable communications links, and additional resources for combined training in denied and degraded environments.
Fifth, even as many allied governments pursue procurement of advanced combat platforms, all European air forces still struggle to maintain high levels of readiness. To be operationally relevant during a theater conflict, NATO's air forces must maintain a sufficient number of available aircraft, munitions, and aircrew. Currently, most European air forces maintain around half of their existing fleets or less at mission-capable status, with some allies falling below that mark. For many fourth-generation fleets, rising maintenance costs from platform age, operational wear and tear resulting from a high operational tempo, and challenges associated with spare parts pipelines serve as significant constraints to aircraft availability. Early challenges within the F-35 program-in particular implementing an envisioned global spare parts pooling concept and overcoming malfunctions of the ALIScould limit the benefits from European investments in the platform if left unaddressed. European investments in PGMs, including standoff weapons, deepen the allied arsenal and, if sufficient in quantity, would allow for a more sustained contribution to a collective defense operation should the need arise. Finally, insufficient airspace for exercises and the number of pilots and skilled maintainers represent limiting factors for most allied air forces.
Over the coming decade, European air forces will be increasingly capable of playing a significant role at the outset of a high-intensity collective defense operation. In particular, current and planned acquisitions of fifth-generation aircraft and their use within combat ISR, SEAD, and counter-land roles could fundamentally change the way that NATO conducts air operations, improving survivability and lethality and enabling greater European involvement across some of the mostdemanding mission sets. Drawing from these findings, the recommendations made here are designed to inform European investments, the implementation of JAPS, and other forms of multinational collaboration that make the most of emerging technology.
1. Prioritize investments that enable fourth-generation aircraft and other platforms to complement the F-35's unique capabilities. In order for the F-35 to maximize its impact across a conflict, the following investments should be made by allies to improve the survivability, firepower, and connectivity of existing platforms:
• Upgrade fourth-generation aircraft radars. In particular, an AESA radar system for Eurofighter Typhoon fleets would enhance survivability during a high-intensity conflict. • Continue to stockpile munitions, including new options such as the Joint Strike Missile and recently developed or expected anti-radiation missiles. Using mechanisms such as the NATO Air-to-Ground project (known as A2G-PGM) as well as collaboration with European industry, allies should continue to expand their PGM arsenals with particular attention to anti-armor weapons and air-to-ground missiles with ranges between 100 km and 1,000 km, including anti-radiation missiles that provide fourth-generation aircraft a SEAD and strike capability from standoff ranges. • Ensure that fourth-generation aircraft as well as ground and maritime systems can receive targeting information from the F-35 in a timely and secure manner. Since NATO communications are a likely focus of Russian electronic attack, these must be robust and sufficiently redundant in the context of jamming and other interference.  At present, unclear and sometimes unnecessary restrictions on information sharing and planning stifle cooperation among air staffs and reduce their ability to adequately prepare for high-end multinational operations. In particular, senior-level attention can take the following actions:
• Release an updated F-35 interoperability policy that identifies guidelines on information sharing within the consortium in a way that balances legitimate security needs without unduly restricting multinational cooperation. • Facilitate collaboration among U.S., European, and NATO planners to synchronize TTPs and concepts of operation, perhaps through the establishment of standing liaisons at the squadron and/or group levels.
two of the most significant European military powers, will experience a generation-long gap in their combat air capabilities as they bypass fifth-generation capabilities in favor of collaboration on a European future combat air system slated to be completed in the 2040 time frame. For France, upgrades to the Rafale as well as investment in standoff munitions would still allow it to play a constructive role in the initial phases of a conflict with Russia, particularly if communication systems permitted the platform to be networked with the F-35. However, this concept would require the French air force to be reliant on targeting and threat data from other European platforms, running somewhat counter to the French inclination toward strategic autonomy. In light of the prominent French role in previous NATO air operations, additional research and analysis could assess potential trajectories for French strategic and operational leadership within a range of future air conflict scenarios.
For Germany, a 20-year gap in combat air capabilities could undercut aspirations for a leadership role in European security. Germany's current lack of fifth-generation aircraft, technologies such as the AESA radar, or long-range missile arsenal would constrain German offensive combat contributions in a high-intensity conflict with Russia, likely circumscribing the Luftwaffe's role to defensive counter-air missions beyond the range of Russian surface-to-air missiles. Germany's contribution would not be negligible in light of the extensive NATO infrastructure on German soil, but the implications of German absence from a forward combat air role, and uneven distribution of operational risk across the alliance, merit further discussion. Furthermore, while it is beyond the scope of this paper, further analysis should consider the implications for NATO nuclear burden sharing of a Germany unable to credibly perform NATO nuclear missions in a denied and degraded environment.
Ultimately, European military investments presume a benefit to European security through the deterrence of further military aggression on the European continent and empowerment of European militaries to make substantial contributions to future operations. This RAND study, premised on the validity of that assumption, concludes that in the air domain, at least, trend lines with regard to platform modernization lead in the right direction. European investment in modernizing combat aircraft fleets and building PGM arsenals improve allies' collective combat capability, with air training and exercises increasingly reflecting emergent requirements. With additional budgetary and policy attention to increasing platform availability, airbase survivability, and interoperable data links, Europe has the opportunity to significantly enhance its combat airpower over the coming decade.
9 NATO,
5
4  
4  
PL
SOURCES: Jane's World Air Forces database 2018-2019,"Belgium: Air Force," "Denmark: Air Force," "Netherlands: Air Force," and "Norway: Air Force."
SOURCES: Jane's World Air Forces database 2018-2019,"Belgium: Air Force," "Denmark: Air Force," "Netherlands: Air Force," and "Norway: Air Force."
SOURCES: NATO, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations, AJP-3, Edition C, Version 1, NATO Standardization Office, February 2019a; NATO, Allied Joint Doctrine for Air and Space Operations, AJP-3.3, Edition B, Version 1, NATO Standardization Office, April 2016. Various Russian documents, 2019.
30 Timothy L.
30 Timothy L.
22 Marrone, 2012.    
48 49  
48 49  
69 Lorell and Pita, 2016.   
74  
74  
NOTE: This table includes only munitions outfitted for fixed-wing combat platforms, with the exception of the Hellfire missile that can be fired from fixed-or rotary-wing aircraft; includes only munitions purchased from the United States and excludes training missiles. Figures report possible arms sales.
38
131  
131  
137  
149
168  
168  
NATO, Strategic Concept for the Defense and Security of the Members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Adopted by Heads of State and Government at the NATO Summit in Lisbon, Brussels: North Atlantic Treaty Organization, November 19-20
, 2010, p. 1.2 NATO, "Warsaw Summit Communiqué," July 9, 2016, cited in "Joint Air Power Following the 2016 Warsaw Summit: Urgent Priorities," NATO Joint Air Power Competence Centre (JAPCC), 2018, p. 1.
We assume that Turkey will not acquire F-35s.
For one of the more extensive public accountings of how the F-35 is transforming operational concepts, see Justin Bronk, Maximum Value from the F-35: Harnessing Transformational Fifth-Generation Capabilities for the UK Military, Whitehall Report 1-16, Royal United Services Institute, February 2016. See also Justin Bronk, The Future ofNATO Airpower: Whitehall Papers,
 Vol. 94, No. 1, January 28, 2020b.   9  This report focuses on combat air capabilities. For more on the evolution and future direction of air command and control, ISR and early warning, and EW-dedicated systems, see, for example, Justin Bronk, "The Future of Air C2 and AEW: E-3 Sentry, Threat Technologies, and Future Replacement Options," RUSI Occasional Papers, June 2017.
David A. Shlapak and Michael Johnson, Reinforcing Deterrence on NATO's Eastern Flank: Wargaming the Defense of the Baltics, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1253-A, 2016.
For more on the maritime dimension, see Magnus Nordenman, The New Battle for the Atlantic: Emerging Naval Competition with Russia in the Far North, Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute Press, 2019; and Chapter 2 of Gene Germanovich, J. D. Williams, Stacie L. Pettyjohn, David A. Shlapak, Anthony Atler, and Bradley Martin, NATO's Amphibious Forces: Command and Control of a Multibrigade Alliance Task Force, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2928-USMC, 2019. Cyberspace and space have been declared by NATO as operational domains in 2016 and 2019, respectively.
See Joint Air Power Competence Centre (JAPCC), "Joint Air Power Following the 2016 Warsaw Summit: Urgent Priorities," 2018.
In using the terms airpower and air forces in this report, we are referring to capabilities residing in multiple services. Unless referring to a single service (e.g., the United Kingdom Royal Air Force), these terms are used to denote the domain, not a particular service. Combat aircraft residing within naval aviation are considered in this report, though principally as they relate to contributions to joint missions such as countering integrated air defense systems (IADS), not maritime-dominant missions such as protecting naval task forces or conducting anti-submarine warfare. We did not review multinational training in regard to naval aviation. Additionally, this report focuses on the European dimension of NATO's airpower and as such does not consider Canada, although many of this report's observations would most likely apply.
See, for example, Binnendijk and Priebe, 2019;
and McNerney et al., 2018.
The four airpower roles are not necessarily mutually exclusive. For example, many fighter aircraft-in particular, fifth-generation systems-have an organic ISR capability. While recognizing the importance of specific advanced early warning, ISR, and electronic warfare (EW) systems, this review focuses on forces and platforms designated as fighters. For more on air command and control and early-warning-dedicated systems, see, for example, Bronk, 2017. European nations do not possess bombers.
NATO, AJP-3.3, 2016. Airpower contributions to counter-maritime operations are also addressed in NATO doctrine, but were excluded from this study.
De Durand, 2014, p. 18.   
Mueller, 2015, p. 4.   
Craig Hoyle, "UK Details Cruise Missile Use in Libya Campaign," Fight Global, October 24, 2012.
42
Mey Holger, "German Air Power: Ready to Participate in Joint and Combined Operations," in European Air Power: Challenges and Opportunities, ed. John Andreas Olsen, Dulles, Va.: Potomac Books, 2014, p. 48.
  98  Atlantic Council, "Infographic: Transformation of NATO Forces After Wales Summit," June 11,
2015.
99
25, 2018. 100 Daniel Keohane, "The Defense Policies of Italy and Poland: A Comparison," Center for Security Studies (CSS) Analyses in Security Policy, No. 219,
December 2017. 101 "RAND Workshop on NATO Air Power and Collective Defense," PowerPoint presentation, June 2019.
Gareth Jennings, "LM Contracted to Upgrade Greek F-16s," Jane's Defence Weekly,December 21, 2018.   
JAPCC, "Regional Fighter Partnership-Options for Cooperation and Cost Sharing," March 2012.
Jane's, "Netherlands: Air Force," World Air Forces database, October 9, 2019.
Stephen Blank, "Threats to and from Russia: An Assessment," Journal ofSlavic Military  Studies, Vol. 21, No.  
3, August 29, 2008.   3  Guerman Diligensky and Sergei Chugrov, The "West" in Russian Mentality, Institute of WorldEconomy and International Relations, Moscow, 2000, p. 10.   
David Brooks, "The Siege Mentality Problem," New York Times, November 13, 2017; Gordon Corera, "Russia and the West: A Century of Subversion and Suspicion," BBC News,
March 25, 2017;
Diligensky and Chugrov, 2000;
Blank 2008.
Stratfor, "The Geopolitics of Russia: Permanent Struggle," April 15, 2012.
Dima Adamsky, "The Soviet PVO Innovation: Strategic Considerations and Non-Strategic Drivers," Office of Net Assessment, March 2017, p. 15.
Yu N.Baluevskii, ed., trans., RAND Corporation, The General Staff of the Russian Military: Past and Present, Akademicheskii Proekt, 2006, p. 321.   
A. R. Davydov and V. N. Gusak, trans., RAND Corporation, "Tactics of the SAM Troops: Past Experience and Lessons for theFuture," Military Thought, No. 5, 2015, p. 52.    
For example, in 2015, Russian Minister of Defense Sergey Shoigu observed "a consistent expansion of NATO. In a relatively short time, it has almost doubled with 12 members. Currently, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, and Ukraine are actively preparing to join the block, while Finland, Sweden, Serbia, and Moldova are being involved in its sphere of influence." In 2019, Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces, General Valerii Gerasimov, echoed Shoigu's sentiment before the Academy of Military Sciences, stating, "Today, Washington is continuing along a path of expanding its system of military presence near the borders of Russia and of destroying the system of treaty relations on issues of limiting and destroying arms, which are leading toward the disruption of strategic stability." See Sergey Shoigu, Defense Minister of the Russian Federation, RAND trans., speech before Russia's Defense Chiefs at the Russian Defense Ministry Collegium,December 11, 2015;
and Valerii Gerasimov, trans.
.
10
December 25, 2014.
Russian Federation, trans., Russian National Security Strategy, Moscow, December 2015.    
Russian Federation, Russian National Security Strategy, 2015.   
For example, see V. N. Dybov and Yu.D. Podornykh, "Necessary Conditions for Attaining Superiority in Aerospace," Military Thought, undated.
  15  For example, see A.V.Kartapolov, trans., RAND Corporation, "Lessons of Military Conflicts and the Perspectives of the Development of the Forms and Methods of Their Conduct: Direct and Indirect Action in Modern International Conflicts," Journal of the Academy of Military Sciences, Vol. 51, No. 2, 2015; P. A. Kul'nev and V. I. Orlianskii, "Principal Changes in the Nature of Armed Struggle in the First Third of the 21st Century," Vestnik Akademii Voennykh Nauk Vestnik of the Academy of Military Science, No. 1,
2015.16  A. V.Usikov, et al., Military Art in Local Wars and Armed Conflicts, Moscow: Military  Publishing House, 2009, p. 577.   
N. E. Makarov, trans., "The Nature of Future War and Problems of Force Structure and Employment of the Armed Forces in Modern Conditions," Vestnik of the Academy of Military Sciences, No. 2, 2010.
This roughly equates to the U.S. concept of "modern warfare." See S. G. Chekinov and S. A. Bogdanov, trans., RAND Corporation, "The Nature and Content of a New-GenerationWar," Military Thought, No. 10, 2013.    
I. N. Vorobyov, trans., RAND Corporation, "Lessons from the War in the Persian Gulf," Military Thought, No.5, 1992.    
Vorobyov, 1992.
Stratfor, "In Syria, the Russian Military Found the Ultimate Testing Ground," October23, 2017.   
Vladimir Putin, Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly, speech, Moscow, Russia,
February 20, 2019.
For an overview of the evolution of European air forces, see John Andreas Olsen, ed., European Air Power: Challenges and Opportunities, Dulles, Va.: Potomac Books,
To illustrate, in 2008, the French air force planned to have 230 Rafales by 2020, but there are currently 100 in the inventory.2  NATO's 2010 Strategic Concept identified collective defense as a core task, but the document assessed that "the Euro-Atlantic area is at peace and the threat of a conventional attack against NATO territory is low."NATO, Strategic Concept, 2010, p. 11.   3  Had this study included Sweden, Finland, and NATO nations with one combat aircraft squadron, the number would be over 2,000.4  Unless otherwise stated, we use the term European to denote the NATO air forces considered in this analysis.
Development of sixth-generation capabilities, through programs such as Franco-Germanled Future Combat Air System and a similar UK-led effort, will remain in research and development during the 2020s and may not be available until 2040 or later. See Sebastian Sprenger, "European Leaders Unveil Model of Next-Gen Fighter Aircraft at Paris Air Show," Defense News, June 17, 2019b.
A possible indication of how the system is held in high regard, reports indicate that the United States uses NASAMS to protect its national capital region. Charlie Gao, "America's Capitol Is Defended by This Missile (From Norway)," The National Interest,May 5, 2018.   
Jane's, "Germany: Air Force," World Air Forces database, July 18, 2019.
Burak Ege Bekdil, "Turkey, Russia in Negotiations for Potential Su-35 Jet Deal," Defense News, October 28, 2019.
The so-called fourth-generation-plus systems such as the newest increments of the Rafale, F/A-18E/F, and Gripen-E could be considered as incorporating aspects of fifth-generation capabilities.
Lee James and Goure, 2019, p. 4.   
Based on discussions with U.S. and NATO airpower experts, we would expect that the counter-IADS mission at the beginning of a conflict, because of its importance to a notional campaign, would involve a large proportion of F-35s in the theater. As operations progressed, the F-35B would likely be needed in support of maritime roles.
Unless otherwise mentioned, all information in this section is derived from Jane's and IISS, The Military Balance 2019.
The AIM-120-C and later versions fit on the F-35. As mentioned previously, the AMRAAM also functions in an air defense role as part of NASAMS, with an extended range (ER) version in development.
To our knowledge, Belgium and the United Kingdom are the only European nations to have acquired the newer AIM-120D with a potentially longer range. Turkey and Spain also maintain the AIM-7 Sparrow, a predecessor to the AMRAAM categorized as having a semiactive radar homing capability lacking a fire-and-forget capability.
33
Only France, Portugal, and Greece maintain anti-ship missiles in the form of the Harpoon and French-made Exocet.
35
2018.
36
12, 2018.   37  Center for Strategic and International Studies, "JASSM and JASSM ER," Missile Threat database, last modified July 18, 2019b.
Kris Osborn, Soon to Be the Ultimate Tank-Killer?" The National Interest, November 22, 2017.
41 Kyle Mizokami, "The F-35 Is About to Enter Beast Mode," Popular Mechanics, September19, 2019.   
Bronk,  
2 NATO, "Conversation with NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg at the Brussels Forum," interview, last updatedAugust 29, 2019.   
Stephen Losey, "Aircraft Mission-Capable Rates Hit New Low in Air Force, Despite Efforts to Improve," Air Force Times,
July 26, 2019b.
U.S. Government Accountability Office, F-35 Aircraft Sustainment: DoD Needs to Address Substantial Supply Chain Challenges,GAO-19-321, Washington, D.C.: GAO, April 2019,  p. 12, figure 4.    
Aaron Mehta, "Mattis Orders Fighter Jet  Readiness to Jump to 80 Percent-in One Year," Air Force Times, October 9, 2018.
Douglas Barrie, Ben Barry, Lucie Béraud-Sudreau, Henry Boyd, Nick Childs, and Bastian Giegerich, Defending Europe: Scenario-Based Capability Requirements for NATO's European Members, International Institute for Strategic Studies, April 2019
.7  According to Freedom of Information reports, "142 of the RAF's 434 aircraft have been taken off the flight line or are undergoing major maintenance," and "55 of the 156 Typhoon jets are in the RAF's 'sustainment fleet'-and not in its 'forward fleet' ready to be deployed on operations." Ben Glaze, "A Third of RAF Planes Were in Storage or Maintenance as Air Force Celebrated Its Centenary," The Mirror,
January 3, 2019.
The parliamentary report cites 39 of Germany's 128 Eurofighter Typhoon jets and 26 of
Tornado fighters as available for combat or training. Justin Huggler, "German Air Force Unable to Train Pilots Because of Shortage of Planes," The Telegraph, August 5, 2019; and Chase Winter, "Only 4 of Germany's 128 Eurofighter Jets [Are] Combat Ready-Report," Deutsche Welle, February 2, 2018. 9 Dan Goure, "Germany's Choice for a Tornado Replacement Could Undermine NATO," Defense News, July 6, 2018. 10 German Ministry of Defense, Bericht zur Materiellen Einsatzbereitschaft der Hauptwaffensysteme der Bundeswehr 2019 [Report on the Material Readiness of the Main Weapon Systems of the Bundeswehr], November 2019.
11
Gareth Jennings, "Airbus Presses for German Tornado Decision to Meet Electronic Attack Requirements," Jane's Defence Weekly, November
27, 2019d. 27 Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Economic Affairs, Agriculture, and Innovation, 2010 Annual Report on the Replacement of F-16s Project, House of Representatives, 2010-2011 Session, 26 488, no. 258, The Hague: Sdu, as cited in Algemene Rekenkamer, Monitoring the Replacement of the F-16 Fleet, The Hague: Sdu, 2011, p. 51. 28 Jane's, "Netherlands: Air Force," October 9, 2019. 29 Aaron Mehta, "As F-35 Comes Online, Norway to Scrap F-16 Fleet," Defense News, January 27, 2017. 30 Jane's, "Norway: Air Force," World Air Forces database, December 5, 2019. 31 Jane's, "Greece: Air Force," March 27, 2019. 32 Jane's, "Greece: Air Force," March 27, 2019.
Steve Thallantyre, "Most Spanish Eurofighter Jets Can't Fly: Report," The Local, October 27, 2014.
Gunzinger et al., 2019;
August 26, 2009.
George Allison, "German Air Force Hosts Multinational Air Exercise," UK Defense Journal,March 2, 2019a.   
Watts, 2013, p. 23.   
Osinga,  
  2  Other factors beyond the scope of this study include similar personnel issues for nonpilots and training for functions such as airfield operations and command and control of largescale multinational formations.
Tom Kington, "Italy Buys 13 Jet Trainers, Inks Naval Industry Deal," Defense News, June 13, 2019.
Luca Peruzzi, "Leonardo and Italian Air Force Launch the 'International Flight Training  School' Initiative," European Defense Review, July 19, 2018.    
Beth Stevenson, "Deciomannu  Selected as Second Base for IFTS," AIN Online,
June 19, 2019.
"UK's Second F-35 Training Squadron Arrives at RAF Marham," Air Force Technology, July 19, 2019.
Interview, European airpower expert, Washington, D.C., June 5, 2019.   
Interview, air power expert, Washington, D.C., September 12, 2019.    
Tom Kington, "Italian Air Force Takes Part in 22-Simulator Virtual Combat," Defense News,
July 20, 2018.
Kington, 2018.
Kington, 2018.
Jim St. Clair, "169th FW Wrap Up Arctic Challenge Exercise in Sweden," U.S. Air Force,
June 10, 2019b.
"Point Blank 19-2 Exercise Featured U.S., French, and Royal Air Force," Army Update, July 2, 2019.
Simon Michelle, "New Capabilities Demonstrated at 'Point Blank' Exercise," Jane's  International Defense Review, December 11, 2018.    
U.S. Air Force, "Trilateral, Cross-Generation Integration at Langley," April 28, 2017.
Pat Host, "U.S. Air Force Awards Northrop Grumman Joint Threat Emitter Delivery Order," Jane's Defence Weekly,May 21, 2019a.   
We assume that Turkey will not acquire F-35s.
Currently, the United States plans to station two F-35 squadrons at RAF Lakenheath beginning in 2021. Dennis, 2019.
---, "Greece: Air Force," World Air Forces database, March 27, 2019. As ofDecember 5, 2019:   https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA106-JWAF ---, "Belgium: Air Force," World Air Forces database, March 29, 2019. As of December 5, 2019: https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA022-JWAF 176 European Contributions to NATO's Future Combat Airpower ---, "Italy: Air Force," World Air Forces database, June 10, 2019. As of December 6, 2019: https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA135-JWAF ---, "Germany: Air Force," World Air Forces database, July 18, 2019. As of December 5, 2019: https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA102-JWAF ---, "Turkey: Air Force," World Air Forces database, August 14, 2019. As of December 5, 2019: https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA277-JWAF ---, "Poland: Air Force," World Air Forces database, September 13, 2019. As of December 5, 2019: https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA217-JWAF ---, "Netherlands: Air Force," World Air Forces database, October 9, 2019. As of December 5, 2019: https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA192-JWAF ---, "Spain: Air Force," World Air Forces database, October 14, 2019. As of December 5, 2019: https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA247-JWAF/ ---, "Air Force: Turkey," Jane's Sentinel Security Assessment-Eastern Mediterranean, October 31, 2019.---, "France: Air Force," World Air Forces database, October 31, 2019. As of December 5, 2019: https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA092-JWAF ---, "Portugal: Air Force," Jane's World Air Forces, November 19, 2019. As of December 5, 2019: https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA220-JWAF ---, "Norway: Air Force," World Air Forces database, December 5, 2019. As of October 28, 2019: https://janes.ihs.com/WorldAirForces/Display/JWAFA198-JWAF JAPCC-See Joint Air Power Competence Centre.Jennings, Gareth, "LM Contracted to Upgrade Greek F-16s," Jane's Defence Weekly, December 21, 2016.---, "MoD Reveals Ascent Penalties for Late Pilot Training Delivery," Jane's Defence Weekly, March 5, 2019a. As of June 23, 2020: https://www.janes.com/defence-news/news-detail/mod-reveals-ascent-penalties-for -late-pilot-training-delivery ---, "Italy Deploys F-35 on First NATO Mission," Jane's Defence Weekly,
September 26, 2019b.
We thank 
Mark Cozad
RAND colleague Clint Reach. David Ochmanek of RAND
Justin Bronk
Russia Strategic Initiative at U.S. European Command
This research was sponsored by the 
Russia Strategic Initiative at U.S. European Command in Stuttgart, Germany
International Security and Defense Policy Center of the RAND National Security Research Division (NSRD)
National Defense Research Institute (NDRI)
Office of the Secretary of Defense
Joint Staff
Unified Combatant Commands
Navy
Marine Corps
For more information on the 
RAND International Security and Defense Policy Center
xi
Planned upgrades to enable the F-35 to fire the new SDB II will further enable the aircraft's anti-armor mission. Improved sensors allow the bomb to track and hit targets under variable conditions and at greater distances. Lighter than many other air-dropped bombs, eight SDB II bombs will fit on the inside of an F-35, allowing them to be carried without compromising the aircraft's stealth properties. 
40
41
39
European investments in combat air capabilities and increased emphasis on training and preparation for high-intensity missions are likely to improve European contributions to a notional collective defense scenario over the coming decade. These developments could also enhance deterrence-an objective at the forefront of NATO's agenda since 2014 -by making it more likely that Europeans would be able to impose extensive military costs on Russia in response to aggression against a NATO member. One common scenario considers a calculation by the Russian government that Russia could leverage a regional imbalance in ground forces to occupy some slice of NATO territory, employ air defenses to stave off allied air forces, present a fait accompli similar to that seen in Crimea, and politically divide NATO by calling for negotiations. 
3
Further analysis should consider alternative perspectives. To the extent that the Russian government perceives an existential threat from NATO's long-range strike capabilities and believes that strategic air operations favor prompt offensive action, Russia could feasibly be incentivized to conduct preemptive strikes during a moment of crisis in order to degrade fifth-generation capabilities. Seen through the lens of Russian insecurity and the "besieged fortress mentality," allied efforts to enhance deterrence could perversely have destabilizing effects on European security. Full consideration of this argument, which would require wargaming and deeper technical analysis, is important but lies beyond the scope of this report.
Within Europe, the broader implications of divergent combat air investment decisions also merit further attention. France and Germany, 