# ID: 97fbd69f767148a7a9705ed24021d893
# Title: An illustrative case study for twentieth century defense planners: the technology and politics of United States coastal defense 1880-1898
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1980.0
# Fulltext:
balance which may total to cause quantum change in the balance. The national defense policies, however, tend to continue basically unchanged until a dramatic and palpable threat arises which can mobilize the President, Congress, and the American people to action. Obviously, this results in crisisoriented diplomacy; it also accounts for the traditional fluctuations of American military strength between times of peace and war. 2 3 How the President interprets and conveys this threat is crucial to what the Congressional and public reaction will be. Traditionally, the President has the ability to exaggerate a minor threat or soft-pedal a more imposing one; the public and Congress will tend to follow his lead. 2 4 "Public opinion" is, to a large extent, both a product of and a determiner of foreign and military policy. It is probably the greatest force in shaping military policy, since attitudes on defense reflect attitudes on foreign policy in general. The image Americans hold of their country as a world power determines the degree of their approval of a strong military force. This was reflected in the American mood of isolationism in the 1920's and in the "win the war" mood of the 1940's: both attitudes were significant shapers of military policy. More recently, the Gallup Poll reflected a dramatic increase in bias against military spending during the Vietnam War in the 1960's.25 But public opinion has many weaknesses as a formative 2 3 Samuel P.
precisely, does the American system for formulating military policy assure that adequate and prudent measures are taken for the defense of the United States? The importance of this question is obvious, for great nations which have not taken such measures for their defense have historically had a higher probability of being defeated or of suffering inordinate damage in staving off defeat in international conflicts than have nations with more efficient military policies.
For purposes of this study, an adequate and prudent defensive military policy is defined as one which has evolved from a rational evaluation of its technological capabilities and those of its possible adversaries, weighed against the international balance of power. Such an analysis should yield a better policy than one derived without such study.
Any answer to the question of whether America's method of determining defensive military policy is "adequate and prudent" will be a complex one, and will inescapably depend not only on the parameters that each different analyst chooses to investigate but also on the inevitable biases he brings to the process.
This study will construct a paradigm of how defense needs are deter-,,ined and funded in the twentieth century, based on a variety of interpretations by contemporary analysts. It will then examine the question of how the United States provided for coastal defense in the closing decades of the nineteenth century, searching for parallels and analogues to the twentieth :entury paradigm. However remote the day and however different the details, the similarities go far to illuminate present day problems in defense with remarkable clarity, justifying an excursion which might at first appear to be an exercise in antiquirianism. The process of funding defense needs has become far more formal and complex in the twentieth century than it was in the nineteenth. To say that the process is more formal is not, however, to say that its basic character is substantially changed. The conflicts between military and domestic spendfng (i.e. the question of "guns or butter"), the impact of pressure groups and constituencies on legislation, the often paro-:nial desires of the military services, and the difficulties in accurately issessing technological developments and the efficacy of deterrent weapons ill have analogues and similarities in the nineteenth century. The problems -at nineteenth century Americans had in dealing with these disparate factors
;zint with informative clarity to similar difficulties of present day 'ipricans.
Three separate groups interact in the process of producing a strategy " national defense in the United States: the publicists, the planners, -. the politicians. These groups are neither homogenous nor static. Members 'hre groups may change from one group to another or may be members of more
, one group at any given time. The key factor concerning these groups is 'he identity of their members, but rather their outlook on defense poliiand how it varies as international and domestic situations change. The ,,Ionlcy of these groups to diverge or converge in their opinions concerning 
defense as these situations change and evolve is a critically important factor in how the United States plans for defense.
The publicists include all those individuals and organizations that examine defense needs and recommend courses of action in national defense strategy. The publicists are the most diverse of the three groups. Publicists include elkments inside and outside government such as the mass media, "think tanks" which devise defense recommendations, veterans' organizations, industrial and domestic lobbyists, and sometimes members of the executive and legislative branches. Publicists may advocate a strong or a weak defense policy; their rationale may be founded on irrefutably accurate analysis or wild flights of fancy. In this context, the editorialist who recommends a defense policy of massive deterrence and his counterpart who advocates passive acceptance of American defeat anywhere outside the continental United
States are both prescribing their solutions to the problem of defense policy.
The publicists have the "national interest" as the foundation of their policies, but their interpretations of the national interest are as diverse as their membership; anti-Communism, strong domestic legislation, healthy defense industries or some crassly self-serving end may be the goal of individually determined national interest. The important point to recognize regarding the publicists as a group is that their policies do not have to meet any concrete standards of rationality or reasoned analysis. Some policies may meet both standards, but they are not necessarily the most influential in the overall process. 
2
4
3
4
1 ~5 Executive branch.
The politicians who take action on the planners' proposals are the critical element in the process of determining national defense policy. In The Federalist No. 51 (1788) James Madison envisioned the will of the people as being expressed through the legislature. Nonetheless, the federalist system would protect against legislative abuses by fragmenting the will of the people in both space and time and by requiring a consensus on some policy decisions between the executive and legislative branches. Ambition would be held in check by countering ambitions, and the interests of office holders would be limited by constitutional guarantees of office. 
5
The factors which serve as parameters influencing Congress and the Executive branch as they decide on America's military policy cover a wide spectrum. The goal of the legislature is the national interest, modified like that of the planners, by their self-interest. But a wide variety of other influences modify a politician's position on national defense. Although no single influence acts alone, an analysis of some of the factors may prove helpful in later analyses of political patterns.
While the national interest is the most overriding consideration influencing Congress and the Executive branch, using national interest to justify action or inaction is much easier than defining it. The national interest can be all things to all men; as we have seen in the case of the publicists, 
5
For an analysis of the effects of The Federalist No. 51 on the defense planning process, see Edward A. Kolodziej, The Uncommon Defense and Congress,   1945-1963 (n.p.: Ohio State University Press, [1966]), pp. 6-7.
S--'..........-war the national interest is a nebulous entity which can be invoked to justify a wide range of action or inaction. In politics, it is probably more often used as a cloak of high-minded rhetoric over political decisions made on realistic and practical grounds. 
6
Most proposals for military policy cost money; given that salient and inescapable fact, monetary implications of a given proposal act as strong influences on the decision-makers. In the matter of appropriations, the Congress can play a negative role in limiting expenditures or a positive role in changing them up or down. 
7
unless the President vetoes'the measure, the services have no recourse except to spend the funds. 
8
6
7
8
the economy could or would afford, since only the President and Congress should make that decision, and "certainly in our military recommendations on force we should not be curbed in any way by economic assumptions. 
"
10
11
12
12
. the location and related transfer, purchase, and sale of properties is the main concern of the House Armed Services Committee. 
13'
14
Pressure groups can be formed to promote or oppose almost any item of defense legislation. Traditional historical pressure groups have included peace movements and preparedhess groups before the World Wars, as well as the advocates of domestic spending on social welfare programs in periods of peacetime. Additionally, industrial lobbying groups are traditionally effective in promoting defense policies when they stand to gain from the contracts involved. The largesse in rewarding cooperative Congressmen need not be improper, as in the case of locating defense plants in districts in return for the legislative assistance; obviously relocating plants out of areas where Congressional support is lacking has a corresponding effect in 
13
49-51. 14
15
16
--I punishing a recalcitrant politician. 
7
The planners may present their proposals to Congress in a way that prejudices their chances of approval from the start. Much of the receptiveness of politicians toward defense projects varies with the reputation of the military service for reliability and accuracy within its various departments, while the personalities of the officers who represent the services before Congress plays a role also. 
19
17
' Gallery," Time, 18 February 1980, p. 19. 19
fail to present a united front, or when they take positions opposed to congressional guidance, chances for their proposed legislation understandably suffer. 
2 0
The foreign policy of the United States is a product of as many factors as the military policy, and is determined by many of the same pressures. But a paramount consideration in deciding on both is the international situation. Both the President and Congress must agree in principle on defense policies for them to be proposed, funded, and approved. 
2 1
22
12 force in military policy. First, it is easier for public debate to come to grips with simple decisions, not complex strategic problems. 
26
27
28
what "public opinion" is on a given subject at a given time is very difficult to measure, either at the moment or in historical research. Public opinion is by nature personal and subjective, but it is formed in part by the mass media, particularly the "elite press," and by public figures in the Executive Branch and in Congress. Although imperfect, these sources can be analyzed as a gauge of public opinion. 
29
Measures can be carried from conception to appropriation only by a process of consensus building in Congress. Given the disparate and divergent nature of the pressures on Congress outlined above, this is a monumental and often insurmountable task. The advocate of a military policy, like the advocates of foreign policies or domestic policies, must build a consensus for his measure in the political arena; without this consensus, the measure will fail no matter what its merits. 
30
31
3 3
Given the multiple tendencies against consensus-building among the decision-makers it is not surprising that certain observable biases develop favoring some types of legislation over others. Because of the relatively short terms of office with relation to long range programs which may require years or decades to show results, the Executive Branch is more likely to propose, and Congress more likely to pass, measures that can be completed quickly. Additionally, given the requirement for a fairly high decree of 3 1 polsby, Congress and the Presidency, p. 153.
32 Huntington, The Common Defense, p. x. --public support for Congressional actions, the bias is in favor of situations which are perceived as acute and against those which are perceived as chronic or long term. 
3 5
Building a consensus is easier in some cases than others. One analyst has catalogued six important parameters within which Congress decides on appropriations. First, Congress considers the amount the given agency or department received in the preceding year. That is, the appropriation in a succeeding year is likely to be a little larger or a little smaller than previous appropriations, but not markedly so in most cases. Second, world developments as perceived and interpreted by Congress and the Executive branch particularly influence foreign and military policy. Third, the agency or departmental reputation for hard work, accuracy, and reliability are taken into account. Fourth, prior program commitments are considered; Congress is less likely to terminate a long-term program that is moving toward completion. Fifth, lobbyists and interest group demands for or against a measure are important. Finally, the general economic situation in the country has a profound effect on measures concerning appropriations. 
36
37
38
" Ibid., vol. 1, no. 4 (Spring 1977), pp. 163-169, among others in this journal. 39 Huntington, The Common Defense, pp. 203-204. 40
Because of the uncertainties concerning possible enemy intentions, the general complexity of new technology, and the difficulties inherent in conceptualizing changing parameters, such abstruse evaluations are unlikely to be made in a timely manner.
Throughout the political process of determining military policy, a basic irrationality is at work; policies tend to continue after their efficacy has passed or is at least questioned, while new policies are not adopted to deal with changing circumstances. The irrationality occurs in part because of the complexity of the system. Military policy exists only to support and complement the nation's foreign policy, but exactly what is the nation's foreign policy at any specific time? Alternate means of defense exist, but which is best? The nation's foreign relations change almost daily; what will they be when a proposed military policy comes into existence?
The defensive military policies must be det2rmined in advance, but how can that determination be made? Divergent demands are competing for the nation's economic resources, but how can the best allocation be made? Multiple answers, even multiple "correct" answers can be made to each question at any given time; therefore a problem of choice will always exist. This problem of choice can only be determined in the arena of politics, thus the defense budget will always be a poltical problem with a political solution. 4 1 As one analyst observed, "Military policy is always the product of politics.
Good military policy is only the product of brave choice and ingenious compromise by experienced politicians." 
'4 2
that experienced politicans would carefully analyze the international and domestic situations and make rational choices and compromises to provide for American security. But Congress is not so organized as to encourage the examination of all parameters which come together to make defense policy.
No single committee can look at strategic needs, the military threat, budget demands, domestic needs and taxation, and weigh them for a solution.
Thus the final decision is always ex parte: it may be a good decision or it may not, for there is no mechanism to insure rationality. 
43
Dramatic changes in military policy can almost never be taken except in response to dramatic changes in international affairs.
By looking back to an earlier period when the problems of national defense were less complex, it lay be possible to identify and isolate for critical analysis those factors which constitute the enduring essentials of the defense equation. The problem of how best to defend the coastlines of the United States in the late nineteenth century provides an example of problems in military policy with modern parallels. Most of the difficulties of providing for defense needs late in the twentieth century had their analogues in the question of coastal defense. The publicists, planners, and politicians of both periods grappled with new and rapidly developing technologies in which quick obsolescence was an important factor. In the nineteenth century, decisions on measures for coastal armament had to be 
43
The dominant feature of international relations during the third quarter of the nineteenth century had been the numerous national and international conflicts in Europe and-America. Following the mid-century revolutions throughout Europe, a period of instability ensued which saw countries warring in dozens of conflicts until the 1870's. The Great Powers were forced to spend huge resources on armies and armaments. 1 In the United States, tensions concerning sectional rivalries, industrialization, and slavery had erupted in an internecine war that had exhausted the country and its resources.
As the decade of the 1830's opened,the world seemed more stable. Europe was at peace, albeit *an uneasy one, as systems of alliance by Bismnarck and others took form. The Great Powers all seemed more interested in dominating faraway colonies than in further wars on the continent. 
2
4
5
The foreign policy of the nation was very nearly the absence of a foreign policy much of the time; but the economic forces that would bring about the extra-continental expansion later in the century were already at work. The expansion did not begin suddenly, but was a natural evolution of the settlement of the North American continent. About the time of the Civil War, the character of expansion changed from searching for frontier lands to searching for markets on and off the continent. Both businessman and politician only poorly understood that such an economic expansion would bring an increased need for protection of commerce. Even less did they appreciate the political and military price of such expansion: international political 
3
4
51bid., p. 3, and Samuel P. Huntington, The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of Civil-Military Relations (Cambridge: Belknap  Press, Harvard, 1959), pp. 223-224.  entanglements and a reinvigorated Monroe Doctrine, which would require military forces to make it credible. 
6
A country without perceived imperialist goals and with oceans as barriers to foreign encroachment had little use for an efficient military establishment. The Army's role in America was restricted to fighting Indians on the ever-decreasing frontier while the Navy had become a collection of Civil War antiques with a limited mission of protecting American commerce.
The period was one of equilibrium, particularly for the Army. It was maintained after 1869 with twenty-five regiments of infantry, ten of cavalry, and five of artillery, with twenty-five to twenty-eight thousand men dispersed at 255 posts in the United States and its territories. Partly because it was so small, it received little public support, for the Army had little public exposure and offered only meager opportunities for political patronage.7
To the average citizen, the military seemed a misfit in American society in an era of enlightenment, a negative influence which lived off the producers of the nation. International law and arbitration would limit and solve future international conflicts, making wars anachronisms of earlier ages. Since an era of unending peace was almost certainly at hand, war was 6 Walter LaFeber, The New Emoire: An Interpretation of American Expansion, 1860-1898 (Ithaca, N. Y.: Cornell University Press, [1963]), pp. vii, 1-3.
an evil manifestation of wasteful militarism. The military services were non-productive parasites on the economy. Military institutions and military preparations, many believed should be eliminated, except for forces on the frontier to control the Indians, and a small Navy. Thus society separated the military from itself bringing about a mutual indifference, sometimes even hostility between the civilian and military sectors of America. 
8
9
Many if not most families had members who had fought as citizen-soldiers in that war, and their predominant conviction was that the war had been won by the non-professionals, not by the regulars. This constituted a strong argument against theadvocates of larger military forces, such as Emory Upton, who tried to impose an army along Prussian lines on the American system. Such efforts were foredoomed to failure, given the temper of the time and probably diverted attention from more realistic recommendations.10 Without support of the citizenry, it would be difficult for Congress to be pushed to form a consensus for increased defense appropriations. Few forces other than the constituency of the individual legislator were at work to influence such spending. There was no credible foreign threat to 
8
9
.
the United States."H There was virtually no industrial lobbying effort, since neither the Army nor the Navy were significant consumers of industrial products before 1881.12 Congress reflected the distrust and hostility of the populace toward all things military. 
13
14
15
21
22
23
24
22
White and Schneider,
The Republican Era,
pp. 134,
137,
144. 23 1bid.,
p. 98. 24 1bid.,
pp. 45,
47,
54. 25
A revolution in cannon weapons had occurred during the midnineteenth century; a revolution so profound that it has been accurately described as the most fundamental change to occur in artillery between the first use of gunpowder in antiquity and the invention of the atomic projectile in the mid-twentieth century. 1 Beginning about 1870, a series of technological changes came together to make the cannon of 1900 an entirely different weapon than that of 1850. An understanding of some of the technological changes is critical to an appreciation of the difficulty which both the military and the politicans of the period experienced in determining the direction in which coastal defenses should be improved. If the improve-L ments had been the result of a single innovation, they would be considerably easier to understand; they were, however, the combined effect of a number of individually minor improvements in the production of steel, the design of cannon, and the composition of powder. 
occurring, and it is perhaps not surprising that there was dispute as to their importance among contemporaries.
In 1850 cannon throughout the world were constructed primarily of cast iron or bronze with smooth (unrifled) bores; they were muzzle-loading and shot a round projectile when a quantity of black powder exploded in the confined space behind the ball. 
2
1
3
4
Successive firing of cast or wroughit-iron guns progressively and cumulatively weakens them, making reliability uncertain at any given firing. 
5
7
8
9
7
9
The Cosmopolitan 8 (December 1889): 396. effect of the cannon balls no longer caused significant damage. Thus the development of a penetrating explosive projectile became necessary. 1 0 Penetrating power is a function of momentum, which is itself the product of the weight (or mass) of the projectile and the square of its velocity; an increase in velocity will thus increase the penetrating power much more, proportionately, than an increase in weight. Up to a point, this increase in velocity could be produced by simply increasing the powder charge, but this approach necessitated an increase in the chamber volume to accommodate the charge. The amount of explosive force the cannon could sustain was finite, however, so that a better solution than simply a larger explosive charge was to keep the projectile under the influence of a lower propelling force for a longer time. In this way, more propelling force could be transmitted to the projectile before it left the muzzle. Two developments were required before a propelling force could be exerted on a projectile for a longer time. First it was necessary to design a propelling charge wnich vould burn rather than explode; and second, the gun barrel must be proportionately longer. Slow-burning propellants re- this was a mechanical, rather than chemical solution to the problem. 
12
13
14
12
13 Greer, "Recent Developments in Gun-making," p. 400, and "The Defense of OUr Sea-Ports," Harper's New Monthly Magazine 71 (November 1885): 932, and Goodrich, 'Our New Naval Guns," p. 663-69.
14 Brodie, From Crossbow to H-Bomb, p. 139. 
15
smooth-bore cannon in the United States when the Ordnance Department converted a number of the outdated Rodman ten-inch Civil War cannon to eightinch rifled guns as late as the 1890's by inserting a wrought iron rifled sleeve into their bores. 
16
1 7
The other major breech design was the interrupted screw, a French adaptation of an American invention in which a breechblock on a hinged fitting could be inserted with a single thrust into a slotted and threaded breech with multiple teeth and locked with but one-sixth of a turn, engaging all the screw threads simultaneously. This design accomplished rearward obturation by means of a mushroom-like flexible head of asbestos and tallow on the inner face of the breechblock which expanded when pressed by the rearward effect of the expanding gases and sealed the cavities between the breech and breechblock.18 Many cannon aesigners questioned the concept of breech-loading because of a nunber of earlier catastrophic failures of breechloaders.
Breechblockson Krupp weapons failed often in the Franco-Prussian War and several accidents occurred in which British guns fired before the breechblock was fully locked. Breech-loading was not adopted by the British Ar'y until about 1280 when contiguous developments made such designs mandatory. 
1 9
18
19 "Modern Artillery, p. 297, and Eugene Griffin, "Our Sea-Coast Defenses, N orth American Review 147 (July 18S8): 73, and Jobe, Guns, pp. 150-51. one-tenth in muzzle-loaders), and second, to provide enough air to permit the powders to burn rather than to explode. 20 Designers could provide this increased volume either by lengthening or by widening the powder chamber.
Neither approach was easy to implement, since lengthening the chamber increased the length of the gun at the heavy (rear) end and made them extremely unwieldy, while widening the chamber meant that the bags of propellant were too large to be inserted through the muzzle. 2 1 Additionally, forward obturation (sealing spaces between the round and the interior of the tube to prevent gases from escaping forward around the projectile during firing) became more important with the long rifled barrels. If the higher pressure guns were to perform to their potential, the gas seal around the projectile must be as nearly perfect as possible. Such a seal was not possible when the round had to be rammed down the tube from the muzzle: either it would fit too tightly to permit manual ramming (since power rammers were impractical for muzzleloaders) or the shot would fit too loosely to provide efficient forward obturation. By the early 1880's, artillerists agreed that muzzleloaders were obsolete and the question of breech versus muzzle-loading had been largely decided, at least within the military services. 
22
2 lGoodrich, Our New Naval Guns," pp. 667-68. in the nineteenth century by the crucible or open-hearth methods and cast, forged, or otherwise processed for the desired qualities. 
23
The so-called "built-up" design became the standard for the mcdern guns; with modifications, this type continues to be used in the last quarter of the twentieth century. A "built-up" gun is constructed by successively heat-shrinking tubes and hoops over the rear portions of the rifled barrel to put the gun in a state of compressed tension (therefore elastic resistance) which progressively increases rearward from the muzzle to the breech.
Since the pressure within the tube on firing progressively decreases from the rear to the front as the projectile moves along the barrel, the resistance of the barrel to rupture is greater than the expansive force of the propellant all along the gun. 
25
23
25
26
Although the cast-iron versus steel debate would continue in the United States Congress until around 1890, steel had been the exclusive metal for new artillery in the great European powers since the early 1880's. 
27
2
2
For the United States, coastal fortifications had traditionally represented a particularly attractive method of providing for her defense needs. The history of warfare had repeatedly demonstrated the vulnerability of ships to shore-based guns and the relative invulnerability of coastal fortifications to fire from ships, except when the attacking fleet was overwhelmingly superior in firepower, or-the attacker could afford to be prolifigate in accepting losses. Fortifications were a superior alternative to a navy for coast defense, both in expertise and efficiency. Fortifications were far cheaper than a navy in initial outlay, as wll as in main-, tenance and replacement costs. To defend the entire coastline of the United
States effectively would require a huge navy; an attacking fleet could concentrate and attack a harbor before the defending navy had time to concentrate, thus mandating several squadrons of ships to defend separate sectors of the coast or groups of harbors. Once the large navy were built, it would have to be manned continually and maintained, while fortifications could be neglected until war came, when they could be at least partially manned by militia and volunteers. Even obsolescent fortifications, up to the time of breech-loading rifles, could stand a good chance of defeating newer or modern ships. Finally, while many felt that a large navy could by its very existence lead to war, no such possibility existed regardingJ fortifications. Coastal defenses were patently defensive in nature; their existence could never lead to military involvements. On the contrary, many American observers felt that efficient coastal fortifications could buy both peace and security at bargain prices. 
3
1. They must close all important harbors against an enemy, and secure them, to our military and commercial marine. 3.They must cover the great cities from attack. 4. They must prevent, . . . the great avenues of interior navigation from being blockaded at their entrance into the ocean. 5. They must cover the coastwise and interior navigation, by closing the harbors.... 6. They must protect the great naval establishments.  An analysis of these principles of 1816 shows that the term "coast defense," as used by the nineteenth century American planner implied a very different group of functions than the same term used by a British planner, who had to design fortifications both to defend harbors and to repel invasion. The American planners viewed coast defense as a protection of critical points such as large cities, harbors, broad estuaries, or navigable rivers. They had no thought of attempting to fortify the entire coastline against invasion. To avoid insuperable problems of style as well as anachronistic language, the 2rm "coast defense" will be retained in this study, but it is important that the reader bear in mind that it implies something much closer to "harL., ind estuary defense," and that this lack of precision in definition caused as many problems to the nineteenth century publicists and politicians as to the twentieth century student.
The fortifications that resulted from the movement following the War of 1812 were varied in design. Some were linear fortifications which stretched for long distances, mounting guns in a single row; others were mounted in circular towers to give the advantage of height where terrain did not otherwise provide it. But the most characteristic, and most dramatic design was the huge batteries of masonry casemates stacked row upon row like offices in a modern building. Such massing of fire was necessary because of the relative short ranges and inaccuracy of the cast-iron, smoothbore, muzzle loading cannon of the day. Likewise, the vertical fortification was only possible because the wooden sailing ships which might attack them mounted the same inaccurate and relatively small cannon. Designers of land fortifications had been forced to abandon such vertical masonry forts centuries before, when the artillery developed large siege guns which could fire at a single point on the wall of a fortification and with repeated hits, finally breach the wall. Such a cumulative effect of nIL repeated hits on the same point on a wall was not possible given the inaccuracy of firing from ships; since the cannon balls caused relatively little damage when hitting the vertical walls at random, the multistoried design survived in coastal fortifications. 
5
casemate was left open at the back to facilitate ventilation during firing.
While the front of the casemate was heavily fortified with stone, preferably granite, up to ten feet thick; casemates could be constructed on top of one another, limited only by the skill of the architect and the physical limitations of his materials and the geology of the area. In some later casemates, the stone was sheathed with cast-iron or steel armor plating. The firing port was a rectangular arched opening in the stone presenting an opening which was as small as possible at the front, but which tapered outward toward the rear to allow the cannon, whose muzzle would reach almost to the front of the opening, to have a limited traverse and elevation capability. Traverse was usually limited to 1200 (600 left and right of center). This limitation on traverse perpetuated one of the most characteristic features of earlier plans for fortifications, which is the polygonal, often hexagonal, shape (see Figure 
3
The best locations for coastal fortifications were those which commanded long expanses of open sea around a harbor or those which commanded the entrance to a channel leading inland. At either type of location, the fortification had to be able to bring fire over a traverse of from 1800 (in the case of a fort on a straight beach) up to 3600 (in the case of an island commanding a channel entrance). To avoid "dead spaces" (i.e. areas in which th'for L ication could not fire on ships but from which ships t could fire on the fort), the casemated batteries had to have multiple walls which themselves intersected at not less than the 1200 traverse of the guns.
Since the hexagon is a regular polygon comprised of 1200 angles, the hexagon or a truncated hexagonal shape was the most common shape for fortifica- The steel breech-loading cannon could destroy a masonry fort, causing the bulk of the fortification to be a positive .danger to its inhabitants because of the spalling effect which the high velocity projectile caused on the stone walls of the fort. 
7
Although there was much discussion about the new artillery technology by 1880, there was little appreciation for the changes in the design of fortifications which the new guns would mandate. Early in the decade, however, an incident occurred which gave an object lesson in many of the changing relationships between modern cannon on shore defending against modern cannon from shipboard. This was the British bombardment of Alexandria in 1881. The incident is little more than a footnote to both the diplomatic and military history of the period, but its impact on the design philosophy of coastal fortifications was considerable until the turn of the century.
In May of 1882 nationalist uprisings threatened stability in Egypt and the security of the Suez Canal. In response, the British and French governments sent a joint naval squadron to Alexandria, but with instructions to do nothing there except observe events. On 11 July, with the nationalists continuing to riot in Alexandria and throwing up earthworks outside the city, Admiral Sir Beauchamp Seymour acted without orders and bombarded the 7,,. . . our masonry forts cannot withstand such an armament .
the granite splinters scattered by each penetrating projectile would be an additional source of danger to our cannoneers." Eugene Griffin, "Our Sea-Coast Defenses," North American Review 147 (July 1888): 67.
old forts outside the city. The forts soon surrendered and the British landed forces. 
8
The most famous example of naval bombardment of fixed fortifications in the U.S. Civil War was the shelling of Fort Fisher, near Wilmington, North Carolina, in January 1865. Neither the fort, its armament, the attacking fleet, nor the length and intensity of the naval attack were typical of warfare of the period, but the operation does provide a case of naval forces playing the dominant role in defeating fortifications. Fort Fisher was an earthen fort with walls constructed at a forty-five degree vertical angle, revetted with marsn sod. It was situated on an i4iand commanding tne a5proaches to W-ilmington, anc could thus be shelled both from the ocean ar.: from Cape Fear River. The fort mounted ten 1" and ten 8" cast-iron smoctn bore cannon, anj 3 nu:rte, of sma~ler ciuns.
. Union flee, of four moritors and three friqa*es firec on tne fort for two days ana nignts cefore :eln: joined by fifty-two more snips which added their fires to the bombardm.en for another day and night. Total numcers of guns on the ships and rounos fired differ in accounts of the shelling, but apparently between thiree and six hundred guns fired about 50,000 shells on Fort Fisher during the attack.
The shelling broke down the earthen walls, tearing the marsh grass revetting off them and reducing their angle to about thirty degrees. All the guns on the river side of the fort were put out of action, while seventeen out of twenty-three guns on the ocean side remained serviceable and none were dismounted. One reason for the disparity in damage on the two fronts may nave been that fire from the comparatively calm river channel was probably more accurate than the fire from the Atlantic. After an infantry assault marked by fierce fighting, the fort surrendered. The naval attack was unparalleled in the Civil War; whether any fortification could have survived such an assault is questionable. Nonetheless, a stone fortress with more large guns could probably have stood uo to the ounishmert of the naval artillery longer, while preserving more of its own fighting pov.er and inflicting more damage on the attacking navy. For details of the operation, see underlying implications of the engagement for several years, but when they came to light, they had a profound effect on the design of coastal defenses.
A British officer was the first to appraise professionally the . .
Egyptians had no machine guns to disturb the aim of the ships, although they scored twenty-three harmless hits on the ships from the shore-based cast-iron cannon. The accuracy of the ships was at least as high and probably higher than could be expected in engagements against better prepared positions both because of the lack of machine guns and the poor training of the Egyptians in modern gunnery. 
9
9
From their invisibility the defenses would derive their invulnerability. 
10
The flat areas behind the guns would make visual spotting of rounds from shipboard much more difficult; should the rounds hit the wooded slope to the rear, their impact and smoke would be unseen, hidden by the forest. Invisibility could be enhanced by painting the guns in camouflage patterns and by leaving a natural appearance to the area, with a rough foreground, avoiding any clean edges or well-trimmed look. Above all the designer must avoid providing aiming points for the ships in the form of fixed objects.
Otherwise, the design problems were minimal. Only a small infantry force need be provided, preferably in a central keep, augmented by obstacles on any natural approaches. The gun emplacements should be wide concrete arcs to allow maximum traverse, well-drained, with adequate storage area for ammunition, crew shelte , ', and water supply. 
11
The barbette mount might be more descriptively called the center pivot mount, for it is a fixed column which raises the gun over the parapet far enough to allow maximum traverse and elevation of the gun. It was the most common mount for guns on ships, and was the simplest mount for shore guns. It had the advantages of simplicity, reliability, and low expense.
Its primary disadvantage was that the gun remained visible at all times and thus the gun crew was at leas.t partially exposed during reloading operations.
In a well-designed emplacement, the problem of visibility could be greatly reduced by camouflage painting and by a wooded or broken background. 
12
Section Section
Typical Casemate Battery and Disappearing Carriage Guns on Same Terrain. Imaginary site, no scale. Lewis, Seacoast Fortifications, pp. 46-57, 90-91.
was that of Alexander Moncrieff of the Royal Artillery. Moncrieff formed the idea of the disappearing carriage while observing the bombardment of Sevastopol during the Crimean War, but his design was not tested until much later. In principle the design was simple: it harnessed the recoil of the cannon during firing to raise a counterweight as the cannon moved to the rear and down. The cannon could then be reloaded from behind cover and the stored potential energy of the raised counterweight used to raise the gun back into battery for firing. In practice, the system was not so simple, involving complex problems in mechanical and hydraulic engineering. The system was efficient and effective; a well-trained crew could fire a ten-inch gun at a rate of two rounds per minute. 
14
But in spite of the contributing roles played by the other weapons, the raison d'etre for the new fortifications was still the high-powered steel guns. Previously, the armament for coastal fortifications had been only a small fraction of their cost (one-eighth or less), but after 1885 armament would account for three-fourths or more of the total cost. 
17
The report pointed out that although strengthening the forts to withstand bombardment by the best U.S. weapons of the day was theoretically possible, it was unlikely that they could withstand weapons then being developed in 18 U.S., Ordnance Department, Annual Report of the Chief of Ordnance to the Secretary of War for ,he Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1837 (Washington, D.C.: War Department, 1S67), p. 11.
Europe. 
19
20
In the decades inediately after the Civil War, few Americans were seriously concerned with potential overseas enemies. With the great internal conflict behind them, the citizens were more occupied in Reconstruction, continental expansion and improvement, and developing industry than they were in preparing for international squabbles far beyond their foresight. The Army and Navy contracted to become small forces for keeping the peace on the frontiers and protecting maritime comn.erce. 
1
Within the small military services, however, thoughtful officers were turning inward and examining their roles in society as well as the technological developments of other armies and navies. By the late 1870's the lessons of the use of Krupp's steel breech-loading cannon in the Franco-Prussian War had become a popular subject for discussion in the American 1W. R. [58] armed services; planners saw the powerful guns and navies then building in Europe as potential threats.
The military perceived a need for improvement in ordnance and seacoast defenses, but the Democratic Congress 2 was ambivalent on the question of any foreign threat and felt the pressure of their constituents for public works projects more acutely than the needs for defensive improvements.
General Winfield S. Hancock, commander of the Department of the East, and therefore commander of all forts on the northeastern seaboard and Great Lakes, wrote Representative S. S. Cox (R-N.Y.) early in 1880 that ordnance was the most important defense question of the day, since it took so much time to develop; in the event of war, without the time to develop and produce ordnance, money alone would accomplish little. 
3
5
3
of improved fortifications, commenting editorially that "No topic requiring legislation gives [Congress] an easier opportunity for creating irresolution . . . than . . public defenses." 
6
7
8
While other nations have been increasing their means for carrying on offensive warfare and attacking maritime cities, we have been dormant in preparations for defense. Nothing of importance has been done toward strengthening and finishing our casemated works since our late civil war, during which the great guns of modern warfare and the heavy armor of modern fortifications and ships came into use among the nations, and our earthworks, left by a sudden failure of appropriations some years since, in all s ages of incompletion, are now being rapidly destroyed by the elements.
In the Chief of Engineer's Annual Report for 1881, General H. G. Wright described the more than six hundred modern guns the British had in their coastal fortifications, while the United States possessed neither modern guns nor armored forts. He outlined the revolution in technology, describing the antiquated cast-iron, smoothbore cannons as adequate against wooden ships, but not against modern steel armored ships. 10 At the same time, General W. T. Sherman, then commander of the Army, said that the fortifications then standing should be abandoned because they were ineffective against steel ships and garrisoning them with his limited resources detracted from other missions tre soldiers could be performing. 
11
12
The report went on carefully and lucidly to reiterate the technological revolution that had occurred in naval technology in the change from sail to steam and from wooden to steel ships. He cited an 1869 report by the Board of Engineers which had examined the fortifications and proposed modifications. Even at that early date, the engineers had recommended against strengthening the masonry forts, correctly predicting that sheathing the masonry with armor could not indefinitely stay ahead of the technological progress in naval artillery. 
13
14
14
at each existing fortification on the coasts of the United States, General Wright concluded that the nation's harbors were all but defenseless from an attack by sea. "It must be apparent," he said . . . that the defenses designed for their protection in their present unfinished condition are altogether insufficient for the security of H our important harbors, the centers of commerce, manufactures, and wealth; of many minor harbors, which nevertheless have large interests at stake; of roadsteads useful as a efuge for our commercial and naval marine, and of our navy-yards.i5
He suggested retaining the masonry forts, but only as magazines, living quarters, and strong points. He recommended a vigorous program of construction of guns and fortifications, comparing the lethargy of the United States with British action. He pointed out that Great Britain was sending eighty and one-hundred ton rifled cannon to strengthen Gibraltar and Malta, chauvinistically adding the purely economic assessment that these were "po 4 nts -that cannot compare in importance with New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and New Orleans." 
16
17
4-23; quote, p. 22. 16 1bid., pp. 5, 23.
18
An invasion would not be required for the United States to suffer defeat.
With over three millions of population and two billion dollars in property in its harbors, the country could not afford to be without defenses. The editorial continued, pointing out that the oceans on which the country depended for defense were really no protection, for U.S. harbors lay only .thirty-six hours from British naval bases in Halifax and only six hours from Spanish bases in Havana. The Navy was a poor solution because of its expense. Meanwhile, as America delayed putting her defenses in order, her foreign policy was crippled; her most urgent diplomacy was only "an empty expression of opinion" since she could not back her words with force. 
19
22
2 3
wrestling with the problem for years, criticized the nation, and by implication Congress, for its lack of foresightedness. "It is believed,"he said, "that there is hardly any civilized nation so ill-prepared for war, as far as maritime defenses are concerned, as the United States." 
2 4
2 5
2 7
Earlier in 1883, Congress had taken action to provide the beginnings of a modern navy. In the Naval Appropriation Act of that year (which also established the Gun Foundry Board), Congress authorized the Navy to build three steel cruisers, the first keels laid down since the Civil War.29   With what would become the "White Squadron" of later fame already being built, Congress would have been expected to be more willing to accept recommendations of the Gun Foundry Board with respect to the Navy, for the cruisers could not be launched unarmed. Nonetheless, purely political factors caused problems in the matter of appropriations for the military in 1884. That year Arthur, a Republican, was filling the last year of his term in office; Democrats, who controlled the House, appeared reluctant to vote funds for projects which would contribute to a Republican success in the elections that year. The President took the step, unusual for the time, 68 of sending a special message to both houses of Congress asking for passage of a permanent annual appropriation for modern armament to install in the fortifications.
The condition of our seacoast defenses and their armament has been brought to the attention of Congress in my annual messages, and I now submit a special estimate of the Chief of Ordnance, United States Army, transmitted by the Secretary of War, for a permanent annual appropriation of $1,500,000 to provide the necessary armament for our fortifications.
This estimate is founded upon the report of the Gun Foundry Board recently transmitted, to which I have heretofore invited the early attention of Congress.  In presenting this estimate I do not think it necessary to enumerate the considerations which make it of the highest importance that there should be no unnecessary delay in entering upon the work, which must be commensurate with the public interests to be guarded, and which will take much time. 3 0 But both the Navy and Army had to wait for resolution of their problems until the voters decided the Presidential election. Representative Samuel Randall, the powerful Democrat of Pennsylvania engineered the defeat of the proposed appropriation for fortifications,at least according to the New York Times, because it would contribute to the success of the Republican Party. "The most serious obstacle to obtaining [the cruisers]" the Ties continued, "is the mischievous political methods of the administration which must build them. 
' '31
of the Old World, which it was now proposed to copy. ' ' 32 Other speakers cited the absence of indications of war and the faith that the people of Europe were in sympathy with the people of America; in the unlikely event of war, defenses could be improvised. 
33
34
35
The Republicans were only a little less isolationist, opposing foreign 32 1bid., 1 July 1884, p. 1. alliances but for peace and world trade. They supported a strong Navy, but did not mention coast defense. 
36
37
The Secretary of War submits the report of the Chief of Engineers as to the practicability of protecting our important cities on the seaboard by fortifications and other defenses able to repel modern methods of attack. The time has now come when such defenses can be prepared with confidence that they will not prove abortive, and when the possible result of delay in making such preparation is seriously considered delay seems inexcusable. For the most important cities-those whose destruction or capture would be a national humiliation-adequate defenses, inclusive of guns, may be made by the gradual expenditure of $60,000,000--a sum much less than a victorious enemy could levy as a contribution. An appropriation of about one-tenth of that amount is asked to begin the work, and I concur with the Secretary of War in urging that it be granted. 
38
36
37
45
45 DAB, vol. 16, pp. 321-323.
Civil War, but had been naval attache with the British fleet during the bombardment of Alexandria in 1882. He was thus uniquely qualified concerning ship versus shore gun duels. He was an expert in naval ordnance, having served as inspector at the Washington naval yard until his appointment to the Endicott Board. 
46
Corning was the president of the Albany and Rennsalaer Iron and Steel Works, and a personal friend of President Cleveland. 
47
They first met in June 1335 and named committees to examine and report on conditions in the United States and abroad regarding steel armor and guns, torpedoes, capabilities of foreign warships, and the development of the United States steel industry. 
48
4 9
During the time the Endicott Board was doing its work, there was an increasing interest in the question of coast defense in the press. On the day after the New York Times reported the appointment of the board, 5 0 it gave detailed coverage of an address entitled "Our Seacoast Defense" delivered on 14 May 1885 before the Military Service Institute. In this presentation tne speaker, an Army lieutenant,dramatized the uselessness of antiquated and outmoded forts by pointing out that in New York there were eight buildings alone worth twelve million dollars, within gunshot of naval positions off Governor's Island. With British and Spanish naval stations located from one to four days steaming from New York, he saw the defenselessness of the city as absurd. In his view, the Navy, even augmented by torpedoes (i.e. mines) and improvised earthworks, would provide an entirely inadequate coastal defense. Joseph 1. Dolph, a Senator from Oregon since 1883 was present, and, according to the newspaper report, was impressed by the address; in the years to core he would be a perennial advocate of spending for coast defenses. 5 1
In the course of its investigations, the Endicott Board soon found the American iron and steel industry willing to cooperate in providing ingots and forgings for government gun factories. However, the manufacturers would need contracts of one to two million dollars per year, as the plant costs associated with the project would be between two and three million dollars per plant. 
52
53
54
54
55
darker motive; he was ad,. !ting big increases in steel production to secure profits for his friends in the steel industry.56 Whether Tilden was sincere in his concern for the security of the country cannot be determined.
Given his character and temperament, the historian can give him the benefit of the doubt; his biographers are silent on the issue. What is certain is that Tilden had a moderate fortune in iron mining and manufacturing; he owned large interests in eight iron and steel companies. 
57
The Endicott Board published itscomprehensive report in January 1886, less than a year after its appointment. The problem facing the country was immense and discouraging, as might have been expected after almost a generation of neglect. Not only were the fortifications hopelessly inadequte, there was no navy "wortn of tne nanme.
Thus, in addition to protecting harbors of major commercial importance, the board was forced to recommend the fortification of a number of smaller harbors where the merchant marine could take refuge in the event of war. 59 56 NYT, 7 December 1885, p. 4.
57 Alexander Clarence Flick, assisted by Gustav S. Lobrano, Samuel Jones Tilden: A Study in Political Sagacity (New York: Dodd, Mead & Co.,  1939), pp. 508-5C9. 
58
59 "The Taft Report," p. 10 (Commenting on the Endicott Report).
Throughout the report there ran a depressing tone of sombreness combined with a sense of urgency which fosters in the reader an awareness of the probable situation at the beginning of a war against great odds:
It is of no advantage to conceal the fact that the ports along our sea-coast--a length of about 4,000 miles, not including Alaska-invite naval attack; nor that our richest ports, from their greater depth of water and capacity to admit the largest and most formidable armored ships, are of all the most defenseless.
The property at stake exposed to easy capture and destruction would amount to billions of dollars, and the contributions which could be levied by a hostile fleet upon our sea-ports should be reckoned at hundreds of millions.
It is impossible to understand the supineness which has kept this nation quiet--allowing its floating and shore defenses to become obsolete and effete--without making an effort to keep progress with the age, while other nations, besides constructing powerful navies, have not considered themselves secure without large expenditures for fortifications, including armored forts. 
60
62
In the mean time [since 1860] we have acquired great riches and apparently dreamed that prosperity should inspire friendship and not envy in less favored peoples--forgetting that riches are a temptation, and that plunder of one of our sea-ports might abundantl 3reimburse an enemy for the expenses of a war conducted against us.
60 "The Endicott Report," p. 6.
6
The Endicott Board agreed with and repeated the recommendations of the Gun Foundry Board concerning the establishment of national arsenals as gun factories, carefully outlining developments in cannon, projectiles, propellant and armor in an attempt to convince doubting legislators that a technological revolution had occurred. 
64
65
It cannot be expected that even the richest and most flourishing of our steel works, with millions of capital, to uphold it, will venture such an amount of money in plant, merely in the doubtful hope that the Government may give a contract sufficiently large to save it from loss ..
trol the action of subsequent Congresses, . . there is no certainty as to the future, and the risk is far greater thanthe chances of profit. 66
The board felt that an effective defense would require what, in twentieth century parlance, ;'culd be called an array of weapon systems to be effective as a deterrent and as a weapon. That is, the coast defenses must comprise a mix of weapons, each performing a specific role in defeating any attacker. Experimentation with other than steel guns was discouraged.
Rifled guns of eight, ten, twelve, and sixteen inches were recommended with the completion of their manufacture projected for 1918. 67 The use of 64 1bid., pp. 6, 11, 264, and F. V. Greene, "Our Defenceless Coasts," Scribner's Magazine 1 (January 1887): 65.
65 "The Endicott Report," pp. 25-26, 28, and U.S., Ordnance Department, Annual Report of the Chief of Ordnance to the Secretary of War for tne Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 13S TWashington, D.C.: War Department, 1886), p. 2.
66 "The Endicott Report," pp. 26-27. 6 71bid., p. 10 and Captain John E. Greer, "Recent Developments in Gun-making," The Cosmopolitan S (December 1889): 400, and U.S., Ordnance Department, Annual Report of the Chief of Ordnance to the Secretary of War for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1890 (Washington, D.C.: War Department, torpedoes, floating batteries of cannon, mines covered by searchlights, and mortars in conjunction with the heavy guns on disappearing carriages would make a system in which each element contributed to the total defense. 
68
A comparison can now be made of the estimates for modern works with those made in 1840, . . . The population of the country at that time was 17,000,000, and the estimate cost, including the amounts already expended, was $57,131,541, being at the rate of $3.35 per head.
The population in 1880 was 50,000,000, and the estimate for the coast defense is $126,377,800, at the rate of $2.52 per head.
The valuation of property in 1880 was $43,642,000,000; that of 1840 was about $4,000,000,000, and it is to be seen that the ratio of the estimate for defenses to the country at the present time exhibits a still more favorable comparison. 
6 9
68 "The Endicott Report," pp. 9, 10, and 67 ff. 69 1bid., pp. 28-29. the guns when completed. 
70
In it, the author gave a detailed but non-technical exposition of the improvements in artillery and warships since the Civil War. 
71
Today the horizon iswithouta cloud, and we have at least the apparent friendship of nations. The policy of non-interference in the political affairs of the Eastern continent is bred into our very bone; but side by side with it has grown a no less fixed determination to have a controlling voice in the affairs of this continent. Fair as is no' the prospect, what conscientious student of the past could guarantee the certainty of peace even for the next six months, .
, Common sense dictates that we credit other nations with at least some small modicum of military enterprise and ability, especially when we invite the attack by our weakness. 
72
'73
[not] be generally considered a very striking example of that virtue." 
74
On 6 January 1886, an article described the recommended expenditures for coast defenses as large, but since their implementation had been postponed for twenty years, not excessive. In its view, there could be no reason for delay as the dependence of foreign markets on American grain and cotton was no longer a deterrent to war, and there would be no time to improvise defenses if war came. 
75
76
In war . is certain to come and to come without long warning. 
7 9
Fortifications touched off a bitter debate on the floor of the House. The discussion followed an unusual pattern, however, in that proponents of increased spending for coast defenses were vocal, even strident in their demands, while their opponents, probably secure in the knowledge that their side had the votes already, remained silent. In the first speech after introduction of the bill, Representative Benjamin Butterworth, an Ohio Republican lambasted the Congress for its "gross remissness" and for its willingness to trust the defense of our country to the Fourth of July oratorical pyrotechnics and vain boastfulness as to our power and greatness as a people." He said that the bill, in proposing less than one-half of one per cent of the $123 million which the Endicott Board had recommended, provided "hardly a decent apology for'an appropriation." "The meanest power on earth that floats that which serves as a fair apology for a navy" could place New York under tribute in an amount that would "more than pay the cost of girt-i ing our whole land with steel and iron."' with over five billion, dollars in property at stake, the House did not propose even to defend against "decayed and worn out Spain." It must astonish foreign powers, he continued, that the United States felt herself exempt from the wars which beset them.
He challenged anyone in the House to rise and "without blushing, assert that there [was] a proper condition of defense along our coastline." If Congress would not provide iron and steel for defense of the United States, flesh and blood would be required sooner or later. Every nation was at peace with the world, he said, on the day before a war. Reaching his peroration, he declared that [If challenged by Britain], we could adopt a series of resolutions condemning in strong language the outrage, and could also serve notice that as soon as we can establish a plant. and manufacture the necessary guns and armament and as soon as we can build armed ships and generally make suitable preparation, England shall hear from us further, and we may hold her to a rigid accountability. 
8 1
8 2
When the bill reached the upper house for debate, the Senators proved more receptive regar_ing tte mea-ure. Senator George F. Hoar spoke, as quoted in a later periodical:
Our condition is well known to foreign nations. The absolutely defenseless condition of all our coast is well known abroad. The late 81 Ibid., pp. 7098-7101. The support of an Ohio Congressman was probably owing to the fact that the Endicott Report had named the ports of the Great Lakes as fourth in priority to be fortified, after New York, San Francisco, and Boston. "The Endicott Report," p. 8.
Minister of Foreign Affairs in France said to one of our own statesmen, long since, 'How about your defenses? In the intelligence department of our War Office,' said he, 'we have a drawing of every military work of consequence on the whole American coast line, with comments on their strength. There is not a first-class fortification among them all. Do you know how lang it takes to build a first-class modern gun?' said the French Minister. The American replied that he did not. Lacour said: 'It takes a whole year. Your cities would be shelled and sacked and laid under tribute while you are creating a navy; and how could you rebuild your fortifications with one thousand-pound shells falling about the ears of your workingmen? Be sure'--now mark this--'Be sure that the defenseless condition of your country is thoroughly well known and commented upon by every power in Europe that would gladly see you humbled, for, as I said, your prosperity is a dangerous menace to a.l the nations of the Old World except France. '84 With little opposition, the Senate approved six million dollars for fortifications, 85 necessitating a conference committee with the House to set the final amount. The conference committee proved unable to reach a compromise, however, as the Senators were unwilling to appropriate less than five million dollars. 
86
A depressin tore p.er'eeted t'"e arn~al report of the chief of ordarce for fiscal year 1836. The report did not go into all the subsequent ra-ifications of the need for coast defenses, saying that the urgency of the requirement for defenses had been so thoroughly discussed that further remarks were unnecessary. However, because of the delays in appropriations for research on and manufacture of ordnance in the United States, the need for guns at critical large seaports would mean that ordnance and armor must be imported. 87 84 Griffin, "Our Sea-Coast Defenses," p. 71. 85 U.S., Congress, Senate, CR, 49th Cong., 1st Sess., vol. 17, p. 7647,  and NYT, 27  The Board cannot state too emphatically that, if the money were now available, three years would be required to provide either the guns or the forts necessary for New York Harbor alone, if we were to go at once to the great private gun and armor establishments of England, Germany, and France. If they were to be obtained in this country a much longer time would be needed. It seems scarcely necessary to say that no naval power which may see fit to attack our seaports is like4x to warn us of it three years, two years, or one year in advance.
By the time of the report, construction had stopped at the Army's arsenals and the civilian workers had been discharged; the report speculated that the uncertain employment would make it more difficult to hire skilled workers when Congress did appropriate funds. 
89
90
91
9 OIbid., p. 13 ff. 91 1bid., Appendix 23, p. 326; also p. 16.  be no funds whatever for ordnance contracts and thus no hope of amortizing their investment facilities, a dismal situation for any industrial concern Professionals in the Army discussed the issue of coast defenses at length in monographs of the U.S. Coast Artillery School. In a bitter, almost polemical essay, one lieutenant outlined the defenseless state of the nation.
He opened with an analogy of New York City depending only on old handpumped fire engines as the inhabitants of the city were so intelligent that fire probably wouldn't occur, but if it should, could probably be put out.
If, however, high winds fanned the flames higher, the mayor could undoubtedly have enough steam fire engines built quickly and manned by volunteers to control the fire. He then quoted samples of the popular literature which he felt reflected the prevalent absurdity and chauvinism of the national mood; first from InterOcean, a Chicago newspaper:
The fellows that sneer at 'our little army' and our 'old hulk of a Navy' forget that there are 50,000,000 of people behind them. Uncle Sam can move that old flag from the top of the national capitol, or from some peak on the Rocky Mountains, and sound a buale call, and ships would fall in line and 1,503,000 men would answer "ready." 
9 3
The country was in no danger; the moral force of fifty million people was a strong defense . . The only thing, he said, was they might stand outside the harbor and shell New York, or Boston, or Philadelphia, but the danger was greatly exaggerated, ('shelling don't amount to anything') [sic]. 
9 4
95
The subject of coast defenses and fortifications has been fully and carefully treated by the Board on Fortifications, whose report was submitted at the last session of Congress; but no construction work of the kind recommended by the board has been possible during the last year from the lack of appropriations for such purpose.
The defenseless condition of our seacoast and lake frontier is perfectly palpable. The examinations made must convince us all that certain of our cities named in the report of the board should be fortified and that work on the most important of these fortifications should be commenced at once. The wc k has been thoroughly considered and laid out, the Secretary of War reports, but all is delayed in default of Congressional action.
The absolute necessity, judged by all standards of prudence and foresight, or our preparation for an effectual resistance against the armored ships and steel '.ns and mortars of modern construction io may threaten the cities on our coasts is so apparent that I node effective steps will be taken in that direction immediately. 
96
97
96
97 Among other petitions are those found in U.S., Congress, 49th Cong.,  2nd Sess., CR: California (18: 1940), San Francisco (18: 870, 1199, 1603,  1893), Kentu-cky (18: 597), Maine (18: 1756), Massachusetts (18: 1854, 198s,  2050), New Jersey (18: 598), NewYork (18: 1391, 1470, 1701, 1734, 1755,  1756, 1854, 1892, 1900, 2099, 2396), Pennsylvania (18: 1174, 1218, 2231,  2301), South Carolina (18: 909).
------- That beautiful inland sea in Washington Territory, Puget Sound, where already are laid the foundations of a mighty empire, is left entirely unprotected and liable to fall into the hands of any one of the great powers that chooses to take possession.
The fortifications possessed by the United States on Puget Sound are not worthy of the name of forts. Across the straits of Juan de Fuca the English have a navy-yard at Esquimault, a short distance west of the city of Victoria. Prominent engineer officers of the Britisn army have very recently thoroughly surveyed Esquimault and Victoria with a view of adding to their already strong defenses. Hardly was the ink dry on the paper wnich announced this survey than we read of an immense quantity of heavy rifle guns and ordnance . . . of all kinds on their way, . . . to arm the projected forts.
Mark the difference between Great Britain's action and that of the United States, and see how the former stretches her hand out over her possessions, makes the land flourish wherever she owns an acre, extends her protecting arm over every citizen under her flag, and even in the most obscure places, builds forts that can defy force, and maintains a squadron able to defend her citizens. 
98
98
against foreign powers (with the exception of the early nineteenth century fortifications) through a fortuitous combination of its geographic position and the preoccupation of her potential enemies with other problems. A prominent twentieth-century historian has pointed out that America was protected by three oceans--the Atlantic, Pacific, andArctlc--from hostile modern powers with potential design on her territory: the security thus provided was free in the sense that it was enjoyed as a bounty of nature in place of the elaborate and costly chains of fortifications and even more expensive armies and navies that took a heavy toll of the treasuries of less fortunate countries and placed severe burdens on the backs of their people. 
99
At least as important was the preoccupation of the European powers with affairs in other parts of the world than the Americas. Britain's powerful navy, was modernized far more in response to French and Russian naval expansion than as a result of any thougnt of concerted effort against America; Britain was involved after the mid-1880's in African colonial problems which would culminatein the Boer War, thus also preventing any deep involvement with the United States. Likewise, the other European powers were involved so deeply with continental rivalries that American incidents of a threatening 99 C. Vann Woodward, "The Age of Reinterpretation," The American Historical Review 66 (October 1960): p. 2.
1 OOIbid. Figures for military expenditures as a percentage of national income (in 1914, the only year for which comparable figures are available for all countries) give an indication of the significant advantage the United States enjoyed in this regard: United States O.8, Great Britain 3.47', Japan 4.8%, German 4.6', Russia 6.3k. In the 1880's expenditures in the United States had never exceeded 0.4%. Ibid., pp. 4, 5, quoting Quincy Wright, A Study of War, 2 vols. (Chicago: n.p., 1942), vol. 1, pp. 666-72.  character did not occur to any great degree. 
101
There was a clear and continuous dichotomy in Congress between those legislators from coastal areas, including the Great Lakes, who predominantly favored coast defense measures and those legislators from interior districts who were ambivalent or hostile to the question of coast defense. In the congressional debate on the Fortifications Appropriation Bill in 1884, the international situation and the position of the United States in the world arena had been a prominent subject of discussion. Although lavmakers from the coastal cities had reiterated the themes of preparing for war in time of peace and warning against possible future imbroglios, their counterparts from interior regions were clearly unconvinced. 
102
the experiences of the civil conflict had inspired in them a blind confidence in their inventive genius and ability to meet any crisis which might arise. 
' '103
The legislators who opposed appropriations for fortifications left little record of the reasons for their opposition. While the advocates of improved coast defense often recorded pages of speeches, letters, petitions, and other testimony extolling the need for expenditures, there is often no opposition recorded; yet the bills failed passage (or more often, failed F to come to a vote) year after year. 
104
105
The vast population of the Interior States is much more anxious to see the public money spent for improving their rivers, from which, in spite of the abuses of the river and harbor bill, they see an imumediate advartage, than to have it invested in insurance for sea-coast cities. 
107
109
107
9
110
112
Congressmen found it hard to grasp the amount of time required to build modern weapons, which was estimated at three years for delivery of cannon purchased abroad, or five years if manufactured in the United States. 
113
ll4
lll"The Endicott Report," p. 7.
Another factor militating against action was the feeling that the ultimate cannon design in terms of efficiency, cost, and reliability had not yet been developed. A persuasive view was that if the United States waited for European countries to perfect the ultimate weapon design and r then copied that design, not only could the politicians save the costs of the expensive testing of competing designs, but they would avoid the possible purchase of a weapon which would itself become outmoded in a matter of years. 
115
116
If Congress waited for the ultimate, perfect design before appropriating funds to build cannons, a gun would never be bilt for technological 
115
116 C. F. Goodrich, "Our New Naval Guns," The Century.Magazine 40 (September 1890): 668. improvements would continue forever, even if at a slower pace. 1 17 But their arguments had no perceptible effect on the legislators, who would ultimately require increasingly palpable hints of foreign threats to prod them to action.
Throughout February and March of 1887, the New York Times followed r progress of the appropriation bill in Forth-ninth Congress with eager interest. In January it reported that the New York Chamber of Commerce had passed a resolution calling any further delay in providing coast defenses intolerable. 
118
119
121
Among House Democrats, however, the suspicion arose that the Republicancontrolled Senate was trying to stamp the Democratic Party as the party of extravagances and hurt the chances of tariff reform. 
121
122
123
It will cost money; but not more than the loss to the cities of New York and Sre,,-c 1,,r froone da. 's. i.c" rar ...
. Concress slo decide, and deciQ 4at once . . . ndividual interests must yielc to the public good. 
'Z '
industry dS he was a railroad entrepreneur, 125 had introduced an unsuccessful bill to provide funds for four private gun factories. 
126
A primary reason for the failure of the Forty-ninth Congress to provide funds for coast defense was the opposing majorities in the House and Senate. The Democrats controlled the House 183 to 140, while the Republicans controlled the Senate 43 to 34. In the Fiftieth Congress, the parties held control of their respective chambers, but their pluralities dropped to seventeen votes in the House and only two in the Senate. 127 Thus the stage was set for a more compromising attitude; hopefully the House would not insist on tiny and utterly inadequate appropriations, while the Senate would be willing to accept a smaller amount than the members otherwise desired.
The time was right for advocates of coast defense to build a coalition of politicians to pass a bill providing sufficient funds to begin producing modern ordnance and buildir, fortifications. Instead of skillful legislative maneuvering, however, the backers engaged in awkward bumbling that threatened to kill any appropriations bill once again. Senator Joseph Dolph, the Republican from Oregon who would become one of the strongest perennial advocates of coast defense, introduced a bill requesting $126 million, for coast defenses. The "Dolph Bill" would become a farcical recurring event in future years; 128 it was clearly out of the question for any 
125
126 NYT, 12 February 1886, p. 3.
1 27 Webster's Guide, p. 776.
1 2 8The New York Times editorialized on Senator Dolph's reintroduction of the bill in later years on 9 December 1,389, p. 4; 24 December IS91, p. 4; 13 September 1893, p. 4. Theedi orials'wreusually 3a rcastic and talked about how his proposal made the cause of coast defense appear either frivolous or politician to be able to build a coalition for such an amount, given the composition and mood of Congress. The New York Times correctly observed that the estimate of $126 million had been the best that the Endicott Board could make in 1885, but that technology had shown that the board had overestimated the efficacy of torpedo boats, an expensive component of the proposed system. What was far more necessary than to appropriate the full $126 million was to provide for the immediate needs of the country for maintenance of the fortifications; although inadequate, they were the only defense the harbors possessed. After the immediate needs were met, Congress should be able to reach a compromise and appropriate some funds, however small, to begin construction of modern ordnance and fortifications. 
1 2 9
13
1 3 2
Politicians looked for possibilities for patronage wherever they could find them in the bill. Senator Arthur Gorman, a Maryland Democrat threatened to resist passage of the bill unless it provided for private manufacture; the New York Times alleged that he was acting as a tool of the steel interests which had inspired Tilden's letter years before. 13 3 Congressmen were denouncing the Ordnance Department of the Army as the "graveyard of American genius and enterprise" because it refused to test every innovative design an inventor submitted as the answer for American lefense. 
134
,135 13 1 U.S., Congress, Senate, Reports of Committees of the Senate of the U.S., "Report to Accompany Bill S. 62," 50th Cong., Ist Sess. (1883),  Vol. 4, No. 603 (19 March 1888), pp. 1-7, 18-19. The proposal that guns be built at Watervliet Arsenal was, because of possibilities for patronage, more controversial than might otherwise be expected. Kentucky and Pennsylvania delegations strongly supported locating the arsenal in their states. Debate over the location of the arsenal was heated and threatened to kill the bill. U.S., Congress, House, 50th Cong., 1st Sess., CR, vol. 19, p. 7593; also see NYT.editorial, 16 March 1888, p. 4.  1 32 NYT, 29.June 1888, p. 1.
1 3 3 1bid., 9 August 1888, p. 1.
1 34 1bid., 30 June 1888, p. 2.
13 5 1bid., 9 August 1888, p. 1.
In the House, sentiment was as mixed as in the Senate. After a twoday parliamentary wrangle concerning which committee should get to sponsor the bill, which one Representative characterized as a political question from which "the country gets absolutely nothing," 13 6 debate opened with the same sort of nationalistic rhetoric as it had in the Senate. One New York
Republican Representative discussed the British situation in Canada, saying that on Vancouver Island were the best defenses of the Pacific coast;
"within sight of American soil the very best cannon which can be constructed in England . are placed, and pointed toward American soil." 1 37 Another New York Republican from Buffalo was less worried. The state of New York, he said, could take care of Canada and its five million population within sixty days of the outbreak of war, using 245,000 soldiers and its million veterans. 1 38 After the initial rhetoric, however, the House turned to mundane political matters as the Senate had done; debate ensued over the competence of the Ordnance Department and the location of the gun foundry. 
139
It was far reduced from Senator Dolph's hopes, however, providing only $3.47 million for construction of forts, guns, and an arsenal, and for purchase of forgings. In addition, the advocates of private gun manufacture prevailed, and the bill provided $6.5 million for contracting for finished guns from private firms. Additionally, the bill created a Board of Ordnance and Fortifications to coordinate planning and building the defenses. In addition to a start on the long-delayed work of coast defense, another matter was settled in 1888; that was the question of the most costeffectivematerial for manufacture of cannon in the United States. Although all government boards had recommended against its use, steel manufacturers in the United States had hoped that Bessemer process steel would prove suitable for ordnance, as it was a much cheaper process than the laborious process involved in constructing a built-up gun. Additionally, the Bessemer process was used widely in the United States. In January 1888, a six-inch Bessemer gun was cast, the biggest ever, at a cost of about $3,300 compared with costs of $22,000 for a built-up steel gun. 
1 4 1
1 4 2
It appeared that the built-up gun was the only solution to the problem of elasticity.143
Manufacture of steel cannon in the United States was not a simple matter of contracting for weapons and having them delivered to the Army and Navy after fabrication. It had taken almost a year and a half of work around the clock for Krupp to produce the first fourteen-inch rifle, even after more than twenty years experience at making smaller steel guns. 
14 4
14 2 1bid., 6 December 1888, p. 1.
1 
4 3
reluctance to share the secrets of his company. There had been no foundry in the United States which could produce steel of sufficient quality for artillery when the first development contract was let in 1883.145 Only one firm, the Midvale Steel Company, was able to produce eight inch forgings by 1886, while two other foundries were able to produce smaller castings. 
1 4 6
14 7
14
The second session of the Fiftieth Congress spent little time on appropriations for fortifications, appropriating $1.62 million. 14 
9
accomplishments of the Fiftieth Congress concerning coast defenses was expressed by Representative Richard W. Townshend, an Illinois Democrat. On the House floor on 28 February 1889, he said that the naval policy of the Cleveland administration had been good, but that the administration had not done its duty regarding coastal fortifications. He predicted that the incoming administration would be praised if it could quickly provide for the nation's needs on the coasts, but he regretted that his party, in power for four years under a Democratic president had neglected the defense of the country. "Congress," he said, "in which each party controlled a branch, is responsible . . . unless we are prepared for offensive as well as defensive war on shore and on the sea, the first great power that may attempt it may annihilate the Monroe Doctrine."
15
The incipient involvement of the United States in world affairs had begun to increase in the mid-1880's, with several diplomatic incidents which are today little more than footnotes to the history of American foreign relations; at the time, however, the President, Congress, and the citizenry perceived them in varying degrees as potential armed conflicts.
Several deserve some examination, more for the public perceptions of their potential for precipitating wars at the time than for a retrospective analysis of the actual likelihood of conflict.
During the decade of the 18-00's, the question of where a canal across the isthmis should be dun and who would construct and control it held a substantial potential for causing conflict or confrontation. The United States held the position that a canal dug there and controlled by a power outside the western hemisphere was a violation of (the Monroe Doctrinle. Nonetheless, France had been digging a canal from 1881 to 1890.
Additionally, the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty prevented the United States from building a canal which she alone could control. The danger of war from canal incidents was a favorite topic which proponents of increased coast States, although without a significant financial or trade interests in the area, refused to compromise with Germany over the question of sovereignty in the islands. By 1889, the navies of Britain, Germany, and the United States were in Samoa in a virtual standoff; neither the Americans nor the Germans were ready to back off from their position. A typhoon destroyed both the American and German fleets in Apia harbor in March 1889, preventing any possible showdown bet.een the two powers. Although any incident in Samoa would have been unliKely to lead to war, the fact that such a volatile confrontation could occur so far from American shores indicated the gro'win inolvement of the United States in World affairs. 
2
States had followed to that time: one of isolation and non-involvement in world affairs. Certainly there was no reason to believe that such occurrences presaged international crises or wars which could require stronger military policies than those which had sufficed for the United States during the past century.
After Congress approved the first appropriation for a new system of coast defense in 1388, each succeeding Congress approved some funds for improved coastal defenses. None were as large as recommended by the Endicott Board. Moreover, moneys voted declined steadily from 1890 to 1895.
They were adequate only to build the steel industry and to give the Ordnance Department experience in constructing heavy cannon. Often they barely exceeded the "fixed costs" of salaries and factory upkeep. They did little to begin constructing new forts. Had the sums voted continued at the pace of the period from 1883 to 1895, they would have been inadequate to complete rebuilding the fortifications before the mid-twentieth century.
Appropriations averagej less than three million dollars annually, if the amounts for contracting guns (which never became a very successful program) are disregarded; with these funds included, the total still averaged less than five million dollars annually (see Figure 
5
4
The ca-mpaigr of i-3? vas fouzrz prim-arily on tariff and tax rei. ction, with q-uestions of military policy being penipnerai.
The Democratic platform Ing moderatelyi suToriv of D -o-acpI was moderately supportive of the Navy, but did not mention any other military questions. The Republican Party, however, was strongly pro-Navy, and advocated new coastal fortifications and ordnance; it also moved into the 3 U.S., Congress, 50th Cong., 2nd Sess. through 52nd Cong., 2nd Sess.,   CR, and SAL: 25: 886-888: 404, 26: 315-320: 797; 26: 767-770: 233, 27: 257-260: 233; 27: 458-461: 136, 28: 212-215: 178; 28: 704-707 
area of foreign expansion by advocating construction of an isthmian canal in Nicaragua. 
5
Congress. 6
Judged by modern standards, we are practically without coast defenses. Many of the structures we have would enhance rather than diminish the perils of their garrisons if subjected to the fire of improved guns, and very few are so located as to give full effect to the greater range of such guns as we are now making for coast-defense uses. This general subject has had consideration in Congress for some years, and the appropriation for the construction of large rifled guns made one year ago was, I am sure, the expression of a purpose to provide suitable works in which these guns might be mounted. An appropriation now made for that purpose would not advance the completion of the works beyond our ability to supply them with fairly effective guns.
The security of our coast cities against foreign attacks should not rest altogether in the friendly disposition of other nations. There should be a second line wholly in our own keeping. I very urgently recommend an appropriation at this session for the construction of such works in our most exposed harbors. 
7
5 Kirk H. Porter, ed., 'ational Party Platforms (New York: Macmillan Co., 1924), pp. 141, 150, 151. 6
7
Harrison would continue to be a strong advocate of improved coastal defenses in his annual messages. On 1 December 1S90, he recommended "that adequate and regular appropriations be continued for coast defense works and ordnance[;] there can be no good reason for delaying the execution of them, while the defenseless state of our great seaports furnishes an urgent reason for wise _xoi1lr.
ii., p.5550. In 1891, he said that any delay in improving coast jifensrs snoul.i not be for lack of funds, for their importance lay in allowing the 'proper distribution and use" of naval vessels. Ibid., p. 5631. The folloving year he observed that work on the defenses had begun and urged its continuance without delay. Ibid., p. 5755.
in April 1890, with the prevailing mood among the Democrats being one of chauvinistic isolationism. After a speech in the House strongly advocatir improved coast defenses, Representative William S. Holman, a Democrat fror the interior state of Indiana, spoke against the bill. "The real fortifications . . . of value," he said, "were those which were improvised and thrown up on the spur of the hour." 
8
9
In the upper house, Senator Frances M. Cockrell, a Democrat from Missouri, spoke against the bill with sentimlents similar to those of Pe  Senator Joseph R. Hawley, a Republican from Connecticut, objected to the large funds which had been authorized for private gun contracts in the 1888 and 1890 bills and which were proposed in the current bill. He said that such expenditures were worthless, since there was not enough certainty of continued appropriations to convince the civilian industrialists to make the huge investments required for production of heavy ordnance. 17
His appraisal would later prove correct, for the private manufacturers 16 U.S., Congress, Senate, Senator Blair (R/NH) speaking against the Appropriations Bill for Fortifications and Other Defense, 3 February 1891,  51st Cong., 2nd Sess., CR (22: 2033). For other debate, see 
2053
-2058
. 1 71bid., pp. 2053
-2055
(2 February 1891))
2 2
Early in 1891, a civil war had broken out in Chile which threatened to involve the United States in a more serious international confrontation than the preceding ones. During the war, the United States sympathized with the government in power under President Jose M. Balmaceda and seized arms from a rebel ship in the Chilean harbor of Iquique after attempting to impound the ship on a stop in San Diego. American support of the Balmaceda regime inspired intense anti-American feelings in Chile, after the rebels had been successful in September. In October, sailors of the U.S.S. Baltimore were allowed shore leave in Valparaiso; a riot ensued in which two sailors were killed and seventeen wounded. Although the situation simmered through the fall, by January 1892, other inflammatory developments caused 
21NYT, 3 April 1891, p. 4. 22
President Harrison to demand a Chilean apology and reparations for the incident. For a time the President, British observers, and at least some of the American public felt that war was imminent. 
2 4
2 5
2 6
27
were not yet finished. 
28
2 9
3 1
3 2
4
3 5
3 6
37
3 8
The Second Session of the Fifty-second Congress appropriated only $2.73 million for coast defenses. 
39
4 2
The bill did not provide furcs adequate to pay government contracts coming due during the fiscal year. Questioned on the deficiency, a committee member said that they thought it prudent to provide less than the amounts contracted since deliveries were often slow. At this, Senator Joseph R.
Hawley (R/CT) blasted the committee for its short-sightedness. The bill,
was not half what it should be, he said, and by their inadequate appropriations for contracts, Congress was telling manufacturers to slow down in deliveries; why shouldn't the entire amount be appropriated and thus tell  the manufacturers to speed up? 
43
44
for coast defenses and the manufacture of guns, 
46
47
48
50
as predicted, speculators now owned the sites and were demanding exorbitant The hopes of proponents of coast defense soared when elections for the Fifty-fourth Congress (1895-1897) passed control back to the Republican party. 
5 3
54
55
Britain's answer to the Olney message on Venezuela did not arrive in Washington until the First Session of the Fifty-fourth Congress had opened. The British response was not particularly conciliatory and refused arbitration, but it was nothing beside Cleveland's reaction to the British The document which President Cleveland sent to Congress, on the afternoon of December 17, 1885, changed the entire aspect of affairs and brought about a new order of public sentiment on the question of national defence. . .. The President's declaration was one of defiance-possibly of war--against the most powerful and resourceful nation of Europe. It startled, especially because the practical judgment of Americans told them that they were totally, negligently, and almost criminally, unprepared even for defence on land, much less aggression on the ocean.
Britannia ruled the waves as in the days of Drake and Nelson, while her military outposts extended along our rorthern border; ard hostilities meant the immediate advent of flying squadrons off tre harbors .
The situation Yas humiliatinn, as well as startlin.. ,'esi: t or t1e v.e etsiest people on the gloue tnaz we were co:)-elIei to rely for protection or the jus,e of t.e Presi r's -ropositicr for 4nternazional artrat ion, and the known conservatism of Great Britain. Throughout . . . the grand harbor and along the magnificent aoproach from the ocean . . . [New York] enjoyed the protection of only two great guns of modern make, . . . antiquated smooth-bores alone frowned through the portholes . . . of Forts Wadsworth and Hamilton. Fort Lafayette was a picturesque ruin Boston and San Francisco each have sixteen twelve-inch mortars in position, while a fifteen-inch dynamite gun battery for San Francisco has recently been completed. 
60
6 1 Henry Steel Commager, ed., Documents of American History, 7th ed. (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1963), 1: 62T. (The entire text of the message is also found here.) 129 same amount. 
69
70
72
But a real coastal "panic" was still two years away.
The crisis concernin-g Venezuela was over for most purposes by mid-January 1896, but the Congressional bustling on coast defenses continued through February. The Commanding 3eneral of the Army and the chiefs of ordnance and enginees all tes ifiei -e Dre congressional :o7ri:tees in January. They affirmed the need for S'7 million in appropriations over several years. 
73
74
7 5
The speaker introducing the bill began as so many others had, with a history of coast defense in the United States. Starting with estimates of the Endicott Board, he showed that it ha-projected total expenditures of $29 million ocr floatinc coast defense and $97 million for shore-based defenses.
Yet since the ti:m:= of tie Report, S136 7illion had been spent for flati' defenses (the figure was apparently arrived at by lumping all spendinc for naval vessels together as "floating coast defense"), while only $11 million had been spent on shore-based defenses. He went on to state that the Navy needed coastal defenses to protect their shore installations and ended with the theme of comparative economy. One dollar spent on land defenses, he said, was from nine to twenty-five times as efficient as a dollar spent on naval defenses, both because of initial cost and required maintenance. The bill would also succeed, but without enthusiasm, in the Senate.
The Senators received the speech introducing the appropriations bill for fortifications with apathy. The New York Times attributed the apathy to the fact that it was a presidential election year, with a Democratic President and a Republican Senate; had there been a Republican President and Secretary of War, "the marked indifference of Senators in respect of the Squire bill [for fortifications] would give way to eager interest." 
77
7 8
For the first time, the questio of artillerymen to man the guns was raised.
So long as the Army was limited to four regiments of artillery, they would be spread increasingly thir, having to man both the field artillery units and the coast artillery fortifications. "e are talking a great deal absut war now.-adays," Senator Hav.1e 1 said, an" tl-_ tec cnicll t' a in; required for artillerymen would be letter conducted in peacetimc-.79 Later the sa-e year, the New York Chamber of Commerce seconded Senator Hawley's request for artillerymen. In a resolution to the President, the body asked for more harbor defenses and for approval of twice the number of artillerymen; 8 0 the 7 7 NYT, 11 April 1896, p. 4. The Times did not explain why the same anti-administration sentiment did not prevail in the House, which was even more heavily Republican.
78 SAL 29: 256-261: 33.  Hemenway, the Indiana Republican who had sponsored the bill, responded that it was the Democrats who wanted to make appropriations for coast defense 8 6 For background and history of the Spanish-American War, see Walter Millis, The Martial Spirit (Caibridoe: The Riverside Press, 1931), and Ferrell, Aericana/DiD1T:2C', cn. 15, or Campbell, The Transfonnation of American Foreign Relations, chaps. 13, 14. into a question of politics, so that they could call the Republican Congress a billion-dollar Congress. Representative Wallace T. Foote, a New York Republican, responded, accusing his fellow Republicans of seeing it merely as a question of politics, as the Democrats charged. Republicans wanted to go to the voters and tell them that they had not been a billion-dollar Congress, so they left the coasts undefended, merely as an accommodation to politics. 
89
In mid-February 1898, the battleship Maine blew up under suspicious circumstances in Havana harbor, shocking the citizenry and moving the Congress to action on defense measures. The New York Times editorialized that the incident made appropriations for forts and ships more necessary but later wondered whether the war scare sweeping the United States might have been concocted merely to pass appropriations bills. 
90
91
92
93
94
The government that has been niggardly in making military preparations in time of peace must pay the piper and be lavish when war is imminent. It must also scour the markets of the world, to procure what ought to have been done at home. 
95
96
97
98
99
Whatever else it may have done, the war demonstrated to Congress that any war with a greater naval power than Spain during this period could have had grave consequences, given the lack of coastal defenses. 1051bid., p. 279.
10 6 Alfred Thayer V1ahan, "Lessons of the War with Spain," published in ibid., p. 58. war with Spain was entirely owing to luck and a poor Spanish navy; in a future war with a stronger navy or even another weak one with more aggressive commanders, such a diversion could bring defeat. Foreseeing Germany as a possible future enemy, Mahan warned that a similar lack of prudent preparations could be disastrous. I 0 
9
The conversion of such an important naval thinker as Mahan from a position of "benign neglect" of fixed fortifications to one of determined advocacy had a dramatic effect. Mahan's backing and the impetus provided by Report "as applicable to-day as when formulated," and said:
The necessity for a complete and adequate system of coast defense is greater to-day than tw.'enty years agc, for the increased wealth cf the country offers rore te2..ting inoucerents to attack, and a nostile fleet can reacn o.r coaSt in a ' sh shor~-er oe'iod of ti-e. The fact that we nc., nose a navy does not in ar, ..s ai.ii3' C-
It is an accepted naval .axir that a navy ca be used to strate-!ic advantage only wren acting on the offensive, arc it can be free to so op erate only after our coast defense is reasonably secure and so recognized by the country.) 
1 4
The Endicott Board's report was submitted in 1306. The principles of seacoast defense, so clearly stated therein, ard the necessity of having our i oort,nt strateiic and ccnr-:ercial centers made secure against naval attack, witn as little delay as possible, are equally 114 "The Taft Report," pp. 3, 4. 
applicable to-day and need not be repeated. 
1 16
As the Taft Report stated, "The continued improvement in the quality of steel and in the manufacture of a powder, which increased the power of the gun, and .
the production of a satisfactory disappearing carriage adaptable to the weights of the heavier guns
."118 gave far hicher levels of :erfz tnar ccj' nae :.eer, foresees by the boarc in '-1380's. This improved performance, bot in rates of fire and in pcw.er of the new weapons, had allowed much of the expensive machinery for lifting the guns into position to be deleted and had allowed a substantial reduction in the number of guns required for adequate defense. 
11 9
For tie tI.e';tet2 :. -.-defe se paner, no.-,ever, tne e, iin the auestion of coasza Jefenses is not the serendipitojs resil of t'e nineteenth century case history, but how that result was arrived at, and what risks were involved in the process. To look at this process and its risks, we must return to the paradigm of defense planning in the United
1201bid., p. 9.
To conclude this case study by maintaining that it holds explicit "lessons" for the defense planner a century later which presage parallel developments would be to place a greater burden on the study than it can bear. Nevertheless, it would not be inappropriate to examine some of the characteristics of the process by which the United States planned for defense in the last decades of the nineteenth century-in an effort to illuminate analagous characteristics of the process in the twentieth century.
By returning to the paradigri of modern planning for defense, tne actions of the publicists, planners, and politicians may be examined individually as tney playec their roles in tne qjestion of coastal Jefefnes.
In analyzing these actions, one must remember that the groups are not fixed and discrete, but that an individual may perform two or three roles at different times. Thus a military officer may play the role of a publicist in advocating strong coastal defenses when speaking to a Chamber of Commerce, yet be a planner when recommending specific measures to Congress. Likewise, a legislator may act as a publicist in an article on coast defense, as a planner in formulating recommendations in congressional committees, and as a politicidn in buildinj a consensus for the final bill.
[144] --The publicists I of coastal defense proposed a wide spectrum of solutions to the problem; characteristically, these thinkers did not limit their ideas to proposals which were realistic and feasible. Some of them saw the isolation of the United States as a factor precluding any need for improved coastal defenses. Others felt that the U.S. Navy alone was adequate protection for the shores. Still others believed that the country needed better fortifications and ordnance as well as a strong navy. Technology sometimes appeared to offer a comparatively easy and inexpensive solution to the problem; had the dramatic technological proposals such as maneuverable torpedoes, the dynamite gun, or the multi-charge cannon lived up to their advertised potential, the country might have had a less expensive and time-consuming program of coastal defenses. The publicists were not forced to take account of important factors such as the costs of their proposals or the changing international situation, although some of them did so. them, the planners had to appraise the efficacy of the weapons scientifically.
Not surprisingly, many of the inventions were deemed to be worthless by the planners, giving the planners a reputation as obstacles to innovation.
The nineteenth-century politicians who alone could transform plans into actions were motivated by many of the same influences which cause modern Congressmen to behave as they do. All of the factors which influence legislative voting behavior are too complex for precise analysis in a study of this scope. Nonetheless, some insights can be gained by looking at the reasons Congressmen gave for their opposition to coast defenses and by inferring some of the other unstated factors which seem to have influenced their votes.
The preceding chapters have shown that Congressmen offered a variety of rationales for not advocating strong coast defenses. Most were variants of a few themes: the proposed defenses were too expensive; the Navy was a better form of coast defense than shore-based fortifications; the state of the art s.. no: far enou-: Jeveoloed 'or tre oimr cannon design t2 be available; cannon should be built by private ,,anufac'trers (preferatiy in the home district of the spokesman!), not by the government in federal arsenals; coast defenses could be improvised in time of crisis; and finally, they saw no existing maritime threat to the United States. If we examine each rationale in turn, we find that all except the last had been effectively refuted by the early 1890's.
The estimate of the Endicott Board for coast defenses was S26 million, if construction were begun in 1836 and continued for twelve years; that is, less than two million dollars per year after "start-up" costs were made the first year. The Congress was annually voting funds in comparable amounts both for naval construction and for improvements for rivers and harbors. Additionally, by the early 1880's, several of the expensive proposals for coast defense had been technologically superceded. But the actual amounts required, while reduced below the estimates of the Endicott Board in some areas, had to be increased markedly for purchases of land and ammunition, which the Board did not consider in its intial appraisal.
Many spokesmen in Congress and in the military services had long avowed that the Navy was not the most efficient or economical means of coast defense. The purpose of the Navy was to strike at the vessels and coastlines of the enemy, not to defend the coasts of the United States.
Additionally, the Navy was far more expensive than defenses based on shore in terms of initial costs, maintenance expenses, and its fast obsolescence.
Although advocates of both coast defense and the Navy had made these points in and out of Congress, their validity only slowly came to be appreciated by the politicians.
At the time the Endicott Board made its report, the argument that the state of "he art ;.'I s)cor sjr.ss existing designs for ordnance h d a good deal of validity. However, once the technological revolution had taken place, by approximately 1890, designs were substantially as they would remain for decades.
Advocates who maintained that private industry should manufacture ordnance cannot be faulted in the early years after the Endicott Report.
Certainly private manufacture was in the American tradition of free enterprise, and would have added a potent lobbying force to the otherwise weak consensusforcoastdefense. Whether or not a continual annual appropriation of funds for privately built weapons would have eventually resulted in the production of guns of equal or superior quality to those manufactured by the government can not be answered. The fact is that the appropriations Congress made were too small and too uncertain of continuation to encourage steel makers to make the substantial capital investment necessary to fill the contracts for ordnance. By the early 1990's, the few contracts for finished weapons were being filled with delivery of defective guns after l long delays, causing Congress to abandon the concept of private manufacture without a truly satisfactory trial.
Congressmen who believed and argued that effective defenses could be improvised when a crisis came were largely dismissed by advocates of stronger defenses as chauvinistic dreamers. The "improvisers" did not understand the developments which had occurred in military technology in the years since the Civil War. But dismissing their arguments did not make them less attractive, and seldom made them less persuasive to the group of Americans in and out of Congress who wished to avoid spending for defense.
If the public or the Congressmen failed to study or to believe how the technology of war had chanced, proponents of increased appropriations could do little to change their blissfil ignorance.
Finally, the irrefltate -cr-ert" I one believed tha: -ericforeign policy would retain unchanged, then there was no credible maritire threat to the United States. All but the most ardent advocates of coast defense had to admit that most of the scenarios of potential wars were fanciful if one accepted the premise that American foreign policy was static. Many held this view, for it was an attractive one. Free in her geographic isolation from the defense worries of European powers, the UnitE States might never have occasion to use her coastal defenses. Yet the nation's foreign policy was in transition. For the perceptive observer, there could be no mistaking the signs that foreign relations in the twentieth century would be different from what they had been in the nineteenth. Samoa, Hawaii, the Isthmian canal question were all harbingers of the crises over the Venezuela boundary and the Cuban revolutions: not that 149 crises were inevitable, but that they were possible and even probable.
Most influences on Congressional voting can only be inferred, but, as recounted in the foregoing chapters, party and regional politics were irrefutably present. Although measures for coast defense were inescapably questions of national defense policy, they were unfortunately perceived as regional measures.
At first there were debates which pitted coastal legislators against those of the interior. As it became evident that only the great harbors, not the entire coastlines, would receive the largesse, the question turned to one which pitted the small number of Congressmen who represented the large ports against the representatives of the rest of the country. Party politics were always a factor, whether subtle, as in the case of the relative isolationist tendencies of the parties, or blatant, as in the case of Congressmen being reluctant to vote funds which an administration of the opposing party would get credit for obtaining. These less tangible influences cannot be measured, but their existence v.as articulated in Con-ress ar2 'n tre prcss, a-.d t.i -anifestly ad tne~ r e on legislation. To say that Congressmen, individjallv and collectively, sometimes based their decisions more on political factors than on the "national welfare" is not to accuse them of ulterior motives, but to state a fact of political life: a Congressman would have had to be exceedingly idealistic to vote on a measure in a way that would have contributed to his defeat in the next election. In the absence of a palpable threat to the coasts, there was no political advantage to the individual Congressman in voting for their defense.' 
2
States should havie were marked by three characteristic imperatives. The economic imperative which sought to minimize defense spending and the military imperative which sought to minimize risks were mediated by the political imperative which sought to meet public expectations. 
3
The twentieth century student of defense policy should be hesitant in taking the view that defense planning has become removed from political problems similar to those of the nineteenth century, or that legislators have becom-e aPoliti cal re~arding the ratio' deene Fral planning for weapons and forces a decade in the future have not overcome the inherent dilemma between planning and funding for military policies in peacetime, as the following paragraphs from a current newsweekly illustrate.
It can be maintained, in fact, that a nation's most fundamental social-welfare obligation to its citizens is to defend them against attack. The responsibility for this is entrusted to the armed forces, but the U.S. military has been denied sufficient resources to fulfill the responsibility. Catching up now is certain to be erpensive. How much it will cost an how long it will take are urgent questions that the mounting debate on national defense will have to resolve. What exactly is the price of power?
1   
1   
I
BRITISH: (ROUND SHOT OF US SMOOTHBORE HAD NEGLIGIBLE PENETRATION) FIGURE 2 Characteristics of Ordnance in National Service 1889 SOURCE: John E. Greer, "Recent Developments in Gun-Making," Cosmopolitan 8 (December 1889) p. 400. Emanuel R. Lewis, Seacoast Fortifications of the United States, p. 142.
48
46 NCAB, vol. 13, 
46 NCAB, vol. 13, 
75 NYT, 6 January 1886, p. 6.   76 1bid., 5 April 1886,p. 4.   77  
75 NYT, 6 January 1886, p. 6.   76 1bid., 5 April 1886,p. 4.   77  
8 6U.S.,
8 6U.S.,
The amount would not be excessive, for in the past, Congress had proved willing to appropriate three to four times as much for river and harbor improvements and forty times as much for pensions as it had for coast defense. Additionally, the editorial continued, coast defenses had advantages over other form.s of mi itary sper.dnir, t.ey coild no: be ised for aggression, only for defensee, and they were comrparatively inexpensive to maintain.
The amount would not be excessive, for in the past, Congress had proved willing to appropriate three to four times as much for river and harbor improvements and forty times as much for pensions as it had for coast defense. Additionally, the editorial continued, coast defenses had advantages over other form.s of mi itary sper.dnir, t.ey coild no: be ised for aggression, only for defensee, and they were comrparatively inexpensive to maintain.
97
The emphasis here is on defensive military policies as opposed to the total military strength of a nation, which would include both offensive and defensive components.[l)-~--~-.i
For the range of viewpoints which affect defense decisions, see George C.Gibson, "Congressional Attitudes Toward Defense," [1972]  in Richard G. Head and Ervin J. Rokke, American Defense Policy (3d Ed., Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 11972]), pp.
358-369, particularly, p. 359.   
2 Samuel P. Huntington, "Strategic Planning and the Political Process," in Bobrow, Components of Defense Policy, p. 81.
5 polsby, Congress and the Presidency, p. 6. 3 6 1bid., p. 174. _A
Russell F. Weigley, History of the United States Army (New York: MacMillan, [1967]), p. 167, and Huntington, The Common'Defense: Stratecic Programs in Defense Politics (New York; Columbia University Press, 1961), p. 9.
Greer, 
jobe, Guns, p. 147.
Quentin Hughes, Military Architecture (New York: St. Martin's  Press, 1974), p. 7.   
Lewis, Seacoast Fortifications,  
67
Eugene Griffin, "Our Sea-Coast Defenses," North American Review 147 (July 1888): 66, and "Condition of the Fortifications," p. 3, and Lewis, Seacoast Fortifications, pp. 42-66. The portion in Seacoast Fortifications * I is particularly valuable in its profuse illustrations, showing the variety in detail but the overall similarity of the designs.
Clarke, Fortification, pp. 147, 152, 266; and George Seton, The House of Moncrieff (Edinburgh: N.p., 1890), pp. 121-022.
NYT, 16 April 1894, p. 13, and Lewis, Seacoast Fortifications,   p. 80, and Hogg, History of Artillery, p. 93.   
6 Clarke, Fortifications, p. 1. l 7 Quentin Hughes, Military Architecture (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1974), pp.
[205][206] Seacoast Fortifications, p. 78.   
Griffin, "Our Sea-Coast Defenses," p. 66, and "Conditions of the Fortifications," p. 3.
"Taft Report," p. 1.
NYT, 13 March 1880, p. I.
SAL, 21: 109: 80.   
NYT, 20 March 1880, p. 4.    
71bid.
8
8Messages and Papers, vol. 10, pp. 4767-4768. 2 9 SAL, 22: 472-431: 97.'.Weigley, The American Way of War, p. 169.
3 1bid., p. 6.~4 Z
1bid., p. 937.(L
0 U.S.,Congress, House, CR, 49th Cong., Ist Sess., vol. 17, p.    6765.
2 U.S.,Congress, House, CR, 49th Cong., Ist Sess., vol. 17, p. 7154. It must be emphasized here that no analysis of voting patterns by party, region, financial interest, etc. is possible because only a few roll call votes (on relatively minor amendments) were taken on coast defense matters. All generalized inferences regarding motives or sectional differences must therefore remain tentative.
21bid., Appendix 24, p. 356. 9 3 U.S., War Department, USCAS, Assuming the Present Defenseless Condition of the Seaboard of the U.S., What Military Policy and Action [Should be AdoDted , by Solon F. Massey (Fort Monroe, Virginia: USCAS, 1886), p. 1, quote p. 5.9 41bid., p. 5.
G. N. Southwick, "Our Defenceless Coasts," North American Review 162 (March 1896): 318.
U.S., Congress, House, Representative Butterworth (R/Ohio) speaking for the Fortifications AppropriationBill, 17 July 1886, 49th Cong.,  1st Sess., Congressional Record (17: 7100). Although the bill failed because of House/Senate conference aifficulties (the Senate advocating more funds than the House) the point is that the question of fortifications was not considered important enough to produce compromises. Since cormmittee hearings were not printed and no roll call votes taken, a precise analysis of party/regional biases is not possible.
1bid., 5 March 1887, p. 4.    
Chief of Ordnance Report of 1887, pp. 6, 10, and 11.   
9 NYT, 7 January 1888, p. 4.    
0 1n December 1887, President Cleveland had devoted his entire Annual Message to the problem of the surplus in the Treasury, indicating its contemporary political and economic importance. He had recommended that departmental requests for funding be honored.Messages and Papers,  vol. 13, 
1U.S.,Congress, House, 50th Cong., 2d Sess., CR, vol. 20,  pp. 2492-2493.   J   
Pratt, United States Foreign Policy, pp.  
320-334.   
4 For a fuller account of the Chilean incident, see Campbell, The Transformation of American Foreign Relations, pp. 168-176. For U.S. sentiment, see ,.IYT, 21 December 1891, p. 5; 23 December 1891, p. 1; 24 December 1891, p. 8; 25 December 1891, p. 1; for an account of the Valparaiso riot, see U.S., Congress, House, 52nd Cong., Ist Sess., House Executive Documents, No. 91, pp. 105 ff. 2 5 NYT, 26 December 1891, p. 1. 2 6 For examples, see Ibid., 21 Decer;ber 1891, p. S; 27 December 1891, p. 1; 29 December 1891, p. 2; 2 January 1891, p.l. 2 7 1bid., 28 December 1891, p. 4; 15 January 1892. 2 8 1bid., 14 January 1892, p. 4; 15 January 1892, p. 1.
3
4 1bid., p. 1042. 451bid., p. 1039.
NYT, 1 March 1895, p. 10, and 11 March 1895, p. 4; wording of both amendments is in SAL, 28: 707: 162.
54th Congress: House: R244, D105; Senate: R43, D39. Webster's Guide, p. 776.
7  NYT, 30 January 1898, p. 2. 8 8 U.S.,Congress, House, 55th Cong., 2nd Sess., CR 31: 1373 (2  February 1898).
sAL 30: 396: 235 (4 May 1893); 30: 704: 571 (7 July 1898).
1bid. 30: 400-403: 248 (7 May 1898).
0 3 NyT, 30 October 1898, p. 14.
7 1bid., p. 48.   1081bid., pp. 53-54, 56.   6L   
D. H. Roe, 'Thoughts on Force Levels, Risk, and Dollars," ([Washington: Research Directorate, National Defense University, 1979]), p. 2. (Xeroxed.)
The debts I owe to individuals who helped or encouraged me in the preparation of this thesis can never be repaid. Certainly there were many
All other harbors are absolutely defenceless. 
6 2
6 3
64
The most modern fortifications and ordnance on the continent were in British North America; moreover, she then had over seventy armor-clad warships. 6 5 Victoria, commanding the Straits of Juan de Fuca and the United States entry to Puget Sound, had mounted modern eighty-ton guns almost a decade earlier. 
66
The time had come to test the theories of previous Congressmen that required defenses cculd be improvised when a crisis occurred, for the bulk of the defenses of the United States in the event of war in I195 would haji to be iprovised ones. Tne lack of c.astal orjnance rec.ired zne Arty t prepare to use field artillery (li~n:, mobile cannon) for coast defese.
Representative Wiliam Grout of Vermont proposed SIO0 million for fortifications and ordnance; 68 three other Congressmen introduced bills in the New York Times quickly endorsed the request editorially. 8 
1
82
8 3
During the past year rapid progress has been made toward the completion of the scheme adopted for the erection and armament of fortifications along our seacoast It is peculiarly gratifying at this time to note the great advance that has been made in this important undertaking since the date of my annual message to the Fifty-third 
Congress, .
In the elections of 1896, the Republicans successfully won the The Fifty-fifth Congress (1397-1899) did not get around to the question of coast defense in its First Session, but by the Second Session the Cuban revolution was offering journalists, jingoes, and politicians an opportunity for unrestrained rhetoric that would soon lead the United States to    Even more critical perhaps is another question: Are Americans willing to pay the price? .
. deciding what to do will test the nation's confidence and nerve as well as its ability to see issues in a long-term perspective. It will also require a challenging self-examination in which the U.S. weighs its role as a [world] power and balances the inherent heavy burdens against the benefits. How such a process turns out could set America's course for the closing decades of the century. 
4
4
a -e-:.. of the Endizett .-rd ar,.3 s issue i.tn a'ah r's otser'.'aticns . ' -2 degree of un-reoaredness of the United States coast defenses az tre opening of the Spanisn--.erican ,,ar; he does no:, ho..ever, markedly disagree with Mahan's observations on strategy.   
------------, o--
Ordnance Office. Notes on the Construction of Ordnance, Nos. 1 to 25, inclusive, vol. 1, 20 
July 1882
-26 January 1834.