# ID: 991fd321174044aba15a6e3770c9fb48
# Title: Operational Art in the Megacity
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph examines the practice of operational art within the urban operational environment and the implications on operations inside future megacity campaigns. It highlights shortfalls that exist in US Army and Joint Doctrine as applied to a Megacity when taking account for the immense complexity therein. It uses the 1994 Battle of Grozny in Chechnya to illustrate some of the challenges involved at the operational level and how improper use of operational art leads to failure. It also uses the 2004 Battles of Fallujah as an example of initial improper use of operational art and the subsequent success achieved through proper application and execution of operational art in a large urban environment. It uses these two case studies to highlight specific elements of operational art which are critical to understand and execute inside of a megacity to achieve success; namely basing, operational reach, arranging operations and tempo. It concludes with recommendations to leaders and practitioners as to the best uses of these elements of operational art and their most efficient application to future conflict within megacities.
It is inevitable that at some point the United States Army will be asked to operate in a megacity and currently the Army is ill-prepared to do so. 1 -Army Chief of Staff's Strategic Studies Group, 2014   While urban combat operations are not new, a megacity presents old challenges at previously unimaginable scale and complexity. 
2
3
As of this writing, there are thirty-one cities in the world classified as megacities with that number expected to reach forty by 2030. A megacity is an urban area containing more than ten million inhabitants. 
4
5
2 Kevin M. Felix and Frederick K. Wong, "The Case for Megacities," Parameters 45, no. 1 (March 2015): 20.
3 Ralph Peters, "Our Soldiers, Their Cities," Parameters (Spring 1996): 43-50. 
4
5
overwhelming poverty, a disintegrating infrastructure, and crime. A natural assumption is where the people go, so goes the conflict, war takes place among the people. With the current trend of population migration to dense urban areas (especially along the littorals) added to the inherent economic and governmental instability in national and local governments there, areas of urban sprawl present a significant and growing threat to regional and global security.
A 2014 Army Strategic Studies Group report, Megacities and the United States Army identifies that "Each day, an estimated 180,000 people across the globe migrate to cities.
. . . By 2030, cities will account for 60 percent of the world's population." 
6
The same Strategic Studies Group report identified this problem as a quickly emerging threat.
The report states that "it is inevitable that at some point the United States Army will be asked to operate in a megacity and currently the Army is ill-prepared to do so." 
7
6
7
Where can leaders and planners go to formulate such a framework? This monograph proposes that both superseded and current US Army and Joint doctrine provide a firm start point.
Additionally, research of Soviet and Russian doctrine and experience provide input to laying the groundwork for leaders to succeed in LSCO in urban terrain. Our successes and failures, and those of our allies and adversaries, can help shape our understanding of how to properly approach the megacity problem.
Instances of urban combat exist throughout recorded history. During the Battle for Mexico City, then Major Ulysses S. Grant occupied a church overlooking the San Cosme Garita by force. There he ordered his men to emplace a howitzer in the belfry to support infantry maneuver during the attack. 
8
9
The US military must build upon it's experience and knowledge base to ensure victory.
Stalingrad is the preeminent battle that comes to mind in any conversation about the urban fight.
Involving the largest concentration of forces, and the highest number of casualties, its strategic outcome was vital to the subsequent Soviet victory on the eastern front. Stalingrad represents Soviet skill in planning, intelligence, and adaptation to the urban operating environment.
Simultaneously, it brought to the forefront lack of imagination and incompetence of senior German leaders and serves as a classic example of urban fighting. The sheer scale of operations in the German's attack on Stalingrad and the subsequent Soviet counter-offensive that annihilated the German Sixth Army is the closest any military action has come to megacity proportions. The campaign involved over 1 million combatants, 250,000 Axis Power casualties, an unknown number of Soviet casualties, and seven months of intensely horrific combat. 
10
However, this monograph focuses on more contemporary conflicts to place the added levels of complexity inside a megacity environment in their proper context. This monograph asserts that the division is the echelon of primacy for the urban environment yet may not be enough in a megacity operation. The division is the lowest echelon organization best suited to apply an urban operational framework, but the sheer size of a megacity necessitates much more in terms of combat power. Increased lethality, tempo, sequencing, and size of activities are all inherent characteristics in large-scale combat. The nature of LSCO and the attributes of megacities require organizations to conduct offensive, defensive, and stability operations simultaneously. The division is best suited for this role.
Though megacities present especially unique challenges in the conduct of warfare in urban terrain, examination of past actions in cities that do not meet the criteria of a megacity can offer insight and provide a start point into these challenges. To find supporting evidence to test this hypothesis, the battles of Grozny and Fallujah serve as suitable case studies to examine. This 10 Antony Beevor, Stalingrad: The Fateful Siege, 1942-1943 (New York: Penguin Books, 1998),  439-40; Jochen Hellbeck, Stalingrad: The City That Defeated the Third Reich, trans. Christopher Tauchen  and Dominic Bonfiglio (New York: Public Affairs, 2015), 1-5. study relies on the following research questions to fully explore the implications of fighting in a megacity:
1. What elements of Operational Art are especially important when planning, preparing and executing operations in the urban environment?
2. What can the success and failure of US and other combatants inform us about the complexity of urban terrain and how can that be applied to a future megacity fight?
3. What are problems presented by megacities not addressed in doctrine or lessons learned from our case studies?
The research and analysis for this monograph focus on operations at echelons above brigade and is therefore limited to relevant division and corps size organizations and their related doctrine. To analyze applicable doctrine and case studies, research conducted for this monograph includes sister service, allied, and adversary doctrine. In regards to adversary doctrine and material, a lack of access and classification requirements preclude total access to vital doctrinal publications and documentation.
To provide relevant recommendations, a primary source qualitative analysis of US Army and Joint doctrine is necessary to determine whether the framework for large-scale urban operations is appropriate for megacity operations. Also, a qualitative study of partnered nation doctrine, both current and superseded, is needed to determine if any allied nation doctrine provides an appropriate framework assisting in the formation of a suitable base for a US doctrine.
Furthermore, research and analysis on important adversary doctrine as well as tactics, techniques, and procedures as it pertains to divisional operations in a megacity type environment is required.
These areas will lay the foundation for a historical perspective to the argument.
Case study research will focus on identifying and characterizing the friction and inherent problems affecting division commanders and staffs when implementing operational art in such a complex environment. Case studies of Grozny and Fallujah provide the critical insight necessary to identify past success, failure, and apply lessons learned to future US Army LSCO operations. 
The appropriate starting point for a US doctrinal review is the recently published capstone document Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations. In a manual that represents the course alteration away from eighteen years of counter-insurgency operations, stability operations, and nation building toward LSCO, urban combat is only mentioned in passing. 14 The ensuing case studies show that true joint combined arms operations, not merely Infantry and Armor, are the key to success in urban operations. Specific Joint and US Army War Fighting Function doctrine make little mention of the urban environment and the complexity therein. US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 2-0, Intelligence (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 6-1; US Army, FM 3-0 (2017), 5-5, 7-20; US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-09, Field Artillery Operations and Fire Support (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), 1-28; US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-34, Engineer Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing  Office, 2014), 2-22.  connection to urban operations lacks continuity and fails to address the elements of operational art in an urban context. This omission leads to a gap in planning considerations towards the most complex operational environment in which future conflicts are likely to occur.
Unlike Army doctrine, Joint doctrine does consider operational art in the urban environs because joint operations lend themselves better to complexity. Joint Publication (JP) 3-06, Joint Urban Operations, fills the operational planning and execution gap from ADP 3-06. Whereas Army doctrine focuses on the tactical level of urban operations, JP 3-06 provides operational and strategic context to urban combat and gives both division-and joint commanders and their staffs a framework to begin attacking the urban puzzle.
JP 3-06 details the characteristics inherent in urban operations and applies the elements of operational art to those characteristics to provide a framework for planning and executing joint urban operations, stating When planning an operation or campaign to deal with adversaries within urban environments, the JFC [Joint Force Command] must go beyond the idea of attacking the embedded adversary. . . . The reality of the urban environment presents a unique set of circumstances and parameters, which will significantly influence the approach to operational art. Commanders at all levels must fit the execution of short-term operations into a larger operational design, and this design must link their near-term actions to the end state. 
15
Of significance is the weighted importance placed on Mission Analysis about critical infrastructure , civilians on the battlefield, collateral damage, and environmental impacts with second and third order effects, and Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield (JIPB). This emphasis in understanding the unique complexity inherent in an urban operational area is necessary because unlike other operating environments, urban environments present a multitude of operational characteristics that are orders of magnitude more complex due to added levels of 
15
human terrain combined with the three-dimensional aspect of cities. Each city is a distinct complex system in its own right with surface, subsurface, super-surface, and unique interconnectedness physically and digitally. Analytically understanding all potential adversaries, non-combatants, friendly forces, and unique characteristics as a dynamic system is of the utmost importance to set conditions to achieve victory. 
16
18
Chapter IV of JP 3-06 builds upon that foundation by incorporating the specific elements of operational art and design which are relevant to urban combat operations. Here is found one of the few links to ATP 3-06. Chapter IV of JP 3-06 details each joint function and its relation to urban operations, much like chapter III of ATP 3-06, it describes the Army warfighting functions 16 US Army, JP 3-06 (2013), III-1 -III-29. 17 Ibid. 
18
19
Adversarial doctrine and practices may offer an alternate perspective to the urban operational environment. Russia, with arguably the most experience of any modern military in the conduct of urban warfare, provides the most relevant doctrine, practices, and application to future operations. As discussed in the Grozny case study to follow, Russian urban doctrine underwent a significant revamping between the first and second Battles of 
Grozny in 1994
Grozny in to 1995
Grozny in and 1999
Grozny in to 2000. 20 . 20
20
21
22
After this brief doctrinal review, it stands that the best guide for the urban operational artist is JP 3-06. Only this publication makes the leap from the tactical to the operational level and views fighting in a city as a significant component of a campaign. Specific elements of operational art and design are inherently more relevant than others when planning and executing division/joint operations within a city, and are even more important when applied to an LSCO urban setting. Operational reach, tempo, basing, and arranging operations prove to have the most significant impact for the operational artist in planning and executing operations within the urban 21 Dale R. Smith, "Commonalities in Russian Military Operations in Urban Environments" (Master's Thesis, Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2003), 9-18. 
22
The Russians could take the city back. It would take them half a year, and they would have to destroy the town all over again. They could even take it in a month, but it would cost ten to fifteen thousand men.
-Chechen guerrilla leader Shamil Basayev
The first case study to consider involves the Russian Army, though in this instance a catastrophic failure at the operational level had direct effects on the tactical ability of the fighters.
It is not appropriate in this monograph to delve into the political and strategic reasons leading to the 1994 Battle of Grozny. The Battles of Grozny resulted from the fragmentation of the Soviet Bloc and the desire of new Russian leaders to retain the oil-rich region of Chechnya. This led to a bloody conflict between the remnants of the Red Army and Chechnyan independence fighters.
Suffice it to say that this case study is an example of regular military forces with a considerable technological advantage facing fragmented and poorly trained militia fighters and insurgents.
Following World War Two, the Soviet military owned the most experienced urban military force in the world. The Battle of Stalingrad, and the subsequent seizure of Berlin, honed the Soviet Red Army into the premier army in the world concerning city fighting. Following the war, however, the Soviets lost much of that expertise. The only LSCO post World War Two involving the Soviets was the occupation in Afghanistan, which saw little urban engagements. 
23
Additionally, the Soviets thought, much like American military thinkers of the time, that a defendable city could just as quickly be bypassed, surrounded, and starved out rather than  The combat power the Russians hurled at the seizure of Grozny was 38,000 soldiers with 230 tanks, 353 infantry fighting vehicles, and 388 tube and rocket artillery pieces, all under the command of Russian Defense Minister, General Pavel Grachev. Additionally, for close air support the Russians used attack helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft from the 4th Air Army.
Opposing the Russian regular army, the five thousand Chechnyan defenders fielded a disparate group of fighters with little to no military experience. The few Chechnyan fighters with military experience were composed of former Soviet soldiers, placed in ad hoc leadership positions. The number of experienced military Chechen fighters is estimated at less than one thousand. The defenders also had a small amount of old Soviet equipment left behind after the breakup of the Soviet Union. This equipment included approximately forty battle tanks, thirty armored personnel carriers and thirty medium artillery pieces Not the scale practitioners can assume for megacity operations, yet large enough to apply the operational art urban framework. By December 30, 1994, Russian forces completed phase one (after failing to force negotiations) having encircled Grozny, blocking the major routes in an out of the city. Despite this, the complete isolation never materialized. Gaps existed within the Russian perimeter; as a result, the Chechnyan rebels maintained freedom of movement in and out of the city center throughout the operation. 
27
28
28
for the ground and air forces. The seizure plan for Grozny followed three axes, although the plan briefed had "four directions", all actions were to occur simultaneously. The assumption that all objectives were able to be taken near simultaneously proved to be an egregious error, costing the Russians in blood and equipment. The Russians employed artillery and air strikes against templated enemy positions for ten days before the attack with little regard for collateral damage and the impact on civilians, especially supportive ethnic Russians living in the area. 
29
31
32
After fifty years, the Russian army had lost its operational and tactical experience. Unprepared commanders and staffs combined with soldiers ill-prepared mentally and physically for a prolonged action in a city fight, led to disaster and a lesson paid for with precious blood and treasure.
Though the Russians eventually reevaluated their initial operational approach to the situation in Chechnya and would go on to earn a hard won victory in Grozny, it was a tenuous victory that led to a second war five years later in 1999. How had the Russians, having arguably the most operational experience in urban warfare of any army in the world, failed so miserably in the initial stages in the first Battle of Grozny? Using the framework from chapter one as a lens, the answer becomes clear: a lack of any semblance of an operational approach. The Russian leadership fell back on their doctrine of destruction to force capitulation. Ironically, this is similar to the German approach in Stalingrad, which the Soviets proved faulty sixty-one years earlier.
In selecting their initial objectives, the Russians failed to link them to their desired effect on the Chechen rebels. The initial intent, to force capitulation from Chechen rebel leaders through sheer force, proved flawed from the outset. The Russian high command's strategic end state of capitulation by Chechen leaders offered enough specificity to operational leaders to define specific objectives within Grozny, which arguably they did. However, the specified objectives of seizing the two airfields, the presidential palace, the road junction, the rail station, and Lenin Park offered no link to the termination criteria. 
33
Flawed assumptions regarding the length of the proposed operation combined with unwavering adherence to the published timeline led Russian planners to vastly under-forecast logistical requirements for the resource-intensive urban fight. Additionally, Russian units advanced toward disparate objectives on three separate and non-supporting axes of advance, and the farther the Chechen fighters pulled them into the city and extended their LOCs. As a result the less effectively the Russians could conduct resupply, replenishment, and casualty replacement.
Had Russian planners and commanders adhered to the element of basing and established logistical points up to and inside Grozny, the issue of replenishment and troop replacement would have been somewhat mitigated. This small, yet significant, change to the Russian plan would have enabled a more robust ground force, thus extended their operational reach up to, and through, their respective objectives. The Chechen success in destroying Russian armor with small groups armed with anti-armor weapons proved successful. However, the Russians had no replacement plan, having assumed away the need for effective and timely replacements. 
34
34
weather in the Caucuses. At one-point, Russian soldiers were sharing single cans of food with virtually no water for days on end. 
35
36
The Russian plan failed to coordinate the four axes is of attack into the city, failing to achieve a "combination of simultaneous and sequential operations to reach the end state conditions with the least cost in personnel and other resources." 37 Each axis aimed only at achieving individual objectives, and at no point did the forces on each approach provide mutual support or strive to achieve mutual aims to reach the operational endstate.
It is important to note again the importance of combined arms operations, especially the consequences of improper execution as seen in the Russian operational approach in Grozny in 1994. One Rebel Chechen commander remarked, What struck me at first was that Russian tanks and APCs were not even advancing in battle order. They were marching as if on parade ground with only a distance of 5 to 6 meters between each APC. They were unable to maneuver or turn around when 
35
36
37
38
While JP 3-06 demonstrates a framework for operations in Grozny, it falls short when applied to a megacity construct. In particular here, basing, operational reach, and tempo represent the most important elements of operational art in need of further review when applied to a megacity operation. JP 3-06 only makes little mention of basing, dedicating only one paragraph and only in conjunction with sustainment as a whole. 
39
39
40
With the prevalent Low-Intensity Conflict mentality inundating the Corps, there has developed a mindset that small and light is good, and big and heavy is bad. The truth be told, small, and light equates to weak and dead. 
41
The Operation Vigilant Resolve failed, and Fallujah became more of a lightning rod for insurgents than ever before. The necessity to retake the city through direct action became increasingly clear over the next weeks and months as stability operations no longer seemed viable. 
46
44
45
46
47
Additionally, the Marines rectified the supply shortfall identified during the previous operation and units began to stockpile vast quantities of small arms ammunition, fuel, food, and other necessary supplies. Also of note, the Marine headquarters implemented an information operations campaign targeted against both the insurgents and civilians remaining inside the city.
The aim was the minimization of civilian casualties by requesting all residents to evacuate the city and to counter any anti-coalition narrative from the insurgents by imbedding approximately ninety journalists with the units identified to conduct Al-Fajr. 
48
Natonski and his staff decided to divide the city into two sectors and created two Regimental Combat Teams (RCTs) to each and augmented them with one US Army tank battalion to operate as combined Armor/Infantry teams. RCT 1 assumed control of western 
47
48
Fallujah while RCT 7 assumed control of the eastern half. As seen in Grozny, the task organization of Armor and Infantry forces is critical to success in urban operations and was no different in Fallujah. As depicted in Figure 
2
3
50
Yet enemy fighters were still able to effectively use homemade improvised explosive devices and light anti-armor weapons to mount a defense. Making steady progress and keeping the appropriate tempo in the face of the fierce defense, the Marines and Army forces reached Highway 10. Natonski, with recommendations from his staff and subordinate commanders, updated the plan. He ordered each RCT to designate a battalion to remain behind the main elements with the supporting armor to continue. These "stay behind elements" were to secure each RCT's rear area (now referred to as the Consolidation Area) to clear bypassed enemy and secure the area for follow-on forces, while the main ground forces continued to seize objectives in southern Fallujah. 
51
4
52
53
On November 13, Natonski and his staff further sub-divided the city into sectors and ordered the soldiers and Marines under their command to conduct the systematic clearance of the assigned sectors with the intensity of enemy resistance increasing, depicted in Figure 
5
With whis experience, these fighters and employed those lessons to the fight against coalition forces in Fallujah. 54  The 16th of November marked the relative downturn in resistance from insurgents, allowing US commanders to begin rotating troops out of the city and replacing them with fresh soldiers and marines. This rotation is essential to note, even though the fighting had begun to wane, maintaining operational tempo and operational reach was still crucial, and fresh troops were the answer. On November 20, Marine and US Army forces began a phased withdrawal from the city while maintaining a presence in support of Iraqi Security Forces in the area with RCT 1 assuming sole responsibility for Fallujah as depicted in Figure 
6
55
57
In After Action Reviews conducted by both RCTs, leaders found that the marines and soldiers 
56
57
had expended 300 percent more munitions than was anticipated by I MEF logisticians, forcing subordinate commanders to pick up the sustainment workload. 
58
Identifying objectives that lead to mission success is a difficult task and requires critical thought and planning from both commanders and staffs. A proper objective articulates the commanders intent and must be understood across the formation. They direct the operation toward a "clearly defined, decisive, and achievable goal. As in the previous case studies, and particularly in urban operations, the arrangement of operations played an important role in Operation Al-Fajr. Following the concepts laid out in JP 5-0, Joint Planning and JP 3-06, Joint Urban Operations, I MEF's commander and his staff determined the best arrangement of the "joint force, and its component operations to conduct the assigned tasks and joint force mission." 61 In any campaign or operation, the shaping effort has an important impact on the success or failure of the mission. In an effort to minimize civilian casualties psychological operations units within I MEF urged citizens of Fallujah to leave the city by any means available while also disseminating misinformation on the operation to mislead the insurgents. A successful indicator of the information campaign was the low civilian casualty rate.
It is estimated that as few as 500 civilians remained in Fallujah once Operation Al-Fajr started. 
62
60
61 Joint Staff, JP 5-0 (2017), IV-36; Joint Staff, JP 3-06 (2013), III-17. 
62
With a proper task organization assigned to each RCT once the assault on Fallujah began, both RCTs and their subordinate and supporting units used light/heavy arrangements to best execute assigned tasks and accomplish the commander's purpose. Both RCTs supported each other while executing simultaneous action at the RCT level of operations and sequential operations within subordinate units. The combination of simultaneous and sequential action enabled I MEF to utilize depth in operation, thus keeping the enemy consistently off balance, and never ceding the initiative. As JP 5-0 states, "the concept of depth seeks to overwhelm the enemy throughout the operational area, creating competing and simultaneous demands on enemy commanders and resources and contributing to the enemy's speedy defeat."
63
Overall, Operation Al Fajr stands as an example of proper planning and execution of joint operations in an urban environment. Commanders and their staffs assumed risk after the first Battle of Fallujah in the spring of 2004 by taking upwards of six months to plan the second assault and giving the defenders time to prepare for the seizure of the city. The risk was well worth it; proper planning and application of operational art by I MEF led to a rapid defeat of the majority of insurgents in Fallujah, leading to a transition back to stability operations. JP 3-06, while again serving as a proper frame for urban operations as it did in Grozny, again falls short when the lessons from Fallujah are applied against a megacity construct. If we apply the three most important elements of operational art which pertain to a megacity (basing, operational reach, and tempo), JP 3-06 falls short in offering planners and commanders an appropriate foundation with which to conduct a megacity operation.
Though not specifically referencing megacities, JP 3-06 does address the fact that dense urban battlefields may not provide adequate area to house an all-encompassing support structure such as a Brigade Support Area or a larger Logistics Support Area, and recommends constructing smaller bases for specific support operations.
There exists a contingent of professionals who believe that the basics of urban warfare are enough to cope with urban environments at scale. These professionals in the fields of urbanization, military art, and their relevance to military actions in urban environments espouse a great deal of confidence that megacities do not constitute an anomaly worthy of a doctrinal update. One such professional is Michael Evans, a military and security expert who has written frequently on the subject of megacities, argues: "most fundamentals of urban warfare are likely to remain relevant for general-purpose forces even in a conglomeration on the scale of a megacity." 
64
The elements of operational art and design of basing, operational reach, objectives, and arranging operations weigh heaviest in terms of planning and execution when considering LSCO in an environment as large and complex as a megacity. Though doctrine, specifically JP 3-06, make mention of these aspects of planning, planners and practitioners need a more detailed explanation of the proper use and importance to enable better planning and execution. The solution to the megacity problem is not the adherence to current joint and US Army doctrine and applying an appropriate scale. Doctrine proves insufficient in describing the complexities and inherent challenges in megacities. JP 3-06 provides a solid start point, but needs expansion to provide the necessary knowledge and tools to the planners at echelons above execution, but most importantly to the soldiers on the streets, whose task it is to fight in these terrible and exhausting environments. 
65
Timothy D. Johnson, A Gallant Little Army: The Mexico City Campaign (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2007), 235-36.
Geoffrey Wawro, The Franco-Prussian War: The German Conquest of France in 1870-1871 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 213.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), Para 1-64.
US Department of the Army, Army Techniques Publication (ATP) 3-06, Urban Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), 3-1 -3-18.
Louis A. DiMarco, Concrete Hell: Urban Warfare from Stalingrad to Iraq (Oxford: Osprey, 2012), 153.
Faurby, "The Battle(s) of Grozny," 76.
US Department of Defense, Joint Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 5-0, Joint Planning (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), IV-21.
McWilliams and Schlosser, U.S. Marines in Battle, 31.
McWilliams and Schlosser, U.S. Marines in Battle, 39; US Army, FM 3-0 (2017), 1-35 Para 1-158.
McWilliams and Schlosser, U.S. Marines in Battle, 64.
Joint Staff, JP 5-0 (2017), IV-37.
First, I must thank 
Colonel Geoff Whittenberg
Dr. John Curatola
Advanced Military Studies Program
Megacities. Finally
Advanced Military Studies Program. If not for Nikki
Margot Fritze
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or