# ID: 99a3e70ebc49437b8f8ff42c029e57dd
# Title: Drone nation: the political economy of America's new way of war
# Database: Libgen
# Year: 2017;2012
# Fulltext:
A book is a major, multiyear project during which authors accumulate debts of gratitude. For the cover art, we would like to thank artist Simon Robson, also known as Knife Party, for the powerful image entitled Click Boom
The twentieth century was the era of total war though periods of war were punctuated by even longer periods of nonwar. Many of his ancestors participated in the Great War (1914-1918) and World War II (1939-1945) as members of the Royal Canadian Army. One great uncle, Horace Morell, did not return. These disruptions also had a major impact on the home front, especially for the women and children. As we wrote about the changing nature of air war and of the role of the pilot, Martin thought about his late uncle Capt. George W. Morell, who served in the Royal Canadian Air Force for twenty years starting in the late 1940s. Uncle George never knew combat but he did know about the life-and-death responsibilities of a fighter pilot. All of these people and many since often learned the hard way the truth about war and it is foolhardy for us to forget those truths.
Past wars and periods of relative peace have defined the lives of many of us in surprising ways. But now we appear to be entering a period of permanent war, aided by assassination mainly via ever-proliferating drone aircraft, and we are being led by people very different from past leaders. Whatever the faults of those who were the political leaders of the past, more often than not they did know war firsthand and by 1945 they finally decided that every available step needed to be taken to abolish the war system. We dedicate this work to those who seek to remind contemporary leaders, most of whom have never served, of the uncontrollability and dangers of war.
There is an accepted wisdom that democratic, developed countries in the Western world conduct themselves at a higher moral level than others. But the US government, over the last fifteen years, has done things to others, such as kidnapping, torture, and assassination, that only the "bad guys" used to do. Their newest and most alarming tactic is drone warfare-the application of technologically advanced aerial vehicles with no pilot in the cockpit, purportedly capable of precise strikes on the enemy. As a key tool in counterterrorism strategy, the use of drones is increasing rapidly, along with a corresponding increase in the number of civilian deaths. The title of this book, Drone Nation, is no exaggeration.
Normalizing assassination and drone warfare has created a profound historical transformation in the way war is fought that has been evident on this scale only every fifty to seventy-five years. Its significance is equal to transformative events going back a century or further. To put it in the language of French historian Fernand Braudel, the rise of drone warfare means change in the much longer period, the longue durée. This technology has a momentum to become the dominant form of military force over the coming decades. It will transform many aspects of life, including a decline in personal privacy and security. In a 2016 article, 
1
Even some proponents, like retired Lieutenant Colonel T. Mark McCurley, a former Air Force drone pilot, say over-reliance on remote killing and electronic intelligence has hurt efforts on the ground. "Too often, remotely piloted aircraft are being used as a tool to wantonly kill individuals, rather than as one of many tools to capture and shut down whole terrorist networks," he said.
While wars have multiple internal and external players, each with a separate agenda, an end to the violence is often created through a combination of a committed citizenry, international pressure, and negotiations. The use of drone warfare, however, may create a much different result. It could actually herald an era of permanent war. Imagine a war that doesn't end, a war that generates continual, extraordinary changes in military and domestic life globally-and one that could require rewriting international law. Whereas twentieth-century international law focused on the long-term relationships between and among nations and states, drone warfare and its new associated policies focus only on the short term-until the next election. There is little regard as to how these intimidating actions will affect the future-for Americans and for citizens of other countries.
Drone Nation provides the opportunity to give these new developments the serious scrutiny they need, before they become regarded as normal Western government policy. The authors have discovered that it is important to focus both on the short-term impact of drone warfare, and to situate it in a much longer historical perspective.
There were warnings as far back as 1976, with the Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, known as the "Church Committee." It was established following revelations of intrusions into the privacy of American citizens by the CIA, and, perhaps more importantly, the CIA's orchestration of the 1974 overthrow of the democratically elected government of Salvador Allende in Chile. Senator Frank Church (D-Idaho) wrote prophetically in his introduction, speaking for the committee majority: "We regard the assassination plots as aberrations. The United States must not adopt the tactics of the enemy. Means are as important as ends. Crisis makes it tempting to ignore the wise restraints that make men free; but each time we do so, each time the means we use are wrong, our inner strength, the strength which makes us free, is lessened." 
2
In a discussion about drone warfare, the first issue is what to call these aerial weapons-unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), unmanned aerial systems (UAS), remotely piloted aircrafts (RPA), or drones. There are strong supporters and detractors for each term. Kevin McCaney points out that the US military (particularly the army and navy) calls them UAV because they are expected to become more autonomous with a declining level of human control. 
3
Brian Fung reported in the Washington Post that drone manufacturers are trying to rebrand them as UAS because the word drone has a reputation for showering death from the sky-not helpful in selling Americans on their domestic civilian use. 
4
5
The creation of what will truly be a Drone Nation will require a paradigm shift, not only in equipment, but also in how the United States fights in the air, who does the fighting, and how those who fight relate to their aircraft, ground crew, and commanders. Historically, the USAF has been dominated by its pilot corps. The pilots have been at the top of the pinnacle, and senior commanders are primarily drawn from their ranks. Military pilots of fighters, bombers, or transports are highly trained and work in physically demanding jobs. So what happens as the United States makes the transition, and the balance shifts from pilots in cockpits to pilots in overstuffed leather chairs? (The image of a cluster of office cubicles, a cube farm, comes to mind.) And what happens when the pilot has changed from a relatively autonomous decision maker to a cog in the wheel of the new way of war? At one level, this new attitude to military piloting resembles the shift from custom, craft-based production to industrialization's standardized factory production. In the twentieth-century model, the fighter pilot is like a craftsperson who delivers the entire service, responsible for takeoffs, landings, aerial maneuvers, reconnaissance, and identification. The pilot bunks near his or her plane; in fact it is his or her plane, as each plane in the squadron had been assigned to a pilot/copilot-navigator duo, with their names inscribed on the fuselage. The pilot is an officer, typically a captain or above but without a body of enlisted people to command. He or she does have power to make awesome decisions of life and death and to apply the laws of war and the rules of engagement. This traditional idea of the pilot is displaced as a quaint, inefficient relic of the past, superseded by new technology as were the unionized pressmen in the newspaper business in the 1970s. 
6
7
One of the features of European-based Western civilization over the last number of centuries is the common, optimistic idea that society continually improves. This spirit of progress, as it is sometimes called, contends that human civilization is on an upward trajectory, that by many measures we are getting better off all the time. The market economy is said to encourage economic growth, human freedom continues to advance, and old gender and racial prejudices are undermined. Advocates of this global view would point to the seeming spread of democracy and ever-increasing economic growth. Reverses are seen as temporary and as preparation for future improvements, much as a short economic recession within a multidecade period of economic growth.
This book, however, is animated by a different view. It recognizes that civilization is fragile, and that reverses can happen in years, or at most decades, that reshape human life, and often in a negative way.
There are points in history where, while the world's great civilizations seemed to be at the apex of their sophistication and power, their great achievements were lost in mere decades. The best example may be the Roman Empire, which in 300 CE stretched from England in the northwest to the Middle East in the southeast. By 500 CE the empire was falling apart. That new era has often been referred to as the Dark Ages precisely because Roman civilization, inherited from and influenced by the Greeks, was lost until the 1100s, when the Moslems of North Africa reintroduced classical ideas to Europe through Spain.
In the last one thousand years, Europe built a world based on Enlightenment ideas often influenced by the classics of the ancient world. As we think about the world, and specifically the United States, we can look at the twentieth century in this fashion, with periods of progress and regression. Through the Interwar period of the 1920s, the United States had been unsure of its role in the world, symbolized by the Senate's refusal in 1919 to ratify the Peace of Paris, which created the League of Nations designed to prevent another Great War (1914-1918).
World War II (1939-45) was the decisive revolutionary event for the United States, as it was for so many other countries. In 1939 the country was struggling to recover from the Great Depression-the worst, most prolonged, economic downturn it had ever seen. But by the end of 1945, and shortly thereafter, it was a different matter altogether. Along with the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom and its junior allies, the United States had vanquished fascism-the state powers of fascist Italy, Nazi Germany, and imperial Japan. The United States had the world's largest intact industrial structure; it controlled 80 percent of the world's gold supply; it was at full employment; and it was ready to take a leadership role in the world. The war set in motion internal transformations, particularly in the role of women, the place of African Americans and Hispanics, and the growth prospects of what would become known as a middle-class society. The United States and its allies supported the elaboration and ratification of the Geneva Conventions, which codified the proper treatment of prisoners of war (POWs). The world was moving away intellectually from the "might makes right" of power politics, and toward a new system with a single set of global rules for all states and other actors, regardless of their size and power. This was a step away from the "sovereign inequality" 8 of the nineteenth century, where imperial powers were free to attack the weak, and toward the concept of "sovereign equality" that we are now familiar with. progress on gender equality, race relations, and environmental protection. In retrospect, the New Deal bargain between the rich and poor, and labor and business, provided economic growth and relatively shared prosperity in the 1950s through the early 1970s. While it should not be romanticized, this economic situation can only be the envy of today's bottom 70 percent of Americans. The Equal Rights Amendment to the US Constitution had easily passed Congress and was deemed a shoo-in as protection for the rights of women in America. Optimists thought that the United States had finally turned the corner.
Even as the United States was starting to decline economically, a sign of the high-water mark in foreign policy was in the very existence and conclusions of the Church Committee. In an era of assassination and drone warfare, its interim report reads like a work from a very different time and place. 
9
Ronald Reagan took office in 1981, signaling the beginning of a rollback of all postwar achievements. Union rights would be curtailed, America would deindustrialize, income taxes for the rich would be cut numerous times, and the poor and the working class would sink back into greater poverty and insecurity. Steady, lifetime employment, possibly with a single enterprise, would come to be regarded as an unrealistic relic of a past economy. The Democratic Party would pass from the hands of the New Deal liberals, who remembered the problems of the world under laissez-faire capitalism, into the hands of the Democratic Leadership Council. This centerright group, represented by Bill and Hillary Clinton, and more recently Obama, carries the endorsement of Wall Street and other crisis-ridden "sunrise industries," including banking, insurance, and accounting and management services.
Despite the gainsaying and hyperpartisanship of the last fifteen years, Republicans must have known (and it has been borne out by events) that their high-income constituency was not too badly served by these new Democrats, whether in tax policy or in management of the US empire. While Jimmy Carter ended his time in 1980 with a military budget of around $80 billion, by 2015 it was over ten times that. As much as the United States is provoking China and Russia close to their own "spheres of influence," in reality it does not yet have a real superpower military rival. Perhaps this is why the US government is fighting multiple wars in Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria, 
10
The concern of this book is the frightening implications of drone warfare in the seemingly endless global war on terrorism. As an introduction to the pages that follow, we have established the historical background and raises the vital questions to be addressed in the rise of drones in military applications.
Chapter 1 focuses on the profound transformation underway in US strategic ambitions, as well as its overseas military activities. The rise of assassination and drone warfare is really only at the surface of these changes-perhaps the small part of the iceberg visible above the water line. There has not been enough public awareness or discussion of these developments and their medium-to long-term results. There is a certain irony that those who run the US government do so based on the pretense that they cut their teeth as critics of the old order and do things in a more enlightened fashion. The reality is far different.
In chapter 2 the roles of Congress, the judiciary, and especially the president, are examined. This involves questioning Bush-and Obama-era legal justifications for drone warfare, including the Obama development of the kill list. The idea of negative long-term consequences of the use of drones is introduced. Supreme Court decisions, such as Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, however, provide reason for optimism. Citizens must ask and answer the tough questions about the degree to which an imperial state requires ruthless tactics to survive.
The focus of chapter 3 is the background of the development of the military-industrial complex (MIC) in the United States, including a long history of providing misleading information on the costs and effectiveness of new weapons systems. The decline of some military-industrial product lines, such as contemporary fighter bombers, will be made up for by the rise of drone production and sales. Will the MIC prevent citizens from critical analysis of the long-term consequences of drone warfare?
Chapter 4 looks at the impact of drone warfare inside the US military, including the Taylorization and displacement of traditional cockpit pilots, the role of communications technology in increasing the role of senior officers making air-war combat decisions, and controversies among serving members and veterans regarding the "warrior status" of drone pilots. One of the underdiscussed aspects of drone warfare is that it is finally a means to break the power of the pilots in the USAF. Debates over retention of drone pilots and their senior command potential are also considered, as is the controversy over the proposed awarding of a new military medal for drone warriors.
Chapter 5 features an analysis of the rush to develop drone technology for domestic use in the United States and ultimately globally. Military contractors want to develop civilian models of their technology for private sector firms and government to increase efficiency or cut costs. However, this may normalize it for domestic commercial and law-enforcement use, and overseas military use. It may also lead to domestic accidents and acts of terrorism. While there has been little public discussion, significant evidence already exists that the capabilities and reliability of domestic drone technology have been exaggerated.
In chapter 6 we tackle the role of experts, particularly think tanks. There has been an explosion in their number over the last thirty-five years, with a domination of conservative and capitalist libertarian ideas. The role of money and the donor's preferences are discussed, as is the possibility that think tanks are used by powerful people to produce ideas that may be novel, risky, or unpopular. Given changes in the mainstream media, including their need for free or cheap, digestible ideas, think tanks and canned expertise have risen greatly in visibility and influence on policy makers. The contemporary reality seems to be that most information for the general public comes from think tanks.
The topic of chapter 7 is the media, focusing on how lack of complete analysis in the mainstream media after 9/11 and in the run-up to, and then fallout of, the US invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan continue to plague the dialogue about drone warfare. Discussion will include media bias and ownership interests, reliance on official sources, lack of access for war reporting, the media's event orientation, persistence of unasked questions, lack of historical background, and labeling.
Chapter 8 examines resistance to drone warfare, including the view of practitioners and scholars of international law. The contemporary system of international law, despite the creation of fully autonomous drones, has potential in reducing or limiting drone use. Interestingly, those from outside the United States are far more likely to be critical of US use of weaponized drones. Simmering domestic resistance to drone warfare is in need of leadership. The international campaign to ban antipersonnel landmines is a good precedent, and useful case study, for how a movement might be organized.
Although introducing new material in a conclusion may be unorthodox, ours features a fascinating comparison between recent US activities in the Middle East and those during the Vietnam War. With a particular analysis of the Phoenix program, we argue that recent activities in the Middle East are even more brazen and show less regard for the sovereignty of local governments, human rights, or the laws of war, than during the tragic Vietnam era.
It is fitting in a work on the rise of assassination and drone warfare to examine the conventional wisdom of US military policy and its relationship to international and domestic law. Armed conflict is nothing new, so putting this discussion into a historical perspective is helpful-with a brief look at wars through history, and how wars and beliefs about them have changed over time. It's particularly interesting to consider the Augustinian view of war as just, because it meant those who did wrong were punished. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, there was a move away from this punitive view; it was a time when soldiers followed the rules of war and did so without question. And because they were following orders, guilt or blame was not expected to be an issue. More than one observer has noted a return to both of these modes of thinking in recent US military policy.
Also in this chapter is a discussion of the law-enforcement perspective on international conflicts, and of international humanitarian law (IHL), established as a set of rules that seeks to limit the effects of armed conflict. The case study of Canadian child soldier Omar Khadr will prove to be useful. There is discussion about the need for a transformation in how we conduct warfare because of where we are today. For instance, following the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union, changes in war strategy and technology have meant that far more civilians have died than soldiers.
The immediate US response to 9/11 and the resulting wars are examined here. What were the options of the US government and why were some of them so quickly dismissed? Why was the United States so seemingly anxious to engage in war? How has history provided lessons on a better way to proceed? The current track the US government is on, especially since it includes drone warfare, is a dangerous one.
While anthropologists have identified small-scale societies in which people have lived peaceably with each other and their neighbors, even a casual survey of the last three thousand years indicates widespread armed conflict with often brutal consequences for civilians. In the ancient world it was not unusual for the victor to kill the men and enslave the women and children. Empires expanded their boundaries by force if necessary, until opponents possessed even greater force. For most of the past five hundred years in Europe, widespread civilian death in war has been more common than efforts to prevent harm to noncombatants. With unprecedented technology, such as high explosives, repeating rifles, machine guns, and airplanes, the mass slaughters continue-much as in the American Civil War, the Great War (World War I), World War II, and in the "limited" wars since.
The twentieth century was different, however, in the way that World War II represented a tipping point against the continuation of the old order. By 1945 even the great powers and superpowers were so traumatized by total war that they agreed to a series of changes to the world's organization that could restrict their own room to maneuver. They wrote a charter for a new entity, the UN. It essentially outlawed war as a policy choice, with the exception of self-defense when the global community neglected to come to a state's aid. They developed a Security Council based on the nineteenthcentury Concert of Europe system in which the five allied and victorious powers were expected to "act in concert" to jointly manage the global security system.
Leaders in the late 1940s and early 1950s also seemed to accept the view that Karl Polanyi expressed in 1944 that absolute faith in the "gold standard" and the self-correcting market economy were utopian ideas. The future would require global efforts to aid development and reconstruction, and state leadership. (Numerous commentators have noted that by contemporary Republican Party standards, President Dwight D. Eisenhower [1953-1961]  could be labeled a socialist. President Richard Nixon [1969-1974] could be a liberal-albeit a much-hated one.) In the late 1940s, the surviving senior Nazi leadership was tried for crimes against humanity at Nuremberg, and the Geneva Conventions on the proper conduct of combatants were extended and elaborated. At the same time, the principle of national self-determination was affirmed, recognizing oppressed people's right to struggle against imperial powers that denied their independence.
At the base of these postwar legal and moral developments was the belief that when war occurred between two or more states, IHL must be applied. A separate body of law known as "human rights law" also addressed noninternational conflict situations. Both practically and philosophically, by the mid-twentieth century, attitudes toward war and combat had changed. In the Christian tradition, starting with St. Augustine of Hippo (354-430 CE) and elaborated by St. Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274 CE) and others, killing in war was just because the true Christian prevented evildoers from committing further sin. As Helen M. Kinsella points out, the Augustinian tradition was not designed to prevent Christian engagement in war, but rather to legitimize it. 
1
As Colin McKeough notes, the great achievement in thinking about war in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, by legal minds like Vattel and later Grotius, was to move away from the punitive approach that dominated the Christian tradition for a thousand years. 
2
The Augustinian perspective is further illustrated by the case of Omar Khadr, the Canadian child soldier. Khadr was born in Toronto in September 1986 to an unsavory family with loyalty to the anti-Western Afghani Taliban and a close connection to Osama bin Laden and al Qaeda. For most of his first nine years he was raised in Pakistan, but by 1996 ended up in Afghanistan, living for a time in the bin Laden compound. From the age of ten he was given weapons-training by his family, like many rural North Americans. On July  22, 2002, during the US occupation of Afghanistan, Khadr was apprehended for throwing a hand grenade, killing one US soldier, Christopher Speer, and injuring another. Although only fifteen, he was not treated as a prisoner of war or as a child soldier. He was also not considered a juvenile or "young offender" (to use Canadian terminology).
At sixteen Khadr was transferred to Camp X-Ray in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where, in October 2002 and in February 2003, members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the Canadian Security and Intelligence Service interviewed him. They turned over information to the US military. There were significant legal machinations in the following seven years, including in Canadian courts. In October 2010, he accepted a plea bargain, admitting guilt to five crimes, including murder, in exchange for a sentence of no more than eight years. In April 2012, US Defense secretary Leon Panetta signed off on Khadr's transfer to the Canadian judicial system, and by mid-2015 Khadr was out on parole, living with his lawyer in Edmonton, Alberta. The Canadian courts modified his parole conditions to provide him with greater freedom. 
3
One of the problems of the Augustinian view of war, and our return to it, is that no effort is made to see the conflict from the other side. When the United Kingdom and Argentina fought each other in the Falklands War, both sides knew the other's point of view and did not characterize the other as evil to the same degree as we find in these Afghani and Iraqi cases. An extreme version of our mental devolution is found in the story of William C. Bradford, who started work as a professor at the US Military Academy at West Point, New York, in the summer of 2015. He had just published a paper in which he argued that it was legitimate for the US military to target and kill legal scholars who criticize the US war on terrorism. According to Bradford, they can be targeted at work and home, and in media outlets that interview them. 
4
This has happened against a background of a transformation of the country in the forty or fifty years beginning with World War II. As Garry Wills argues in his fascinating account, the US political system had the potential to be a functioning republic in form and reality, with its large number of elected offices and its separation and sharing of powers. This ended with developing the atomic bomb in 1945 and succumbing to the temptation to project its power over an ever-increasing portion of the globe. Because the atomic bomb can only be deployed by one person (or a committee acting as a single agent), it elevated the presidency to a paramount position. Congress could only be reactive as the power to declare war declined in the wake of increased power to make war. The United States made the transition from a small, agrarian republic to a "national security state," one that is unresponsive to public opinion, just as one would expect as republican ideals fade. Wills identifies twenty-five events in peacetime, from October 1948 through November 1952, that effectively set the United States on its current course. The changes since 9/11 are just a deepening of these trends. 
5
6
7
• Increase cooperation with the security agencies of other friendly governments. • Unilaterally and/or in concert with other countries neutralize or counter terrorist organizations and terrorist leaders. • Develop an information exploitation program, aimed at disrupting and demoralizing terrorist groups." (emphasis added) Some theorize that use of the term neutralize legitimizes assassination. As we will see when we discuss the Phoenix program later, however, the term is understood to "render neutral" rather than terminate. In any event, there is no disputing that for a long time the United States has violated the sovereignty of other countries with covert operations against individuals. Two major changes since the Reagan period have been to abandon the insistence on "lawful measures" and to extend permanent war to a truly global battlefield.
Of course the Obama administration and US military can treat users of the surface-to-air missile as common criminals if they like, but the United States invaded Afghanistan on flimsy grounds and has been the de facto occupying power, along with its allies, ever since. So is there any surprise that a resistance attacks? The timing of the return to the Augustinian view of war is not a coincidence, because it is designed for a situation in which a Christian force faces an unknown and mysterious adversary in battle. This could be the peoples of the New World, the Ottoman Turks in the sixteenth century onward, or those of the Islamic world today, primarily in the Middle East. Is there any doubt that countries that are predominantly Christian, or at least with overwhelmingly Christian governments, waging war against predominantly Islamic countries and movements have contributed to this revival of the Augustinian perspective? Or perhaps the revival has enabled new forms of warfare launched by the Christian West?
In the twentieth century, the just-war tradition within IHL departed from this older tradition in virtually every major aspect. Recourse to war is not legal under the UN Charter unless it is defensive and truly the last resort, in which case there are elaborate rules. In contrast to the ancient Christian tradition, war is a policy decision of governments for which individual soldiers, sailors, and air crew are not morally responsible. Combatants are considered "privileged" when they wear their country's uniform, carry arms openly, and are under responsible command. Civilians are not to be harmed; only members of the opponent's military are subject to attack. Whereas twentiethcentury international law focused on the long-term relationships between and among nations and states, drone warfare and these new policies focus only on the short term-until the next election.
One of the principles of the twentieth-century revision of IHL is noncombatant immunity, the idea that warfare is conducted between armed and uniformed combatants only. Kinsella makes a valid point in saying that there is much more doubt in the civilian-combatant distinction then we normally recognize, but it is helpful that the tradition also says that when there is doubt, "that person shall be considered to be a civilian." 
8
9
10
In the translation of his recent book 
12
13
14
With the end of the Cold War and the Soviet collapse at the end of the 1980s, observers of modern warfare have argued that we were witnessing a transformation in war, either as the development of "new wars" or a "revolution in military affairs." 
15
This was of particular concern as the country continually expanded its own global definition of its vital interests. In the 1950s and 1960s the United States overthrew governments or interfered in countries in Latin America, but also in Iran, Lebanon, Iraq, and elsewhere. By the late 1970s, the Carter administration was defining the Persian Gulf as an area of vital interest, and was funding and training "anti-modernist" Islamist fighters in Afghanistan and Pakistan to provoke a Soviet entry into "their Vietnam." This eventually happened in December 1979. The Soviets were bogged down in Afghanistan for much of ten years but as Carter's national security advisor Zbigniew Bzrezinski admitted in a widely noted interview much later, he thought bringing down the Soviet empire was worth the risk of the creation and encouragement of the fundamentalist Islamic militants in that part of the world. 
16
But the attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001, attributed to bin Laden's al Qaeda organization, put the US government to the test. Would the president and Congress view this as an act of war, the first shot in a prolonged conflict, and respond as such? Or would they see it as President Clinton saw the first effort to attack the World Trade Center, as essentially a crime to be addressed through law enforcement? The advantage of these two choices is their clarity. If it is an act of war, then once one identifies the state responsible, the victim declares war on that state, defeats it, and signs a treaty to end the conflict. Apart from the initial loss of life, 9/ 11 did not have the military significance of the 1941 Pearl Harbor attack, which was a crippling blow to the US military in the Pacific by the Japanese, then one of the world's great military powers. And Afghanistan (commonly held responsible for al Qaeda) was certainly no imperial Japan. A conventional war with Afghanistan would yield an easy victory for the United States, similar to those in Grenada and Panama years before. After 9/11 the United States had overwhelming world sympathy and it could have defeated Afghanistan following the rules of war from IHL.
Of course, the US government could also have pursued with vigor the law-enforcement route, in cooperation with most of the world's states. They would have treated the al Qaeda hijackers and their supporters as criminals, using police and judicial means of seeking redress. The United States invaded Afghanistan on the pretense that its Taliban government refused to extradite bin Laden and other key al Qaeda personnel. It could have implemented sanctions against a country harboring these fugitives, waiting as long as necessary for them to be turned over. A country as powerful as the United States would not have been denied had it used its overwhelming power and treasure to achieve such a small task. Pursuing the law-enforcement perspective would have allowed the United States to protect the human rights of all involved-something clearly not done in the fifteen years since 9/11. With the permission of the state involved, suspects could have been arrested, transported, and tried in US federal court, and if found guilty, punished in accordance with US law. (Admittedly, the defendants would have used their trial to expose US involvement in their organization's creation in the 1980s; only advocates of US and Western realpolitik, not law enforcement or truth seekers, would suppress that defense.) These were crimes committed in the United States in violation of US laws. It was well known that al Qaeda was a small organization that could have been broken through pressure and apprehensions. Choosing law enforcement allows the country that is not eager for war to avoid it. But in 2001, avoiding war was not a high priority for the Bush administration and congressional establishment, both Republican and Democrat. In retrospect, and as some identified at the time, 
17
Ironically, the US government did the worst thing it could do under the circumstances. It avoided picking one of two clear options and instead chose a third, hybrid option that provided maximum flexibility, but also maximum risk of military and intellectual calamity. The Bush administration, with congressional support, launched its war on terrorism. Tactics that the government occasionally employed in the past-pre-emptive invasion, killing civilians, and summary execution and torture-became commonplace, official policy. This war, rather than focusing on limited goals in one or two states, was much more ambitious. Policy makers including Donald Rumsfeld and Dick Cheney soon admitted it might go on for decades. Because it was a war on tactics (and those adversaries who use and support them), the administration was quick to personalize it. This was a virtual invitation for the US military, mercenaries like Blackwater, the CIA, and aligned militaries, to treat these people as less than human once they were captured. They would deny them the privileges of either the POW or noncombatant status.
The Bush administration lawyers tried to do legal somersaults to define the captured as "illegal combatants," to claim that Guantanamo Bay's Camp X-Ray, where detainees were kept, was not the equivalent of US soil (perhaps a surprise to the Cubans) and therefore out of reach of federal courts. It was legal to claim "extraordinary rendition" of the captured to countries like Syria, where it was known they would be tortured. (By 2013, Bashir Al Assad, the dictator of Syria, faced an armed insurgency supported by the West. Like Moammar Qaddafi a year before him, he must have wondered, "Where's the loyalty?") Further, Bush and Obama lawyers claimed that it is acceptable for the US government, based on presidential order alone, to run a series of "black site" secret prisons in Iraq, Afghanistan, central Europe, the island of Diego Garcia, and many other locations.
By choosing to fall between two stools (the inter-state-war and law-enforcement perspectives), the Bush administration bequeathed the worst of both to the world. It, followed by Obama, chose a course of action that conveniently made it possible to render moot the rules that had been achieved in the twentieth century. In the netherworld of the global war on terrorism, why not invade countries like Afghanistan, Iraq, Pakistan, Yemen, and Libya at will? (North Korea and Iran, the other two members of Bush's "axis of evil" in addition to Iraq, would be spared only because things went so badly from 2001-2004.) Also, why not target urban infrastructure like water systems, medical facilities, and electrical grids? Or why not kill civilians on a large scale or use extraordinary rendition to send captives to Syria, Libya, and other authoritarian states to be tortured? Why not legitimize water-boarding as an acceptable form of "aggressive interrogation technique," or allow and encourage unspeakable acts at the Abu Graib prison in Iraq? Once they located bin Laden in 2011, instead of arresting and trying him, they killed him and dumped his body at sea, denying his family the right to bury their wayward son consistent with their religious traditions. With no due process and no coroner's death certificate, the Obama administration then wondered why people asked whether they had really gotten their man. The country did not exactly attract the global trust and sympathy as in the months after 9/11.
The United States elevated a relatively unimportant individual and movement to global prominence. After the disputed election of November 2000, the attacks on 9/11 saved the presidency of George W. Bush from ineffectiveness and irrelevance. The US reaction to the attacks must have been exactly what bin Laden was hoping for. By starting the war on terrorism, primarily against bin Laden, the United States was essentially conferring on him de facto statehood that he and his movement did not warrant. If we are to take their efforts at face value, the Bush administration made one of the greatest mistakes a superpower can make: it elevated a much weaker adversary to equivalence. The greatest help to the radical is the notoriety, and some might say legitimacy, that the superpower's attention confers. The United States and its allies were unfettered by either the IHL of the rules of war or international human rights associated with the law-enforcement perspective. They angered large numbers of citizens in the countries that they bombed and invaded. For the families of the hundreds of thousands of Moslems that they killed in the last dozen years, many of them civilians, what could be more logical than joining the local franchise of al Qaeda? Intellectual error has become fulfilled prediction. Widespread attacks in the Middle East were premised on perceived widespread enmity toward the United States. They in fact created the widespread enmity.
It is ironic that by July 2013 the US military and government were accepting this logic when they faced reporters who asked, "Who are these 'associated forces' that we are at war with, in addition to al Qaeda and the Taliban?" The answer, from Lt. Col. Jim Gregory, was that the list is classified "because elements that might be considered 'associated forces' can build credibility by being listed as such by the United States. . . . We cannot afford to inflate these organizations that rely on violent extremist ideology to strengthen their ranks." 
18
What are just and unjust wars? How has drone warfare changed the game? Bush's leap into a military solution after 9/11 set the stage for continuing conflicts in many countries. In this chapter we have shown that through most of its history the United States functioned along with other countries in a global system in which there was at least a rhetorical acceptance of the modern version of international law and ethics in warfare. Over the last number of decades, and especially since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1990 and then 9/11 in 2001, the United States has made both a rhetorical and practical commitment to unilateralism and a rewritten version of the conduct of states in the use of violence. In reacting to 9/11 the United States did not apply either the law-enforcement perspective or an inter-state-war perspective, but rather a mishmash of the two. The enemy was personalized and members of the US military and "private contractors" were allowed, even encouraged, to react with anger. The demonizing of the enemy has led to the use of harsh and hard-hearted measures, such as torture, terrorizing, and killing of civilians, and the attack on civilian infrastructure. In the past, only evil enemies would have pursued these methods. The rise of drone warfare is a continuation and extension of the willingness to employ assassination and these harsh techniques used in Afghanistan, Iraq, and now other countries.
The election of Barack Obama in 2009 created an expectation throughout the world for real political and economic transformation. Many expected change from the new bipartisan foreign-and military-policy consensus. But clearly, rather than policy transformation by the US government, there has been an entrenchment and continuation of established policy. This should not come as a surprise. There is no reason to believe that transformation was even the intention of the man himself or those powerful people around him. As G. William Domhoff has written, "President Obama's network of donors was similar to those of most of the successful national-level candidates in that it built on wealthy contributors from growth coalitions on up to the corporate community." 1 There is no better example of policy continuity and deepening than the subject matter of this book.
Candidate Obama criticized US detention practices in the George W. Bush era, but once in power his own approach was "kill, not capture," which allowed him to avoid the dilemma of what to do with the captured. He succeeded in a feat of Clinton-style "triangulation," developing a value-freepolicy position to minimize opposition and maximize support. Obama said he would get out of Iraq but beef up US efforts in Afghanistan, allowing him to reassure militarists that his would not be a pacifist presidency. The expansion of assassination, and what has turned out to be more random killing, was never mentioned during the campaign, nor was the need to open new fronts in a growing list including Pakistan, Libya, Somalia, and Yemen. Perhaps he was not counting on the fact that in 2008 the last of the blowback and fallout from US military and foreign policies in the Middle East was yet to be seen.
In 2016, the United States finds itself embroiled in a region-wide civil war, with fluid sides and fronts in Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, Syria, Pakistan, Libya, Saudi Arabia, and elsewhere. Given the war-weariness of the American people and a sense that these efforts are pointless and expensive in blood and treasure, it is unlikely that the principal US response will be ground troops. Enter the rise of drone warfare, the new form of warfare that would allegedly allow the precise targeting of key figures in the leadership of terrorist movements hostile to the United States and its Middle East friends, as well as suspicious but otherwise unknown people. This great increase in the use of drones, beyond anything the previous Bush administration could have imagined, has allegedly allowed for the degradation of al Qaeda, the Islamic State (Da'ish), and other adversaries, and at an acceptable political and economic cost.
This chapter will cover the rise of drone warfare in assassination, the Obama administration's legal rationale for this shift, the institution of the kill list in the hands of the president, and also the broad question of the constitutionality of this new form of warfare.
It is fair to say that one of the more surprising aspects of the Obama administration has been its embrace of assassination via weaponized drones. Drones were developed in the United States in the 1930s and 1940s, particularly for military target practice. They were used in a limited way during Vietnam, but their application exploded in the 1990s, pioneered by Israel in the Occupied Territories. Under the George W. Bush administration, they were initially used for reconnaissance, with only forty-five strikes over eight years. In the first year of the Obama administration there were fifty-one reported uses of drones in Pakistan alone, and another 118 there the next year. 
2
3
Internal rationales for the new US tactics were not exclusive to the Bush era but obviously have also been largely adopted by the Obama administration. In an April 2012 speech at the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington, DC, 4 John Brennan, assistant to the president for homeland security and counterterrorism, and later Director of the CIA, first admitted publicly that the United States does kill militants and terrorists using drone attacks and other means. As a long-time senior CIA official, Brennan served George Tenet in the era of "extraordinary rendition," waterboarding, secret prisons, manipulated intelligence, and illegal, warrantless wiretapping. Deemed too controversial to be the choice for CIA director in Obama's first term, Brennan was hired into the White House instead. Brennan's perspective is a rosy one, in which these actions are justified by congressional resolution and are consistent with US law, Constitution, and the right of self-defense. His read-ing of the Constitution is very much like that of the Bush administration-it has provided a president-centered politics in which the president commands the military and can, without restraint, use the military and intelligence assets as the president sees fit. In his account, with rare exceptions, only militants and terrorists are killed. The United States only intervenes with the host government's permission, or when that government cannot or will not apprehend or neutralize the subject. According to Brennan, US adversaries are becoming weaker all the time, and the drone attacks meet the traditional tests of necessity, proportionality, and humanity.
The hardest case to make is that not only is the Obama drone war legal and appropriate, but that it is also legal and appropriate for the Obama administration to kill US citizens at home or abroad. This comes from a law professor at the University of St. Thomas School of Law, Michael Stokes Paulsen. In a stark but fascinating argument, based on a presentation before the conservative Federalist Society, Professor Paulsen takes the most assertive position in justification for Obama administration policies. Lest he be thought a shill for the administration, he stated in 2013 that the United States has, "an exceedingly poor Commander in Chief serving in the office of the President . . . , arguably the weakest such commander in more than 100 years." 
5
6
The key document about the Obama administration's specific justification for both its assassination program and the inclusion of a US citizen in that program was authored by David J. Barron, acting assistant attorney general, and released to the public by federal court order in April 2014. 
7
Barron claims that the United States is in a "non-international armed conflict" with al Qaeda, albeit one that does spill across borders. In contrast to an "international conflict" (or more accurately an "inter-state conflict"), it is less restrained by international law because its normal form is a civil war within one or two countries. (The conflict in Vietnam was treated by the Vietnamese, if not by the United States, as a non-international conflict.) Perhaps for this reason Barron also seems untroubled by the fact that the CIA carries out drone strikes, or, as we now know, issues strike orders to the "contractor," the US military. In the law of war, combatants must be in military uniform, must carry their weapons openly and be under responsible command. It is a war crime for CIA officers to engage in inter-state war, though perhaps in the view of the Obama administration those rules don't apply, since this is a non-international armed conflict. Such a fine distinction will not impress those at or near sites where drone attacks are raining down. The reasoning is redacted, but Barron also dismisses concerns about the denial of US Constitutional rights to a US citizen, though at least he recognizes that these rights do apply outside the country. This provides yet another example of the muddle resulting from hybrid theory, that combines both the international-war and law-enforcement perspectives.
Administration critics such as Marjorie Cohn and Jeanne Mirer have noted that the fact that President Obama approves names for the kill list does not make it right or legal. Most victims of drone strikes are not US citizens, and most are not clearly militants, though, as Cohn and Mirer say, the Obama administration claims that it kills few civilians. This is primarily through redefinition because, under their doctrine of "signature strikes," they define military-age men killed in drone strikes as suspected combatants or militants. These signature strikes, unlike personality strikes, target groups exhibiting "suspicious patterns of behavior" rather than known individuals who are supposedly leaders or responsible militants. 
8
10
President Obama makes decisions on who goes on the list, but it is not clear whether this applies to even a majority of those who could be killed by the United States. The CIA directs the largest drone strike program-in Pakistan-and it is said that the President approves only one-third, at most, of attacks there. The level of casualties, those targeted as well as civilians, is unknown to the public. The Obama administration has consistently opposed disclosure of data on the number of targets and civilians killed, with considerable congressional support for its position. 
11
12
As an illustration of the kill-rather-than-capture incentive, consider the case of Bilal el-Berjawi, dubbed "objective Peckham," a British citizen who traveled back and forth from the United Kingdom and the Middle East. He was stripped of his citizenship and then killed in Somalia in a drone strike instead of being arrested in the United Kingdom. 
13
14
15
Those who wanted to see a shift in US policy from CIA control of drones to Pentagon control got their way in July 2016 when the Obama administration issued a new executive order to move most drone activity to Defense. As the Washington Post's Greg Miller wrote, there are a whole variety of background reasons for the policy shift. CIA drone strikes had declined in Pakistan in 2016. The Yemeni government that banned operations by Joint Special Operations Command collapsed, opening the door again to conventional military operations. The United States was also ready to turn Syria over to the Pentagon. Drone operations became so well known, whether directed by the CIA or DoD, that the CIA lost its secrecy advantage. 
16
17
The US courts, including the Supreme Court, have a history of being deferential to the executive branch in foreign-and military-policy matters. However, given the rise of new and unconventional warfare over the last fifteen years, the courts have taken greater interest in this realm. Some of the decisions that have come down from the US Supreme Court have potential to set a precedent that may eventually be used to restrict what the president can do when it comes to assassination, particularly via drones. The most suggestive decision since the beginning of the global war on terrorism is Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, which the Supreme Court issued in 2004. 
18
It came out that the designation of the plaintiff was based on the hearsay evidence of Michael Mobbs, identified as special advisor to the undersecretary of Defense for policy. Writing for the Court majority, Justice Sandra O'Connor concluded that: "We hold that although Congress authorized the detention of combatants in the narrow circumstances alleged here, due process demands that a citizen held in the United States as an enemy combatant be given a meaningful opportunity to contest the factual basis for that detention before a neutral decision maker."
How the Court came to this conclusion, as well as the concurrence from Justice David Souter, are both interesting but also suggestive of the means through which the Court might strike down the legitimacy of, or at least limit, drone warfare. The Court majority accepted that the AUMF of September 2011 was a legal declaration of war, and taking surrendered combatants as prisoners by the US military was acceptable during operations in Afghanistan. Interestingly, the Court majority affirms that the purpose of taking prisoners is "neither revenge, nor punishment," but rather it prevents a combatant from rejoining the fight. However, the Court recognizes the legitimacy of Hamdi's concern that this war may be indefinite, and therefore imprisonment may be too harsh. His concern is "not far-fetched" since even the US government concedes that "given its unconventional nature, the current conflict is unlikely to end with a formal cease-fire agreement." The Court also notes that the writ of habeas corpus has not been currently suspended, that citizens have the right to access the writ in the United States, where Hamdi now lives. The Court is aware that this case may create a "perverse incentive," in that in the future the US military may not bring the captured back to the United States, though the Court does not indicate any concern that "kill" may be substituted for "capture," as has in fact happened.
What comes next is perhaps most important from the perspective of the application of this case to drone warfare. The Court majority notes that the US government's position is that the judiciary should not interfere in the executive branch's prosecution of the global war on terrorism. However, if there is to be a judicial role, the executive branch argues that the courts should review the enemy combatant's status using only a minimal "someevidence" standard. Instead of weighing the balance of evidence in favor and against, as we would normally see in a judicial process, the some-evidence standard means that "a court would assume the accuracy of the Government's articulated basis for Hamdi's detention, as set forth in the Mobbs Declaration, and assess only whether the articulated basis was a legitimate one." The Court majority ultimately rejects as inadequate the government's position, saying that the detainee "must receive notice of the factual basis for his classification, and a fair opportunity to rebut the Government's factual assertions before a neutral decision maker."
The descriptions of the process for the Obama administration's drone program and kill list show that it only meets the some-evidence standard, rather than a more robust standard such as in Hamdi. The military and intelligence agencies build files and propose names of individuals to be killed by drone strike or other means, and the targeted person is not given an opportunity to "rebut the Government's factual assertions before a neutral decision maker." There is no advocate for the accused, not even one uninstructed by the accused. Even if the counter case is addressed in the kill-list process, there is no reason to think that those deliberating, including the president, would do anything beyond taking the military information at face value. And yet this process has been explicitly rejected by the Court, at least when it comes to an American citizen in custody in the United States. Of course, some will argue that the Court decision applies only to them. But is it so much of a stretch that these ideas would be applied to drone attacks overseas? Given the unconventional nature of the war, given weaknesses or human and surveillance intelligence, why shouldn't the Court eventually insist on a higher standard for executive branch assassination, especially if the war becomes permanent?
It is also worth mentioning that members of the Court, such as Justices Thomas, Scalia, and Stevens took a more conservative position than the majority, and dissented. Others such as Souter and Ginsburg concurred in the essentials but took a more liberal position. Justice Souter, writing for himself and Ginsburg, makes three points that could also pave the way for a rethinking of drone attacks and the kill list, should their views become more widely accepted on the Court. First, they don't accept that the AUMF actually authorizes the United States to take prisoners. They argue that such authorization needs to be more specific and explicit. One might say that this view could lead the same Justices to challenge whether the broad reading of the AUMF is correct, to the effect that it only authorizes US war in Afghanistan and not forever. Such a finding would present a challenge to the very heart of the expansion of the global war on terrorism.
Second, Souter points out that the government concedes that "the Geneva Convention applies to the Taliban detainees" and that, therefore, Hamdi "would seem to quality for treatment as a prisoner of war under the Third Geneva Convention." This means that the US government has violated the Convention in a number of ways, including holding Hamdi incommunicado for a long period. The Convention and the US Army regulation also have a robust process for a POW to challenge his status. Third, Souter points out that even the USA Patriot Act authorizes "the detention of alien terrorists for no more than seven days in the absence of criminal charges or deportation proceedings." He goes on to write: "It is very difficult to believe that the same Congress that carefully circumscribed Executive power over alien terrorists on home soil would not have meant to require the Government to justify clearly its detention of an American citizen held on home soil incommunicado." The current US drone program and kill list can only continue if there is acceptance that the country is at war on a global basis despite the lack of formal declarations. What if the Court decided that the United States couldn't expand its efforts in Yemen and other countries? In the current political climate would Congress dare to declare war on new fronts? A more aggressive Court could also deliver a blow to the new rules about indefinite detention that the United States is trying to put into place.
Few advocates of airborne assassination address the almost inevitable collateral damage, or the tendency of murder of the innocent to alienate and radicalize entire societies. Richard Belfield notes that assassination is very disruptive of domestic political systems, and one assassination either has followed others or leads to others. 
19
Writing before the large-scale effort to practice and legitimize assassination, Robert L. Holmes made the following comment: "Moral considerations aside, if one's quarrel is with the leadership of a country, and one believes in the use of violence, the more rational course [than conventional war] would be to engage in selective assassinations." 
20
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld said that US forces would be welcomed as liberators in Iraq, though it is not clear whether he actually believed it. He and his successors actually think their dispute is only with leaders, so "take out" the leader (whether Saddam Hussein, bin Laden or Qaddafi) and problem solved. This is based in part on the power-politics tradition that says that foreign and defense policy is made exclusively by leaders. They lead according to their desire to preserve and increase their country's (and their own) power and treasure; the average citizen or subject has little to do with it. This theory never really came to terms with the change wrought by Napoleon Bonaparte and the Enlightenment era, in which people's willingness to support the state and to fight in war, or struggles for national liberation, is crucial. The reality is that to attack the country and kill the leader, who is often not as domestically unpopular as the "monster" created in the Western media for Western consumption, will increase the number of your opponents tenfold.
Trevor McCrisken cites Ikram Sehgal, of Pathfinder G4S, "Pakistan's largest private security firm," who estimates that seven to fifteen thousand "extremist students" attend pro-Taliban religious schools in any given year, and are among the sea of recruits for anti-Western militancy. 
21
It would appear that there are as many or more experts with government experience who are concerned about the negative effects of drone warfare than there are those who accept the Bush-Obama line.  
22
23
24
Even though such ideas were never meant for widespread public consumption, their advocates are now more open. As Parenti has written, "much of the historical literature on empire is rather favourable." 
25
Under the Bush and Obama administrations, US tactics such as torture, summary execution, and assassination may be the subject of significant internal debate, but the history of empire shows that these are the tactics that a state must pursue in order to maintain its influence. A fascinating illustration of this was published in France in 2001, with an English translation in 2002. Retired French general Paul Aussaresses describes unapologetically and in great detail his pursuit of these tactics-torture, summary execution, and assassination-in Algeria from 1955-1957, particularly in Philippeville and Algiers. 
26
27
Former US president Richard Nixon once said, "Well, when the president does it, that means it is not illegal." The arrogance and assumption behind that thinking might well be applied to the George W. Bush and Obama administrations as use of drone attacks and numbers of assassinations increase. They believe what they are doing is not only legal, but just. This chapter's argument, however, is that rather than performing actions that lead to peace in the world, US governments have managed to antagonize much of the Middle East and North Africa. The constitutionality of these actions is questionable, especially the infamous kill list. Together with the administration's drone program, it shows that it only meets the some-evidence standard rather than a more robust standard such as in the Supreme Court case of Hamdi v. Rumsfeld. It is vital to democracy to examine what a government feels it must do to maintain power and control inside and outside its own borders. While the administration may believe it has support for the drone program, there is some opposition, or at least questioning, even within the government and the CIA.
To truly understand the new way of war and the normalization of permanent war, one needs to look seriously at the US military industry. This necessitates recounting scandals about the provision of military materiel as far back as the US Civil War and World War I. But it is also inevitably a discussion about the rise and dominance of the military-industrial complex (MIC) in US society. This involves the collective interests of thousands of military suppliers, as well as states and congressional districts with military bases and manufacturing plants. Part of the sordid tale are elected politicians who stand to gain from reelection when they make decisions based only on their perception of their own state's economic interest, not to mention postretirement return of favors from military contractors. All this isn't new. Although the term MIC was not coined until the late 1950s, the concept was evident in American politics long before that.
As this chapter will show, sometimes this issue is also about a single major player, such as Lockheed Martin, which can easily stand in for all the vices of a sector. From this perspective, the rise of drone warfare is just a new frontier for the MIC. These multinational corporations and subsidiaries will have an interest in the cultivation of global markets for any military product, even if that runs against the interest of the United States and its NATO allies. The MIC also has privileged access to public resources and since 9/11 can spend in ways that are unknown in the rest of the public sector. Connections between industry, government, and the military are tight, and in many cases they are questionable. While government representatives are focused on keeping their home states happy, who is looking at the bigger picture, ensuring that decisions are made in a just and equitable way? In the early 1980s there was a quip to the effect that the "United States has a Military-Industrial Complex but the Soviet Union is one." It now looks like the United States is one as well.
The classic view of the US government is that Congress, assumed to be a good reflection of the opinions of American voters, creates a budget and makes policies and laws that the presidency then executes. If the voters are unhappy with the performance of the legislative or executive branches, then they can vote for different candidates who promise and execute change. This may never have been an accurate rendering of the political process, and it is now a quaint vision that doesn't remotely capture how government works and how change does and (mostly) does not happen. An alternative idea is that the United States has a "permanent government," with external social and internal bureaucratic forces that exercise significant influence regardless of the competition between Democrats and Republicans. Acceptance of this idea goes well beyond those who wear tinfoil hats-believers in conspiracy theories. One such form of this permanent government is the MIC. James Ledbetter describes it as "a network of public and private forces that combine a profit motive with the planning and implementation of strategic policy." 
1
Now this conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American experience. The total influence-economic, political, even spiritual-is felt in every city, every statehouse, every office of the federal government. We recognize the imperative need for this development. Yet we must not fail to comprehend its grave implications. Our toil, resources, and livelihood are all involved. So is the very structure of our society.
In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist. We must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes.
While the idea behind the MIC was not new in 1961-Ledbetter points out that the radical sociologist C. Wright Mills published the basic idea a few years earlier in his now-classic book The Power Elite 2 -this was the first time the general public heard the terminology. Eisenhower was no radical, but he was something of an American traditionalist. He knew the reality of the military and of war, as a career military man and Supreme Allied Commander in Europe in World War II. He did not take war lightly, unlike some of his successors. Part of Eisenhower's traditionalism took the form of a belief in limited, republican, competent government. Most importantly he would not pander to what he regarded as uninformed public opinion or the opportunism of the unscrupulous. Part of these traditional values included the idea that elected people, rather than civil servants and military officers, would actually make key decisions and be accountable for them. As Ledbetter reminds us, Eisenhower spent much of his eight years in office resisting calls from Democrats and more conservative Republicans for more military interventions and increased spending on effective-and ineffective-weapons systems. He had no patience for interservice rivalries in the military or other such inefficiencies.
For example, the United States might have introduced combat troops into Vietnam in 1956 had Eisenhower not given a firm "no" when some of his advisors urged it. 
3
4
5
During World War I, Rep. C. H. Tavenner called for nationalization of the armaments industry to take away the private, for-profit, pro-war pressures. In the 1930s, North Dakota senator Gerald Nye launched an investigation, known as the Munitions Inquiry, which followed up on arms dealings and also flirted with the idea that the United States should be officially and legally neutral in other countries' conflicts. Nye's initiatives stepped on the toes of the growing arms industry, and many in the Roosevelt administration, but he was ultimately discredited by introducing documents challenging the idea of former president Woodrow Wilson as the idealist who was unaware of and opposed to European power politics during the war. 
6
8
9
Despite US government neutrality in the late 1930s, producers like Lockheed sold weapons to all sides. This included the Electra, the civilian transport plane that was easily converted to military purposes and was the basis for the Hudson bomber during World War II. In September 1939, Congress made it illegal for US citizens to provide war materiel to the belligerents in Europe. Lockheed's response was to fly Hudson bombers to an airfield straddling the Canadian border and then push the planes across to be transported to the United Kingdom. Canada was at war with Germany at the time but was not an active combatant until months later. 
11
12
13
14
15
16
Another example of conflict of interest, incompetence, and lack of accountability is found in the Cheyenne program. In 1967, the US government was looking for a replacement for the Cobra helicopter, and Lockheed had an idea-build an aircraft that takes off like a helicopter but flies like a fixedwing aircraft. The company received developmental funds for two years, even though it had never built a helicopter, let alone a complicated design that was to perform more like a British-style "jump jet" than a Cobra or a Hughie. In that time Cheyenne experienced a cost-estimate increase from $1 million to $3 million, as well as a series of design and performance deficiencies. In March 1969 a prototype crashed, killing the pilot. One month later the US Army laid down an ultimatum that the problems must be fixed or the project would be cancelled.
Despite sinking $500 million into the project, only ten prototypes were produced, instead of the planned run of 375 aircraft. It turned out that one of the chief advocates of the Cheyenne, Willis Hawkins, was a former Lockheed executive hired by the Army in the mid-1960s. According to Hartung, Hawkins sold his Lockheed stock when he entered government service, though he still received deferred compensation. Hawkins and his assistant, Gen. William W. Dick, Jr., were then hired by Lockheed as the Cheyenne program collapsed. This was only the tip of the iceberg; Senator Proxmire issued a report stating that in 1969, two thousand former civilian and military federal employees went to work for major defense contractors, including 210 for Lockheed. 
17
18
19
20
It is sad to say that private contractors and their governmental overseers are not above faking test results. This was the case for Lockheed's Homing Overlay Experiment, which was central to Ronald Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), popularly called Star Wars. In what could be termed "operation stocked pond," a General Accounting Office report in the 1990s confirmed that a 1984 successful test was, in fact, faked. The target warhead was easier to hit than if it were in a combat situation because it sent out a signal to help the interceptor find its target, it was heated up for the heatsensing equipment, and it was turned sideways to provide a bigger target. Hartung reports that the Pentagon considered but then abandoned the idea of explosives in the missile so that it could be detonated whether or not it was hit. All these plans were characterized as in the "national interest" because they were designed to intimidate the Soviet Union. They were very much in Lockheed's interest as well, since it meant the money would keep flowing. 
21
22
The end of the Cold War and the expansion of NATO have been a boom for companies like Lockheed Martin because new members have an incentive to replace their domestic or Soviet-era hardware with NATO-compatible, and especially US-compatible, weapons and equipment. Hartung reports that US arms exports increased from $11 billion in 2000 to $46 billion in 2011, some of it from sales to the Middle East, including Saudi Arabia and Iraq. While Lockheed Martin is not on the ground floor of the development of new drone technology, it is making sure it can take advantage of the increasing market for the aircraft. The company produces the Hellfire missile, which is now a standard part of drone weapons packages. It also makes the RQ-170 surveillance drone, the Desert Hawk III mid-drone, and the Stalker. Add to this an unmanned truck, the "ox," and being in the running to build a next-generation unmanned bomber. 
23
24
Even when the DoD and executive branch wants to cancel a system, Congress, so permeated by MIC interests, sometimes reverses the decisions. In 2012, for example, Defense decided to cancel the RQ-4 Global Hawk program, only to have it revived by Congress a year later after a robust lobbying campaign by drone maker Northrop Grumman. According to research by the Center for Responsive Politics, that year Grumman spent $17.5 million in lobbying, up from $11 million in 2011. And the company spent another $14 million in the first three-quarters of 2013. 
25
26
27
The rise of Drone Nation can be associated with the products of General Atomics, such as the Predator. Not only are US firms actively cultivating global markets, but drone design and production have become truly global as well. As Christopher Harress has written, besides General Atomics there are at least eleven other global players poised to enter the market with drone products to transform the global military in ways that only science fiction authors once imagined. This list includes American companies Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, AeroVironment Inc., SAIC, Textron, and General Dynamics; Prox Dynamics AS from Norway; Denel Dynamics from South Africa; China's DJI; and last, but not least, Israel Aerospace Industries-one of the early pioneers of drone technology. 
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
Ellen Brown, a well-known advocate for public banking and economic reform, sums it up well: "The MIC currently drags down the real economy in a variety of ways. The MIC and MIC-related activities account for over a trillion dollars of federal spending each year, and the military provides the closest thing the US has to an industrial policy and a jobs program. The political dynamics of the US are such that increased military spending is the only form of spending that 'gets a pass from the deficit hawks.'" The military provides much-needed funding to university researchers and diverts the best minds away from civilian innovation. She notes that production for the military has "built-in obsolescence," because war materiel is either blown up or has a limited shelf life. There has been a long-standing recognition that domestic spending on education, health care, transportation, green energy, and industrial investment provides a greater economic impact in the short term. In the longer term it generates economic growth through a better educated, healthier population with access to more efficient transportation, more sustainable energy, and a more productive and up-to-date economy. Because of the hold of the MIC, the country's major industrial export is military hardware. The US taxpayer is the first customer. 
35
This chapter has illustrated the power of the MIC as it neatly combines profit for corporate America with decision making by the US government. Despite early calls for nationalization of the armaments industry, it was allowed to grow, creating wealth for companies and opportunities for politicians. Industry lobbying has resulted in questionable decisions about planes, armaments, and other military materiel. The history of the MIC can actually be traced through the history of what became Lockheed Martin. The company's story is the story of the MIC-sale of arms to combatants, government bailouts to avoid bankruptcy, weapon systems' underperformance, cost scandals, and government promotion of the arms industry. While the company does not create new drone technology, it is taking advantage of the increasing market for drone aircraft. Competition in the global drone market is fierce. The industry will double before the next decade ends, and its influence will continue to be felt. Conflicts of interest, contradictions over what is really in the interests of the citizenry, and who deserves to profit, are all compelling issues to be considered.
As the Vietnam War dragged on with increasing numbers of young American men coming home in caskets, public support in the United States greatly declined. Years later the term "Vietnam syndrome" was coined as a description of America's aversion to involvement in any international war. Today Drone Nation can be seen as a response to that syndrome because the revolution in satellite communication, computerization, and the remote control of aircraft flight makes a "shadow war" possible. US forces can strike at adversaries without much domestic public awareness. 
1
2
3
Drone warfare has changed how the US military operates. Most importantly, the role of the pilot has greatly evolved. The image of the fit, skilled, uniformed fighter pilot has essentially gone out the window to be replaced by a pilot that is somewhat detached from the task. Ground crews have a greater role and decisions are made remotely. It's worth considering the differences between drone pilots and traditional cockpit pilots. And with these role changes come new problems of stress and culpability.
Most of what follows is about the drone experience in the USAF. Although the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) is deeply involved in the drone business, it has not been as transparent in how its system works.
Drones in the US military and the CIA have gone from a small number of aircraft doing surveillance, to larger, more rugged aircraft carrying heavier weapons, allowing them to play an offensive role. Increasingly sophisticated drone aircraft has appeared over the last fifteen years, with promises of innovation to come. The USAF has made major commitments to three vehicles: the MQ-1B Predator, the MQ-9 Reaper, and the RQ-4 Global Hawk. Each has its purpose and each is equally menacing.
The Predator is referred to as a Medium-Altitude, Long-Endurance (MALE) aircraft, powered by a 115 horsepower gas engine with a top speed of 135 mph. It can fly as high as 25,000 feet, weighs only 1,130 pounds but can carry 450 pounds of payload. It can stay in the air forty hours, has a range of 454 miles, and, when armed, carries two laser-guided AGM-1154 Hellfire missiles. Also a MALE, the Reaper is bigger, heavier, faster, and with a longer range. It can spend fourteen hours in the air when fully armed. It carries eight times the payload of the Predator with a combination of Hellfire missiles, GBU-12 Paveway IIs, and GBU-38 Joint Direct Attack Munitions (JDAM).
The Paveway II is a laser-guided, 500-pound bomb, and the JDAM is an "add-on" guidance system that uses Global Positioning System (GPS) technology for the missile. The Predator and the Reaper are built by General Atomics Aeronautical Systems Inc., of California. Finally, the RQ-4 Global Hawk is an unarmed, high-altitude long-endurance aircraft used for surveillance. It is larger and faster, and can stay in the air longer than the Predator and Reaper. It is built primarily by Northrup Grumman, with contributions by Raytheon and L3 Comm. 
4
Drone warfare is designed to provide a greater number of flight hours per shift of ground crew, pilots, and commanders, and to increase command oversight and control over the conduct of the aircraft. Instead of the highly trained and physically fit fighter pilot, the drone pilot can work at great distance from the operational base. Because of computer guidance, the drone pilot needs far less skill, particularly at the relatively low speeds.
The pilot maneuvers the aircraft in mid-flight but ground crews direct the takeoffs and landings. The drone pilot sits in a leather chair in an air-condi-tioned trailer with a thrown-together and temporary feel. This could be at one of several locations: Creech Air Force Base, Nevada; Holloman AFB, New Mexico; Ramstein, Germany; 5 or even Saudi Arabia or Turkey. Along with a sensor operator, the pilot monitors video feeds and other data, and communicates with ground forces and intelligence analysts and senior officers at the stateside base or other location. The sensor operator is lower in rank than the pilot (usually enlisted), is at a work station identical to the pilot's, and even has a set of flying controls. The operators on average have more experience than drone pilots, including handling challenging flying situations. The pilots are either newer recruits, or are rated "cockpit pilots" (actual fliers) doing a rotation in a drone squadron. 
6
Some of the pilot skills in takeoff and landings are now done at the forward base or by computer. Analysis of video and data and decisions on the use of force can now be made remotely as well. The drone pilot has been deskilled by the standards of twentieth-century flying. The idea that the drone pilot is a "joystick warrior," and that video game players are the pilots of the future, is an indication of how little a drone pilot will need to know to do this job. Drones are not really "unmanned" for, as Caroline Holmqvist says, they are as much a part of the human-material military system as any other relationship between people and the weapons that they direct. 
7
8
The application of Taylorism to piloting means dislodging the pilot as generalist and as a member of a modern version of a medieval guild. The drone pilot won't need to be in great physical condition and have strong hand-eye coordination, or understand airframes and maneuvering, takeoff and landing protocols, weaponry, the laws of war, or even the rules of engagement. Many of these attributes will be designed into computer software or allocated to senior officers "in the loop." Peter Asaro notes that internal USAF studies have identified roughly eleven distinctive tasks for each drone pilot and sensor operator. As we would expect, the studies seek to "identify inefficiencies in the labor production of drone operators and potentially to reconfigure their work practices to reduce or eliminate these inefficiencies."
The military is on the record as embracing the "quality of working life" approach to human resources, so naturally is also concerned about stress in the workplace. 
9
Based on Old Soldier's experience in Vietnam, the "inefficiency" of the USAF is not a new phenomenon. He recalls that in 1966 the US Army was ordered to give up its "troop carrier" fixed-wing aircraft to the USAF. The rest of his comments are worth reproducing in full 10 :
The untold story here was when the Army was flying the C-7s, each Army Aviation Company of 24 Caribous was commanded by a Major with a captain leading each platoon of 8 aircraft and a few lieutenants but mostly warrant officers piloting the planes. When the Air Force took over, each Major was replaced by a Lieutenant Colonel Squadron Commander and each Captain platoon leader was replaced by an Air Force Major Flight Leader. The Warrant Officer pilots were all replaced by AF [Air Force] commissioned officers although several Army Warrants accepted AF Direct Commissions to keep flying them. Bottom line was, it cost the AF at least 25% more in salaries to fly the same planes doing the same missions as the Army was flying! So the USAF not only faces rationalization pressures from the wider society, but also from other military services.
The central unit in drone warfare is referred to as the Combat Air Patrol, (CAP) and provides for the great expansion of time in the air. An official publication notes that the USAF currently has sixty-one drone CAPs with a plan to increase this number to 165. 
11
It is worth saying, too, that the current capabilities of drone warfare, embodied in the Predator, the Reaper, and the Global Hawk, are only the beginning. Without doubt, there are powerful forces behind the idea that most, if not all, of the USAF's aircraft can and should be remotely piloted, or semi-autonomous and eventually fully autonomous. Northrop Grumman is testing a drone fighter for the navy called the X-47B. According to the company, it can land perfectly every time on the pitching deck of an aircraft carrier, and its payload can be fitted for surveillance equipment, tanks for mid air refueling of other aircraft, or bombs or missiles. It has computer technology that surpasses the Automatic Carrier Landing System that live pilots can and do use. Research and development are also in process to enable drones to taxi on the carrier deck and to follow the standard arm signals of the "yellow shirt" deck crew.
And there is more. BAE Systems in the United Kingdom is developing the Taranis, a drone stealth aircraft that is invisible to radar and has intercontinental range. Boeing's Phantom Works is developing an attack fighter called the Phantom Ray. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is funding research into a new ground-support drone aircraft to replace the A-10 Warthog, the "flying gun." Future mission scenarios include sending drones on high-risk missions that are too risky for live pilots, or for drones to act as wingmen to a live pilot flying in formation. 
12
One of the current conundrums of the USAF is the relationship of rated pilots-qualified to fly fighters, bombers, or transports-and drone pilots who are qualified only to fly drones. In the 2000s the USAF transferred rated pilots to drone duty with a "temporary duty" designation for up to three years. Those with flying experience were considered best qualified to fly drones. Few pilots, however, want to make a permanent shift to drones because it is boring and may also be career suicide-promotion to command level seems to favor cockpit pilots. They are likely to regard flying drones as a step down, which is aggravated as the USAF increases the percentage of drone pilots who are unqualified in the cockpit. On the other hand, stories of senior officers flying drones may mean that they can finish their twenty or thirty years until pension time without riding a desk. While it is difficult to find any open admission of this, if cockpit pilots are most likely to rise to command, then it makes sense for advocates of drone warfare to get these same pilots time in the overstuffed chair. This would be a way of familiarizing and socializing cockpit pilots in drone warfare, so that as they rise up the chain of command, they will bring that familiarity with them. Using cockpit pilots as drone pilots may raise the status of flying drone aircraft.
Despite the interest in expanding drone activities, and the attractiveness of an officer's pay envelope in a stagnant economy, there continues to be a shortage of pilots. In 2010, the USAF created a new employment classification known as 18X, which is a pilot qualified to fly drones exclusively. The cost of training and time is only a fraction for that of cockpit pilots. 
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Lambér Royakkers and Rinie van Est argue that the technology of the drone program encourages moral disengagement by the operators. They can't really be held morally responsible for what they do, 
22
23
24
25
26
This question of whether drone pilots are really warriors is also at the heart of the controversy over the Obama administration proposal to strike a new medal in recognition of their achievements. In 2012 William Pastore commented that a new special medal for drone warfare was unnecessary because the military has a "bewildering array" of medals that it can give out; action in warfare can't really be "distinguished" when there is no risk to one's own person and no pressure from the enemy. 
27
28
The response to this announcement was largely negative. Groups such as the Veterans of Foreign Wars argued that no medal for performance in "the rear" should be ranked higher than medals awarded to those in harm's way, such as the Purple Heart and the Bronze Star. 
29
30
31
32
33
This can also be complicated because of a diversity of voices providing direction for drone pilots and sensor operators, voices that can operate with different military rules of engagement. It has been known for a long time that some US drones are under the direction of the Pentagon while others are under the direction of the CIA with its "theater of operations" likely to be mainly Pakistan. It has also been assumed that CIA drones are piloted by CIA officials under different rules compared to the military. However, it has become increasingly clear that military units, such as the 732nd Operations Group at Creech AFB, Nevada, have been contracted to fly drones under CIA orders. 
34
The robot for search-and-rescue drones may be designed to look human. This can provide comfort to the victim and also allow others to attach credit or blame depending on how things go. Research on offensive military drones is moving toward two-way voice communication in order to anthropomorphize the drone so that the human operator can deflect some of the responsibility onto the software. 
35
It appears that the rise of drone warfare provides an opportunity for the "brass" in the US military to break the power of cockpit pilots. They have found a new form of labor that is easier to monitor and control, and that will not have the autonomy that pilots have enjoyed since the beginning of human flight early in the twentieth century. The military is seemingly a great employer in terms of compensation and benefits, even in a stagnant economy. Yet this chapter also raises the possibility that in an environment of permanent and unpopular war, the military can't meet its recruiting or retention targets for what are literally "cushy positions." This does not bode well for the future of the US military given the emphasis on drone warfare. And if the US military advances plans to expand the use of drones and to cut compensation for drone pilots, its current challenges may worsen considerably. Beyond recruiting and retraining, the military also needs to deal with mental health issues because of everything from moral disengagement, culpability, and diluted responsibility from serving two masters-the military and the CIA.
Star Simpson, Dustin Boyer, and Scott Torborg, of Silicon Valley in California, have a dream. It's well known that technology developed and perfected for military use often later finds applications in civilian life, whether it's contemporary plastics or the Internet. So if drone aircraft do such a great job in conflict zones throughout the world, then why not allow them to be used for civilian, commercial purposes within the United States, and eventually other countries? Drones are already being used by members of the US border patrol, by civilian police departments, and by firefighters. Whether at home or abroad, surely drones can do work that might be described as "dull, dangerous, or dirty." And their use is particularly attractive given that the purchase price and operating costs are only a fraction of that of full-size helicopters and airplanes. Domestic use of drones, however, does raise unavoidable questions of privacy and safety. Polls are showing citizens are concerned about domestic surveillance and how information gathered could be used against them. And drone technology is not considered completely safe in terms of possibilities of midair collisions, standards of training, and the aircraft's vulnerability to sabotage.
But not all domestic applications have the seriousness or weight of security protection, or other issues, which is where Simpson, Boyer, and Torborg come in. They have launched an Internet startup called TacoCopter.com, and their dream is to use small drone aircraft to deliver tacos to customers. In the words of Huffington Post contributor Jason Gilbert, this concept combines "the most prominent touchstones of modern America: tacos, helicopters, robots and laziness." 
1
The principals of TacoCopter.com better move quickly or else they will be left in the rotor wash of events. The first case of a domestic delivery by an unarmed drone has already been executed. Australian startup Flirtey, in collaboration with NASA and Virginia Tech, delivered ten pounds of medical supplies from a rural Virginia airfield to a medical clinic a mile away after a three-minute flight. Amazon, Google, and Facebook are working on commercial drone technologies either to service their core businesses (particularly in the case of Amazon), or to diversify their business. 
3
4
One of the concerns about the widespread use of drones in combat is that they will be acquired by every country, making everyone vulnerable to attacks because of the small size and perceived difficulty of intercepting them. But another worry is that there will be great pressure to allow drones, increasingly popular technology, to be used for domestic civilian purposes without much regard for the consequences. The first step was taken in Febru-ary 2012 when on a bipartisan basis Congress reauthorized the FAA, providing it with legislative priorities and direction in exchange for its annual budget. 
5
In section 332, within 270 days of its passage the Secretary of Transportation is directed to produce a "comprehensive plan" to "safely accelerate the integration of civil unmanned aircraft systems into the national airspace system." The contents of the prospective plan are defined, and within one year of passage the secretary must make public a five-year roadmap for the introduction of drone aircraft for civilian purposes. By mid-2014 the secretary is directed to publish rules-to take effect December 31, 2015-on the domestic integration of drones, considering experimental projects, and their use in parts of the Arctic under US sovereignty. Section 334 provides that starting in 2012 there be an expedited process to allow drone use by universities, and federal, state, and municipal governments and agencies. They must weigh up to twenty-five pounds and operate within the operator's line of sight, below four hundred feet off the ground, during daylight, and five miles outside aviation activities such as airports.
In 2012, twenty-five universities possessed certificates allowing drone use, largely for R and D, rather than on-campus snooping. While domestic drones are sold officially for surveillance purposes, some reports say that there are off-the-record discussions between police departments and Texasbased Vanguard Defense Industries, for example, about weaponizing drones, such as with grenade launchers and 12-gauge shotguns. 
6
From the vantage point of 2016, the FAA has made good on these legislative mandates. Commercial operators such as Amazon have been waging a fierce lobbying campaign, arguing that they will develop "sense-and-avoid" technology that will make restrictions unnecessary; so far there has been no change. 
7
8
Despite the balance of forces behind domestic drone use, resistance is now manifest, beginning with public opinion. In a 2012 national poll with a sample size of 1,700, respondents were asked whether they support or oppose the use of drones for various law-enforcement purposes. Results are telling: 27 percent claimed that they knew "a great deal" about unmanned surveillance aircraft used by the military, while 29 percent said they knew "some" and 44 percent said they knew little or nothing. On the use of drones in search and rescue, 80 percent said they were in support, while 67 percent said they supported using drones to track runaway criminals. A slightly smaller number, 64 percent, said they supported using drones to control illegal immigration, while only 23 percent said they supported using drones to issue speeding tickets.
Fully 64 percent of poll respondents were very or somewhat concerned about protection of their own privacy "if US law enforcement started using unmanned drones with high tech cameras." 
9
10
11
A 2015 report in Wired magazine noted that drones can simulate cell towers if they are positioned correctly and have access to cell-phone usage in particular areas. The author also said that if drones are to be used at the country's borders, then they should be restricted to within ten miles. They should also not be weaponized, the rules should be transparent, and there should be certainty that the benefits exceed the costs. 
12
13
14
Politicians on both sides of the aisle have also begun to express their dissent through legislative proposals. On June 12, 2012, Senator Rand Paul (R-KY) introduced the "Preserving Freedom from Unwarranted Surveillance Act of 2012" (S. 3287), with two cosponsors, Senators Coburn of Oklahoma and DeMint of South Carolina. Paul's one-page bill says that the federal government or those bodies it funds are not permitted to use drone aircraft to gather evidence in federal investigations unless a warrant is obtained in advance. 
15
On the Democratic side, then-representative Ed Markey of Massachusetts, cochair of the Congressional Privacy Caucus, released the "discussion draft" of a proposed law in late July 2012. It is a longer and much more ambitious effort to limit and regulate the domestic use of drones. The legislation requires that the Secretary of Transportation study the ways in which domestic drone use may compromise privacy; that FAA rules be written to protect personal privacy; that agencies licensed to use drones articulate how their drone use will avoid violating personal privacy; that the licensee establish policies to destroy data unrelated to the purpose for which the drone is licensed; that there be public disclosure by the FAA of licenses granted and for what purpose; and that licensees obtain a judicial warrant for general surveillance "without a particular target." It also grants the power to enforce the law to the Federal Trade Commission and provides a role for civil actions in the US District Courts. 
16
17
While these legislative initiatives have not made it into law, and at this point may not even come to a vote in either of the legislative chambers, they have provoked congressional hearings which in themselves are interesting and raise awareness. On July 18 and 19, 2012, the Subcommittee on Oversight, Investigations and Management of the House Committee on Homeland Security held hearings on the domestic use of drone aircraft. Many witnesses pointed to problems. The most general discussion, focusing on safety and other technical issues, was offered by Gerald Dillingham, the director of Physical Infrastructure Issues for the US government's General Accountability Office. He pointed out that under existing rules, the FAA had issued 201 certificates of authorization for domestic drone use to 106 public agencies at the federal, state, and municipal level in the previous six months alone. 
18
19
20
21
22
Third, Dillingham says that a problem of drone use is the question of "standards of performance and training." 
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
As law enforcement considers weaponizing domestic drones, it need only look to the innovations being pioneered by civilians. In the summer of 2015 a video went viral on the Internet, showing the work of an eighteen-year-old student in Clinton, Connecticut, who rigged a drone with a semiautomatic handgun and then fired it on remote command. The student's family also made public a video showing a flamethrower attached to a drone immolating a Thanksgiving turkey. Law enforcement said it might only be illegal if the firing happened within municipal boundaries. 
30
31
32
Todd Humphreys, a University of Texas at Austin engineering professor, testified in the Homeland Security Committee hearings discussed above on the relative ease of "spoofing" the GPS signals that civilian drones rely on. It is not well known outside of technical circles, but there are two GPS signals accessible in the US-an encrypted one for the military, and one for civilians for which there is "clear access." Humphreys recounts working cooperatively with the Department of Homeland Security to show how it is possible to crash a civilian drone by spoofing its GPS signal and taking over control of the craft.
Humphreys and his students constructed a "GPS spoofer" that allowed them to interfere with the internal guidance of a Hornet Mini, an $80,000 rotorcraft. While he did not go into great detail, Humphreys explained that the equipment sends a GPS signal at low power, and then by raising the power the spoofed signal "takes over" as the dominant signal for the drone. By changing the GPS signal, the operator of the spoofing equipment can simulate a "rise" in the drone's altitude. If the drone is set to hold steady at a certain altitude, then the drone (or the human operator) will take corrective action to reduce its height. A significant change will cause the drone to crash. Humphrey says that this spoofing technology is not available to the "ordinary person on the street," although persons with engineering and physics training can develop them. "There is no quick, easy, and cheap fix for the civil GPS spoofing problem. What is more, not even the most effective GPS spoofing defenses are foolproof," he says.
Humphreys suggests that civilian drones of eighteen pounds or more be required to have spoof-resistant navigation systems, and that Homeland Security fund the development of a cryptographic authentication system for civilian GPS. 
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
While most of the public discussion and media coverage has been about the military uses of drones, all evidence suggests that domestic drones are shaping up to have a transformative impact on everyday life in the United States. And when other countries have military drone capabilities, domestic use will be common throughout the world as well. Domestic drones can be used in nonviolent ways by government and can prove to be useful in anything from fighting crime to fighting forest fires. The technology can even be used to create commercial opportunities for taco-loving citizens! As explained in this chapter, however, privacy is a serious and growing concern. Technological glitches and the ability to spoof GPS signals combine to make domestic use something to be wary of. At the same time, positive uses by citizen groups are in the works. Drone manufacturers and advocates are likely to be in the "long game," and will be content to make only gradual progress toward their ultimate goal of free rein for domestic drone aircraft around the world.
The United States was meant to be a republic. The 1787 Constitution declared that property-owning men were citizens, with all powers in their hands unless granted to local, state, or national government. This definition of citizens was broadened over the succeeding two hundred years to include men without property, women, African Americans, and other excluded groups. The Constitution and its Amendments continue to define and limit the power of governments versus the people. There are many elected offices, especially compared to the British-style Westminster limited monarchy in which the voter elects only one officeholder, the local member of Parliament.
In the original vision of the American republic, election is the chief means through which the voter directs policy making and lawmaking. Those elected are expected to have real power. Add to this the Constitution, a complicated interaction of central political institutions and a federal system designed to diffuse rather than centralize government power. It was accepted that there would be divisions of opinion, referred to by James Madison as "faction," but this would be managed by the representative nature of the system and the division of powers; no one faction should be able to attain complete power. This system was accepted by the American people in part because a number of writers intervened in the public discourse in advocacy of the new model through what is known as The Federalist Papers. Arriving in Philadelphia in 1789, they were educated men but they were not professors, intellectuals, or "policy wonks," as we now think of them, and they were certainly not paid "talking heads."
It is no surprise that the independent opinion leader did not survive nineteenth-century events like westward expansion, civil war, major population growth, industrialization, and urbanization, or America's twentieth-century rise to superpower status.
This chapter is about the role that experts such as journalists, editorialists, pundits, academics, and think-tank scholars play in the realm of the international and domestic use of drones. It is inevitably informed by "the elephant in the room," as the performance of the vast majority of these experts over the last fifteen years has been dreadful, specifically in connection to 9/11, the US war in Afghanistan and invasion of Iraq, and activities in Libya and other countries in North Africa, the Horn of Africa, and the Middle East. While the next chapter examines the role of the media, the issue overlaps here as think tanks and pundits use the media as their public platform.
US print and broadcast media, with a few notable and noble exceptions, largely discredited themselves and led to the mass departure of their audience to Internet sources and alternative forms of information, including faux news like The Daily Show and The Colbert Report. Greg Mitchell's book, published in 2008 and with a title that says it all-So Wrong for So Long-is a useful reminder of the breakdown of the chattering classes. It would take a 747 to transport those who failed. To scratch the surface of Mitchell's list we find William F. Buckley, Jr., Ann Coulter, Thomas Friedman, Francis Fukayama, Jim Hoaglund, David Ignatius, William Kristol, Chris Matthews, Mary McGrory, Dan Rather, Joe Scarborough, George Will, and Bob Woodward. Those who got it right, like Amy Goodman, Chris Hedges, Norman Solomon, and Jon Stewart, can be carried in a much smaller conveyance.
The classic idea is that there is a "marketplace of ideas" featuring those whose ideas are the best product. What is remarkable, as Mitchell says, is that "few of those who promoted the war based on false information have lost any standing in the media, even if they did lose respect from some in the audience." 
1
2
It is telling to outline the rise and role of think tanks, their sheer number, and the conditions under which they can be independent. Conflict of interest, nondisclosure of interests, and the role of donors is also vital to discuss. Think tanks may add to the debate but also sow doubt or confusion and they dull conclusions on policy issues simply by the information they release. This is especially true regarding weaponized international and domestic drone use. The domination of pro-drone opinion in the media and think-tank universe can explain, in part, public acquiescence to drone warfare as well as domestic drone use. It is, however, worth noting that think tanks do produce material that departs from official government policy, even when they are government sponsored.
Developments in the last forty years are quite remarkable, not only because of the change in journalism but also the rise of full-time pundits drawing salaries from tax-exempt organizations. This began in the 1960s with the breakdown of the society-centered "pluralist model," and the rise of alternatives. 
3
This also appears to be the same period when there is either a change in the effectiveness of voting, or, more likely in this account, a change in the realization of the actual significance of voting. It has been increasingly obvious that replacing the party in power does not even make a marginal difference in policy and law. At all levels, winning the election is only the beginning of the process. Those who are elected have a mandate-their liberty and obligation-to implement their platform. But despite great differences during the campaign, governance does not reflect diversity of opinion.
Fast forward to the 1970s. By then Americans were accustomed to the lobbyist, that representative of industry, labor, students, gun owners, or other interest groups, who tries to influence legislation through providing meals, travel junkets, and bribes. The most legal and cleanest form of influence had been campaign contributions to enable reelection. But the number of think tanks has exploded. As Thomas Medvetz says in his important book on the subject, think tanks are not very easy to define, which perhaps provides them with their potency. He points out that the historical discussion over their rise has been dominated by pluralist and elite theorists, those inheritors of the debate over the very nature of the US political system. For pluralists, think tanks are like any other organization in that they enter the "empty arena" or "marketplace of ideas" and compete for the policy outcomes they want. For elite theorists, the rules of the game are already rigged and only those think tanks that square with elite interests can have any real impact. One might also add that neopluralists, or some of those in the Marxist tradition, would see think tanks, like lobbying organizations, as part of the fight but with an outcome that is not as predetermined as elite theorists would have it.
Medvetz brings this description of think tanks' influence to the table: "the products of a long-term process of institutional growth and realignment, have become the primary instruments for linking political and intellectual practice in American life." Further, he argues that "any intellectual figure who wishes to take part in American political debate must increasingly orient his or her production to the rules" of this system. The think-tank system "has undermined the value of independently produced knowledge in the United States by institutionalizing a mode of intellectual practice that relegates its producers to the margins of public and political life." 
4
The importance of lobbyists and think tanks is connected to the transformation of US politics. Unlike the classic formulation, the election is not the end of the consultative process. After the election, the diverse forces with an interest in politics relitigate the issues (to use President Obama's term) in front of decision makers, in public and private, regardless of the election outcome. What those decision makers will ultimately do is very much in the hands of major donors and investors who can make or break political leaders and even the US economy. We are now in an era of the deep state, to use a term made prominent by former Republican political staffer Mike 
Lofgren,
5
6
7
8
A general definition according to James McGann 9 :
Think tanks are public-policy research analysis and engagement organizations that generate policy-oriented research, analysis, and advice on domestic and international issues, thereby enabling policymakers and the public to make informed decisions about public policy. Think tanks may be affiliated or independent institutions that are structured as permanent bodies, not ad hoc commissions.
Perhaps those who can claim independence will have the most credibility in an age of suspicious readers and viewers. In reality, almost everyone is dependent on someone, apart from the tenured academic doing pure research with an unlimited, ironclad grant of academic freedom, a secure salary, and either guaranteed funding or no need for funding. McGann suggests that we classify think tanks as "Autonomous and Independent," Quasi-Independent," "Government Affiliated," "Quasi-Governmental," "University Affiliated," "Political Party Affiliated," and "Corporate Affiliated (For Profit)." 
10
Further light can be shed on the role of think tanks within powerful institutions by looking at past insights into the role of secretariats and thinktank equivalents in the UN system. For many decades, including before the rise of think tanks in domestic politics, scholars of international organization, now called "multilateralism," have asked about the decision-making processes in inter-governmental organizations (IGOs). In theory the state members of IGOs have the power, shared with the appointed leader of the secretariat, to make decisions and steer the organization. However, there are many individuals within the organization who have influence, as was pointed out by Robert Cox and Harold Jacobson in their pioneering work on the subject. 
11
12
As Cox points out in his later work, it is possible that there will be units within an IGO that are permitted, or even encouraged, to work at crosspurposes from the organization's main goals. As he wrote in 1979, "One way in which an established institution can ward off the risk of arteriosclerosis and mental atrophy is to harbor in its midst a ginger group of critics whose acknowledged role is to challenge policy orthodoxy, to redefine issues, and to propose alternative methods of dealing with them. The International Institute for Labour Studies [IILS], founded within the framework of the [International Labour Organization] in 1960, might have performed a role of this kind." 
13
McGann helps us answer the question of which think tanks are regarded as the best or most influential. His organization surveyed 20,000 university administrators and academics, journalists, think-tank scholars, executives, and donors from around the world, of which 3,572 responded. He also relied on 1,950 functional and regional experts, and he invited the participation of over 6,500 think tanks. The top seven think tanks are described as prestigious, long-standing, and not hyperpartisan or hypersectarian, with the partial exception of the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). The others are the Brookings Institution, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Council on Foreign Relations, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, RAND Corporation, and Pew Research Center. More tendentious organizations on the list are the Cato Institute, the Heritage Foundation, and, on the other side of the spectrum, the Center for American Progress. 
14
Think-tank donors receive significant influence over research and advocacy. In October 2014, Project Censored made this its eleventh most underreported story for the previous year. They wrote that in the United States there is no requirement that think tanks reveal their funding sources, even though contributions are tax-deductible. They also pointed out that oil companies and weapons manufacturers are major donors to the country's leading think tanks. It is even possible to channel money to organizations like the DonorsTrust Foundation which then passes it to the intended recipient with little chance of the contribution being traced. 
15
16
17
Think tanks can also act as enforcers for certain views, enlisting their prestige in the effort. On October 14, 2012, New York Times public editor Margaret Sullivan wrote a critique of Times coverage of drone warfare, specifically the question of labeling civilians as militants. She said the paper has not "aggressively challenged the administration's description of those killed as 'militants'-itself an undefined term." This was too much for Benjamin Wittes, senior fellow in Governance Studies at the Brookings Institution, who described the column as "very weird" in his Lawfare blog. He wrote: "The Times is not an advocacy organization whose job it is to 'aggressively challenge' the government's claims of the rates of civilian casualties-except to the extent that those claims are untrue." 
18
19
20
The think-tank world is not much better, heavily weighted to the interests of advertisers, donors, and the private capitalist economy. The debate for and against drone warfare, assassination, and the kill list often plays out in the hands of rival think tanks. For example, writing in 2012 in the venerable Foreign Affairs, Christopher Swift, a fellow at a university-based think tank in Virginia, argues that based on research in Yemen, drone strikes have not been a successful recruiting tool for al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. 
21
A meeting point of the role of experts, punditry, think tanks, and uncritical media is captured in the case of Gen. Jack Keane, a senior military commander in the George W. Bush era. He is retired and now leads a think tank called the Institute for War Studies. As Lee Fang wrote in The Nation in 2014, when Keane is interviewed in the media he invariably advocates militaristic solutions to global problems and US reentry into countries like Iraq. At best the media refer to him as a retired general and leader of a think tank; little else is said about what he is currently doing. His think-tank partners include neoconservative militarists Liz Cheney and William Kristol. As the author says, Keane's other activities are: special advisor to Academi, the contractor formerly known as Blackwater; as a board member to tank and aircraft manufacturer General Dynamics; a "venture partner" to SCP Partners, an investment firm that partners with defense contractors, including XVionics, an "operations management decision support system" company used in Air Force drone training; and as president of his own consulting firm, GSI LLC. To portray Keane as simply a think tank leader and a former military official, as the media have done, obscures a fairly lucrative career in the contracting world. For the General Dynamics role alone, Keane has been paid a six-figure salary in cash and stock options since he joined the firm in 2004; last year, General Dynamics paid him $258,006.
Fang also notes that this same conflict-of-interest analysis applies to many other Washington talking heads, including Gen. Anthony Zinni and former Homeland Security advisor Frances Townsend. 
22
23
24
25
26
Judging from the history of the debate over climate change, as well as previous controversies, one of the goals of the funders of think tanks is simply to sow doubt in public opinion. While winning the debate is desirable, creating doubt is acceptable because it means decision makers don't face a backlash for doing what fossil-fuel producers want-to allow the oil and fossil-fuel economy generally to continue at full blast regardless of the consequences. In the case of drone warfare, the result of doubt was to allow decision makers to retool the military toward remote killing and permanent war.
As Naomi Oreskes and Erik Conway point out, over the last number of decades there have been several scientific controversies in which a minority of contrarians challenge virtually unanimous scientific opinion at the behest of powerful economic forces wanting to ensure market-oriented solutions and weak government (except when strength is needed by business interests). Based on major donations from right-wing actors, bodies like the George C. Marshall Foundation (1984) were created to deny the scientific consensus. They consider key cases over the last several decades as the health effects of direct and indirect tobacco smoke, acid rain, Soviet military superiority, Reagan's SDI, and global warming. The pattern has always been the same. Even after there is a scientific consensus, they make several claims: that there is a lack of clarity or consensus, that nothing needs to be done, or that something is to be done on a "free-market basis." This generally means that only the sovereign consumer or investor is permitted to solve the problem, given the absence of government regulatory action. 
29
The fact that people talk about climate change instead of global warming was a win for the conservative think tanks, because climate change is less specific; climate is not just changing, but global temperatures are getting warmer. If targeted killing sticks instead of assassination or murder, this would also be a think-tank win. Targeted killing bears the assumption that this killing is like any other in war, no doubt unfortunate, but part and parcel of what happens when people commit aggression against us. The term drone is also not first-rate as a brand label from the perspective of some of its advocates, as discussed earlier. Most important for them is that people believe that twenty-four-hour drone coverage and camera optics mean that the United States knows who it is killing, mistakes are not made, and collateral damage is minimized. At least the goal is for people to be uncertain about it, because if people are arguing about this they aren't arguing about whether the country should even be actively fighting in Pakistan, Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan, Yemen, Somalia, Libya, and so forth.
In a 2013 Alternet column David Sirota amplifies this. His starting point is a comment from Senator Angus King (I-ME) who said that drone warfare involves the use of a "humane weapon" because it is allegedly precise and minimizes the harm done to civilians compared to larger-scale bombing or introduction of US troops. But moderate and conservative drone supporters don't want people to realize that military de-escalation and withdrawal is another option worth discussing. As Sirota says:
In a country whose culture so often (wrongly) portrays bloodshed as the most effective problem solver, many Americans hear this now-ubiquitous dronewar argument and reflexively agree with its suppositions. Having been told in so many ways that killing is the best and only possible policy prescription, most simply assume that our only national security choice is between drone wars and ground wars-between different forms of pre-emptive violence, and nothing else. 
30
A related role of think tanks is to soften up conclusions by introducing new data to obscure what is going on. This is similar to the dynamics of "triangulation," that skill of successful Democrats or Republicans to make decisions not based on platform or principle, but on a precise reckoning of where to land on a multidimensional policy spectrum. They need to preserve the political and financial support of the partisan base, while at the same time undermine and attract neutral and opposition support. This is exemplified by the competitive counting of alleged militant and civilian deaths from US drone strikes by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism (BIJ) and the New America Foundation (NAF). The higher BIJ figures are most widely quoted in the media. This happens in front of a larger societal background, one in which US government officials and opinion leaders are either indifferent toward civilian deaths of the "other" or deny or seek to minimize those deaths. This is not a new phenomenon but rather goes back centuries, John Tirman argues. 
31
32
The effect of the NAF is to provide comfort to those who look for lower casualty numbers and assurance that the Obama administration has been effective in tightening up processes to minimize civilian deaths. For example, a report by the Human Rights Institute at Columbia University Law School said that in 2011 the NAF and the Long War Journal (LWJ) both undercounted civilian deaths in Pakistan, while the minimum and maximum ranges offered by the BIJ was more accurate. Specifically, the report says that:
Our recount found reports of between 72 and 155 civilians killed in 2011 Pakistan drone strikes, with 52 of the reportedly civilian dead identified by name-a relatively strong indicator of reliability. By comparison, New America Foundation's count is just 3 to 9 "civilians" killed during this period; Long War Journal's count is 30 civilians killed. 
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
It should be no surprise that there is a wide range of views on the question of drone warfare-approaching the Tower of Babel! American citizens, however, do not seem very concerned perhaps because of the bromides offered by think-tank policy experts as well as the mainstream media's indifference to counterevidence. Not all think tanks take extreme pro-drone positions. The Stimson Center, named for Henry L. Stimson, who served both Democratic and Republican presidents as secretary of state and secretary of war, describes itself as offering "pragmatic solutions" to global problems. In June 2014 it released a report by a ten-person panel chaired by Gen. John P. Abizaid (US Army, Ret.) and Rosa Brooks, taking a middle-of-the-road position on the weaponization of drones, warning of the risks of permanent war and urging greater safeguards in identifying targets and authorizing strikes. 
43
44
Two studies by the RAND Corporation and a think tank within the British Ministry of Defence illustrate another role for think tanks, which is to work on technical problems. In one RAND study, the authors' task is to model what the next medium-altitude drone should look like, in the context of production ending on the MQ-1 Predator, and the MQ-9 Reaper being ready for upgrading or replacement. The report provides some actual discussion (not for wide circulation) of the limitations of the drone aircraft, particularly in weather, and steps that can be taken to address these issues. 
45
In order to provide the necessary capabilities, military planners must know what their political leaders intend with respect to anticipatory attack, with far more specificity than is provided by broad policy statements such as the National Security Strategy. Senior military officers need to keep national decision makers familiar with the extent and limits of their capabilities, particularly if pre-emptive options are going to be considered in conditions where the time available for making strategic choices is limited. 
46
An example of a think tank within government is the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre of the British Ministry of Defence. In 2014 it produced the fifth edition of its report entitled Global Strategic Trends -Out to 2045. It does not present an overly happy scenario and certainly is not the stuff of politicians' optimistic stump speeches. This is a world of considerable uncertainty, in which most states find themselves less powerful and less likely to act unilaterally. They have diverse domestic populations with all the attendant risks and rewards, with climactic fallout from global warming and the continuing rise of China politically, economically, and militarily. The authors make no mention of drone warfare, but rather anticipate technologi-cal advances in the targeting and power of laser and particle beam weapons. They also foresee biological warfare including targeting adversaries based on their DNA. 
47
The research in this chapter makes it clear that there has been an explosion in the number of think tanks in recent years, especially in the United States. Their political viewpoints vary, but the majority lean to the right. In a world of effective electoral systems, think tanks would mostly provide interesting, entertaining commentary but be largely ignored. Instead, think tanks are part of the postelection jockeying for policy outcomes, and like other sources of punditry, the track record of the majority on security issues in the last fifteen years has been poor. There has been a long tradition of think tanks and other pundits acting at the behest of well-heeled forces, seemingly with the goal of supporting the status quo or of creating doubt about particular policy issues, ensuring stalemate and inaction. Think tanks in the United States have become an important part of maintaining public opinion in favor of current policy on drone warfare. They should think harder.
After having discussed the forces that create information to suit the powerful and the wealthy, it is time to turn to the transmission belt for this information-the news media. Over at least the last fifteen years, the US mainstream news media has repeatedly failed to provide its readers, listeners, and watchers the diversity of information they need in order to make sound conclusions as citizens in a liberal democracy. As far back as the 1980s and 1990s the media largely gave the US government an easy pass when it came to the effectiveness of new high-tech weapons systems, wars of choice such as Grenada and Panama, or support for right-wing dictators and insurgents in Latin America. Even before 2001, as G. William Domhoff has put it: 
1
But for at least six years starting with 9/11, they raised the patriotic cheerleading to another level. It led not to a break with the past, but rather to a deepening of existing trends. The Bush administration was able to respond to the 9/11 attacks in the most muddled fashion, virtually without challenge and, in fact, with a good deal of media encouragement. There was almost no mainstream questioning of the breadth of the congressional AUMF, that, fifteen years later, is still used to legitimize US overseas military operations. 
2
The greatest media crime of the early 2000s was the soft coverage of the Bush administration's claim of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, as well as the revolving door of other reasons to justify the war. The media could have recognized the importance of accountability and self-reflection, while still maintaining their editorial independence. Instead their coverage perpetuated these problems.
The mainstream media coverage has been so mediocre that it has given continued traction to Chalmers Johnson's concept of blowback, the sense that an adversary's action is in response to a US action, except that the initial action is "unknown to the American people." 
3
One of the themes of this chapter is that, judging from the coverage of drone warfare, the US media did not learn their lesson from the events of the first half of the 2000s. Problems remain with the use of euphemisms and perverse definition of terms, overreliance on official, governmental sources, and lack of commitment to serious investigative journalism. The aphorism that "governments lie," however often it is proven in practice, still doesn't seem to govern or even inform very much of the journalism profession. Perhaps this is no surprise, not only because of the concentration of media ownership, but also because the owners of the media are corporations with strong conflicts of interest, particularly in the production and export of military hardware. War is profitable for the minority even if it imposes great costs on the majority.
As Tara McKelvey says in her 2013 study entitled "Media Coverage of the Drone Program," in 2009 and 2010 the media's attention to drone warfare was rather muted considering that at the time the Obama administration was greatly increasing its use of drone attacks. It was, in fact, making drones a central feature of its "kill not capture" military strategy. McKelvey counted articles in five major US print outlets (the Christian Science Monitor, the New York Times, Time magazine, the Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post). She found 326 articles in 
2009, 435 in 2010, 577 in 2011, and 625 in 2012. 4
5
The double standard was on full public display as recently as February 2016, when former CIA director Michael Hayden reproduced in a New York Times opinion piece what he said was a transcript of an operator conversation before a successful drone strike during his time in the Bush administration. This was written to promote his forthcoming book. While he admits mistakes will occasionally be made, he wrote that "the targeted killing program has been the most precise and effective application of firepower in the history of armed conflict." 
6
7
8
CIA drone program attacks in Pakistan provide some insight into the importance of pro-administration leaks as well as media bias. What we know about Mehsud's assassination came from an authorized leak. Journalist Gareth Porter explained in October 2013 that the CIA feared the Obama administration might reduce or end the CIA drone campaign in Pakistan. They leaked information to a sympathetic Post reporter, Bob Woodward, to the effect that there was a secret agreement between the United States and Pakistan assuring that Pakistan supported the US drone war secretly even if it protested it publicly for domestic consumption. However, as Porter notes, through 2008 Pakistan did appear to support the drone campaign, because attacks were few in number and targeted adversaries of the state, specifically al-Qaeda leaders in Pakistan. However, under the Obama administration in 2009 the United States greatly expanded drone strikes in Pakistan and elsewhere, and broadened the list of those subject to attack. So the United States was making both "signature" and "personality" strikes against members of the Taliban in Pakistan with whom Pakistan had made peace. Yet this is not reported in the story, so that readers are allowed to believe that Pakistani objections are wholly insincere, which greatly undermines sovereignty and international law concerns. 
9
Sometimes in the interest of the administration, officials oscillate between openness when it works for them and being closed when it doesn't. McKelvey notes that Bush administration officials allowed media tours of the main stateside drone base at Creech AFB, Nevada, until 2009, when access was cut off. Obama officials thought that a journalist had "gone too far" in revealing information about the drone program. 
10
11
12
By 2013, the PBS program Nova devoted a one-hour episode to this subject matter, called Rise of the Drones. Much of the episode focuses on the technological marvel of drone technology for both military and civilian purposes, perhaps not surprising for a program about science and technology. Diversity of opinion comes from an interview with Senator Rand Paul over his concerns with the expected violations of Americans' domestic privacy. It also shows Medea Benjamin of Code Pink disrupting a speech by John Brennan on the grounds of international law and ethics. There is no opportunity for an articulate critique from her, or anyone else, and the episode quotes defense expert Peter W. Singer saying that the United States is fighting the equivalent of an air war in Pakistan without calling it an air war. The program raises the possibility that this is radicalizing people in countries subject to attack. There is also recognition that the drone and operator can lose the satellite link and, with it, control, and that drones can be vulnerable to attack because they are slow and fragile. The producers were given access to drone training at Holloman Air Force Base in New Mexico. Their message is to fixate on the technology and to accept that it allows the USAF to kill the right people while avoiding killing civilians. One of the two major named funders of the series was the David H. Koch Fund for Science, which provides an indication of conservative support for the program, and possibly a conservative influence. 
13
As noted earlier, use of the phrase targeted killing is favored by the US government because killing is something that legitimately happens in war (unlike assassination and murder). Targeted means that the US military knows who it is killing. Another renamed term is militant. Historically a militant was an individual who carried arms, usually in an insurgency or revolution, while a uniformed member of contemporary, state-based militaries was called a soldier. But as Glenn Greenwald points out, reflecting on a New York Times article, as of May 2012 the Obama administration had redefined militant to mean "military-age males in a strike zone," unless after the fact the individual is proven to be a noncombatant. The administration's rationale is that jihadi terrorists only consort with other jihadi terrorists, and therefore any male of military age can be assumed to be a participant in the movement. 
14
This situation is aggravated by the innovation of referring to "personality" and signature strikes. Personality strikes are those drone or other strikes in which a known person is targeted, someone like al-Awlaki or other identifiable individual who is on the kill list. In this situation civilians can be killed, either with or without US admission. However, the Obama administration also makes reference to signature strikes that are attacks on groups of individuals, who exhibit "suspicious behavior" or who fit the profile of terrorists or other militants. The reality is that the United States doesn't really know who it's killing, and given the state of the bodies after the attack there may be no way of conclusively finding out. A personality or signature strike is often reported without discussion of what this means.
It is well known that the US government does not routinely release footage of aerial attacks (and not even footage of returning coffins of US military per-sonnel), so that most images come from leakers such as Chelsea Manning and others. There are often no graphics in television media coverage or there are unrealistic ones. Scholars in communications and psychology have done experiments to test reactions and see what, if any, effects come from realistic versus substituted images in media reporting. Erica Scharrer and Greg Blackburn conducted a study in which they showed viewers media coverage of drone strikes and other topics and then surveyed them on their reactions. They found that viewers had greater empathy for the victims of drone strikes when they saw more graphic images. The researchers concluded that they were not desensitized by them. The viewers were not necessarily more negative toward US policy on the use of drones, 
15
Cameron Riopelle and Parthiban Muniandy point to the (inaccurate) messages that graphics convey on CBS World News online. In an academic article they reproduced sixteen images from CBS World News online graphics and argue that there is a decontextualization of maps, a recycling of the same graphics for very different stories, a conflation of Islam and the Middle East as one and the same, and a monolithic representation of Islam. These patterns will be familiar to those who watch network television. In some graphics, omnipotent Reaper or Predator drones, or cruise missiles, loom large over maps of particular countries like Libya, Pakistan, and Yemen. Other graphics show Islamic symbols, shadowy figures sometimes carrying weapons, or unflattering photos of adversarial leaders such as Moammar Qaddafi. In the last case, the graphic that announces the death of Qaddafi shows silhouettes of jubilant figures, a clear indication of the intention to convey political content. 
16
The media also almost universally present the idea that drone warfare is popular within the United States. The Obama administration is positive about drones, and it should be no surprise that it would want to minimize public opposition and maximize public support. One way is to maintain secrecy for as long as possible. American people don't know that there are one hundred drone missions per day and that, frankly, there is every reason to believe that this will be a permanent condition. Another way is to discourage mainstream discussion of issues that are being raised in this book and other works. Finally, the administration would benefit if polling showed that drones are popular, to reassure policy makers and elected officials that this major change will not have any negative political fallout.
In September 2015 Glenn Greenwald pointed out that reporting in the New York Times provided false information on the US attitude towards cluster bombs. Rick Gladstone of the Times had written a story on the Cluster Munitions Coalition's critique of the five states that used cluster bombs in 2015-Libya, Sudan, Syria, Ukraine, and Yemen. He wrote that "the use of these weapons was criticized by all 117 countries that have joined the treaty, which took effect five years ago. Their use was also criticized by a number of others, including the United States, that have not yet joined the treaty but have abided by its provisions." It is hard to believe that the United States really opposed the use of cluster bombs because the country is one of the world's leading producers. Cluster bombs are particularly controversial because they are largely an anticivilian weapon causing many bomblets to be released and scattered over large areas. Further, a small percentage of bomblets are duds and, like antipersonnel mines, they can lie in wait and explode at a future time, including when they are handled by children. As Greenwald says, the United States could not abide by the treaty, because to do so would be to stop producing, stockpiling, and exporting cluster bombs. 
17
Are we really sure, however, that drones are so popular? As Sarah Kreps has pointed out, the actual degree of citizen support for drone warfare depends on the questions pollsters ask. She notes that many criticisms have been made, but that "these criticisms have tended not to translate into lower levels of support for drones strikes because contemporary polling has restricted the frame of reference for how individuals evaluate the policy." As she says, the polling questions often look something like this: "Do you favor or oppose the use of unmanned aircraft, also known as drones, to kill suspected members of al-Qaeda and other terrorists?" Or, perhaps, do you approve of using drones to "launch airstrikes in other countries against suspected terrorists?" It is generally accepted that, particularly in 2011 through 2013, strong majorities answered that they approved.
In response, Kreps developed an experimental design asking individuals for their level of support. Questions were modified to account for International Humanitarian Law concerns about lack of distinction regarding noncombatants, lack of proportionality, legal concerns about absence of domestic US authorization, and nonconformity with international law. Kreps found that majority support suddenly becomes minority support when these doubts are raised. 
18
As this chapter suggests, the treatment of drone warfare in the mainstream US media has reproduced the disastrous problems of the 2000s when reporters and columnists rarely questioned decisions made by the Bush administration. Because of this, the media must take some responsibility for the unnecessary invasion of Iraq and the calamity that followed. The media are mostly timid in challenging the interests of corporate ownership and continue to rely on official sources. The US government treats the most sympathetic media in a special way, assuring that its message is presented in a complimentary fashion. This form of journalism leaves many unasked questions and incomplete historical context. Drone warfare may be less popular than the media imply, given that people are reacting to a sanitized version with no awareness of possible long-term results. Does the American public truly understand drone warfare? Do Americans have any idea of the concept of permanent war? Because drone warfare has not taken many direct American lives, the story has not been adequately presented. The media has a lot of work to do to ensure that the public has the facts and the analysis to move forward.
Drone weapons make it much easier to intervene militarily in countries with which one is not legally or formally at war. The deploying power can intervene very selectively in states more overtly than small-scale "cloak-anddagger" missions but without leaving its fingerprints in a way that the use of conventional infantry, helicopters, or fighter-bombers do.
Drone attacks are also easier to keep secret from your domestic population than other forms of intervention, with the exception of small-scale, covert operations using conventional military forces. This means that the state that possesses weaponized drone aircraft can undertake military operations in more countries at far lower cost, with lower domestic political fallout. For the United States, this is a formula for increased overseas military operations in countries where there has been no explicit congressional authorization or declaration of war, such as Yemen and Pakistan. Sarah Kreps has commented that the increasing availability of drones might introduce "moral hazard," because of those "situations whereby avoiding costs has the perverse incentive of causing one actor to engage in risks that they would not otherwise take." 
1
Scholars of international relations and foreign policy have oscillated between enthusiasm for the monopoly over a new weapon, and realization that peace will only be kept by deterrence (or by limits placed by treaties) once the weapons are acquired by numerous parties. 
2
Since 2001 it has appeared that US experts in international law are much more likely to support their country's actions in the world than are international lawyers from elsewhere. US media have an easier time finding USbased international legal scholars who support the Bush/Obama policy, which then gives observers the impression that the international law community accepts administration claims. This is particularly true in the case of assassination and extrajudicial execution. Non-US scholars are more skeptical of US government doctrine, whether it is the question of detention of prisoners, or the use of assassination as a technique through on-the-ground hit teams or drone aircraft. 3 Kenneth Anderson, for example, sees "stand-off targeted killing" as appropriate, based on the idea that this is part of the right to self-defense "short of armed conflict." 
4
5
Michael Gross asks why liberal democracies engage in assassination, torture, and blackmail. His response is an astute one, for he notes that because of asymmetry, the great inequality between the Western countries (especially the United States and United Kingdom) and the rest of the world, there has been no reciprocal violent response to these activities. 
6
7
8
9
10
11
Citizens are resisting the rise of "Drone Nation" through direct action or more creative means. People of conscience have been protesting and, in some cases, engaging in civil disobedience at drone air force bases. John Dear, S.J., provides an account of his trial in Nevada, with thirteen codefendants, for "criminal trespassing" during their protest at Creech Air Force Base, April 9, 2009. For the defendants, it was victory enough to have the judge hear arguments about international law, the necessity defense, and drone warfare from expert witnesses such as former US attorney general Ramsey Clark, Col. Ann Wright (US Army, Ret.) and Bill Quigley from the Centre for Constitutional Rights. 12 Some years later, a fifty-eight-year-old grandmother of three, Mary Anne Grady-Flores, was sentenced to a year in county jail for repeatedly protesting drones at New York Air National Guard Hancock field. 
13
14
Since the last half of the nineteenth century in particular, the global community has been discontent with a laissez-faire attitude when it comes to the outbreak and conduct of warfare. Since the 1890s, activists have tried to use the treaty mechanism both to reduce the outbreak of warfare and to eliminate the harshest tactics. The widespread ratification of the UN Charter was aimed at greatly reducing the likelihood of war, with the five permanent members of the Security Council acting in concert. Before that, there were efforts to control the size and number of naval ships, to control other forms of war, and to ban war altogether. One of the early treaties was the St. Petersburg Declaration of 1868, designed to ban explosive or incendiary bullets; the Geneva Gas Protocol of 1925 finally prohibited the use of poisonous gases in war, after the terrible experience of World War I. Since World War II, there has been greater success in treaty writing. The use of chemical and biological weapons has largely been banned, and there have been considerable efforts to create treaties to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
Treaties and protocols also exist that restrict or ban conventional weapons, including the intentional use of white phosphorus, cluster bombs, and, most successfully, antipersonnel land mines. Most people would agree that a global ban on atomic weapons in the mid-1940s, after the United States used the bomb in Japan and before the Soviet Union and China developed it, would have been a great achievement. There were discussions at the time, but the lack of trust prevented an agreement.
Notwithstanding the small Israeli arsenal, the United States has a virtual monopoly on weaponized drones, though this won't be true by 2020. Part of the purpose of this work is to discuss the current US love affair with drone warfare, but also to show the medium-to long-term consequences of this infatuation. US policy makers and citizens may not realize this, or may be in denial, but the United States is generating a great deal of hostility because of its drone attacks. It is creating a situation (a "security dilemma" in the words of experts) in which the logical course of action for friend and foe alike is to embark on a new arms race. All sides can then acquire both the capacity to identify and destroy drones, as well as to develop a fleet of weaponized drones. We are not far from the day in which victims of drone attacks may have the capacity to destroy most of these aircraft before they reach their target areas, while they also develop the capacity to fly their own drone missions over the airspace of Boston, New York, Los Angeles, and Washington, DC.
The next move for the global community is to push for limits on the use of drone aircraft, precisely because they tend to widen warfare to a global level and reinforce the Augustinian idea of war -the targeting of, and revenge against, specific leaders and individuals. In their introduction to a major edited collection about land mines, M. A. Cameron, R. J. Lawson, and B. W. Tomlin note that by the 1980s and 1990s humanitarians were aware of the particularly egregious legacy of antipersonnel land mines. These land mines were laid in dozens of countries in the 1950s through 1980s by military forces to protect their encampments or to cover their movements or retreats. At three to five dollars per unit, these mines would not usually be removed by the party that laid them. They would explode, maim, and kill civilians years, and even decades, later. These explosives were produced by many countries and were standard issue as the United States and Soviet Union provided military support in the proxy wars during the Cold War, in many countries in the global South. The weapons were classic candidates for limitation or elimination by treaty. Of dubious military value, in the medium-to long-term they were more likely to injure noncombatants, in opposition to the rules of war, than to injure combatants during conflict. 
15
The International Campaign to Ban Landmines, launched in 1992, is a "global civil-society" coalition of more than one thousand nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) devoted to the relief of those injured by exploding land mines, and the elimination of landmines as a tool of war. The campaign forged links and cooperated with a number of middle powers including Canada and Norway. The more that people around the world learned about the reality of the land mines legacy, the more horrified they became. Suddenly there was political support to do something about it. The "Ottawa Process," as it was called, began in October 1996, and fourteen months later, in December 1997, the treaty was finalized. Ratified by a sufficient number of states in record time, it makes the production, transfer, and possession of large numbers of antipersonnel (AP) mines illegal. Signatory states have committed to destroy their stockpiles and to provide aid to states that have the task of de-mining parts of their territory. 
16
17
Third, as Stephen Goose and Nobel laureate Jody Williams note, the mine ban treaty was successful because a large majority of participants abandoned the "consensus model," in which an agreement that means little but enjoys virtually universal support is reached, but is by definition ineffective. 
18
Fourth, the treaty has been successful because the NGOs did not disband or move on once the treaty was signed. They persisted to ensure that state commitments to ratify it were met. NGOs have also played an important role in overseeing the implementation of the treaty and keeping the issue in the global public eye. Interestingly, Williams, a major force in the land mine ban process, has herself moved on to drones and has called for a ban.
There are important rumblings in civil society about taking steps to control "Drone Nation," including in the United States, where arguments come through in congressional resistance to current drone policy. For example, the "International Committee for Robot Arms Control" (ICRAC) is an organization that is devoted to pushing for the application of conventional arms control to the drone sector. Beyond the problems of the proliferation of these weapons, and the fact that they lend themselves to violations of the international law of war, there are some central issues in the not-too-distant future that should be addressed now. It is only a matter of time before weapons of mass destruction are loaded onto drones, which makes them, as first-strike weapons, as or more destabilizing than quick-strike cruise missiles. The challenge of these drones will be felt particularly by those states in Central and East Asia that find themselves ringed by US military bases, including drone bases. The People's Republic of China, Pakistan, and India do not have a reciprocal capacity to launch drone strikes on US territory. The other challenge, perhaps not far in the future, is current research that takes the human out of the equation and make drones fully autonomous, including on the decision to fire.
There are now public glimpses of research on topics such as computer recognition of human gestures and body language, including the meaning of raised hands as a "surrender" sign, leading, hopefully, to a "do not fire" decision. Ronald Arkin, of the Mobile Robot Laboratory in the College of Computing at Georgia Tech, has produced a lengthy technical report, funded by the US Army Research Office, on how to embed ethics in "robot architecture." His goal is to write software to incorporate the laws of war and rules of engagement to allow robots to self-govern. He says: "It is not my belief that an unmanned system will be able to be perfectly ethical in the battlefield, but I am convinced that they can perform more ethically than human soldiers are capable of." Citing a 2006 report of the Mental Health Advisory Team IV (Office of the US Surgeon General), Arkin points out that US soldiers and marines in Iraq were distressingly inclined to mistreat combatants and non-combatants alike, to countenance torture, and to cover up for fellow soldiers who needlessly harmed Iraqi civilians. He asserts that autonomous robotic systems will be able to do better than this, 19 though he does not entertain the idea that the US military should not be in these countries in the first place. While he does not go as far as Williams and others, he has called for a moratorium on the use of robotic weapons to ensure that they are used properly and with the necessary safeguards. 
20
21
But what makes weaponized drones so dangerous that they should be the subject of "preventative arms control?" Relative to other weapons and tactics, such as the violent confrontation of two armies, drone warfare represents a serious threat to humanity's thoroughly articulated rules on the conduct of warfare. These rules are not there to be swept aside by a newly dominant power, as the US government increasingly would have us do. They are one of the great achievements of the twentieth century and, in fact, must be used to restrain twenty-first century states.
Drawing from I. J. MacLeod and A. P. V. Rogers, an examination of the development of arms control treaties since the mid-1860s allows us to identify four general principles that can be considered part of customary international law. These are: 1) that weapons should not cause unnecessary suffering or superfluous injury; 2) that weapons must not be indiscriminate in their effects; 3) that weapons must not be treacherous in their nature; and 4) that weapons must not be abhorrent to ordinary people. 
22
Drones are also treacherous because they attack targets without any regard for theaters of war or traditional rules of engagement. In international humanitarian law, treachery is defined as perfidy, specifically the use of deception to instill in your adversary confidence that he or she is entitled to receive privileged status, or that the adversary must confer privileged status and that no harm will be done. More concretely, this takes the form of feigning a truce or surrender, feigning incapacitation by wounds or sickness, feigning noncombatant or protected status, or using undercover personnel to do the fighting that is appropriately done by those in uniform. 
23
Finally, these weapons are likely to be abhorrent to ordinary people as they learn more about them, just as they found abhorrent AP landmines, cluster bombs, and the targeting of people with white phosphorus. The international medical organization Medact also argues that drone warfare should be included in treaty negotiations and banned because it inflicts continuous psychological injuries on subject populations, including those who are never targeted. 
24
25
Issues such as opposition to the weaponization of drones, the killing of both US citizens and foreign civilians, and general concerns about drones as a means to eliminate individual privacy, are finding their way onto the agenda of all three levels of US government. For example, writer David Swanson has drafted a resolution for his home city's council, Charlottesville, Virginia, that calls for a ban on US extrajudicial killing, the use of drones for surveillance, and the weaponization of drones within the United States. It declares that Charlottesville is to become a drone-free jurisdiction with the exception of the activities of hobbyists under certain controlled conditions. 
26
27
28
29
30
Retired representative Ron Paul continues to express skepticism of current US drone warfare and foreign and defense policy more generally, through the vehicle of the Ron Paul Institute for Peace and Prosperity. He was particularly exercised over the revelation of the unintended killing of US citizen Dr. Warren Weinstein in Pakistan in early 2015, as well as the lesscovered overseas assassination of two US citizens said to have joined al Qaeda. 
31
32
Public anti-drone sentiment may not be loud but it is percolating, even in the United States. Discussion in this chapter focused on ways that can be used to capitalize on it-specifically international laws and treaties. A presentation of problems with assassination in general, and specifically drone warfare, was followed up with how international law and treaty mechanisms should be used to address drone warfare as the new and unlawful frontline of international aggression. The unique, exciting, and successful process resulting in the International Coalition to Ban Landmines sets a strong example and can certainly be pursued regarding drone weapons. Just as there were countries such as Canada and Norway that were willing to take the lead on the AP mine ban, Pakistan, Iraq, and even Afghanistan may be prepared to step forward and speak out on the use of weaponized drones, particularly if and when the US grip is eased in these countries. As the historic anti-landmine battle proved, strong, informed, and organized citizen action creates positive results.
On May 1, 2016, international media reported that a British group known as the Islamic State Hacking Division released names and personal information on seventy individuals said to be members of US-based drone units active in the Middle East. The group called on adherents to go to the homes of these people and kill them. It was later reported that group founder Junaid Hussain had been killed in a drone strike in August 2015. The organization says they have a mole in the British Ministry of Defence and will in the future release names of drone operators in the Royal Air Force. They also temporarily gained control of the US Central Command's social media assets. 
1
When this research was begun several years ago, the United States was at the beginning of a major expansion in the frequency and scope of drone warfare. Much of what is included here on this most fluid of topics was unknown to the authors then. And new information is becoming available all the time. As of this writing, four countries-the United States, United Kingdom, Israel, and Pakistan-have used weaponized drones in combat. There are three others that possess them, and at least ten others that are working on them. Remarkably, seventy-eight countries now have drone surveillance capacity. There is every reason to think that the ranks of weaponized drone powers will continue to swell. 
2
3
The major challenge in the near future is not so much seeing what is right, but having the faith and confidence to transform the situation. Acceptance or resignation is the greatest ally of those who would employ destructive and self-defeating practices. The United States has faced down domestic adversity before-many times, in fact-and reformed itself. Despite confidence that this is an enlightened age, the argument in this concluding chapter is perhaps a shocking one-that US foreign and domestic policy is cruder and more ruthless now than it was in the Vietnam era. This means that the moral challenge Americans face today is even greater than that faced in the 1960s. The fierceness and resulting death toll of the Phoenix program in Vietnam is legendary, but parallels exist to today's global war on terrorism. Unlike Vietnam, there have so far been few vigorous protests, but that too could change. Clearly, the ultimate lesson of the Phoenix program and of the Vietnam War more generally, is that when American citizens understand the brutal acts of their government they will rise up and demand change. That is our potential for the future. It is worth noting that atrocities in Vietnam were so widespread that one can write a critically oriented book on the war with almost no mention of Phoenix, as Nick Turse has recently done. 
7
Any discussion of the US war in Vietnam must address that conflict's highly contested nature. For American conservatives it was a noble effort and a winnable war that the United States chose not to win. For liberals and the left it was inherently immoral, based on an act of aggression, intervention in a civil war, and part of the US Cold War effort against the Soviet Union and China. The Vietnamese people mattered little. (The US government knew so little about the Soviet Union and China in the early 1960s that it didn't even understand the tensions and fissures between those soon-to-be former allies.) The West still does not understand that era from the Vietnamese perspective because a history based on Vietnamese experiences has not yet filtered into Western consciousness. Western literature either condemns the program for the body count or defends it as a good attempt to undermine the revolutionary movement that supported the military operations of the Viet Cong (as they were called in the United States).
Perhaps the most comprehensive source is The Phoenix Program by Douglas Valentine. He condemns the program based on interviews with former Phoenix operatives from the CIA and the US uniformed services. The United States worked with military forces of the pro-US Republic of Vietnam to apprehend or kill members of the civilian Viet Cong infrastructure (VCI), to deny supplies, intelligence, and recruits to the armed struggle. As Valentine says, and confirmed by more sympathetic observers, the program was plagued by US incompetence and lack of understanding of Vietnamese society, corruption of the South Vietnamese regime, inability to deal adequately with civilian detainees, personal vendettas, Vietnamese hedging and half-hearted efforts, and weak indigenous legal systems. 
8
9
Andradé writes that 1967 and 1968 were challenging years in Vietnam. He notes that Ho Chi Minh would have won united elections in 1956, agreed under the Geneva Accords, had they been allowed. He adds that the United States and Government of (South) Viet Nam (GVN) militaries thought the main challenge in the mid-1960s would be a conventional military one, even though it took the form of a guerrilla war. The military was the dominant US actor in Vietnam and was unwilling to change its tactics. One reason the French failed in the 1946-54 period, Andradé confirms, was its opposition to any kind of reform and its desire for a "return of the old inequitable ways of running village affairs." 
10
11
12
Phoenix teams sometimes conducted cordon-and-search operations where they would surround a village and search for evidence of VCI and supplies, literature, weapons, or tunnel networks. They would often receive information regarding individuals who joined or supported VCI, and they would embark on kill-or-capture raids. Andradé downplays the assassinations, though he does admit that there were considerable numbers killed. He focuses on the great numbers arrested for being VCI supporters, who were interrogated, and then tried and convicted or acquitted. He argues that "neutralization" was not at this time a synonym for "killed," but also referred to those captured and held for a time. It also included those who abandoned a civilian or military role in the insurgency and rallied to the government side. He cites official figures showing that in 1969, for example, 19,534 individuals were neutralized, either by being killed (6,187), captured (8,515), or coming over to the government side (4,832). 
13
It is instructive that the accused Vietnamese in the late 1960s generally had more rights and protections than adversaries today in Guantanamo, Afghanistan, Pakistan, or elsewhere. The GVN ran Chieu Hoi (Open Arms), an amnesty program for those willing to quit the National Liberation Front or North Vietnamese military; 130,000 did so from 1963 to 1973, according to official figures. 
14
15
Authorities were allowed to arrest suspects under the rubric of the Phoenix program based on earlier decrees declaring a state of emergency, state of war, and outlawing of certain organizations in South Vietnam. (It should be remembered that the GVN was itself illegitimate, a product of US eagerness to prevent the Vietnamese "domino" from falling to the "international communist conspiracy.") While warrants were required to arrest targeted, named individuals-and some Phoenix killings were the result of resistance to these arrests-it was also possible for warrants to be issued after the arrest. 
16
The screening committee could also declare them members of the VCI, which meant they would be directed to what the Vietnamese called the an tri system. Government had to prove that the detainees were members or supporters of the VCI based on a dossier that could include captured documents, eyewitness statements, intelligence reports, and confessions. A confession alone was not enough evidence to convict, and at least three eyewitness accounts were needed. A senior VCI cadre could be imprisoned for two years, while a lesser supporter could be sentenced for less than two years. 
17
18
19
Government officials were aware of these problems. Deputy Undersecretary of the Army James V. Siena traveled to Vietnam in August 1969 to report on the Phoenix program. Andradé reports his reactions as follows:
Siena gave the example of one highly regarded province chief who refused to back the Phoenix program and made no secret of his reasons for doing so. In his view the program, "exacts too high a price in social stability for the return it yields." He pointed out that most of the VCI neutralized by Phoenix were not ideologically committed to communism and they were not regarded as "bad men" by their fellow citizens. Delving into the sociological roots of the war in Vietnam, the province chief noted that becoming "a VC or an ARVN soldier depends on who was in control when you became old enough to bear arms." 
20
21
22
By 2012, the speeches of Obama officials, including former attorney general Eric Holder and John Brennan, indicated ways in which the current US assassination program has even fewer safeguards than Phoenix. As Glen Greenwald points out, in defending assassination, including of American citizens, Holder is on the record as saying that "due process and 'judicial process' are not one and the same, particularly when it comes to national security. The Constitution guarantees due process, not judicial process." This is an extreme view, every bit as extreme as some of the Bush administration positions. The idea that the test of due process is met by a process within the CIA, Joint Special Operations Command, or the West Wing of the White House, flies in the face of hundreds of years of the rule of law. It was revealed that, despite an "executive order banning assassinations, a federal law against murder, [and] protections in the Bill of Rights and various strictures of the international laws of war," Brennan led a unit in the White House in 2012 to recommend names that the president could then add to the kill list. 
23
24
Phoenix had certain features that compare favorably to US and Western policy in the global war on terrorism. Captured insurgents were treated as POWs, not as unlawful combatants. Detainees had a legal right to hearings. There were limits on sentences and recognition of the possibility of rehabilitation. In Vietnam there was a stronger element of a police or law-enforcement role, in contrast to the war on terrorism in which the solution is almost always a military one. There appears to have been greater US willingness to cooperate with the Vietnamese, even if Vietnam was considered a puppet of the United States. In Afghanistan or Pakistan, no amount of public complaining about drone attacks or night raids, makes any impact. Western countries are so powerful they don't even need the pretense of the host countries' consent to do as they wish. By 1975, the US military and diplomats left Vietnam, having lost. The most important lesson was that, as discussed earlier in this book, US voters sent a loud and clear message to Congress and the president that "presidential war" needed to end. The public demanded that the US government restrain successive officeholders from taking the same actions that caused so much grief for so many in the previous twenty-five years. Surely the citizens of the United States, and elsewhere, can have this kind of impact again.
Who really believes that the West can "win" this battle? How long will it take? What will the toll be in lost lives of combatants and civilians? Will society be recognizable by the time it happens? The West must go back to the drawing board to rethink this campaign known as the global war on terrorism. While there are truly odious people in the world, they have only become more numerous and powerful. Clearly the war on terrorism is not working, apart from the idea that some are gaining on a purely short-term basis. For economic and geopolitical reasons, the Western countries, led by the United States and the United Kingdom but with many other culpable allies, have sown chaos and carnage through the Middle East, with no regard for the medium-to long-term impact-or for the unintended but predictable consequences. It is instructive to look at recent history. Consider the last fifteen or thirty-five years, going back to the fateful decision of the Carter administration to impose on the Soviet Union its own Vietnam in Afghanistan.
World War II was a calamity of the twentieth century but one that ushered in a new world, a world better than the one that preceded it. This included the United Nations and its Charter, an elaborate system of international law, the Keynesian Welfare State, newly decolonized countries with their own nationalist and developmental agendas, and ironically, the stability created by the nuclear deterrence of the two adversarial superpowers.
There could be another disaster ahead, a bleak period for the human spirit and soul, and one that does not necessarily hold any glimmers of a better world. The Western intellectual tradition is largely optimistic. In dialectical thought it is posited that over time there is an upward trend in wealth and income, human freedom, enlightenment, and so on. But today perhaps is the moment of Giambatista Vico, the eighteenth-century Italian historian and philosopher, who understood that the human condition can go into long periods of degeneration, that progress can be lost, and that regeneration is far from automatic. 
25
the Vietnam War (Andradé), 111-114, 115 Assad, Bashir Al, 10 assassinations/neutralizations: arguments against, x, xiv, xv, 59; drone warfare as means of, 16-18, 111; expansion under Obama administration, 15, 115; international responses, 96; Mehsud, Baitullah, 87-88; normalization of, ix; of other heads of states, 110; term usage, x, 5, 77, 90
provided him with some salary support to get a start on this project.
The Battle of Algiers (film), 26  Becker, Rick, 61  Belfield, Richard, 24  Benjamin, Medea, 58, 89  Bergen, Peter, 78, 79  Bhatt, Chatan, 76  BIJ (Bureau of Investigative Journalism), 78-79 Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 79 Bill of Rights, 17 bin Laden, Osama, 3, 8, 9, 10-11, 110  biological warfare/weapons. See weapons, specific types Blackburn, Greg, 91 Blackwater (now Academi), 10, 75  Boeing 747, 35  Bowcott, Owen, 97  Boyer, Dustin, 55  Bradford, William C., 4  Branfman, Fred, 25  Brennan, John, 16, 87, 89, 115  Brookings Institution, 72, 73  Brooks, Rosa, 80  Brown, Ellen, 39  Bryant, Brandon, 52, 89  Bureau of Investigative Journalism (BIJ), 78-79 Buren, Peter Van, 38  Bush/Bush administration, 3, 9-11, 16, 27,  85  Bzrezinski, Zbigniew, 8   C-5A Galaxy (Lockheed Martin), 33, 34,  35  C-17 (McDonnell Douglas)  34-35  child soldier, 4  China, 101, 109-110  Chomsky, Noam, 82n2, 110-111  Church, Frank, x  CIA, 6, 18, 19, 51, 87, 88, 89  civilians, 6, 101  (Mitchell), 68 soldier ranks, Army versus Air Force, 46 some-evidence standard, 22-23  Souter, David, 22, 23-24  Soviet Union, xiv, 2, 7-8, 30, 31-32,   21  Swanson, David, 38, 104  Swift, Christopher, 74  Syria, 10, 15-16, 21, 92   TacoCopter, 55  Taliban, 3, 9, 20, 25, 73, 87  