# ID: 9a19798fec9142b1843c349299007162
# Title: The Power of Operational Art's Requirements.
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1996.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for thi» collection of information is estimated to average t hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
Figure 
1:
A senior commander schooled with this idea sought decisive battle as the means to decisive victory. He would seek a single decisive victory to produce national objectives.
His opponent attempted to order his combat power in the same way. Thus, each commander had the predominance of his nation's combat power located at the same place and time. Their search for this single great battle was the center of gravity of their operations. 
4
The end of this concept emerged when a single battle could no longer produce a decisive outcome. 
6
7
8
Finally, industrialization improved the nation's military endurance. The nation's loss of a large battle did not mean it had to surrender. It could reproduce or hold in reserve vast military resources. 
9
Military theorists in the late 19 th and early 20 th Century began to wrestle with the problem of how to achieve decisive victory without being able to bring about decisive battle. Young theorists like Captain Alexander Svechin of the Russian Army typified this debate. Svechin, who had returned from the Russo-Japanese War in 1905, was disturbed that Russian battles there lacked a unifying purpose. 
10
1
• 12   space, resources and events into a connected campaign to achieve Russian success.
To Svechin the issue was how a theater commander struggled with the enemy until he could no longer conduct successful military operations. 
13
Combat operations are not self-contained they are only the basic material from which an operation is formed. Only in very infrequent cases can one rely on achieving the ultimate goal of combat operations in a single battle. Normally tins path to the ultimate goal is broken down into a series of operations separated by more or less lengthy pauses, which take place in different areas in a theater and differ significantly from one another due to the differences between the immediate goals of one's forces temporarily strive for...On the basis of the goal of an operation, operational art sets forth a whole series of tactical missions and a number of logistical requirements. Operational art also dictates the basic line of conduct of an operation, depending on the material available, the time which maybe allotted to the handling of certain tactical missions, the forces which may be deployed for battle on a certain front, and finally on 14 the nature of the operation itself.
Svechin and this debate caused commanders to think in a new way about military operations. The senior commander now had to integrate more complex questions. What resources should he and can he use to defeat the enemy? Where and when should he make his attacks in the theater with these resources to destroy the enemy? 
1
16
Second, they should appoint a senior theater commander to achieve it. Finally, this commander should develop the sequence of actions to apply available resources to gain the political aim in concert with his tactical commanders. 
18
19
20
Operational art seeks to ensure that commanders use soldiers, materiel, and time effectively to achieve strategic aims through campaign design. 
21
22
Operational art requires broad vision, the ability to anticipate, a careful understanding of the relationship of means to ends, an understanding of the inherent risks that are under them, and effective joint and combined cooperation. 
23
Relating means to ends is the operational commander's ability to use his forces to achieve the NCA's end state. As JP 3-0 lays out, the commander must apply his resources through his vision to accomplish the strategic aim.
Joint and combined cooperation is this commander's capacity to integrate all of his available resources to accomplish national goals. JP 3-0 tells us that operational commanders must "seek combinations of forces and actions to achieve concentration in various dimensions, all culminating in attaining the assigned objective(s) in the shortest time possible." 26 Anticipation, as described in FM 100-5, is the commander's "ability to avoid surprise as operations unfold; mental and physical adjustments as a result of monitoring operations and determining future actions." 27 JP 3-0 expands this definition to include the commander's ability to exploit any advantage the enemy gives him. This paper will show that if a commander meets these requirements he should execute a campaign that accomplishes the national ends. If a commander meets only some or none of these requirements, he likely will execute an ineffective campaign that does not achieve the political goal. FM 100-5 and JP 3-0 warn that:
Operational art helps commanders understand the conditions for victory before seeking battle, thus avoiding unnecessary battles. Without operational art, war [will] be a set of disconnected engagements, with relative attrition the only measure of success or failure. 
29
1. Dardanelles-Gallipoli Campaign 1915   2. The Soviet Defense 1941-43   3. The Korean War 1950-1951   First, the paper will examine the events that shaped the strategic goals of these campaigns.
Second, it will describe the commander's campaign and its execution. Third, it will show whether or not these commanders accomplished their national end state. Fourth, it will show the degree to which these commanders met the requirements for operational art.
Finally, the paper will conclude that successful campaigning requires commanders to meet all of operational art's requirements; meeting some or none of the requirements is a recipe for failure.
Much of the success of the joint force hinges on the Joint Force Commander's capability to integrate the capabilities of the joint team and synchronize their full dimensional efforts. When Joint Force Commanders fully understand the capabilities of subordinate forces and the strategic and operational environment in which they conduct operations, and organize joint forces for flexible and responsive combat, powerful operational leverage can be achieved in all dimensions of combat operation.
In late 1914, the British War Council was seeking an answer to the stalemate along the Western Front. The impasse between the Allies and the Central Powers had ended the War Council's hope for a short war. Consequently, the Council eyed operations in the Dardanelles to take pressure off its forces on the Western Front and weaken the Central Powers alliance.
Turkish control of the Dardanelles not only threatened freedom of movement in the Mediterranean, but also held the vital entrance to a strategic sea lane to Russia. Since these straits led to Constantinople and it controlled the sea lane between the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea, the British Navy could not support Russia through this line of communication. Additionally, British control of the Dardanelles and Constantinople would threaten the stability of the Turkish government, a key member of the Central Powers. Controlling the Dardanelles was the War Council's first step to cause Turkey's withdrawal, weaken their enemy's alliance, and aid Russia. As J.F.C. Fuller wrote in his book A Military History of the Western World, had the operation prevailed it would have caused:
... the relief of Russia, the neutrality or active cooperation of the Balkan states; the salvation of Serbia, the defeat of Turkey, and the encirclement of Germany from the east while she was gripped in the West. In all probability, not only could Russia have held her own but... without Gallipoli the Russians would have had no revolution. 
31
32
33
On March 5, the Turks repelled a second naval attack through the straits. 
35
This second attack signaled to the Turkish and German governments the value of the straits to the British. On March 26, the Turks, with German advice and consent, appointed German General Liman von Sanders commander of the Dardanelles defense.
He had 25,000 Turkish troops. 36 By April 25, his force had grown to 60,000 defenders, six Turkish divisions. 
37
He located each strong point away from the coast. Considering where the Allies landed, he would order their attack from the strong point to the landing site to force the them back into the sea.
On March 12, the War Council appointed General Hamilton commander of military forces deployed to seize the straits. 
39
40
Consequently, on March 16, the 29 th British Infantry Division quickly deployed to Egypt to link up with French, Australian, and New Zealand divisions in the country and his total strength grew to 75, 000 troops. 
41
4
43
Cnorfibtr Hit! J^^-
Bulair was located at the northern and most narrow portion of the peninsula. He preferred to attack there since it was the shortest approach from the western side to the eastern side's fortresses protecting the straits. 
44
Additionally, he would land a sizable French force on the western shore of Turkey at Kum Kale. Finally, he would conduct a naval bombardment with troop transports in their visible presence from the Gulf of Saros in vicinity of Bulair. He designed these two attacks to confuse the enemy as to his actual landing sites. The French deception force would then return to support the main effort at Cape Helles. 
45
On April 25, Hamilton attacked the Turkish forces on Gallipoli (Figure 
l
47
Hamilton, for the moment, had successfully deceived Sanders into thinking that his main effort was at Bulair. Sanders took steps to protect this vital stretch of land. He moved from Gallipoli to Bulair. By the evening, he was convinced that nothing was happening at Bulair and that the main attack had to be in the south. He ordered two of the divisions there south towards Cape Helles and Gaba Tepe. 
4
However, because the Allied force was equally confused by their landing, they had failed to exploit the advantage offered to them by having surprised the enemy. The Allied force allowed the Turks to seize the key terrain guarding Anzac Cove and by midnight, Hamilton ordered them to dig in to preserve the landing site. 
49
3
Adding to the confusion at Cape Helles was the Navy's inability to land troops at the planned beaches. 
53
54
The early morning deception attacks at Kum Kale and Bulair went well. The French captured its fortifications. Then, according to Hamilton's plan they returned to their ships to support the main effort at Cape Helles. 
55
At the end of the day, Hamilton had one successful attack at Kum Kale and two beachheads on Gallipoli. Yet, he did not have control of the straits and was on the defensive at Cape Helles and Anzac Cove. 
56
57
58
60
61
Furthermore, the Navy's increased combat power in the region should have enhanced Hamilton's force ratio. Yet, the Army did not trust the Navy's ability to provide naval bombardment. 
63
On the morning of August 6, General Hamilton finally attempted another amphibious operation (Figure 
1
Oddly enough, Stopford was not the main effort in this attack. Hamilton's main effort was his battle weary Australian and New Zealand force at Anzac Cove. This force would attack out of their trenches into the early morning darkness just prior to Stopford's landing. Their object was the same terrain it had been fighting on for three months. The key terrain that dominated the cove, Sari Bair. This attack, though bravely fought, was so unsuccessful, that Sanders thought Hamilton's main effort must be at Suvla Bay. 
65
In contrast, Hamilton, although acutely aware of the situation in Suvla Bay, let General Stopford fight the battle. Hamilton's concentration was on the attack at Sari Bair. Stopford, who sat on his ship, thrilled by the landing's success did not aggressively pursue the enemy before its reinforcements could arrive. He was convinced he could overcome the enemy with deliberate movement supported by artillery fire, as he had witnessed on the Western Front. He refused naval gunfire support because he did not trust it to provide safe fires.
By August 8, Sanders was able to position more than a division to react to Stopford's cautious landing. In three days, Stopford committed his entire corps to the attack. But he could not overcome Sanders' leadership or reinforcements. Sanders' forced Hamilton once again to defend his limited success at the Suvla Bay shoreline without the ability to use it as base of operations for a future attack. 
68
On October 14, the War Council ordered Hamilton back to England. 
69
70
Let us now analyze General Hamilton's failure to meet any of operational art's requirements.
First, as an operational commander, General Hamilton failed the broad vision test.
Although he had an operational end state he could clearly see, ships passing through the Dardanelles toward Constantinople, he did not have a design to accomplish it.
Although Hamilton attacked from a different direction, his plan was essentially a repeat of the Navy's. He highlighted in his mind the strategic value of the straits and developed events to seize the fortifications from the southern and western side of Gallipoli. But his frontal attacks for three months from his defensive positions and his landing at Suvla Bay reinforce the notion that Hamilton's design was centered only on He consistently remained fixed on Gallipoli's fortifications to achieve his operational end state. As the authors in Military Misfortunes wrote:
Over the next three months the Allied troops struggled to enlarge their foothold against the opposition of Turkish machine guns and the difficulties of the terrain, while their commander telegraphed home for more divisions and more artillery ammunition. Men were easier to find than shells, and with them Hamilton planned to make a major effort at the start of August to surge to the crests of the hills which dominated the Gallipoli peninsula. Once held, they would put the Allies in a commanding position from which to bombard the Turkish positions, support the navy against Turkish batteries strung out along the narrows, clear the peninsula. All that would remain would be a triumphant advance on Constantinople, already terrorized by the appearance of Allied battleships off the Golden Horn. 
71
Although Hamilton had a good operational end state to base his future upon, he did not, despite his new resources, design a different series of events to accomplish it. General Hamilton did not correctly relate his means to accomplishing his operational end state. First, he insisted on trying to defeat a static and forward deployed defense. From the campaign's outset, Hamilton's preoccupation was to get ashore. He demonstrated to some extent his ability to land forces. Once ashore however, he convinced himself that he could overcome the forces to his front to get to the eastern side of Gallipoli. His useless attacks for three months clearly illustrate this point. Even the landing at Suvla Bay was designed to support operations to push the Turks off the key terrain at Sari Bair. Hamilton should have realized that his means were playing into Sanders' ends.
Hamilton never developed a method to overcome an active defense. Despite having the British Navy and two successful deception operations as a big part of his means, he never thought of a method to weaken or disrupt the active defense. Clearly, Sanders was surprised at Suvla Bay and had to react quickly to save the defense. Yet Hamilton let Stopford run the supporting attack, while he witnessed another failed effort at Anzac Cove. An opportunity was lost because Hamilton did not realize what he had done to Sanders' active defense. In other words, he never deliberately used his forces (means) in a new way to achieve his operational end.
Finally, Hamilton, despite having three full corps by mid-July and the most modern navy in the world at his disposal, was fixed at the tactical level. He could not think of an operational method to achieve an operational end. He relied on wasteful tactical frontal attacks for three months to achieve this operational end objective.
General Hamilton failed to integrate his joint and combined combat power to achieve his operational end. First, Hamilton did not integrate all of the forces available to him to achieve his objectives. Sanders' weakness was on the Asiatic coast. Hamilton chose not to exploit the opportunity he created at Kum Kale. The French return to Cape Helles after their successful attack at Kum Kale shows that Hamilton was only ready for a success on Gallipoli.
Second, as noted earlier, Hamilton conducted wasteful frontal attacks for three months from his initial landing sites before attempting to use the sea to maneuver. Given the success of the deceptions at Bulair and Kum Kale, Hamilton should have tried other efforts to confuse Sanders. Hamilton had unrestricted use of the sea throughout much of his theater, but failed to use it to his advantage.
Finally, despite having ship to shore communication with line of sight and radio, Hamilton and the Navy never worked out their problems with naval gunfire. Since much of the combat was close quarters, Army officers like Stopford did not trust it. Yet, given its potential effects and three months to train with it in combat, one would expect they could have worked out this problem. This issue gains even greater significance given the ground artillery ammunition shortage.
Overall, Hamilton's command paid too little attention to how they could coordinate their available combat power to capture the straits and seize this vital sea lane.
Failing to exploit his success at Kum Kale, his freedom of the seas, and the potential effects of accurate naval gunfire significantly contributed to this operational failure.
Finally, Hamilton did not anticipate the effects of Sanders' defense or his own offense. General Sanders was assigned to provide the professional military leadership the Turkish government felt it needed to protect the straits. The German General did not disappoint them. As mentioned, he significantly strengthened the defenses of the straits with manpower and material. In addition, he reorganized the forward deployed defense into an active one that could respond to a variety of landing efforts to seize the fortifications on Gallipoli. 
72
Furthermore, on April 25, Hamilton had one successful landing in his operation.
The French seized the forts at Kum Kale and then returned to the ships. Sanders would eventually reinforce Kum Kale with three divisions because Hamilton did not exploit this early opportunity to threaten the entrance to the Dardanelles.
Hamilton did develop a plan to deceive and surprise the commander of the Turkish defenses. Yet, he did not make the physical and mental adjustments to take advantage of the effects of this surprise.
Although the War Council shaped an affective end state, General Hamilton's campaign failed to meet any of operational art's requirements for the following reasons.
First, his operational design was fixed solely on destroying the fortifications on Gallipoli.
Second, he never adjusted his methods to relate his means to achieve operational objectives, even though the conditions of the campaign changed dramatically. Third, his failure to effectively employ his joint combat power from the sea or exploit his combined success at Kum Kale culminated this disaster. Finally, Hamilton failed to anticipate the nature of the defense he was attacking on the peninsula or his own success off it.
In this first case study, Hamilton's campaign did not meet any of operational art's requirements and the national end state was not achieved. No amount of tactical success could overcome operational failure. Chapter Three will show how meeting all of the requirements achieves favorable results.
The first duty of the art of politics with respect to strategy is to formulate the political goal of the war. Any goal should be strictly coordinated with the resources available to achieve it. The political goal should be appropriate to one's war waging capability. 
74
The two leaders agreed not to fight each other and in the nature divide Poland and the Baltic states. 
75
On December 18, 1940, Hitler published Directive 21. The directive's military purpose was to protect the German eastern flank from potential ground and air operations.
His ultimate objective was to defeat the Soviet defense force stationed in the east with a Blitzkrieg attack and force Stalin to surrender. 
76
77
78
Stalin ordered a second game. The two principal players switched roles. Stalin this time allowed Zhukov to arrange his defense in depth. There are no published reports of the results of the second game, but Stalin did abandon the forward defense option for two reasons. First, he realized that he did not have an army equipped to defeat a rapid German thrust from the east. Second, he concluded that defending forward did not take advantage of Soviet terrain. The wargame produced one other result. Stalin named General Zhukov Chief of the Soviet General Staff. 
80
81
From December 1940 to June 1941, Zhukov developed and revised his defensive campaign plan. He knew ultimately his operational end state was to defeat the German main attack on Moscow. This would be his main effort in spite of objections from Stalin and other members of the High Command. They insisted that the Ukraine should be the main effort because of its rich oil reserves. 
82
2
Zhukov arrayed a 1st echelon defense in zones to counter the initial German penetrations of the Soviet western frontier. The defense would stretch north to south 1,200 miles. Its depth would cover most of European Russia. The essential purposes of these 1 st echelon forces were to absorb the German attacks, to weaken their effect using the expanse and potentially brutal weather of the Soviet frontier, and to deceive the Wehrmacht into thinking they were fighting the entire Soviet Army. 
86
Moscow, but close enough to attack its remaining strength. 
87
The final element of the plan was to would protect and preserve the 2 nd and 3 r echelons for future counter attack and offensive operations. 
89
In February, Stalin partially mobilized the Soviet Armed Forces according to Zhukov's plan. 
90
On June 22, 1941 Zhukov's defensive plan was turned over to the capable hands of General Shaposhikov, Stalin's new Chief of the General Staff. 
95
By the fall of 1941, Southern Group seized Kiev. German forces produced one million Soviet casualties and won many battles. Zhukov's defensive plan was stressed, but still in tact. 
97
On the other hand, Hitler and his generals still did not agree on where to focus the operation; in the center or the south? Hitler initially thought he should continue to exploit The Germans on the other hand were convinced that the Russian's had culminated.
Consequently, Hitler and General Manstein, commander of the remainder of Southern Group's original force, developed a plan a to regain the initiative in the south and in the center. Hitler called the plan Operation Citadel. Manstein's objectives were limited.
They were to penetrate the Soviet defense, capture valuable equipment, and reunite encircled forces. 
106
107
Operation Barbarossa before the Soviet Union's collapse in 1991, ". . . [that] the Soviet state exists today is testament to the correctness of his vision,. . ."
Zhukov's broad vision designed a defense that absorbed the effects of a Blitzkrieg force aimed at his operational end, Moscow and preserved the USSR, his strategic objective. His vision saw both the letters "D" for design and "E " for end state.
First, he designed the events to use forces in the present and preserve others for the future. His 1 st tactical echelon was able to absorb the effects of the brutal German advance, while the 2" echelon was preserved for the counterattack at Moscow. By preserving his 2 nd echelon and sacrificing his 1 st , the Soviets were able to employ their best equipped armored divisions, as designed, at Moscow.
Second, he designed events so that the 1 st tactical echelon's terrain and depth weakened the German's long advance through its main approach. Four months into their attack, not only were the Wehrmacht and Hitler indecisive in the south and center, but when their main effort finally made it to Moscow it was vulnerable. Zhukov's tactical counterattack and the 2 nd echelon's one compelled Center Group to withdraw 60 miles and the Wehrmacht to temporarily hunker down into a frozen defense. Operation Barbarossa's offensive push to Moscow was over.
Zhukov effectively related Soviet available means using methods that preserved the continuity of this state. First, his defensive plan used terrain and depth as a method to protect his strategic reserve from air or ground attack. He also used the depth of the Soviet interior as a method to weaken Center Group and direct its advance into the preserved strength of the 2 nd echelon and strategic reserve.
Second, he preserved the strategic reserve as a method to conduct counterattacks and counteroffensives. The Soviet Army consistently surprised German commanders with new forces on the battlefields at Moscow, 
Stalingrad and Kursk. 118
It is difficult to measure how Zhukov integrated his joint and combined power.
Since much of his air force was destroyed in June 1941, the bulk of the campaign was a ground one and the defense was fought exclusively with Soviet forces.
Yet, if one measures how he integrated available forces into a defensive plan and the actual attacks he led, he receives high marks. First, the Wehrmacht and Luftwaffe never paralyzed his echeloned defense long enough to cause the defense to collapse. His plan could always engage the German advance in spite of giving up vast amounts of territory and losing many soldiers to a tactically superior fighting one.
Stalingrad demonstrate his capacity to integrate combat power. Furthermore, at Kursk, as an operational commander, he integrated close air support into a strong point defense that defeated 60 percent of the remaining German armor on the Eastern Front. This joint defense also severely damaged the Luftwaffe's air capability. Ultimately, Zhukov's integration of his joint combat power as the supreme commander of the Soviet counteroffensive attrited the Germany Army in the east.
Zhukov's defensive plan anticipated the requirements for defeating the German attack. First, he understood German strengths and vulnerabilities as the attacker. He equally understood his own. He prioritized his echelons in depth including his strategic reserve in anticipation of those effects. Consequently, by trading space for time with weaker forces, he anticipated the effects of extending the Germans across the Soviet frontier would have on its advance and at same time preserving the Soviet Army's best forces to confront it.
Second, because he anticipated these effects during the first wargame, he was able to persuade Stalin to mobilize some of his armed forces well before the German attack and most of the strategic reserve before the actual invasion date. Although the results of the second game are not yet uncovered, one can credibly assume from Stalin's decisions to defend in depth and mobilize some his strategic assets, that Zhukov was equally successful in this one.
Consequently, Zhukov was able to begin the early constitution of the strategic reserve. Stalin would later relieve Zhukov. Yet the character of the defense remained and
Stalin had the strategic assets with which to fight. As a result, during all critical stages of the defense, the Soviets always had forces available to conduct decisive counterattacks.
Although there is a great deal of evidence to suggest that the Soviets were tactically surprised by the German advance through the Soviet State, there is ample evidence to show they were not so operationally. Zhukov recognized that the better trained and equipped German Army could destroy the Soviet one. He made the mental and physical adjustments in his plan as an operational designer to avoid those paralyzing affects. 
119
Consequently, he and the Soviet military met all of operational art's requirements and achieved Stalin's end state. Furthermore, sound operational planning and execution, in this case, overcame tactical failures. Chapter Four will show that meeting some of the requirements does not have the same result.
Balance is the maintenance of the force, its capabilities, and its operations in such a manner as to contribute to freedom of action and responsiveness. Balance refers to the appropriate mix of forces and capabilities within the joint force as well as the nature and timing of operations conducted. JFCs strive to maintain friendly force balance while aggressively seeking to disrupt an enemy's balance by striking with powerful blows from unexpected directions or dimensions and pressing the fight. 
120
From the late 1940s to the early 1990s, the United States was engaged in the Cold War. As the free world's only superpower, the US accepted responsibility for fighting communism on many fronts. This Cold War environment determined how America would and could apply its combat power to achieve a national end. General Douglas MacArthur planned and executed a campaign in Korea during this Cold War period.
After World War II, the US and Soviet Union administered the surrender of Japanese forces with the understanding that these two great powers would reunify Korea in 1947. Meanwhile, the Soviet Union was also consolidating its power in the communist bloc and the Chinese were waging a civil war. General MacArthur commanded US forces in East Asia during this period. 
121
Consequently, the United Nations (UN) declared the 38 th parallel an internationally recognized boundary between North and South Korea. In response to the invasion, the UN security council held an emergency session On June 27, the UN declared that it would authorize the use of force to aid South Korea repel the North Korean invasion and reestablish the international boundary in Korea.
President Truman unilaterally endorsed the UN mandate. 
128
He was convinced that the ROKA could not prevent the NKPA from seizing the entire peninsula. He originally thought the North Korea war aims were not that extreme and the ROKA could handle the situation. He no longer held that opinion and began planning for ill the deployment and use of US joint forces on the peninsula.
On July 5, 1950, the first element of the 8 th US Army in Japan engaged the North Koreans in South Korea. 
132
133
134
133
136
137
As early as July 13, Mac Arthur developed his plan to reestablish the territorial integrity of the ROK. Clay Blair in his book The Forgotten War effectively summarized MacArthur's campaign plan.
He would first "isolate the battlefield" by closing off NKPA supply routes at the China and Russia borders with American air power. . . After the battlefield had been isolated and stabilized. MacArthur went on, his intention was not merely to drive the NKPA back across the 38th Parallel but rather to "destroy" it. This he would do by reviving the recently canceled Inchon amphibious landing plan, designed to trap the NKPA in giant pincers between those forces and an attacking Eighth Army. . . After the NKPA had been destroyed the problem would be to "compose and unite Korea," and that might require American occupation of the entire peninsula." 
139
His plan had three vital elements. First, an air power element needed to isolate the enemy from its base of supply. Second, a naval element, as it had done in World War II, needed to maneuver a large ground force and surprise the enemy with an amphibious assault at Inchon. Finally, a ground element needed to breakout from Pusan to trap the enemy between the Inchon insertion and the Pusan perimeter.
MacArthur's plan to land at Inchon was actually developed by Pentagon staffers.  He privately told Truman that the Chinese Civil War had weakened their military capability to the extent they would not risk war with his command. 159 Furthermore, if they did invade with forces from Manchuria, (as they were on this date) he would destroy them from the air as they attempted to invade. He went on tell Truman that although the Soviets did pose a credible threat, mounting such an effort was well beyond their current military capability in the region. Truman and Bradley did not privately or publicly challenge the General's assertions. 
160
ROKA forces continued attacks against the NKPA and reached the Yalu (Figure 
3
Consequently, MacArthur's military vision to accomplish his initial operational end was effective. We will never know if his vision for the second one would have had the same result. Yet, one must argue that his impressions of Chinese involvement clouded his vision before and after they invaded.
Once the Chinese invaded, MacArthur was not authorized to maximize the effects of his ability to integrate his forces. Yet, until his reaction to the Chinese invasion, MacArthur proved his ability to integrate joint and combined operations.
This leads to MacArthur's inability to anticipate the impact of his operations north of the 38 lh parallel. The Chinese were prepared to support the North Koreans if their help was required. Not only did the Chinese invasion surprise him, but MacArthur refused to believe the impact of it and had to withdraw to the south in response.
He had failed to effectively wargame the Chinese response to his actions in North Korea. The Chinese surprised him because they covertly prepared for the invasion in advance, moved at night, and stayed out of major contact with ROKA and UN forces until they attacked. Because he considered them militarily weak, he did not make the mental and physical adjustments to his operations north of the 38 th parallel to account for their potential involvement.
Consequently, the Chinese dominated his command for five months. He lost the opportunity to reunify Korea by not limiting his actions in North Korea and not planning to thwart the invasion. 
170
By meeting only some of operational art's requirements, he did not create Truman's end state. Although the opposing forces ended up essentially where the conflict began, the opportunity to reunify-Korea was lost and tension exists today.
but fail to adapt it and not achieve the national end state. Too, a commander's brilliance at employing joint and combined forces must be matched by his ability to anticipate how the enemy will react to that brilliance. This case study shows that a commander's military abilities must coincide with his authority's political realities. Truman's Cold War realities constrained MacArthur's idea of how to wage the war in Korea.
The essential question answered in this monograph is "How does meeting operational art's requirements affect a theater commander's ability to accomplish the national end state in the Age of Industrialized Warfare?" It has focused on the ability of various commanders to meet operational art's requirements. They are broad vision, relating means to ends, effective joint and combined cooperation, and anticipation.
The current state of modern warfare requires that commanders apply operational art to impose their nation's will on another. These requirements are so profound that they will have fruitful or disastrous impact on the national end state.
The commanders in the case studies examined caused or did not achieve their political leadership's end state. This statement does not presuppose that these are the only requirements to achieve a national goal. Certainly the integration of the other forms of national power: diplomatic, information, and economic, tie operational campaigns to a strategic end state. However, in operational art, a commander's inability to meet all of these requirements will almost surely cause a campaign's failure.
In Chapter Two, General Hamilton's operational failures caused his inability to achieve his operational end, freedom of sea movement in the Dardanelles. His vision was too narrowly focused on destroying the fortifications on Gallipoli. He also failed to anticipate the Turkish mobile defense and exploit his own successes. Furthermore, Hamilton did not develop methods to take advantage of his naval superiority and his experiences on the peninsula. Finally, the British military did not develop a unified combat team to capture the straits and seize Constantinople. Consequently, despite having a clear strategic end state, Hamilton failed to properly apply operational art to achieve it.
In Chapter Three, Zhukov and the Soviet military met all of the requirements for operational art. Zhukov's vision to defeat the German advance at Moscow created a defensive design that absorbed the German attack, defeated its offensive operations at Moscow, and then attrited the German Army in Russia. He anticipated the mental and physical adjustments required to turn the enemy's strengths into weaknesses and his weaknesses into strengths. Stalin's end state was to halt the offensive and preserve the force. Zhukov related operational methods to his means to accomplish those ends.
Zhukov also integrated his available combat power in the defense to overcome many defeats and material losses to remain an effective defensive force. Furthermore, he demonstrated his personal command of them at Moscow, Stalingrad, and Kursk.
In Chapter Four, much of the failure in Korea can be placed on MacArthur's inability to adjust to his new operational end state. Although he did design events to defeat the NKPA, he failed to wargame the Chinese response to his victory. His desire to expand the conflict into China put methods in direct conflict with Truman's end state.
Until November 1950, he proved his ability to integrate joint and combined operations to achieve his initial operational end state. Yet, this ability conflicted with his political leader's desires to contain the conflict. 
Operational art's requirements establish the foundation for conducting modern warfare because they create an integrative thought process between operations in a theater and the accomplishment of a national end state. When a commander does not meet all of these requirements in a well thought out way, he will probably fail to achieve his operational end state. He will most likely create meaningless events on the battlefield, that lead to strategic failure. A commander cannot bat .250, .500, or even .750 and expect to achieve the national end state. He must hit 1.000.
What is the impact of this analysis?
First, each of these commanders had clear national end states. It is popular in the current military to question the strategic level's capability to form an adequate end state before launching military operations; we claim that is all we need. This research indicates that given a clear strategic goal, the potential exists to execute ineffective operational art and not achieve that goal.
Finally, FM 100-5 and JP 3-0 have identified the requirements for creating effective operational art to attain the strategic objective. Yet, in this author's opinion, they do not give them exact explanation. These requirements should be well defined terms in doctrine. The writers of the next version of these documents should better define these requirements to insure commanders understand their meaning and the power of their intended effects in a campaign.
defense. This echelon surrendered 400 miles of territory, more than 300,000 soldiers, 1000 tanks, 600 artillery pieces, and 2,000 aircraft. Northern Group penetrated the Leningrad province.
defense. This echelon surrendered 400 miles of territory, more than 300,000 soldiers, 1000 tanks, 600 artillery pieces, and 2,000 aircraft. Northern Group penetrated the Leningrad province.
Zhukov and his plan had halted Operation Barbarossa's advance.
Zhukov and his plan had halted Operation Barbarossa's advance.
interfering with his policies to contain the war in Korea and his negotiations to settle the conflict.
interfering with his policies to contain the war in Korea and his negotiations to settle the conflict.
This discussion of the first naval attack I summarized from Fuller, A Military History of the Western World, p. 239.
This discussion of the Council's reaction to the first naval attack I summarized from Fuller, A Military History of the Western World, p. 238.
This discussion of the second naval attack I paraphrased fromMoorehead, Gallipoli,  p. 80.    
This discussion German and Turk reaction to the second naval attack I paraphrased form Fuller, A Military History of the Western World, p. 241.
This description of Sanders' view of the events as they happened I summarized fromMoorehead, Gallipoli, 
This description of events at Anzac from the British and Turkish perspectives I put together from these two sources Fuller, A Military History of the Western World, p. 243 andMoorehead, Gallipoli, 
This casualty figure at Anzac Cove I found in Ernest and Trevor Depuy, The Encyclopedia of Military History, (London: England: Janes Publishing Company), p. 954.
This description of events at Cape Helles I summarized fromMoorehead, Gallipoli, p.  141.    
This description of the landing and events at Cape Helles from a Turk perspective I summarized fromCohen, Military Misfortunes, p. 138.   "  This description of the confusing 29 th Div landing and events at Cape Helles I summarized fromCohen, Military Misfortunes, p. 137.   54  This description of events at Cape Helles I summarized from Fuller, A Military History of the Western World, p. 242.55  This description of events at Kum Kale I summarized fromMoorehead, Gallipoli, p.  150.   
This description of the field artillery effects I paraphrased fromCohen, Military  Misfortunes, p. 150.    
This description of naval artillery effects and use of I paraphrased fromCohen, Military  Misfortunes, p. 152.    
This description of the Stopford's intel and mission I paraphrased from Fuller, A Military History of the Western World, p. 260.
Sanders' reaction to the attack at Suvla Bay I obtained fromMoorehead, Gallipoli, 
Sanders' use of terrain and Turk forces I paraphrased fromCohen, Military  Misfortunes, 
This evaluation of Hamilton's reaction to events and their outcome I summarized fromMoorehead, Gallipoli, 
This evaluation of Hamilton's reaction to events and their outcome I summarized fromCohen, Military Misfortunes, 
I obtained this date of Hamilton's relief from Fuller, A Military History of the Western World, p. 260.
This description of Zhukov's defense I summarized from Fugate, Operation Barbarossa, p. 41.
This description of Zhukov's defense I summarized from Fugate, Operation Barbarossa, p. 100.
This description of Zhukov's defense I summarized from Kipp, "Barbarossa and the Crisis of Successive Operations" p. 105.
This description of Zhukov's defense I summarized from Kipp, "Barbarossa and the Crisis of Successive Operations" p. 95.
This description of Zhukov's defense I summarized from Kipp, "Barbarossa and the Crisis of Successive Operations" p. 105.
This description of the effects of this power on MacArthur's future war plans in Korea I summarized fromJones, The MacArthur Years, p. 451, 468.   
I obtained this summary of Truman's NSC meeting from Flint, "The Korean War," p.3.
The dates of Operation Chromite's naval bombardment I obtained from Depuy, The Encyclopedia of Military History, p. 1242; and the map fromCohen, Military  Misfortunes, p. 167.    
The dates of Operation Chromite's landing at Inchon I obtained from Fehrenbach, This Kind of War, p. 661.
I paraphrased this description of the Inchon landing from Depuy, The Encyclopedia of Military History, p. 1243.
The dates of Operation Chromite's breakout from Pusan I obtained from Fehrenbach, This Kind of War, p. 662.
I paraphrased this description of the breakout from Pusan from Depuy, The Encyclopedia of Military History, p. 1242. 132 I summarized the reestablishment of the 38 th parallel from Appleman, The US Army in the Korean War, p. 600-6. 153 I paraphrased this description of the ROKA crossing the parallel from Depuy, The Encyclopedia of Military History, p. 1243.
of the plan for his command's review. 
14
141
Inside this newly formed defensive perimeter, MacArthur conducted a build up of material and troops. 
143
Combined and joint air assets provided close air support to enhance the defense. In addition, much of the remaining ROKA was reconstituted. Once the Chinese invaded, MacArthur did not use his means to accomplish his newoperational goal in a manner consistent with Truman's desired strategic end state. Prior to this event, he demonstrated an enormous capacity to do so.
Despite having ground forces that were not well trained or equipped, MacArthur effectively used his joint and combined methods from the sea and air to accomplish his operational end. He used these methods to attrit the NKPA in the South, to protect his build-up of forces in Pusan, and to execute Operation Chromite.
Once MacArthur wanted to use these same methods to accomplish his new operational end, Truman relieved MacArthur. His operational methods were no longer consistent with Truman's strategic concerns. His desire to expand the conflict into China with his air forces had put his methods in direct conflict with the President's strategic goals.
MacArthur, until his public pronouncement, integrated all of his available combat power. He effectively used UN air, naval, ground and ROKA combat power to restore the territorial integrity of South Korea and destroy the NKPA.
The landing at Inchon and breakout of Pusan integrated all of his ground, sea, and air operations to overwhelm the NKPA in less than two weeks. His operations in North Korea captured its capital, and until the Chinese became involved in the conflict, reunified the Korean peninsula. MacArthur also integrated UN and ROKA forces in the combined defense of Pusan, the landing at Inchon, the breakout at Pusan, and the attack across the 38 th parallel.
I obtained Truman's reasons for relieving and the date from Fehrenbach, This Kind of War, p. 416-20.   I obtained the dates for all of these events in the chronology found in Fehrenbach, This   Kind of War, p. 663.   This idea of not planning for the invasion I obtained from Cohen, Military   Misfortunes, p. 172-3.  