# ID: 9a775ac6268d4be0977586be406a0b26
# Title: Historical Case Studies of Combined Arms Maneuver in Large-Scale Combat Operations
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The operations to capture Riga and the Baltic islands represented a clear evolution in German operational doctrine.
In the assault against Riga, General Hutier recognized the advantages of stormtrooper tactics and integrated them into an operational plan that further utilized key artillery innovations pioneered by Bruchmüller.
Following up on the success at Riga, German forces successfully built upon the innovations at Riga while effectively engaging in a type of warfare in which Germany had no previous experience.
The amphibious operation also marked one of the few times that the German naval and army branches of the military successfully coordinated and supported each other during the entirety of the war.
While very few of the tactics during these operations proved to be new or unique, their application and scope demonstrated to German High Command the effectiveness of this new way of waging war.
The following offensives at Caporetto in October 1917 and the Spring Offensive in 1918 heavily resembled the operations in the Baltic in their execution and planning.
In fact, following Riga and Albion German High Command transferred General von Hutier and Bruchmüller to the Western Front to play crucial roles in the pivotal Spring Offensive.
Many of the units that took part in the operations in and around Riga also found themselves transferred to the west following the withdrawal of Russia from the war.