# ID: 9a775ac6268d4be0977586be406a0b26
# Title: Historical Case Studies of Combined Arms Maneuver in Large-Scale Combat Operations
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Since the Soviet Union's fall in 1989, the specter of large-scale ground combat against a peer adversary was remote. During the years following, the US Army found itself increasingly called upon to lead multinational operations in the lower to middle tiers of the range of military operations and conflict continuum. The events of 11 September 2001 led to more than 15 years of intense focus on counterterrorism, counterinsurgency, and stability operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. An entire generation of Army leaders and Soldiers were culturally imprinted by this experience. We emerged as an Army more capable in limited contingency operations than at any time in our nation's history, but the geopolitical landscape continues to shift and the risk of great power conflict is no longer a remote possibility.
While our Army focused on limited contingency operations in the Middle East and Southwest Asia, other regional and peer adversaries scrutinized US military processes and methods and adapted their own accordingly. As technology has proliferated and become accessible in even the most remote corners of the world, the US military's competitive advantage is being challenged across all of the warfighting domains. In the last decade, we have witnessed an emergent China, a revanchist and aggressive Russia, a menacing North Korea, and a cavalier Iranian regime. Each of these adversaries seeks to change the world order in their favor and contest US strategic interests abroad. The chance for war against a peer or regional near-peer adversary has increased exponentially, and we must rapidly shift our focus to successfully compete in all domains and across the full range of military operations.
Over the last two years, the US Army has rapidly shifted the focus of its doctrine, training, education, and leader development to increase readiness and capabilities to prevail in large-scale ground combat operations against peer and near-peer threats. Our new doctrine, Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations, dictates that the Army provide the joint force four unique strategic roles: shaping the security environment, preventing conflict, prevailing in large-scale combat operations, and consolidating gains to make temporary success permanent.
To enable this shift of focus, the Army is now attempting to change its culture shaped by over 15 years of persistent limited-contingency operations. Leaders must recognize that the hard-won wisdom of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars is important to retain but does not fully square with the exponential lethality, hyperactive chaos, and accelerated tempo of the multi-domain battlefield when facing a peer or near-peer adversary.
To emphasize the importance of the Army's continued preparation for large-scale combat operations, the US Army Combined Arms Center has published these volumes of The US Army Large-Scale Combat Operations Series book set. The intent is to expand the knowledge and understanding of the contemporary issues the US Army faces by tapping our organizational memory to illuminate the future. The reader should reflect on these case studies to analyze each situation, identify the doctrines at play, evaluate leaders' actions, and determine what differentiated success from failure. Use them as a mechanism for discussion, debate, and intellectual examination of lessons of the past and their application to today's doctrine, organization, and training to best prepare the Army for large-scale combat. Relevant answers and tangible reminders of what makes us the world's greatest land power await in the stories of these volumes.                     
Large-scale combat operations are at the far right of the conflict continuum and associated with war. Historically, battlefields in large-scale combat operations have been chaotic, intense, and highly destructive than those the Army has experienced in the past decades. During the 1943 battles of Sidi Bou Zid and Kasserine Pass in World War II, 5,000 American Soldiers were killed over the course of just 10 days; during the first three days of fighting the Army lost Soldiers at a rate of 1,333 per day. 
1
2
3
The definition of combined arms maneuver is the application of the elements of combat power in a complementary and reinforcing manner to achieve physical, temporal, or psychological advantages over the enemy; xi preserve freedom of action; and exploit success. 
4
5
In his excellent history of Third Army in the Persian Gulf War, Richard M. Swain pointed out that theorists, historians, and commentators on things military frequently align themselves in one of two camps of explanation. Swain called them the romantic school and the realist school. Romantics believe that maneuver can be so adroit that a discerning enemy will admit defeat at the hands of an operational master, and will surrender to the brilliance of the enemy's operational art. The other school-occupied primarily by practitioners, especially those of an artillery heritagebelieves that the end result of military operations is death from indirect fire. The more you shoot, the less damage the enemy can do. Victory happens-not through psycho-shock or silk scarves in the air but from 155mm and larger artillery fires. 
6
7
These chapters are not all strictly chronological; the editors selected particularly noteworthy assessments of US actions in Operation Iraqi Freedom I and at the start of the stabilization period in Korea to begin the discussion. From those assessments, a common language emerged. The remaining chapters tend to be chronological.
The concluding chapter was written by Lieutenant General Michael D. Lundy, the commanding general of the Combined Arms Center-not as a case study of the past but as an anticipation of the American needs of its Army for the next two decades. General Lundy discusses the future of combined arms maneuver requirements and expectations to win our next wars in multi-domain operations. In all these chapters, issues of Rick Swain's romantic and realist versions of modern combat are debated ; each reader will make his or her own assessment given the lessons revealed through these case studies. For the convenience of readers, a brief overview of each chapter follows. Chapter 1, written by General (Retired) William S. Wallace, former V Corps commander during OIF1 in 2003, and Colonel (Retired) Kevin C.M. Benson, former J5 Combined Forces Land Component Command (CFLCC) planner during the invasion. They explain the planning effects leading to the production of the CFLCC/Third Army major operations plan Cobra II and execution of the plan in combat. The focus is on the major developments of the planning effort during war gaming and plan revision as well as how the V Corps commander adjusted his execution as the conditions of combat changed.
In Chapter 2, Colonel Bryan Gibby, the Chief of the Military Division at the Department of History, US Military Academy, analyzes the 2nd Infantry Division's assault on Korea's Punchbowl in 1951, to include the assault on Bloody Ridge and Heartbreak Ridge. He analyzes how combined arms affected the Punchbowl operations through the preliminary attacks to seize Hill 1179 and establish a forward patrol base-a hasty attack to eliminate the North Korean forces at Bloody Ridge and follow-on operations on Heartbreak Ridge. He reviews each of the field commanders on the ground in this analysis of the doctrine and fighting in a large-scale combat environment and shares the honest results of leaders who failed to be adaptive in large-scale war. Gibby's cautionary note primarily addresses the difficulty of achieving great things with less-than-overwhelming resources. His narrative should enable further discussions of life under heavy and sustained enemy artillery bombardment-something we have missed, thankfully, in most actions in Afghanistan and Iraq.
In Chapter 3, Major Mike C. Kiser, an instructor in the Department of History at the US Military Academy, examines the Chinese use of maneuver to achieve the PLA's operational and strategic objectives from October 1950 to June 1951. Kiser demonstrates how Chinese officers understood advantages against the United Nations forces and created superiority through maneuver and firepower.
In chapter 4, R. David Pressley II, a history graduate student from the University of North Texas, analyzes German utilization of combined arms operations at Riga and the Baltic Islands in the final months of the Eastern front in World War I. He discusses several tactical and operational innovations witnessed during these German attacks that were promulgated into official German doctrine and quickly transferred to the Italian and Western fronts. This return of movement to the battlefield was actually based primarily on overwhelming firepower as well as indirect and direct fire at the point of penetration rather than on some romantic notion of adroit operational art, mystical psycho-shock of enemy command and control systems, or getting inside his observe-orient-decide-act loop. Today's doctrine writers and senior leaders, as well as those who would become senior commanders and staff officers, would do well to read this chapter-especially if they think they have found the magic keys to the kingdom in some new technology.
In Chapter 5, Major John M. Nimmons, an Armor officer and recent School of Advanced Military Studies (SAMS) graduate, provides a case study of V Corps' operations in Meuse-Argonne offensive, charting the obstacles to adaption as well as the social and cultural impacts that affected V Corps actions and decisions. This chapter details early V Corps struggles to link their artillery and intelligence systems at the corps level with tactical innovation of combined arms maneuver at division level. The challenge of dividing the multiple tasks on the modern battlefield between echelons to maximize both effectiveness and efficiency is rarely the focus of historians' xiv work but is a critical component of battlefield competence. Nimmons describes the steep US Army learning curve in the fall of 1918 and finishes his chapter with a clear depiction of what victory looks like-the clear coordination of fires, maneuver, tanks, combat aircraft, effective logistics, and an effective level of coordination from the corps to the divisions.
In Chapter 6, Robert M. Young, a history professor at American Military University, explains the effect of just-in-time, or almost just-in-time, support to a hastily mobilized US Army division in World War II in the Southwest Pacific Area (SWPA) in 1942 and early 1943. Equipped with only one howitzer of sufficient firepower to actually destroy Japanese bunkers, inadequate ammunition for that one artillery piece, initially no tanks worthy of the name, and woefully short infantry front-line strength, the early fighting in Buna and elsewhere in the SWPA was not a story of success. However, learning did occur and subsequent offensives-using more artillery, many more tanks, and some allied combat-experienced Soldiers-rapidly turned the course of these battle against the Japanese. In Chapter 7, Major Paul P. Cheval, an Infantry officer and another recent graduate of SAMS, discusses the 80th Infantry Division that engaged the German Army in August 1944 at Argentan and again in September 1944 when crossing the Moselle River. He analyzes the 80th Division's ability to employ combined arms and reveals that although it eventually achieved its objective, the division too often fought with separate arms. More an explanation of the challenges of attaining useful levels of combined arms than a rousing success story, this is an important perspective on the difficulty of even the simplest things in combat. In this case, Cheval reminds us of the difficulty of anything when engaged in large-scale combat with an opponent who refuses to give up.
In Chapter 8, Captain James A. Villaneuva, a Department of History instructor at West Point, discusses General Kreuger's Sixth Army. The Sixth Army landed in Luzon on 9 January 1945, with initial operations on Luzon and focusing on the seizure of Manila. He analyzes the adaptive combinations of infantry, tanks, and tank destroyers and mobile artillery that allowed the 37th Infantry Division and 1st Cavalry Division to drive south to seize Manila. A story too infrequently told in our histories, the clearance of Manila may very well be a forecast of combat in mega cities.
In Chapter 9, Lieutenant General (Retired) Daniel P. Bolger discusses our operations in Cambodia-from the political realities of the Nixon administration, through the machinations at four-star headquarters, down to the fighting soldiers, both South Vietnamese and American. Bolger-a xv University of Chicago-trained historian, former division commander in combat, and fellow instructor in the US Military Academy (USMA) History Department-contributed a smoothly narrated but incisive history of the operational and sometimes tactical incursion into Cambodia that brought powerful strategic results, although not quite as intended. Strong on assessment of Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) contributions and the sometimes-silly-but-frequently-fatal political micro-management of squad-level details, Bolger's piece establishes the right tone for assessing future US Army operational art in a combined arms large-scale combat operations environment.
In Chapter 10, Tal Tovy, an associate professor at Bar Ilan University in Israel, discusses the Egyptian and Israeli armies in combat during the October 1973 war. Adding significantly to the relatively well-known analysis of the '73 War, Tovy provides a double-level assessment of the use of combined arms by the Egyptians and the late discovery of this old concept by the Israelis. He then adds to the discussion by linking US Army lessons learned-or imagined-from this war as the Army entered the operational art period of American doctrine. Useful in several aspects, Tovy's account adds appropriate complexity and subtlety to what has usually been a somewhat sterile recitation of changes to Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operationsor Field Manual (FM) 100-5 as it was called in the late 1970s.
In the concluding chapter, Lieutenant General Michael D. Lundy, Commanding General of the Combined Arms Center, presents a vision of the future in combined arms maneuver. He also expands the discussion in this set of books-and in possible future additional volumes-by identifying some of the unresolved issues of peer-competitor combat operations where divisions and corps are mere tactical formations. Our complacency (Lundy does not use this word in his chapter)-resting on the valorous actions of the last 17 years and a sense that the new culture of the Army, inculcated by those 17+ years of stability operations, implies that preparation for more stability operations is enough-are as much the enemy of the future as the Russians, North Koreans, Chinese, or Iranians. Lundy argues that we must fight now to regain our ability to deter, engage, deny, defeat and win against any and all competitors. He persuasively establishes that the Army needs to reorient on large-scale combat operations (LSCO)remembering the lessons and the ability to conduct stability operations but quickly and drastically improving the Army's capabilities for training, preparation for LSCO, and deployment into immature theaters; these are the hallmarks of future conflict.
General (Retired) William Wallace and Colonel (Retired) Kevin C.M. Benson
No operation plan extends with any certainty beyond the first encounter with the main body of the enemy. It is only the layman who, as a campaign develops, thinks he sees the original plan being systematically fulfilled in every detail to its preconceived conclusion. 
1
Our intent in this chapter is to describe the planning efforts leading to the production of the Combined Forces Land Component Command (CFLCC)/Third Army major operations plan Cobra II and the execution of this plan in combat by US V Corps. We will cover the major developments of the planning effort during wargaming and plan revision and then how the V Corps commanding general adjusted his execution of the plan as the conditions of combat presented challenges and opportunities. We begin with the development of the major operations plan, Cobra II. 
2
In late August 2002, Lieutenant General P.T. Mikolashek handed over command of Third Army and CFLCC to Lieutenant General David McKiernan. McKiernan was a highly regarded officer who had a real sense for warfare at the tactical and operational level. He was also coming out of the Army staff G3 position, so he had a sense for the state of the US Army and the politics of the impending invasion. McKiernan also brought with him a team of experienced general officers to lead key Third Army staff sections.
On 7 October 2002, Lieutenant General McKiernan's team assembled in the top secret briefing area within the headquarters in Atlanta. Major Generals James "J.D." Thurman, the new J3; James "Spider" Marks, the J2; Claude "Chris" Christensen, J4; and W. Glenn "Fuzzy" Webster, the deputy commander for operations, were present. Colonel Kevin Benson, J5, briefed the plan as it existed at the time. It was a very instructive session.
McKiernan spoke in-depth on his views, setting conditions for great interaction with the new team of general officers. All bought into the operating principles and how McKiernan wanted to fight. McKiernan said he was thinking about the CFLCC mission statement and would "write out" his thoughts on it, as well as the commander's intent. The proposed intent was this:
The purpose of this operation is to isolate/control Baghdad with combined arms forces and the effects of operational fires, IO [information operations], and SOF [special operations forces] to attain the strategic objectives of the campaign: regime change and control/elimination of Iraqi WMD [weapons of mass destruction]. The calibrated application of fire and maneuver, coupled with the full acceptance of calculated risk at the tactical and operational level, will effect the rapid destruction or neutralization of actively opposing forces, while preserving infrastructure and selected civil-military institutions to support an efficient and short-term post-hostilities transition. At the end of Phase III, Decisive Operations, CFLCC forces will control Baghdad and be postured to transition to post-hostility stabilization operations throughout Iraq and ultimately to JTF-Iraq [Joint Task Force-Iraq].
The initial plan began with I Marine Expeditionary Force (I MEF) commanding both 1st Marine Division and 3rd Infantry Division. V Corps would enter the battle after CFLCC had forces across the Euphrates River near An Nasiriyah at which time V Corps would become the main effort on the advance on Baghdad with I MEF on the right flank as the supporting effort. It was clear McKiernan did not like this part of the plan. McKiernan intended to make the plan his own.
McKiernan gave some initial planning guidance to let his senior staff in on his thinking about the campaign. Regarding fires, he said he wanted CFACC to bomb the Republican Guard divisions around Baghdad "starting on A-Day." Thurman and Webster noted this and would begin talking with their counterparts on the CENTCOM staff. McKiernan indicated his understanding that "fixing" the Republican Guard divisions meant CFACC would hit Republican Guard Forces Command command and control (C2) nodes and logistics units on A-Day and afterward. This would prevent large unit movements into Baghdad. McKiernan said his position and the Combined Forces Air Component Command (CFACC) position were coming closer, indicating he'd been talking to Lieutenant General T. Michael "Buzz" Moseley, commander of CFACC. The topic of control versus destruction and bombing versus information operations would come up again at General Franks' next component commanders conference, which would be McKiernan's first.
Benson raised three points: the CFLCC zone, staging of the 173rd Airborne Brigade, and regime collapse/exploitation. The CFLCC zone was still a point requiring resolution as Benson felt establishing the zone would assist McKiernan in making this plan his own by allowing him to have the major directive authority on the use of air-delivered fires, thus shaping the operational battle for V Corps and I MEF.
Benson suggested to McKiernan to base/stage the 173rd ABN in either Italy or Cyprus for use in dam seizure or exploitation. This would put those operations under CFLCC command vice relying on Combined Forces Special Operations Component Command (CFSOCC) or Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC) to conduct the operations. McKiernan nixed this suggestion decisively. McKiernan said he wanted the 173rd attached to the 4th Infantry Division (4ID) when it attacked from the north. (This suggested northern option was a major effort of plan development until the government of Turkey denied Coalition requests for support and access to its territory, thus preventing introduction of 4ID from the north.) McKiernan said he was certain if CFLCC needed paratroopers for dam seizure or exploitation, he could go to the Army for the 82nd Airborne Division, which CFLCC did.
As far as exploitation of an anticipated regime collapse, Benson proposed giving those tasks to V Corps for planning, along with the projected forces and their availability. The J5 team would do some more work on this prior to handover. A scenario involving collapse of the regime, and how to exploit such a circumstance was definitely a branch plan to the major operations plan. There were more details to refine through wargaming. CFLCC would announce this effort in more detail in another warning order.
The approach taken during the initial wargame at Scott Air Force Base with the Central Command (CENTCOM) planners was a modification of the CENTCOM J5 tasks to CFLCC in Phase II of the skeleton campaign plan. Phase II concerned mainly air operations with the caveat that CFLCC would be prepared to take advantage of opportunities to attack significant objectives, oil fields, and the Basrah airport. The arrival of tactically significant forces would allow CFLCC the leeway to attack toward Jalibah, Iraq (site of a good air base), and initially block Basrah until the arrival in theater of the 7th Marines Regimental Combat Team (RCT). This force closure would give CFLCC enough forces to attack and seize the oilfields and Basrah airport without distracting from operations toward Baghdad. There was also a discussion of the level of expected Iraqi resistance. CFLCC J5 pressed for an articulation from the CENTCOM planners on the level of enemy resistance and where the CENTCOM J3 and J5 planners believed CFLCC could and would accept risk. CENTCOM J5 thought there would be very little fight from the Iraqi Regular Army and limited resistance from the Republican Guard Forces Command (RGFC) divisions and corps. This resistance would diminish in proportion to the closure of Coalition ground forces and the application of fires (lethal and non-lethal). CFLCC expected to face moderate to heavy resistance from a range of forces, including the units of the Special Republican Guard (SRG). This meant CFLCC would face some fighting in Baghdad itself. CFLCC J5 based these thoughts on talks with the CFLCC Deputy J2, Colonel Steve Rotkoff, and some of the CENTCOM J2 staff.
Mitigating the risk to CFLCC forces and the expected level of resistance CFLCC could face played a large role in crafting information operations messages tailored to Iraqi forces. After the initial wargame at Scott Air Force Base, CFLCC J5 was very confident that the experts in information operations understood what McKiernan wanted them to prepare in terms of messages to the Iraqi Regular Army. The desired outcome was for the Iraqi Regular Army to stay out of the fight and join the Coalition in establishing a post-Saddam Iraq. Messages laying out how the Iraqi Regular Army could display its intent to stay out of the fight were prepared for approval as were the means of delivery, and the specific targets-both units and people.
A part of the CFLCC operational maneuver toward Baghdad involved the seizure of the dams along the Tigris River by CFSOCC. The purpose of seizing control of the dams was to prevent a controlled or catastrophic release of water, thus disrupting the downstream crossing sites CFLCC intended to use en route to Baghdad. The timing of the operations to seize the dams had a direct relationship on the length of time CFSOCC had to sustain the special operating forces and Rangers at these sites. CFSOCC did not have the means to sustain its forces for an extended period of time. These units would be supplied by air until CFLCC ground forces could link up with them, thus opening ground lines of communication. Additionally, in order to determine amounts of ammunition and other supplies for special operating forces, CFLCC J5 had to determine how long it would take CFLCC forces to relieve the units that seized the dams and then justify the length of time.
Planning at the operational level is difficult-an understatement. Our military education system focuses on the tactical level: battalions, brigades, and to a lesser extent divisions. The operational level of war involves the movement of divisions and corps along with supporting formations. This involves the sequencing and sustaining of battles. Key to operational level planning is linking these tactical actions to attainment of the conditions needed to ensure strategic and policy success. Given the tactical focus, a main point of effort was ensuring the plans team envisioned large-scale movements. As an example, figuring out how a division would fight so the team could write tasks to the Corps and MEF.
Therein is another difficulty in developing and conducting operational level of war tasks. Officers are taught to wargame, envisioning how the fighting will develop two echelons of command below their level. The usual level of experience makes officers comfortable with wargaming company-level fights while serving at brigade level. At the land component command level, two echelons of command below was a division. Wargaming at the land component level of command meant the J5 had to ensure the planners were viewing the campaign in terms of how a division would fight en route to Baghdad in order to write appropriately worded tasks to the corps and MEF commanders. This effort was complicated by the fact that CENTCOM, a joint headquarters, had Navy and Air Force officers involved in planning the campaign-the centerpiece of which were land operations. This is not insignificant, in that officers of different services are educated differently in the methods of planning.
The wargaming and overall planning effort led to the expected phase III offensive tasks to V Corps such as: on order, as the main effort, attack in zone to defeat the 11th Infantry Division (Regular Army) and opposing RGFC forces (MEDINA and HAMMURABI Divisions) to set conditions for operations in and around Baghdad. Also included in phase III tasks for V Corps were stability tasks. This was in accord with McKiernan's intent, which envisioned a "blurred" transition between phases III and IV. The Corps and the MEF had to consider this form of transition while focusing on isolating the Iraqi regime leadership in Baghdad. V Corps stability tasks ranged from: seize airfields in zone then report airfield status, condition, and estimated resources needed to resume C-130 operations through operational and support channels, on order; provide combat service support to Coalition forces; be prepared to (BPT) secure key oil infrastructure within zone to prevent its destruction and to mitigate against environmental disaster; BPT assume command of Coalition forces to conduct post-hostilities operations; and BPT secure a ground line of communication (LOC) to/ from Jordan in order to facilitate operations and sustainment.
CFLCC planners envisioned the phase IV scheme of maneuver as civil military operations continuing to expand in liberated areas, and support being provided to international and non-governmental organizations (IO/ NGO), as well as humanitarian assistance activities as required. Coalition forces would join the effort in the theater to ensure the success of the operation; deter any potential ambitions by Iran, Turkey, or the Kurds; assist with the many tasks associated with phase IV; and help secure extended LOCs in an expansive rear area. CFLCC prepared to provide support to an emerging provisional government once that government assumed power. After the removal of Saddam's regime, CFLCC would transition from combat operations to supporting the Joint Inter Agency Control Group (JIACG) in conducting sustainment of humanitarian assistance, conducting critical life support, repairing critical infrastructure, and transitioning displaced civilian (DC) operations to the Iraqi government and supporting international and private organizations. After cessation of combat operations, CFLCC forces would secure the surrender of Iraqi military forces and, when necessary, destroy pockets of resistance. CFLCC forces would assist in the maintenance of general public order; assist the JIACG and international organizations in rehabilitating key Iraqi institutions (such as the Iraqi military); transition all civil-military operations to the Iraqi government and supporting international organizations; transition to a Combined Joint Task Force-4 (CJTF-4); and conduct redeployment operations.
The planned effects objectives desired in phase III, both lethal and non-lethal, were: disruption of all RGFC divisions' ability to conduct a coherent defense of Baghdad; denying maneuver units of the III (Iraqi) Regular Army Corps the ability to conduct a cohesive defense; disruption of the IV (Iraqi) Regular Army Corps' ability to mass fires; limit IV (Iraqi) Regular Army Corps' ability to attack I MEF; disrupt the ability of the "inner security ring" to protect the Saddam Hussein regime; deny Iraqi ability to employ WMD; and deny Tikrit as a base of support to Saddam Hussein.
The non-lethal operations were directed at Iraqi military forces and the Iraqi population. Planned Information Operations would disrupt Iraqi air defense, maneuver, and artillery command and control (C2) networkspreventing Iraqi forces from conducting coordinated attacks against Coalition forces. The priority of effort focused on I/II Republican Guard Corps artillery C2 and MEDINA, HAMMURABI, AL NIDA, and BAGHDAD RGFC divisions. Psychological operations (PSYOP) and Civil Affairs efforts would persuade the Iraqi populace to not interfere with Coalition operations. Information Operations would dissuade the populace from supporting Saddam's regime or regime security forces and influence them to refrain from sectarian violence. Public affairs and PSYOP messages would continue to focus on dissuading Iraqi leadership and forces from creat-ing environmental disasters, destroying oil infrastructure, or using WMD. These effects would be coordinated with CENTCOM and CFSOCC for setting conditions for phase IV stability operations in northern Iraq. The populace would continue to be provided instructions to reduce risk of col- lateral damage, prevent interference with Coalition operations, and identify WMD/sensitive sites to Coalition forces.
Phase IV effects, lethal and non-lethal, were: lethal fires focused on direct support of the ground scheme of maneuver to defeat remaining Iraqi military forces that opposed US operations and to protect the force through the destruction of all identified chemical and biological munitions capable delivery systems. CFLCC priorities for air interdiction were to destroy remaining forces loyal to Saddam's regime and hostile to US forces in vicinity of Baghdad; deny movement of enemy military forces to and from Baghdad; isolate Baghdad from Tikrit; and protect CFLCC LOCs. Effects objectives in this phase were: disruption of the ability of the Special Republican Guard (SRG), and RGFC to conduct a coherent defense of Baghdad; continued disruption of the "inner security ring's" ability to protect the regime; destruction of the Iraqi ability to employ WMD; and continued denial of Tikrit as a base of support in order to enable V Corps freedom of maneuver.
Non-lethal effects focus was: Information operations emphasized civil order, influenced support for the interim government, identified WMD/ sensitive sites to US forces, and identified/located remaining Saddam loyalist units, personnel, facilities, and equipment. Information operations would also support humanitarian activities, repair and maintain critical life support infrastructure, and control displaced civilians and rehabilitation of key Iraqi infrastructure. Psychological operations messages would attempt to induce remaining enemy forces to surrender/capitulate and comply with US/Coalition directives. Public Affairs and Civil Affairs would inform regional media and local civil authorities/populace, respectively, of US/Coalition directives. Electronic warfare focused on identifying C2 of forces or factions that continued to oppose Coalition operations for application of electronic or physical attack. Operational security (OPSEC) and other defensive information operations measures would focus on continued protection of CFLCC forces to preserve combat power for follow-on operations or redeployment. If required, on order, Tikrit would be isolated physically and electronically until capitulation was achieved. Public Affairs and Psychological operations messages would continue to focus on dissuading Iraqi leadership and forces from creating environmental disasters, destroying oil infrastructure, or using WMD. CFLCC would prepare to coordinate with CENTCOM and CFSOCC on the conditions to be set for stability operations in northern Iraq.
The planned logistics focus in phases III and IV were: Phase III objectives were to have the Theater Distribution System operate effectively through a series of logistical support areas (LSAs) and Convoy Support Centers (CSCs) along the LOCs to enable the support of operations over long distances and to have the theater joint reception, staging, and onward movement (JRSO) continue according to plan with no significant impacts on the operational flow of forces in support of phase III or in preparation for phase IV. At the end of phase IV, the theater logistics posture would continue to sustain CFLCC forces throughout Iraq and supporting those forces as they conducted regime removal operations in and around Baghdad. Theater logistics units prepared to assist in humanitarian efforts as required. Corps Support Command (COSCOM) and the Force Service Support Group (FSSG) elements developed effective working relationships with Humanitarian Assistance (HA) and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in their respective zones. Additionally, these same logistics elements would seek Iraqi sources of supplies and services and work with the emerging government of Iraq to assist in stabilization, recovery, and transitional operations. (a) Control/isolate the regime (Baghdad is the center of gravity for the regime) by fracturing Saddam Hussein's ability to C3 his sources of power, defeating military that chooses to fight the coalition (influencing neutrality or capitulation of remainder of RA/ RGFC forces), and controlling the civilian population to not impede our attacks. Focus kinetic and non-kinetic effects on regime targets located in Baghdad early and continuously to maintain constant pressure on the regime.
(b) Simultaneous, multidirectional, continuous effects using combined arms maneuver, operational fires, and information operations that are synchronized with CFSOCC, CFACC, and OGA [other government agency] effects. Exploit tactical and operation success at every opportunity. The high tempo of operations will require mitigating actions for the single greatest concern of operational risk-CSS supportability over extended LOCs, both north and south. Logistics must support the depth and momentum of operational maneuver.
(c) Control as we go (LOCs, SSE [sensitive site exploitation], formations, infrastructure, and population). Conduct a "rolling" transition to Post-Hostility Stability and Support Operations, initially in southern Iraq even while combat operations continue in central Iraq/Baghdad. Balance effects of control (population) and destruction (military support to regime's defense).
Endstate. Operational endstate is removal of key regime leadership, coalition forces physically controlling Iraq, RA/RGFC forces defeated or capitulated, and vital infrastructure to provide life support to the Iraqi population sustained. Expect SSE to continue well after cessation of hostilities. Conditions established to effect CFLCC battle handover to CJTF-4.
On 14 February 2002, CFLCC conducted a combined arms rehearsal of Cobra II. The senior commanders of CFLCC used the combined arms rehearsal as a vehicle to present their understanding of the Cobra II plan through the end of phase III, which concluded at the arrival of V Corps and I MEF in and around Baghdad. Phase IV was not covered, as the wargaming was ongoing. The rehearsal served its purpose, which was to talk through the actions delivering major US combat power to Baghdad and coordinate the actions of such Coalition combat forces as there were: Polish and Australian special operating forces along with US Joint Special Operations Task Forces (JSOTFs) and the 1st British Armoured Division.
McKiernan used the term "stance" to indicate not only the physical positioning of units in Kuwait but also those projected to arrive, along with their completion of the pre-combat checks of equipment. 
Of course, having a solid plan and making it work are two distinctly different things. The remainder of this chapter focuses on V Corps' execution of tactical tasks in support of Lieutenant General McKiernan's intent, and how those tasks supported (or in some cases deviated from) the original intent. In that regard, it is no understatement that McKiernan's intent was entrenched in the mind of virtually every V Corps soldier. While the explicit statement of intent is unlikely to have been memorized by any, each soldier knew the purpose of the operation was the overthrow of Saddam's regime. The soldiers knew the regime drew its power (i.e. its center of gravity) from control of Baghdad (in the minds of most 3ID Soldiers, "the road home led through Baghdad"). They also knew a high operational tempo that would dislocate and defeat Saddam's forces was essential to success. There are a few factors which should be understood to appreciate the execution of the fore-mentioned planning tasks. First, V Corps' senior leaders, its subordinate Divisions, and the senior CFLCC leaders knew each other. In some cases they were long-time friends (as was the case with Lieutenant General Wallace, Commander V Corps, and Lieutenant  General McKiernan). In other cases, they attended professional military education together (as was the case with Wallace and Major General David Petraeus, Commander of the 101st). At the very least, they all knew each other through shared experiences and reputation. These relationships grew stronger in the days leading up to the invasion via shared training, wargaming and a constant dialogue among the team on matters of operational and tactical significance. This familiarity led to a level of trust among senior leaders and commanders which was essential to successful mission execution.
Second, plans were rehearsed (and in some cases adjusted) in great detail to the extent that there was a thorough understanding on the part of every unit of what its role was in the overall operation. This understanding was anything but rigid. Commanders understood the purpose of the operation and understood that their tactical exploitation of opportunity which would lead to the achievement of purpose was not only allowed, it was expected.
Finally, the training and readiness of V Corps soldiers and formations was at a very high level of proficiency. Virtually every unit and commander in the formation had a US combat training center rotation under their belts. In the case of the 3rd Infantry Division (3ID) its brigades had been rotating in and out of the Kuwaiti desert regularly for several years, with each executing complex live fire warfighting tasks as part of each rotation. The entire V Corps team of leaders and staffs had joined together at the US Army training center in Grafenwoehr, Germany, to conduct a computer-assisted rehearsal of the Corps plan and several of its branches and sequels. This event served to solidify the team, increase its confidence, and improve mutual trust. This combination of friendship, trust, understanding, and training would prove to be decisive in the execution of Cobra II. As stated previously, the first key task was "to control/isolate the regime (Baghdad is the center of gravity for the regime) by fracturing Saddam Hussein's ability to C3 his sources of power, defeating military that chooses to fight the coalition (influencing neutrality or capitulation of remainder of RA/RGFC forces), and controlling the civilian population to not impede our attacks. Focus kinetic and non-kinetic effects on regime targets located in Baghdad early and continuously to maintain constant pressure on the regime." While V Corps' combat power could not range Baghdad at the outset of the operations on D-day (19 March), Coalition air power could. Joint deep fires, both air and missile, had a significant shaping effect on the operational environment and thus the operations of V Corps.
The Corps crossed the line of departure on 20 March and rapidly moved on multiple routes intending to bypass Iraqi Regular Army units and southern Iraq's population centers, which might slow the rate of advance. By 23 March, significant elements of the 3ID had seized key terrain around An Najaf. From 26 March to 1 April, the Corps consolidated its gains west of the Euphrates River, ensured its lines of communications were secure, and established the conditions (particularly logistics conditions, discussed later in this chapter) for the execution of its attack through the Karbala Gap on 2 April. The Corps completed the encirclement of Baghdad on 6 April, then with little pause executed the attack by 2nd Brigade, 3ID into Baghdad itself on 7 April, which proved to be the decisive thrust into the heart of the regime. Through a combination of these actions, the Corps put direct and continuous pressure on the Iraqi Republican Guard Corps and Saddam's regime in Baghdad. The combined effect of these actions and the Coalition fires which preceded and supported them helped to defeat the Republican Guard and isolate and remove Saddam Hussein's regime from power.
Embedded in McKiernan's first key task was concern that the civilian population might disrupt coalition operations. Whether out of fear or at the direction of the Coalition, the concern that the Iraqi population might interfere with Coalition phase III operations never materialized.
Interestingly, the Iraqi Regular Army was not a significant factor in the campaign either. Coalition air operations targeted known locations of Iraqi units to include the Regular Army with both lethal and non-lethal fires. Leaflets were developed, translated into Arabic, and dropped in significant numbers on known or suspected Regular Army units. These leaflets instructed units on how to "form up" to indicate from aerial observation that they wanted no part of the fight. Few units, if any, followed the instructions on the leaflets, yet the leaflets had an unintended impact. Discussions with former Iraqi soldiers after the conclusion of major combat operations showed they reasoned if the Americans could drop paper with impunity, they could do the same with bombs if they chose to do so. In large numbers, Iraqi soldiers shed their uniforms, left their equipment, and went home. Lieutenant General McKiernan's first key task was achieved although it was done with necessary and sometimes opportunistic adjustments to the original plan. Initiative was encouraged throughout the Corps.
McKiernan's second key task was to "use simultaneous, multidirectional, continuous effects using combined arms maneuver, operational fires, and information operations that are synchronized with CFSOCC, CFACC, and OGA effects. Exploit tactical and operation success at every opportunity. The high tempo of operations will require mitigating actions for the single greatest concern of operational risk-CSS supportability over extended LOCs, both north and south. Logistics must support the depth and momentum of operational maneuver."
Clearly the V Corps' rapid movement was in keeping with McKiernan's intent and served to place pressure on the enemy with unexpected speed and from unanticipated directions. As an example, once the 3ID had secured its assigned objective south of Baghdad, the 2nd Brigade Combat Team (2 BCT) sent elements to recon along Highway 1 to the south to ensure its rear was not threatened. 2 BCT not only reported numerous abandoned Iraqi combat vehicles; it also reported that the vehicles and their fighting positions were oriented south in apparent anticipation of the V Corps attack coming directly up Highway 1 from the south.
Nowhere was the intent of exploiting tactical and operational opportunity more apparent than with the V Corps simultaneous attacks of 31 March and 1 April.
Major General Buff Blount, 3ID Commander, his staff and commanders were leaning forward to assault through the Karbala Gap. They were concerned their lack of recent forward movement might provide the enemy with opportunities to reposition forces-artillery, in particular-which might be able to range the division as it prepared for its attack. Blount proposed a limited objective brigade attack which would accomplish several objectives. First, it would get the division back on the offensive. Second, as Colonel Dave Perkin's 2nd Brigade attacked across the Euphrates River to Al Hindiyah (Objective Murray), it would get 2nd Brigade "out of the way" of the division's other two brigades which were to lead the assault through the gap. Finally, it allowed for Lieutenant Colonel Terry Ferrell's 3-7 Cavalry to clear the zone leading to the gap of any possible enemy forces. Upon completion of the attack, the 3ID would have its forces postured to resume the attack through the Karbala gap and on to Baghdad.
Colonel Steve Hicks, the V Corps G3, was in constant contact with the operations officers of the Corps' combat formations and knew each shared the same concerns about loss of momentum. He also knew each was looking for opportunities to get back on the attack as the weather had cleared and resupply was accomplished. Hicks proposed simultaneous with the 3ID actions in and around Karbala that the 101st and 82nd be ordered back on the offensive as well. What resulted from this quick appraisal was an order to the Corps which, upon completion of the operations, would: 1) posture 3ID for the attack through the Karbala Gap, 2) provide additional security to the Corps' lines of communications and the logistics base established west of An Najaf, 3) provide information about and clear enemy forces from alternative avenues of approach which Wallace would have to consider should the attack through the Karbala Gap fail. In addition to the specific intent of the attacks-and since the focus of the action in most cases was from west to east across the Euphrates River-it was hoped the action across the Corps area of operations might deceive the Iraqis as to the Corps intentions for future operations.
The Corps began rapid preparations to conduct five simultaneous attacks beginning the morning of 31 March. Each of the Corps' subordinate divisions was given task and purpose to resume the offensive. The 3ID would attack toward northeast to Hindiyah while simultaneously conducting a reconnaissance in zone toward the Karbala Gap. The 101st Air Assault (AASLT) Division, would attack to contain enemy forces in and around An Najaf, conduct a feint north and east toward Al Hillah, and conduct an armed reconnaissance with its aviation brigade to the north and west of Bahr-al-Milh Lake. The 82nd Airborne Division's 2nd Brigade would attack east to contain enemy forces in and around As Samawah. The attacks had the desired results. At their conclusion, the 3ID was positioned to attack through the Karbala Gap with its flanks secured, and the Corps' lines of communications were open and secure. The attacks had the additional benefit of providing tangible information about alternative axes of attack and courses of action should there be a need to deviate from the Corps base plan.
As previously indicated, McKiernan, Wallace, and their staffs shared a concern about logistics supportability. Rapid, long-distance movement meant the Corps' lines of communication were long and marginally secure at best. While those Iraqi regular forces with whom the Corps had come in contact were no match for US forces and were easily dispatched, the sometimes-suicidal offensive actions of the irregular forces (Saddam Fedayeen, Quds force, Baath Party Militia, and several flavors of foreign fighters) were both unexpected and unpredictable. These irregulars could melt into the local population with ease and posed a threat to the Corps' LOCs and logistics forces.
The weather was also a factor. A severe sandstorm engulfed the region from 25 to 27 March, impeding both air and ground movement. The logistics convoys on which the Corps depended slowed to a crawl and the necessary logistics buildup west of An Najaf-needed to posture the Corps for its strike through the Karbala Gap and beyond-was delayed.
Wallace and McKiernan both knew once the Corps passed through the Karbala Gap, the Corps had to maintain its momentum all the way to Baghdad. It was to be one continuous movement (and fight). Both commanders expected Iraqi resistance to stiffen as Baghdad was threatened. All of this implied the need for a reasonably secure logistics capability south of the Karbala Gap from which the Corps' formations could draw continuous and reliable support.
To ensure logistics supportability, the Corps originally planned a pause outside of An Najaf. The Corps Support Command, commanded by Brigadier General Charlie Fletcher, was directed to build up at least five days of resupply at the logistics base west of An Najaf. Base security would be achieved by the 101st AASLT Division's containment of enemy forces in and around An Najaf, while the task of securing the LOCs and containing enemy forces in and around As Samawah fell to Major General Chuck Swannack's 82nd Airborne Division augmented by elements of the 2nd Light Cavalry Regiment.
By planning and executing its aggressive logistics support plan and exploiting opportunities both in the march-up and later in Baghdad, V Corps helped to achieve the second key task-simultaneous, multidirectional, continuous effects using combined arms maneuver, operational fires, and information operations-of McKiernan's intent.
The final key task of the operation was to "control as we go (LOCs, SSE, formations, infrastructure, and population)." That required conducting a "rolling" transition to Post-Hostility Stability and Support Operations, initially in southern Iraq even while combat operations continued in central Iraq/Baghdad, then balancing effects of control (population) and destruction (military support to regime's defense).
McKiernan's intent was a reflection of the appreciation across the command for the width and depth of the CFLCC zone and the nature of the operational environment.
For its part, V Corps executed "control as you go" as an odd assortment of combat operations, counterinsurgency operations, stability and support operations, and population control-all occurring simultaneously across the Corps zone. Depending on timing and positioning in the Corps battlespace, each subordinate Corps unit found itself conducting a highly diverse set of tasks simultaneously. In some cases, the requirements of one mission were in conflict with the requirements of another. Commanders and units had to be agile in thought and action, with the intended purpose and overall endstate of the operation in mind.
It is a tribute to V Corps planning-nested with that of the CFLCCthat given the forces actually allocated, the correct mix of units with the correct capability and attributes were sequenced and positioned accordingly.
The forementioned operations by the 3ID, 101st, and 82nd in and around An Najaf are illustrative, as is the sequencing of the follow forces (4ID and 3ACR) as the Corps zone of responsibility expanded to include most of northern Iraq (the exception being the Kurdish areas in the extreme north) and all of western Iraq.
Although perhaps overly simplistic, a snapshot in time lends to the understanding of how V Corps was able to support the "control as we go" guidance.
On 2 April, the 3ID attacked through the Karbala Gap with its 3rd Brigade containing enemy forces in Karbala that might be able to influence the crossing of the 1,800-meter-wide gap, while the Division's 1st Brigade attacked through the gap and turned its attention toward the approaches to Baghdad, capturing an intact bridge over the Euphrates River. At the same time, the 101st continued its containment and isolation of An Najaf, conducted aggressive dismounted operations for which it was ideally suited, and began to build relationships with the local population in this culturally sensitive Iraqi city, assisted by US Special Operations forces that were collocated in the area. Meanwhile, the headquarters of the 82nd continued its containment and isolation of As Samawah and, upon receipt of operational control of the lead elements of the 2nd Light Cavalry Regiment, used the Regiment's mobility to both patrol the V Corps LOCs and conduct reconnaissance operations along Highway 1 to the north to determine the nature of the threat in that area, if any. This combination of units and missions was the essence of "control as we go."
Later in the operation, as major combat operations concluded, the requirement existed to occupy those portions of Iraq which had seen little combat but were no longer under direct regime control. The 101st-with the wide area mobility afforded by its aviation brigade-was ideally suited for occupation then stability and support operations in the vast northern province of Ninivah. The Division used its extensive aviation assets to rapidly move hundreds of miles and establish its presence and control centered on Iraq's second largest city, Mosul.
The 3ACR, under command of Colonel Dave Teeples, was given the challenging mission of occupation of Al Anbar province, thought at the time to be an economy of force area (which proved to be a wrong assumption, as the Sunni insurgency grew in the coming years). The 4ID employment was complicated, to say the least.
After Turkey refused to allow the staging of the 4ID on its territory for a proposed "Northern option," the Division's equipment was moved to ports in Kuwait. Upon linking up Soldiers and leaders with their equipment, the 4ID was immediately dispatched to the Tikrit area (home of Saddam Hussein), expecting that if there was to be a major confrontation with residual regime elements, Tikrit and the surrounding area would be the most likely place for it to occur. 4ID also assumed operational control of the 173rd Airborne Brigade, which had assaulted the area in and around Kirkuk in a bold combination of airborne and air-land operations under direct CFLCC control.
3ID assumed responsibilities for all of Baghdad given its original positioning and its expansion into eastern Baghdad across the Tigris River in relief of the 1st Marine Division that had assaulted into Baghdad from the east.
Other elements of the Corps team assumed increasingly important roles as the Corps tried to return a modicum of normality to the lives of Iraqi citizens. Corps engineers placed an 83-boat float bridge across the Tigris River at Tikrit to replace a bridge destroyed by Coalition air strikes early in the war. Engineers in Baghdad formed "Task Force Neighborhood," which periodically cordoned off multi-block areas of Baghdad and-with the assistance of Iraqi citizens-removed trash from the streets, repaired pot holes, and made schoolhouses suitable to resume the education of Iraqi children. Corps Military Police provided convoy escort and security both in and out of the Corps zone, provided security for critical infrastructure, and made contacts with Iraqi police in an effort to understand their needs and get them back on the beat.
None of these efforts were expansive enough to bring true stability and control to a country as large as Iraq, yet all were in keeping with the theme of transitioning to some degree of post-hostility routine for the Iraqi population. The third pillar of McKiernan's intent-although seemingly the most benign-proved to be the one most difficult to execute due largely to the growth of insurgent activity by former regime supporters who refused to cede power to the Coalition or to the majority Shia population.
When multiple corps are involved in operations, the corps is a tactical formation. While Corps tactics differ from division and brigade, the tactical principles are the same. In order to look beyond initial contact with any expectation of success, commanders and staffs must understand the interrelationship of planning and operating within the commander's intent. The critical thinking of planning and wargaming establish the conditions for disciplined initiative. At all levels of command, commanders must recognize that planning and wargaming produce the specified tasks needed to craft plans and orders. These plans and orders establish the basis for envisioning how an operation MIGHT unfold and provide the common basis for understanding the thinking of the higher headquarters. This basis also provides the logistics underpinning of sequencing and sustaining the battles and operations which flow from making contact with enemy forces.
Execution of the operation recognizes that the enemy and the people in the contested region have a say in outcomes. Thus, continuous estimates and disciplined initiative rely upon an understanding of the commander's intent since intent provides the guidance necessary to see an operation through to a successful conclusion.
Commanders must take time to develop trust across their commands and among their command teams two echelons below their own. Combined arms and logistical rehearsals develop the trust that the plan and its associated tasks are thoroughly understood. Tough, realistic training develops the trust that the tasks developed through wargaming can be executed as envisioned or adapted to changing conditions of the battlefield.
In this chapter, we highlighted the products of both planning and wargaming, as well as the results produced by taking the time to build trust and understanding based on the commander's intent. While professional Soldiers may not be able to look with certainty beyond initial contact with the enemy, they can look beyond first contact with confidence. That confidence is based upon shared understanding of the commander's intent; trust in each other; and the disciplined, realistic training that is provided for Soldiers and their formations.
1. Erich von Manstein, Lost Victories (Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1994), 100.
2. This portion of the chapter and all quotations are based upon personal journals kept by Colonel (Retired) Kevin Benson, then CFLCC J5. Accompanying charts and graphics are also based on his personal files. General Wallace also drew on his personal notes on the operations of V Corps.
Fire and Maneuver: The 2nd Infantry Division's Assault on Korea's "Punchbowl," August-October 1951 Colonel Bryan R. Gibby "Fire without movement is indecisive. Exposed movement without fire is disastrous. There must be effective fire combined with skillful movement." 
1
An attacker advancing against a prepared enemy resorts to various expedients to dislocate or degrade defensive fires. Obfuscation by darkness, smoke, or fog is one effective method, as is the exploitation of surprise, or the utilization of covered and concealed avenues of approach. But sometimes the terrain or the nature of the defenders' array precludes these methods. In these situations, fire must be fought with more effective fire, and the most effective fires are those that support aggressive maneuver. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
In the summer of 1951, the Eighth United States Army Korea (EU-SAK) had performed a military miracle. Although heavily outnumbered and fighting in a theater considered secondary in strategic importance compared to Europe, EUSAK wrecked the Communist armies of North Korea and the People's Republic of China in a series of battles following Chinese intervention in late 1950. The Communists' last effort culminated in May, where American firepower completely dominated the battleground. It was clear that the Communists could not generate the military strength to throw EUSAK off the Korean peninsula. It was equally clear to the Americans that a decisive military victory was not in the cards. US President Harry S. Truman was willing to negotiate an armistice to end the fighting and set the conditions for a political conference to determine the final peace.
Military leaders such as General Matthew B. Ridgway (Commander, Far East Command and United Nations Command) and General James A. Van Fleet (Commander, EUSAK) translated this policy guidance into a new military strategy to apply air and ground military pressure while minimizing casualties. Van Fleet was ordered to hold the Kansas-Wyoming Line, which was the terrain basis for an acceptable truce. When negotiations, which began on 10 July 1951, failed to produce a quick settlement, Van Fleet ordered EUSAK to commence limited objective attacks to keep US and allied troops sharp, inflict casualties on the Communists, and gain ground that would eliminate potential threats to the Kansas-Wyoming Line's security. One such operation occurred from July to October 1951 in a region known as the "Punchbowl," a circular volcanic valley located north of the 38th parallel and less than a dozen miles from the strategic Hwachon Reservoir.
The Punchbowl operation can be divided into three parts: a preliminary attack (26-30 July) to seize Hill 1179 and establish a forward patrol base, a hasty attack (18 August-5 September) to eliminate a North Korean (Korean People's Army or KPA) salient known as Bloody Ridge, and a follow-on exploitation attack (13 September-15 October) to seize an objective known as Heartbreak Ridge. Each of these battles featured heavy artillery concentrations to support infantry maneuver. However, the defending North Koreans learned to neutralize American firepower and extract a steep price in casualties. Enemy defenses exploited the forbidding terrain that defied straightforward application of doctrine, which complicated the Americans' efforts to generate offensive momentum. The division's first two commanders, Major General Clark L. Ruffner and Brigadier General Thomas E. DeShazo failed to appreciate the magnitude of the problem confronting the division, which resulted in poor tactical approaches costly in men, material, and time. The commander who successfully accomplished the division's assigned mission, Major General Robert N. Young, was cut from different cloth, and his imaginative and forceful application of Army doctrine produced dynamic results at a fraction of the cost of the previous efforts.
The 2nd Infantry Division assumed its place along Line Kansas in mid-July and immediately began to patrol its sector, attempting to dominate the land between it and the North Korean Main Line of Resistance (MLR). Prior to its arrival in the X Corps sector, the division had been reorganizing, refitting, and retraining for future combat operations. However, once negotiations began, the division's training emphasis transitioned to defense-oriented tasks. Its new mission was "the active defense of the Kansas Line and the preparation and organization of the secondary Wichita Defense Line." 
8
9
10
11
12
13
With the sanguine assessment of the Hill 1179 operation, the 2nd Infantry Division prepared to attack Hill 983. Korean troops (36th Regiment) from the ROK 5th Division were attached to the division and received orders on August 16 to seize the ridgeline. The division developed an elaborate fire support plan with two 105-mm artillery battalions (11th Marine Regiment and the Army's 300th Field Artillery Battalion) in direct support, four additional divisional battalions (three 105-mm and one 155mm) in general support controlled by the Division Artillery's fire direction center, and two corps-level battalions (one 155-mm and one 8-inch) in a reinforcing role. Finally, the 937th Armored Field Artillery Battalion pulled the unique duty to provide support with direct fire to destroy bunkers. Over 200 point targets were pre-plotted on a 1:25,000 map of the area under attack. Two days prior to the assault, Air Force fighter-bombers and medium bombers dropped 64,000 pounds of bombs in addition to napalm, rocket, and strafing attacks. 
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
33
34
35
36
Hoping to capitalize on the North Koreans' withdrawal from Bloody Ridge, Van Fleet then ordered X Corps to continue the limited objective attack northward to erase the salient and bring the corps's left flank on line with the US IX Corps and place American forces close to known KPA supply centers at Mundung-ni and Satae-ri, giving the Americans control over two north-south main supply routes supporting the KPA's defense lines. Despite these clear terrain objectives, a misappreciation of the enemy's intentions and an overreliance on past tactical methods emphasizing fires as the decisive effort clouded the mission's operational endstate, which resulted in another grinding attritional battle for terrain that reporters soon dubbed "Heartbreak Ridge." 
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
Additionally, the terrain shaped the battlefield such that American units were scattered about, in some cases advancing along converging corridors. On more than one occasion, the division's guns could not fire missions due to fear of short or long rounds landing on friendly units. Belatedly DeShazo noted, "We have to get . . . the fire fight [going] in one direction," which was a paraphrase of FM 100-5 (1949), Operations: "The attack is characterized by the positive action of fire and maneuver . . . to create a preponderance of force in the decisive direction" (emphasis added). 
45
The 23rd Infantry moved out with two battalions in column formation against Heartbreak Ridge after a short preparatory bombardment on 13 September, but once the soldiers hit the web of spurs extending eastward, their forward momentum ground to a halt. The doctrine to attack an organized defense required "Superiority of fire" and noted that "fire effect is increased by enfilade action. Flanking or oblique fire is especially effective when frontal fire is delivered simultaneously against the same objective." 
46
47
48
DeShazo's reluctance to expand the zone of attack to maneuver friendly forces into a position of relative advantage defies simple explanation. The key to Hill 931 was in the disruption of KPA lines of communication extending west and north into the town of Mundung-ni, which was the corps's ultimate objective. General Byers assigned the division the task to capture Hill 931, but he did not prescribe the method. DeShazo was responsible to influence "the course of subsequent action by his leadership, by the maneuver of subordinate elements to include reserves, by the concentration of artillery fires." 
49
50
On 20 September the division welcomed a new commander, Major General Robert N. Young. He had no previous combat command experience (although he served as 3rd Infantry Division's assistant division commander during the last six month of the war). A key difference between Young and his two predecessors was his professional development as a student and later instructor at the Infantry School (during George C. Marshall's tenure) and a full year at the Command and General Staff College. (Ruffner and DeShazo had graduated from the abbreviated General Staff Course at Fort Leavenworth.) 
51
52
53
54
Young determined that nothing short of a division-level combined arms assault would secure the division's objective at an acceptable cost. With such a difficult tactical problem, he took a step back to reconstitute his infantry units and plan a division-level attack. 
55
56
57
58
59
Operation Touchdown commenced the evening of 5 October with a controlled barrage of artillery high explosives and close air support. (No artillery was placed on Hill 931, however, to facilitate a surprise night approach.) Although the KPA continued to fight back, it was a different kind of battle. Both the 9th and 38th Infantry regiments moved out to pressure the North Koreans as the division's shift to a nighttime attack with greater fire support suppressed enemy mortars and tied up his reserves. By 0300 hours, American infantry were occupying Hill 931 in strength, beating off several uncoordinated counterattacks. By daylight, Adams had his own 3rd battalion and the French battalion firmly holding the center of Heartbreak Ridge. American tanks and infantry patrols were also ranging up the Satae-ri valley to fire on Hill 851 from behind. Work continued on the Mundung-ni road, the infantry advance providing cover to the engineers. 
60
61
62
63
64
65
Additionally, the series of frontal attacks against the Heartbreak Ridge's strong terrain played straight into the North Koreans' plan. An American assessment at the end of September revealed the Communists' fighting power in this kind of battle:
The enemy defended his fortified positions tenaciously . . . resist[ing] until his units . . . are no longer effective. It has been necessary to dig the enemy out of bunkers with flame throwers and grenades. Commanders who served in the Pacific during World War II report that the fighting in this sector for the past month has been as fierce as any observed during that war. 
66
67
68
Boatner was less flummoxed by the division's poor showing. Proper techniques to overcome bunkers and fortifications were all spelled out in FM 7-20 (1944), The Infantry Battalion. 
70
Boatner argued that the total casualties on Bloody and Heartbreak Ridges were excessive for the ground gained due to two overriding factors: personnel rotation policies sapped combat units of experience, effectiveness, and efficiency just as North Korean and Chinese units were recovering their strength and equilibrium following the significant reverse they suffered in the late spring of 1951. During the month of September, 41 officers and 1,321 enlisted men rotated out of the division. One infantry company had 32 successive commanders in a 10-month period. The turnover of personnel robbed the division of battlefield experience and necessary manpower for the intensive infantry actions against fortified positions. Additionally, the failure to make good combat losses ensured the infantry companies fought with emaciated platoons and squads. By 24 September when Young called off any further attacks, Colonel Adams reported some companies were down to less than 50 men, with losses most acutely felt among junior leaders: "We have no non-coms," Adams lamented. 
71
72
74
It is tempting for the modern Soldier to project into the past current ideas of doctrine and leadership, such as those articulated in FM 3-0, Operations, and Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 6-0, Mission Command. The danger is that we may find what we are looking for. Rather, sound doctrine is a product of understood and internalized experience. This case study underscores some of the enduring challenges American commanders have faced grappling with tactical principles that are "neither numerous nor complex, [but] their application sometimes is difficult." 
76
The battles over the Punchbowl involved some of the heaviest fighting the 2nd Infantry Division endured during the Korean War. At a time when EUSAK forces were supposed to be in an "active defense," this division engaged in three battles of attrition over extremely difficult terrain and against an enemy determined to resist to the last. The American division commanders had no control over terrain, weather, or the enemy. The only variables they could influence were how Army doctrine was applied and leadership. Of the three commanders involved, Robert Young clearly stood out as the most effective leader. He read the battlefield, adapted doctrine to synchronize fire and maneuver, and accomplished his mission in a fraction of the time and casualties when compared to his predecessors.
Young assumed command of the division on 20 September, but he did not begin to exercise control until three days later. He spent this time observing the situation and consulting with his subordinates, namely Colonel Adams, the regimental commander responsible for the attack against Heartbreak Ridge, and Brigadier General Boatner, the assistant division commander. Both officers gave similar reports and counsel on the best way to accomplish the mission of seizing the ridge and neutralizing the KPA's supporting zone.
In this drama, General Boatner stands out. He exercised real leadership throughout the engagements for Bloody and Heartbreak Ridges. Unlike Ruffner or DeShazo who rarely left their division command posts (Ruffner spent one day with the 36th ROK Regiment), Boatner co-located with the 9th Infantry and the 23rd Infantry's forward posts. He spoke face to face with the regimental commanders. He could read their expressions and sense their confidence and fears-emotions that a field phone could never capture. He dissuaded Ruffner from relieving Colonel Lynch when the former was dissatisfied with the 9th Infantry's progress in late August. At Heartbreak Ridge, Boatner set the conditions for a successful commander-to-commander conversation. When Young had his personal engagement with Adams, he knew that his commander was giving the unvarnished picture. Young would not have used the term "Mission Command," but that is what he was practicing. 
77
78
79
80
The army's disposition is like water. Water's configuration avoids heights and races downward. The army's disposition of force avoids the substantial and strikes the vacuous.
-Sun Tzu
The surprise was total, and the enemy left bewildered on 25 November 1950. The United Nations Command (UNC) forces had just recently begun a new offensive that their commander, General Douglas MacArthur, promised would have them home by Christmas. Now they were fighting against well-organized and experienced Chinese formations that few UNC analysts, and none of consequence at the strategic level, expected to be there. Competent generalship and effective maneuver at the division level and above by Chinese commanders enabled the defeat of UNC forces in Korea between 25 November 1950 and 24 December 1950.
The initial phase of the Chinese intervention (25 October to 7 November 1950) can best be understood as a hasty counter-attack. The rapid initiative change in favor of UNC forces had become an increasing cause for concern for Chinese leadership. By 3 October, within three weeks of the Inchon landing, the US State Department received an explicit message from Chinese foreign minister Zhou Enlai via India's ambassador that China would intervene if foreign troops crossed the 38th Parallel. On 13 October, the Chinese Politburo gave General Peng Dehuai, commander of the Chinese People's Volunteer Forces (CPVF), the order to move across the Yalu, and by 19 October, CPVF units were operating within Korea. 
1
2
3
4
5
MacArthur's conclusions were wrong. The initial Chinese offensive did have limited war aims, but the operational goals focused on the destruction of two to four UNC divisions with a strategic intent of delaying further UNC operations towards the Yalu River, thus buying time for additional forces to reach Manchuria and the surviving 250,000 members of the NKPA to refit, reorganize, and prepare for future operations. Peng considered his objectives accomplished when he ordered the general disengagement of CPVF forces in early November in preparation for a larger offensive. 
6
We recognized that our weapons and equipment were inferior to the enemy's and that our army would have some new difficulties in this war. . . . We believed that as long as we could exploit the enemy's weaknesses by using our strengths, our army would certainly defeat the well-equipped enemy even with our inferior-quality weapons. . . . Applying this analysis, we formulated some principles to guard our operations in the Korean War. In terms of strategy, our army must adhere to protracted warfare. In terms of operational concepts, it must always concentrate its troops to maintain numerical superiority. In order to avoid the enemy's strengths, it must employ its traditional combat tactics such as close combat, night operations, fighting quick and decisive battles, thrusting deep into the enemy, outflanking them, and cutting up their forces. 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Chinese maneuver was also augmented by an astute focus on the relative tactical advantages CPVF commanders believed their forces possessed over UNC ones. Fundamentally, Chinese commanders believed their infantry was superior to the UNC infantry. They perceived that UNC, particularly American, units were too reliant on technical capabilities, such as artillery fires, and would not be able to offer strong resistance to determined close assaults that negated their superior capabilities. Chinese commanders also believed that UNC formations across the board were inferior to their formations at conducting night time operations. CPVF commanders thus placed considerable emphasis on night time assaults with a heavy reliance on tactical surprise and grenades. This tactical doctrine was the direct result of CPVF's assessment that the "US military was strong in firepower but weak in morale" and, when combined with operational maneuvers aimed at isolating and encircling UNC units, would produce the quick, decisive campaigns called for by the overall strategic approach. 
14
15
The effects of these operational maneuvers at the division level and above were devastating to the American forces in the area. Task Force MacLean-Faith suffered more than 1,000 casualties, and Chinese assaults during the night of 27-28 November 1950 effectively destroyed it as a fighting force. An attempt to break through the Twenty-Sixth Army's roadblocks and provide reinforcements and additional supplies to the 5th and 7th Marines was defeated, with the relief column incurring 34 percent casualties in the unsuccessful bid to reopen ground lines of communication. The First Marine Division suffered just under 3,200 casualties before it was able to retreat to Hungnan with the help of the Third Infantry Division and evacuate to Pusan. 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
These offensives also came with unrealistic expectations based on the success of the First and Second Phase offensives in late 1950. Mao expected the Chinese spring offensive to "wipe out 50,000 UNF troops . . . [by destroying] four divisions and two brigades of the US I Corps" despite the CPFV having significantly fewer artillery pieces, tanks, and planes than UNC forces. 
23
24
25
in the Baltic Theatre, Fall 1917 R. David Pressley II
The battlefields of World War 1 witnessed the predominance of linear and static warfare. Technology advanced far faster than military theory could support, resulting in the mass devastation for little gain characterized by the Western Front. This case study examines the German implementation of stormtrooper tactics in the Baltic to overcome this tactical environment through utilizing successful breaching tactics and fire superiority to achieve the operational envelopment of Russian forces. The German integration of combined arms warfare and new mobility tactics allowed the first large-scale encirclement operation since the start of the war three years earlier. The German offensives in fall 1917 against the crucial port city of Riga witnessed revolutionary operational innovations in German warfare that influenced their doctrine for the remainder of the war. The implementation of stormtrooper tactics by General Oskar von Hutier's 8th Army in the assaults on the port city of Riga and the Baltic Islands heralded this new stage of German operational innovation. The operation of encirclement against the Russian 12th Army defending Riga heralded the return of mobility by German forces in World War I. Additionally, the amphibious landings at sel witnessed the continued use of these innovations at Riga by forces which had zero marine training, no amphibious doctrine, and lacked the numerical superiority deemed necessary for successful WW1 offensives. 
1
In 1917, the German Army found itself faced with a dire need to end the war quickly. Despite the eruption of revolution in Russia, the mutinous atmosphere of the French Army, and the failure of the Kerensky Offensive, the strategic situation of the Central Powers remained unfavorable beyond mid-1918 due to the continued British blockade and arrival of American reinforcements. Russian forces not only continued to fight but evaded German attempts at any decisive decision, the French mutinies failed to spread, and the Italian theatre continued to drain Austrian resources. Faced with the imminent arrival of hundreds of thousands of fresh American forces, German High Command recognized the need to end the fighting on the Eastern Front in order to transfer the forces presently fighting Russia west to decisively engage the allied armies before American manpower overwhelmed the war weary German Army. Additionally, the capture of Riga would confirm German naval dominance over the entire region while threatening Reval, Petrograd, and Russian Finland with German invasion. To achieve this, they returned to a previous plan advocated by the German Navy to capture Riga and land on the Baltic islands. High Command hoped that the loss of Riga, the linchpin to the entire northern defensive front, would so damage the flagging Russian morale that Russia would seek peace.
Prior to the fall of 1917, the application of special assault tactics in returning mobility and decisive victory to the battlefield occurred only on a limited scale. French, British, and German innovations in small unit stormtrooper tactics began to appear sporadically in 1915. In fact, a French officer, Captain Andr Laffarague, wrote a pamphlet on abandoning traditional linear methods for assault tactics, making him arguably the first to do so in World War I. French command gave Laffarague's pamphlet little consideration after its publication, but the German army quickly captured a copy and studied it intently. 
2
3
4
The planned operation against Riga and the Baltic Islands learned much from the previous attempt to seize the strategic sector. In 1915, German forces attempted to force their way into the Gulf of Riga with disappointing results. Their naval forces failed to achieve the required decisive victory and the infantry reached the Dvina River adjacent to the city of Riga. Attempts to advance further proved futile. The unsuccessful operation improved Russian morale and confidence in the security of the Baltic region for the following two years. Newspapers seized the opportunity and described how "every day through Riga pass parties of German prisoners . . . the majority of them boys of 17 or 18, frightfully weary, and in rags . . . most of them are barefoot." 
5
6
Dmitri Parskii, commander of the Russian 12th Army tasked with the defense of Riga, expected any attack on the city to focus on the Russian held western bank of the Dvina, a flat and marshy area bordering the Baltic. This salient in the Russian line maintained a strong defensive position composed of two corps: the VI Siberian and II Siberian. 
7
In the successful capture of Riga, Hutier's forces displayed well-coordinated assault tactics coupled with the innovative use of artillery to achieve a decisive result. The troops who spearheaded the first wave across the Dvina trained and rehearsed the attack for two weeks at lakes located behind the frontlines. The attacking division themselves did not advance up into their jump-off positions until the night before the attack. Rather than relying on linear tactics prevalent in all other previous major operations in World War I, the assaulting infantry instead "advanced leapfrog fashion." 
8
9
While these tactics proved revolutionary on this scale, it was the utilization of Bruchmller's artillery tactics in conjunction with infantry assault tactics that set the stage for future German strategy in Italy and France. Bruchmller described the purpose of his tactics best when he stated that he "desired only to break the morale of the enemy, pin him to his position, and then overcome him with an overwhelming assault." 
10
11
12
13
14
Class II observers, accompanied by a non-commissioned officer (NCO) and several telephone operators, signaled changes in the situation back to the observation posts who then directly informed the relevant artillery. Each infantry battalion in the first wave received a liaison officer whose job concerned informing the artillery of changes in the tactical situation of their battalion and advise infantry officers on their available options. 
15
16
The opening bombardment of Russian positions began at 0400 on the morning of 1 September 1917. Within two hours, German guns unleashed more than 20,500 gas shells onto Russian artillery positions and second-line defenses. 
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Good news, however, did not stretch along the entirety of the German line. The flanking attacks proceeded poorly in comparison to the primary crossing further south of Riga. Due to the preponderance of artillery resources allocated to facilitate the main crossing, German forces failed to obtain artillery supremacy over the Russian salient on the western coast of the river, where the Russians expected the primary attack to take place. The three divisions taking part in the diversionary attacks against these Russian positions came under heavy enemy bombardment as a result. 
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
Russian morale plummeted at the devastating loss of Riga and the masses of human and material resources that they simply could not replace. Yet while Riga lay firmly in German hands, Hutier failed to completely envelope and destroy the Russian force. Though disorganized and demoralized, significant numbers of Russian soldiers escaped the envelopment. Though he failed in his second objective, the Russian army in this sector lost a key defensive position that had defended the approach to the key cities of Reval and Petrograd for over two years. The Russian 12th Army fell back upon a less defensible position 40 kilometers behind their original line of defense. While commanding the Northern Front, General Vladislav Klembovskii noted that "the Twelfths Army's retreat has been so disorganized it that it is positively in no state at all to stop an enemy attack without a well-fortified position." 
33
34
Ultimately, however, the capture of Riga and the devastation of the Russian 12th army proved inadequate in forcing the Russians to sue for peace. Therefore, the German command decided to continue with the second stage of the Riga-sel plan. Previously hesitant to allocate army resources for an invasion of the Baltic Islands, High Command finally allocated sufficient forces to at least equal the number of Russian defenders on the islands. The German forces hoped to open sea lanes to the now-captured port of Riga while threatening the crucial naval base at Reval and the Russian capital of Petrograd. Ludendorff summarized his view on the capture of the Baltic Islands when he stated that "the blow was aimed at Petrograd." 
35
The operation to capture the Baltic islands amounted to a massive military endeavor along the lines of which the German military had no experience. Although largely seen as an economy-of-force endeavor, the numbers committed to the capture of the islands underscored the importance placed upon this operation and their hope to finally end the fighting on the Eastern Front. In terms of sheer numbers of ships, Operation Albion was the largest naval operation of World War I. For the operation, the German navy mustered a total of approximately 363 ships against a Russian fleet of 151. In comparison, the famous Battle of Jutland pitted only 99 German ships against 150 British. 
36
37
38
39
40
41
Russian forces understood the importance in retaining control of the Baltic islands, especially following the loss of Riga in September. Minefields constituted the primary defensive measure to prevent landings on the main island of sel. 
42
43
44
Operation Albion proved more difficult to coordinate and manage than did the attack against Riga in the previous month. German forces improvised most of the invasion as the operation fully came together only one month prior to the first troops landing on the beaches. 
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
Additionally, naval forces often deployed the equivalent of a forward observer, sometimes simply a regular naval officer, to facilitate coordination with infantry already on the ground. The most crucial example of this enhanced coordination took place during the desperate defense of Orrisar by the German cycle and storm troops. Lieutenant Commander von Rosenberg entered the Small Sound separating sel and Moon islands with several shallow-draft torpedo boats. Dispatching a naval officer, Rosenberg was able to learn that the beleaguered cyclists found themselves pushed back from their positions defending the crucial causeway by three Russian armored cars against which the cyclists' fire proved ineffective. Acting immediately, Rosenberg order his ships to fire on the armored cars parked on the causeway. The ships' 88-mm guns quickly destroyed two while forcing the third to retreat to Moon Island. Rosenberg then resupplied the defending troops with desperately needed ammunition. 
52
53
54
Although Operation Albion and the attack against Riga presented stark differences in the inherent nature of the offensives, both witnessed revolutionary operational innovation that resulted in resounding success. Although predominantly an amphibious operation, Albion retained aspects from the assault on Riga such as the use of specially trained stormtroopers to exploit through the enemy front line in order to achieve operational superiority. Moreover, while it proved impossible to utilize Bruchmller's artillery innovations during Albion, the German Navy attempted to centralize bombardment operations and establish a clear avenue for communication with frontline troops by utilizing naval officers as unofficial forward observers. In both operations, consistent morale deficiencies hampered the Russian defense and facilitated the rapid, continuous German advance. At Riga, the sudden devastating bombardment caused many of the frontline soldiers to flee or fail to inflict any damage on the vulnerable German units during the first wave across the Dvina. Morale problems further hindered Russian attempts to stop or even slow the attempted envelopment around Riga. During Albion, the rapid German advance combined with superior naval support and frequent air support caused the disorganized Russian defenders to clog the muddy narrow passages through the heavily wooded terrain. German forces would face an enemy with similar, though less severe, moral problems utilizing this operational structure in the Battle of Caporetto. This evolution in German doctrine faced its first hardened, determined resistance in the Spring Offensive in 1918 aimed at French and British forces. Still highly successful in terms of World War I, it ultimately failed to produce the completely devastating results that were achieved outside Riga in 1917.
The operations to capture Riga and the Baltic islands represented a clear evolution in German operational doctrine. In the assault against Riga, General Hutier recognized the advantages of stormtrooper tactics and integrated them into an operational plan that further utilized key artillery innovations pioneered by Bruchmller. Following up on the success at Riga, German forces successfully built upon the innovations at Riga while effectively engaging in a type of warfare in which Germany had no previous experience. The amphibious operation also marked one of the few times that the German naval and army branches of the military successfully coordinated and supported each other during the entirety of the war. While very few of the tactics during these operations proved to be new or unique, their application and scope demonstrated to German High Command the effectiveness of this new way of waging war. The following offensives at Caporetto in October 1917 and the Spring Offensive in 1918 heavily resembled the operations in the Baltic in their execution and planning. In fact, following Riga and Albion German High Command transferred General von Hutier and Bruchmller to the Western Front to play crucial roles in the pivotal Spring Offensive. Many of the units that took part in the operations in and around Riga also found themselves transferred to the west following the withdrawal of Russia from the war.
Within months these new tactics spread to the Western Front as both sides sought to end the war through mobile operations. The Battle of Caporetto, fought in the mountainous Italian theatre, witnessed the successful use of stormtroopers in breaching long held enemy defensive lines to allow breakthrough. Although the advance was halted at the First Battle of Monte Grappa, German High Command decided to integrate the new infiltration and exploitation tactics into the planned 1918 offensive. General Hutier, Bruchmller, and most of the forces that participated in the attack in Riga were transferred to the Western Front to bolster and train the forces already present. The German offensive doctrine for the massive Spring Offensive of 1918 nearly mirrored the techniques witnessed at Riga. Allied countermobility operations, defense in depth, and the inability of German forces to attrite the enemy reserves successfully brought the offensive to a halt. Though beyond the scope of this case study, the Spring Offensive presents the critical flaws of breakthrough tactics in large-scale operations.
The operations around Riga in 1917 never introduced any new tactics or techniques to the battlefield of World War I. It was the synthesizing of already established methods of war into a single doctrine that created the ability for German forces to achieve operational breakthrough and envelopment. This blending of existing technological and tactical elements into a single large successful operation acted as the true revolutionary nature of the Baltic offensives. Modern military forces face a similar conundrum on battlefields like in Eastern Europe and the Middle East where envelopment operations are made increasingly difficult by the proliferation of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs,) cyber warfare, and improved air defense systems. Additionally, the growing importance of the South Asian theatre necessitates further joint operations employing army, navy, and air force resources. The invasion of the Baltic islands in 1917 demonstrates the need for branches to cooperate in new ways in the face of such battlefields as well as the ability for the army to play a significant role in diverse situations, even amphibious operations. While modern technologies present growing difficulties in achieving decisive action, just as this case study demonstrates, successful holistic utilization of combined arms operations offers the ability to surpass such challenges.
Unwilling or unable to work outside of the existing paradigm, many senior American officers treated doctrine like dogma and failed to understand the true test of doctrine was the reality of battle and that doctrine had to be refined-even radically altered if necessary-to be useful.
-Mark Grotelueschen, The AEF Way of War
During the first two phases of the Meuse-Argonne offensive in World War I, combined arms maneuver was a metaphorical "no man's land" for many in V Corps because many in the organization struggled to bridge the gap between operational processes at corps level and divisional innovation on the front line. Staffs within V Corps oversimplified the complexity of the battlefield they faced because of an over-reliance on existing doctrine. As a result, V Corps and its divisions were slow to implement combined arms methods in the early phases of the Meuse-Argonne offensive, and this failure led to profound organizational and tactical change before the final phase.
As the campaign progressed, V Corps learned to embrace the challenges inherent in this no man's land, resulting in dramatic organizational change that brought about necessary adaptation required for battlefield success. V Corps recognized that in-stride adaptation required an internal cultural shift that enabled leaders to balance integration of new technologies with deviations in doctrinal employment. Specifically, before the third phase of the campaign, V Corps made significant changes to its leaders, planning methods, tactics, and organizational structure to address the reality of the emerging changes on the modern battlefield. This study explains how, despite the problems of doctrinal limitations, unsynchronized use of new technology, poorly trained divisions, and newly created corps headquarters, V Corps and its divisions successfully adapted in-stride during large-scale combat operations in the Meuse-Argonne campaign.
Despite the extensive planning that consumed the newly developed headquarters before 26 September 1918, V Corps remained unprepared for the combined arms challenges that awaited them at the outset of the Meuse-Argonne campaign. Namely, the V Corps maneuver plan failed to synchronize divisional infantry maneuver with artillery, aviation, and tank employment. As a result, over the next five days, the divisions of V Corps struggled to achieve the First Army mandated objective of Montfaucon. This failure cost V Corps time and resources as they struggled to move supplies and artillery pieces over rough terrain while maneuvering poorly trained formations.
With mostly untrained and inexperienced units, V Corps positioned the 79th Division on the right flank, the 37th Division in the center, the 91st Division on the left flank (Figure 
1
Despite optimistic plans during the first three days of fighting, the 79th Division, 37th Division, and 91st Division were unsuccessful and the cost to manpower was staggering. 
2
3
4
5
6
Today, Army doctrine defines tempo as "the relative speed and rhythm of military operations over time with respect to the enemy." 
7
8
9
10
11
The disruption to V Corps's tempo continued because of their failure to properly manage the Corps support area as the only three viable routes through the 38-kilometer area in no man's land became increasingly congested. To make matters worse, the heavy rain right after the start of the campaign all but rendered crossing that vital area with artillery, supply wagons, and trucks all but impossible. 
12
13
The challenge posed by the adaption of the Germans notwithstanding, V Corps faced internal obstacles to innovation within their organization. For the first phase of the Meuse-Argonne, leaders and staffs within V Corps primarily relied on the existing doctrine to implement Corps systems for planning. Rushed staff training and a desire to quickly launch the Meuse-Argonne offensive hindered V Corps's ability to develop the necessary organizational understanding required to accurately plan and execute operational tempo. As a new headquarters with roughly only a month working together prior to the offensive, V Corps struggled to understand itself, let alone encourage lower echelons to be innovative. In essence, V Corps lacked leaders capable of bridging new ideas to improve operations through combined maneuver.
As the first phase of the Meuse-Argonne concluded, intense internal and external pressures mounted on V Corps. Doctrine no longer matched the reality on the ground, and all three of the initial assault divisions culminated before reaching their final objectives. 
14
15
By the fifth day of the Meuse-Argonne campaign, V Corps faced a crisis. After a three-day operational pause, by 4 October 1918, V Corps remained unable to seize the First Army mandated objectives directed for 27 September 1918. Desperate to regain momentum, V Corps replaced the 37th, 79th and 91st Divisions with the 32nd and 3rd Divisions. 
16
V Corps leadership still expected infantry-centric plans to lead to success. However, the 32nd and 3rd Divisions differed from their predecessors with regards to combined arms employment, and in doing so, set the precedent for change within V Corps's planning and operations. Despite some early failures, as the second phase progressed, the 32nd and 3rd Divisions avoided costly frontal assaults by employing artillery for suppression as they maneuvered with infantry, tanks and machine guns to envelop German strong point positions. 17
As they reassessed the enemy situation, V Corps staff headquarters expected the Germans to defend their positions along the Kriemhilde Stellung. 
18
2
19
The V Corps artillery plan did not include supporting fires past the initial bombardment. 
20
After relieving the 91st Division, the 32nd Division began the second phase of the Meuse-Argonne campaign on 4 October with an assault on Gesnes, to the northeast of Cierges. Through the use of reconnaissance patrols, the 32nd Division established a greater understanding the battlefield. Based on the intelligence collected by their brigades, the 32nd Division's 64th Brigade utilized divisional artillery to destroy obstacles for an infantry advance while also simultaneously suppressing and neutralizing German machine gun positions. As a result, the 64th Brigade successfully captured Gesnes. 
21
22
23
24
From Bois de la Morine to the Kriemhilde Stellung, the 32nd Division continued to innovative as they deviated from doctrine to synchronize enablers. Meanwhile, their higher headquarters, V Corps, remained largely ineffectual in supporting its divisions. V Corps had no plan other than directing its divisions to penetrate the Kriemhilde Stellung. As a result of this disconnect between V Corps and its lower echelons, divisions under V Corps continued to fight in small, independent actions rather than a synchronized corps attack. 
25
26
27
28
Simultaneously, the 3rd Division's learning process mirrored the learning process of the 32nd Division. Despite starting the second phase of the Meuse-Argonne with a rolling barrage for their initial attack, 3rd Division launched their assault brigade, the 5th Infantry Brigade, without any significant artillery preparation. The lack of artillery coordination allowed the Germans to defend machine gun positions and mass their artillery and aviation assets against elements of the 5th Brigade. Instead of continuing the attack, the commander of the 5th Brigade halted his formation and sent a request to the 3rd Division Headquarters for concentrated artillery fire on the machine gun positions located to the south of the woods near Hill 250. 
29
The innovation at the brigade level helped the 3rd Division learn to fight as a combined arms team. In another assault in Woods 250, the 4th Infantry Brigade took a tactical pause, consolidated personnel and requested a 15 minute artillery barrage on the German machine gun positions in Woods 250. This barrage aimed to suppress enemy positions so the 4th Brigade could advance. The effect of this decision allowed the 3rd Division to gain ground and preserve combat power. 
30
In his review of the 32nd Division, Paul Jacobsmeyer asserted that during this period, Major General Haan communicated a desire to plan combat operations outside of existing doctrinal approaches to his staff. 
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
Even though V Corps replaced the 3rd and 32nd Division with the 2nd and 89th Divisions for the last major offensive, the adaptations made during the second phase were not lost with the addition of these new units. 
39
40
41
While bottom-up intelligence became integral to division and corps planning, it still had its limits. In order to confirm reports as well as fill in remaining gaps, V Corp further adapted its intelligence collection with innovations in their Corps Air Service. 
42
44
Through the Objective Map, V Corps addressed the lingering tempo problem that plagued them from the beginning. Whereas original objectives during the first two phases did not acknowledge a realistic understanding of tempo, objectives during the final phase were realistic, thoroughly researched, and properly planned. The most important part of this collaborative planning was that it allowed for synchronization through a shared common operating picture. The overall success of V Corps highlights the effects of this synchronization during the final phase of the Meuse-Argonne. The planning was so effective that the coordinated effort of artillery and infantry isolated German artillery units, preventing them from leaving their shelters to conduct counterbattery operations in support of their infantry in the defense. 
45
46
47
48
Despite the passing of 100 years, corps and division missions remain focused on creating opportunities that enable continuous positions of relative advantage. 
49
A fundamental assumption concerning this analysis centers on corps as a tactical headquarters maneuvering divisions throughout the course of LSCO. As the Meuse-Argonne case study demonstrates, V Corps struggled in this regard by neglecting the necessary tactical synchronization needed to successfully maneuver its divisions. As a new headquarters, V Corps relied on existing doctrine to create a fighting force that centered on a top-down approach toward artillery employment. This top-down approach also did not account for the simultaneous requirement of sustainment of other combined arms assets, preventing units across V Corps from maintaining tempo.
Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations, states that "commanders conduct decisive action to seize, retain and exploit the initiative. This involves the orchestration of many simultaneous unit actions in the most demanding of operational environments." 
50
Maintaining tempo throughout combat operations also requires an iterative dialogue between staffs and commanders to anticipate changes. The 3rd Division and the 32nd Division used this iterative dialogue to creatively adjust to battlefield conditions. While altering how they employed artillery fires, they also changed the organizational structure of their infantry regiments to include tanks, machine guns and flamethrowers. In this instance, Major General Haan and Major General Buck created dialogue with Major General Summerall and his staff that linked innovation at the divisional level to an adaptation of the V Corps operational process.
In this regard, V Corps's change allowed them to choose the most vital points in the battle to assist subordinates in achieving their objectives while also allowing for subordinate freedom of action at the tactical level. In doing so, they struck the right balance of decentralized control while also ensuring more synchronized efforts across V Corps. This concept may seem paradoxical, but it is in this delicate balancing act of two seemingly opposing ideas that the leaders of V Corps achieved success.
Another important factor that impacts the challenge of balance is implementation of new technology. While there were other factors, like training and experience, which negatively impacted organizational cohesion within V Corps, it is important to note that the organizational structure built on older models of warfare confused leaders and staffs. In effect, the rigidity within the organization prevented leaders from focusing on their environment because older doctrinal methods did not account for the complex endeavor of merging new technology with a new organization.
Today, political factors and other operational environment conditions present similar challenges to Army combat unit structures that form new relationships through the creation of task forces that are "scalable and tailorable" depending on the mission. 
51
Finally, balancing organizational and technological requirements requires an honest look on the applicability of doctrine. As the case study of the Meuse-Argonne demonstrates, doctrinal methods succeed when they are malleable enough for the user to creatively apply as responses from the operational environment dictate. In the latter part of the second phase and into the final phase, V Corps did not completely throw out existing doctrine. Instead, officers linked existing doctrine with new techniques and technology by changing the sequence, timing, and process of synchronization of artillery and other combined arms assets to better suit infantry support. Rather than mass fires effects before assaults or on poorly conceived objectives, they allowed lower echelons to build an intelligence picture that allowed them to mass all effects of their formations on decisive points. This nuanced change to existing doctrine produced striking results that gave birth to modern combined arms. Infantry assaults remained vital, as General Pershing wanted, but their timing and sequence changed to dramatic and successful effect. In essence, these officers shifted the paradigm with a nuanced change to doctrine by changing how they conceptualized the battlefield. In short, doctrine should not be discounted, but similarly, it should not be followed rigidly. If it is, military planners run the same risk as their predecessors in the first phase of the Meuse-Argonne who remained whetted to the checklists and dogma that prevented unit success.
In conclusion, as the Army looks toward possible future wars that may return to LSCO, communication and synchronization are just as important today as they were in 1918. Corps and division leaders and staffs should remain vigilant in their efforts to create opportunities so seize positions of relative advantage by carefully analyzing all the factors that impact operational tempo. Ensuring the right tempo throughout large-scale combat operations requires an in-depth analysis of the dynamic interactions between technology and doctrine. If not properly planned, unsynchronized tempo becomes a no man's land that can prevent even the best units from succeeding. Avoiding unsynchronized operations depends on the willingness of leaders and staffs to creatively and honestly approach problems. Doing so may make us more adaptable while operating in complex environments, and it may help prevent relearning the hard lessons of the Meuse-Argonne at the corps and division level.
Robert M. Young
In no other profession are the penalties for employing untrained personnel so appalling as in the military. 
1
From antiquity to the present day, the use of a combined arms doctrine has served as a predictor of success on the battlefield. The weapons evolve; the basic concept does not. One part of an army cannot win a battle, least of all a war, on its own. The above is blatantly obvious when viewing history's most famous conflict, the Second World War. Technology had advanced to the point where combined arms comprised many different facets of the military art. These included infantry, artillery, armor, tactical air support, engineers, anti-aircraft units, etc. Yet, all were not always available, and at various points in the war those components operated at far from an optimum level. At some points in the war armor or air power would excel while engineer support or artillery was lacking. The value of a combined arms doctrine is as obvious in cases where absent as it is when present. This contrast is starkly obvious in what the United States labeled the Southwest Pacific Area (SWPA). Two battles, at Buna in 1942 and Wakde in 1944, displayed how vital an effective employment of combined arms was to victory. TTT: troops, tools, and training. 
2
MacArthur's G-2 (Intelligence Section) saw little to fear from the Japanese at Buna. They considered them completely useless after their journey through the mountains. All anticipated an easy operation. All also failed to notice the bunker system created by the Japanese and the several thousand fresh troops that arrived at Buna immediately prior to the first American attacks. These bunkers were expertly located, forcing all attacks to advance frontally on the only dry land available. 
3
[The bunkers had] a framework of columns and beams . . . the walls were riveted with coconut logs ranging up to one-and-a-half feet in thickness, and a ceiling of two or three courses of such logs was laid on top. Not content with this construction, the enemy reinforced the wall, using steel oil drums and ammunition boxes filled with sand, as well as log piles and rocks. Over all this was piled earth and sand mixed with short logs, coconuts, and the like. When the bunker, seven to eight feet high, was camouflaged with fast-growing, jungle vegetation, it became almost impossible to spot in the tangled underbrush. The campaign as to prove that as a shelter it would withstand almost anything but a direct hit by a heavy artillery shell with delayed-action fuse. 
4
5
Operating in a jungle environment magnifies the already strenuous combat conditions of warfare. Heat, vegetation, and torrential rains all further magnify the stress of combat. To operate effectively in such an environment requires acclimation and extended training in an actual jungle environment. This requires time but given the gravity of the situation, MacArthur could not allow Buna to remain under Japanese control, and at this point the 32nd Infantry Division was the only American unit he had available; there wasn't time to prepare for the conditions his men would face. A patrol toward Buna by the 126th Infantry Regiment revealed this lack of acclimation and preparation. The patrol commander noted: Marching, living, and fighting in the jungle requires special training and special equipment. The regiment had neither. If it had been known that future operations would be in the jungle, the regiment could have started specialized training in Australia. All through the Papuan campaign no jungle equipment was issued to the regiment. Even clothing had to be dyed green by improvised methods. Troops are going to be inefficient in jungle operations until they have had a minimum of jungle training actually given in jungle terrain. 
6
7
8
9
Poorly trained troops entered combat at Buna without the tools necessary for victory. The infantry had their basic weapons though even many of their hand grenades were defective. Machine gun ammunition was perilously low. 10 There were no bazookas; a lone flame thrower proved as dangerous to its operator as to the enemy. 11 There were light 60-mm mortars but none of the heavier 81-mm variety. Artillery support consisted of a single American 105-mm howitzer and four Australian 25-pounders (87.6-mm). All the guns had only quick action fuse ammunition (exploded directly upon impact). The 25-pounders also had a very limited trajectory, making their value in the thick jungle dubious at best. Veterans of the 32nd noted:
Just to make victory double certain Harding and his artillery officer, Brigadier General W. Waldron, had been trying to get some tanks and heavy artillery to use in the attack on Buna. They received little support from General MacArthur, and for this the responsibility partly lay with General Kenney, who argued that tanks and artillery had no place in jungle warfare. Kenney's influence over MacArthur remained very strong-strangely so in a manner concerning ground action in the jungle, on which he could have had no real knowledge. Loyal to Air, Kenney maintained that "the artillery in this theater flies." 
12
13
A legitimate question at this point is why did MacArthur commit an obviously unprepared unit to combat in a strange environment? Looking at the situation faced by America at this point in the war, November 1942, several reasons appear. American forces had launched two other major operations at this time, one nearby at Guadalcanal and the other in North Africa. Politics is an unfortunate but persistent part of war. MacArthur would not have wanted his part of the war overshadowed. He had to do something with whatever he had available. Buna was a legitimate target. His intelligence told him the Japanese were weak. It is easy to see that a commander could view this as a rather simple operation, even with an inexperienced, under-equipped division. The inexperience was unavoidable. Most American units were inexperienced. The lack of weapons and support is a legitimate area of criticism. Again, thinking an easy opera- tion loomed may have prevented any urgency in securing the weapons the 32nd would need.
The first American attack of the Buna campaign occurred on 19 November. General Harding had hoped to precede the attack with both an artillery barrage and an air strike. The 25-pounders fired a few sporadic rounds but had no specific targets. Heavy rains the previous night forced the cancellation of the air strike. The infantry advanced toward the Old and New Strips. Murderous small arms fire stopped the advance. The fire emanated from the Japanese bunkers guarding the two airstrips though the American troops still could not locate them. Japanese infantry weapons gave off no flash and sounds reverberated in the jungle. Undaunted General Harding offered another attack for the 21st. A pre-attack air strike by Fifth Air Force medium bombers (A-20's and B-25's) missed the Japanese positions, and US troops were hit instead, resulting in four dead and two wounded. 
14
Why had frustration arrived? The infantry could not handle the bunkers alone. Light mortars, no bazookas or flamethrowers, ineffective artillery and air support, and above all else no armor made the only method of destroying a bunker a very lucky and resourceful infantryman advancing close enough to an enemy position to pass a hopefully functional grenade through a vision slit. The artillery problem was particularly frustrating because ammunition existed. On 3 December 800 rounds of delayed action 105-mm ammunition arrived in Australia where it remained for several weeks. 
15
16
17
18
The tanks had an immediate effect. One infantry battalion commander noted:
The tanks really did that job. They apparently completely demoralized the Japs . . . who fought like cornered rats when they were forced into the open as a result of having their fires masked when the tanks broke through their final protective line. . . . There were few holes knocked in the bunkers except where the tanks stood off and blasted them at short range with their 37-mm guns. 
19
20
The attack against the Bridge and the New Strip was initially less successful. Twenty Japanese bunkers thwarted the attack until the four remaining tanks arrived. Joined by two Australian infantry companies and the 1st Battalion of the 128th Infantry, they overran the most formidable Japanese defensive system on the Buna battlefield. The infantry finished what was not destroyed by the tanks, able to now advance within a few feet of the bunkers since the tanks drew most of the Japanese fire. The solitary howitzer also destroyed many enemy positions now that their exact locations were pinpointed and the proper ammunition came forward. Some mopping up remained but the 18 December attack won the Battle of Buna. 
21
22
23
24
MacArthur and his SWPA began their drive toward Japan along the northern coast of New Guinea in the spring of 1944. Hollandia, the first objective, was attacked and secured in April. Wakde was next. It contained a single airstrip capable of supporting both the fighters and bombers of General Kenney's Fifth Air Force. (It had greatly enhanced its numbers and capabilities since the Buna campaign). The 163rd Regimental Combat Team of the 41st Infantry Division (a unit which did most of the mopping up in the Buna campaign) was ordered to secure Wakde.
The support available to the 163rd demonstrates how much American power had grown in the time since the costly victory at Buna. The assault unit, designated Tornado Task Force, had two field artillery battalions, one each of 105-mm and 155-mm howitzers, in direct support. These battalions were reinforced by another battery of 105-mm howitzers. Naval gunfire support included two heavy cruisers (8-inch guns), three light cruisers (6-inch guns), 20 destroyers (5-inch guns), and several rocket-equipped ships. Kenney's Fifth Air Force also dominated the skies.
Wakde, as with most positions occupied by the Japanese during World War II, was superbly prepared. The island itself is only 3,000 yards long and 1,200 yards wide at its widest point. The airstrip dominated the island. Eight hundred Japanese soldiers garrisoned the island and had erected approximately 100 bunkers, many of which were reinforced with concrete or coconut logs and concealed by nature and superb Japanese camouflage. The pre-invasion bombardment and airstrikes destroyed many of these positions before the 163rd went ashore. 
25
26
27
At the same time, A Company of the 1st Battalion moved to clear the western end of the island. Three Japanese bunkers thwarted the advance. The two tanks arrived and quickly destroyed all three bunkers from distances as close as twenty yards. A Japanese counterattack was easily repulsed, and A Company quickly cleared the western and northern shores of the island.
The tanks returned to the beach to reload while artillery continued eliminating Japanese positions. The days of Buna, where the norm was scarce guns and inadequate ammunition, were gone. Positions were spotted, Forward Observers called them in, and indirect fires destroyed them. The battle ended for the day. The morning of 19 May the attack resumed, preceded by an hour-long artillery and mortar barrage. Following immediately behind their artillery fire, C Company was the first to encounter enemy opposition.
Two C Company platoons led the attack. One platoon had a single tank, the other two Sherman tanks. The third rifle platoon and the weapons platoon followed in support. The tanks once again drew most of the enemy fire and again the infantry advanced to within point-blank range of the Japanese positions. The trailing infantry platoon was then available to deal with isolated pockets of resistance, allowing the main attack to continue. As Company C advanced they encountered a small rise in the ground riddled with Japanese positions. The tanks destroyed each position while the infantry killed any fleeing Japanese soldiers. The company now advanced to the beach and turned north, encountering Japanese positions in small coral caves. The Shermans advanced to within throwing distance of the caves, blasting away en route. Riflemen and flamethrowers then finished the job.
The other unit in action was B Company. They were attempting to clear the southern edge of the airstrip and progress was slow. Two tanks quickly arrived. A rifle platoon accompanied each tank, with the third rifle platoon in support. The tanks advanced, encountering bunkers and heavy brush. By early afternoon the airstrip was secure.
Wakde was a rousing victory. Japanese losses were 759 killed and four captured; American losses were only 40 killed and 107 wounded. 
28
McBride, Commanding General of the 80th Infantry Division, wrote in General Order Number Fourteen that "we can look back on two years of varied and intensive training which . . . will be put to the test in the near future . . . the members of the Division can enter battle with confidence in themselves, their comrades, and their units." 
1
2
3
4
FM 100-5 and FM 5-6, Operations of Engineer Field Units prescribed river crossing operations in 1941. According to historian Michael D. Doubler, "the doctrine and tactics of river crossings were well developed and known throughout the American army." 6 FM 100-5 divided river crossings into three major phases: actions to prepare the crossing, the crossing of the river, and the exploitation of the crossing. This framework supported achiev-ing three sequential objectives: neutralizing immediate enemy resistance on the opposite bank of the river, neutralizing enemy observation points on high ground beyond the bank, and exploiting a third objective beyond the crossing itself, which referred to the unit's purpose for crossing the river. 
7
8
While crossing, FM 100-5 stated that "in general, an attacker should operate on a wide front with several determined attacks at separated localities." 
10
11
12
The 80th Infantry Division trained on the tactics and techniques prescribed by this doctrine at three major AGF training centers. On 7 December 1942, the AGF issued a directive to all maneuver areas in Louisiana, Tennessee, West Virginia, Oregon, and the DTC, prescribing the following maneuvers: a. Movement to contact, meeting engagement, and aggressive action by both sides. b. Meeting engagement, aggressive action by a larger force, and the withdrawal of a small force. c. Aggressive action against a covering force, with a view to forcing it to withdraw across or through an obstacle.
d. Attack and defense of a river line, the objective of the attacker to require the crossing of his major elements.
e. Coordinated attack of a prepared position. Situation to be so drawn as to permit at least 24 hours of uninterrupted and unobserved work on the defensive position.
f. Delaying action on successive positions over a considerable distance.
g. Breakthrough of an over-extended position and the withdrawal of the defender over a considerable distance. 
13
14
15
16
Following its initial combat experience at Argentan, the 80th Infantry Division next fought to cross the Moselle River. In August 1944, aiming to conclude the war, General Dwight D. Eisenhower directed a northeast attack into Germany as the main effort of allied forces in Europe. On 1 September, while the 80th Infantry Division established a bridgehead across the Meuse River, Eisenhower assumed direct operational control of allied ground forces in Europe. Eisenhower ordered Patton's Third Army to attack along the Verdun-Metz axis to surprise, confuse, and disperse German army elements by presenting multiple dilemmas. 
18
19
20
21
22
2
24
25
26
27
28
29
The 80th Infantry Division's difficulties during the first attempt to cross the Moselle began with a weak understanding of the enemy's posture in defense of the Moselle River. Lieutenant Colonel Richard R. Fleisher, 80th Infantry Division G-2, provided contradictory analysis of enemy dispositions. He predicted that German artillery would "wait until [US reconnaissance] elements approached, [to subsequently] fire, and withdraw," and that "no small arms fire was expected [west] of [the] Moselle [River]." 
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
The 80th Infantry Division's first attempt to cross the Moselle at three separate points between the 4th and 6th of September aimed to maximize simultaneity to increase tempo and "degrade enemy capabilities throughout the area of operations." 
39
40
Instead, the division attempted simultaneity across three objectives: Pont-a-Mousson, Toul, and Marbache. While the simultaneous assault on three objectives presented the 3d Panzer Grenadier Division with multiple dilemmas, the 80th Infantry Division lacked the depth or combined arms synchronization necessary to overwhelm the enemy at any one of the three. This resulted in the early culmination of two infantry battalions from the 317th Infantry Regiment, which found themselves pinned down between the Moselle River and the Rhine-Marne Canal by German artillery, mortar, and machine gun fire. Unable to place any effects on the enemy, "commanders feared that a withdrawal might result in excessive casualties, so for the rest of the day soldiers remained huddled in shallow foxholes and exposed to a continuous artillery and mortar bombardment." 
41
42
43
Following the retreat of both battalions at three in the afternoon on 5 September 1944, McBride decided to commit a third battalion from the 317th Infantry Regiment to attempt yet again to force a crossing. He ordered it at the same location as the previously failed assault, with a smaller force and less support. During the first crossing, elements of the 3d Panzer Grenadier Division destroyed 38 of 64 assault boats belonging to the 305th Engineer Combat Battalion, rendering them unable to support the third battalion's attack. Furthermore, artillery support remained uncoordinated. 
44
45
46
47
48
First, beginning on 8 September, the 80th Infantry Division prepared for the crossing: it conducted reconnaissance and determined a suitable crossing site at Dieulouard, and "each day the American artillery fired concentrations on targets selected for special treatment on the day of the assault . . . to forestall an enemy alert prior to H Hour." 
49
McBride mitigated risk through combined arms planning and reconnaissance. He also applied FM 100-5's recommendation to immediately establish pontoon bridges to ensure the flow of heavier combat equipment and supplies to the assaulting forces. On 12 September, he balanced risk and opportunity and ordered the heavy construction companies to work immediately; he believed that the speed and ease of infantry movements warranted it. His decision proved prudent; the armor of the 702d Tank Battalion and the 313th Field Artillery Battalion crossed the pontoons and enabled the division's successful defense of the bridgehead. The 80th In-fantry Division faced one more test of its ability to transition and prevent culmination after crossing the Moselle; the 3d Panzer Grenadier Division, 17th SS Panzer Grenadier Division, and the 29th Panzer Grenadier Regiment counterattacked at one in the morning on 13 September. 
50
51
52
Contrast with Modern Doctrine: ADRP 3-0, FM 3-0, and ATP 3-90.4
Much like FM 100-5 in 1941, modern doctrine stresses the importance of combined arms maneuver. ADRP 3-0 defines it as, "the synchronized and simultaneous application of all elements of combat power that together achieve a greater effect than if used separately or sequentially." 
53
54
55
56
While the doctrine in 1941 specifically prescribed the crossing of river lines and the 80th Division trained in unusually stable conditions for over two years, it still struggled to synchronize combined arms at the Moselle River in September 1944. Doctrine in FM 100-5 and FM 5-6 in 1941 provided a detailed structure for crossing rivers with sequential objectives, and detailed methods for the employment of artillery, aviation, armor, and engineer assets. The 80th Infantry Division failed to cross the Moselle River on its first attempt because it did not apply principles of combined arms maneuver or follow the doctrine of the time. A week later, it succeeded on its second attempt, following doctrine and synchronizing combined arms.
Modern doctrine provides less detail on the application of combined arms maneuver to wet-gap crossings. US Army doctrine today, when compared to FM 100-5 in 1941, provides many guiding principles and frameworks but does not specify how to synchronize combined arms to cross a wet-gap. Instead, doctrine in ADRP 3-0, FM 3-0, and ATP 3-90.4 provide general guidance for corps and division leaders, and exacting detail for engineers.
The applicability of this analysis for today's leaders is clear. In the absence of a doctrine such as FM 100-5 that provides the "how" to river crossings, units must develop standard operating procedures (SOPs) that synchronize the warfighting functions in time, space, and purpose to achieve a relative position of advantage against a defending enemy. Headquarters must not only rehearse these SOPs as a staff, but with the totality of a division's or corps's warfighting functions, enablers, and subordinate headquarters.
Tactical headquarters must plan a synchronized operation with phases and transitions that enable tempo, prevent culmination, and mitigate tac-tical and operational risk to successfully cross a wet gap crossing. While modern US Army doctrine provides us with the overall architecture and the engineer-specific details for these operations, history provides us with what leaders may find lacking in doctrine: examples of success and failure, and ideas from old doctrine for developing SOPs. Leaders must ensure the lessons learned by the Soldiers of the 80th Infantry Division at the Moselle River in 1944 are not learned a second time; the cost was significant.
Captain James Villanueva By the end of 1944, General Douglas MacArthur-commander of the Southwest Pacific Area-stood poised to retake Luzon in the Philippines and realize his long-awaited goal of a triumphal return to the Bataan Peninsula and the city of Manila, capital of the Philippines. MacArthur charged General Walter Krueger's United States Sixth Army, which landed on Luzon at Lingayen Gulf on 9 January 1945, with the initial phase of operations on Luzon and the seizure of Manila from defending Japanese forces. 
1
Given restrictions on the use of airpower, American infantry units of the Sixth Army's XIV Corps, primarily the 37th Infantry Division and 1st Cavalry Division, increasingly turned to adaptive combined arms teams, sometimes designated "flying columns," to help continue their advance in the face of stiffening Japanese resistance leading up to the month-long struggle to seize Manila. 
2
The Japanese elected not to defend the Central Luzon Plain in force, only conducting delaying actions and blowing bridges to hinder the American advance. 
3
4
5
6
7
8
The Sixth Army's main subordinate units were I and XIV Corps, commanded by Major General Innis P. Swift and Major General Oscar V. Griswold, respectively. 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Beyond questions of task-organization, in order to facilitate XIV Corps's movements south from Lingayen Gulf, the corps headquarters took care to establish unit boundaries as the divisions advanced, and gave specific guidance to units as far as areas for them to reconnoiter, especially screening the corps's increasingly vulnerable eastern flank as shown in Figure 
1
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
Following a relatively easy advance through the Central Plain, the 37th Infantry and 1st Cavalry Divisions encountered heavy resistance in the City of Manila proper, where Japanese Vice Admiral Iwabuchi Sanji decided to make a last stand despite orders to the contrary. 
33
34
35
36
In addition to or within existing buildings in Manila, the Japanese created a large number of fortified positions and obstacles to hinder the American advance. Japanese roadblocks were often substantial, some consisting of "steel rail[s], six to eight feet high, supported by steel drums filled with sand, soil, or cement." 
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
52
As at Clark Field, American tanks and tank destroyers provided direct fire support crucial to destroying Japanese defenses in Manila, especially in the reduction of the imposing government buildings and Intramuros. 
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
After the assault on the Intramuros and several days of consolidation, Major General Griswold finally declared Manila secure on 4 March 1945. 
63
64
65
66
67
68
1
2
But it wasn't going to happen. The civilian political leaders had no stomach for it. Cold War fears limited the US war effort. Washington officials thought any major American ground attack into North Vietnam might well trigger a massive Communist Chinese response akin to their surprise 1950 intervention in the Korean War. Worse, it could provoke the nuclear-armed Soviet Russians to come to the aid of their North Vietnamese allies. 
3
With land invasion ruled out, the US relied on bombing North Vietnam. At times heavy, and now and then reasonably targeted, the aerial bombardment proved more or less effective depending on the prevailing whims in Washington. Advice from experienced Air Force generals and Navy admirals was ignored. As a result, the North Vietnamese endured it all in pretty good shape, mounting the huge Tet Offensive of 1968 largely unhindered by American bombing. 
4
Denied a land invasion or a powerful air knock-out, the favored US military approaches had been ruled out. But experienced commanders know the value of a good backup plan, and the top US uniformed leadership involved in Vietnam had one. If going into the North was out, why not slash the opposition's logistical umbilical cord? That meant cutting North Vietnam's principal supply line, the infamous Ho Chi Minh Trail that snaked south through allegedly neutral Laos and Cambodia. 
5
6
7
By the spring of 1970, President Richard M. Nixon had been in office for over a year. Tough talk during the 1968 election gave way to same old, same old. Nixon's plan to end the war, such as it was, consisted of training and equipping competent South Vietnamese forces ("Vietnamization") and steady American troop withdrawals. As a later president said in a subsequent unpopular war, as they stood up, we stood down. 
8
9
10
The Ho Chi Minh Trail fed this important rebuilding effort. Each month, more and more PAVN units and replacement soldiers moved down the Ho Chi Minh Trail. Ammunition, new weapons, vehicles, other military gear, and medical supplies also went South. By 1970, the trail comprised some 3,700 kilometers (2,299 miles) of roads, including five main routes, 29 key branches, and numerous lateral cutoffs and bypasses. Much of this network was paved, and almost all had been improved. By 1970, the system averaged 10,000 tons moved per week. North Vietnamese forces required 1,370 tons a day (9,590 tons a week) of ammunition and other Laos attracted the brunt of US attention. Starting in 1964, in a shadowy campaign largely directed by the Central Intelligence Agency, some two million tons of bombs-nearly twice the amount of US aerial munitions dropped in World War II (including both atomic weapons)-rained down on rural Laos. 
12
13
14
He also paid little heed as the Americans did what they did. Officially, the United States respected Cambodian neutrality. But in reality, other things happened. Beginning in 1967, American special forces probed and scouted in eastern Cambodia. Sometimes, in self-defense, US helicopter gunships engaged PAVN troops along the side routes of the Ho Chi Minh Trail. When Nixon assumed office in 1969, he took the gloves off. The United States began secretly bombing Cambodia. Over time, the airstrikes increased dramatically, approaching Laotian scale. But shielded by the greenery, the resilient PAVN, with trucks, bicycles, carts, animals, and human porters, kept right on moving men and materiel. 
15
16
17
Tough old General Creighton W. Abrams, Jr. knew what to do. He had been in command in Vietnam since 10 June 1968, following directly on 13 difficult months in country as the MACV deputy. His combat record was legendary. In World War II, General George S. Patton, Jr. stated that although people believed him to be the best tank commander in the US Army, "I have one peer-Abe Abrams. He's the world's champion." 
18
19
The MACV plan on the shelf dated back to Westmoreland's tenure. Over time, there were various versions and options developed, but the basics were known as El Paso I. In the 1966 concept for this operation, the 3rd Marine Division drew the task of attacking west through Khe Sanh and on to Tchepone, Laos to block PAVN forces moving from the north. Driving from the Central Highlands, the 4th Infantry Division had a similar blocking mission to the south near the Laos/Cambodia border. In the main effort, between the Marines and the 4th Infantry Division, the 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile) would cut the Ho Chi Minh Trail by establishing a large airhead on the Bolovens Plateau. The US divisions, suitably reinforced, then intended to push on to the Laos/Thailand border, some 80 miles west. Optimistic MACV planners referred to sealing off and securing the Laotian corridor, no easy task in such rugged, heavily vegetated terrain, especially up against a jungle-savvy foe like PAVN. When fully developed, MACV planners envisioned severing the PAVN's supply line with a force of five US, one ARVN, and two South Korean divisions. The American contingent alone came to 200,000 troops and included up to 18,000 engineers. Even at the height of US strength in country, it would have been awfully hard to assemble and carry out such a massive offensive. The North Vietnamese response is hard to figure. The whole undertaking may have worked. Or it might not. It would have certainly extended the war into Thailand, a wild card in its own right. A study from the Army Staff in Washington assessed the draft plan as unfeasible. 
20
Now Lon Nol's brazen assumption of power in Cambodia and PAVN's fierce reaction reopened the option of crossing the border. An attack into Cambodia wasn't as useful as punching through Laos. And how deep could the Americans and ARVN go? Was this to be a permanent land-grab or a big raid, in and out? Nobody knew. The Americans had to prepare a flexible plan that could be launched with little notice, adjusted on the fly, and wrapped up abruptly.
In theory, ARVN planners should have been included. But they were not. General Abrams didn't command the South Vietnamese. His predecessor Westmoreland had long ago rejected that option. Unity of command had worked well with the South Koreans in the 1950-1953 war. But Westmoreland didn't want authority over the Southern forces. He offered various rationalizations, to include considerations of South Vietnamese sovereign-ty, the desire the avoid patronizing colonial overtones, and the belief that as long as the US had advisors at every level down to battalion, and control of supporting artillery fires and air support, "co-operation on the battlefield posed few problems." 
21
Along with a bevy of incompetent, politically-chosen generals and rather casual attitudes toward discipline, training, and tactics, the Southerners leaked like a sieve. Agents of PAVN lurked in every recess of the South Vietnamese chain of command. The US officers knew that only too well. 
22
With these guidelines, Abrams established a very tight circle of trust. Initially, he shared his thinking with only a few senior generals, although a select number of more junior US planners were eventually included. Abrams directed the II Field Force commander, Lieutenant General Julian J. Ewell, to work up a corps plan. He also included the I Field Force commander, Lieutenant General Arthur S. Collins. 
23
On 27 March 1970, Ewell himself and a few carefully chosen subordinates started crafting a plan. They drew up both the American and the South Vietnamese portions of the offensive. Ewell and his team created a scheme of maneuver for a conventional combined American/South Vietnamese operation paced by armored attacks to link up with airmobile blocking forces, the classic Vietnam-era hammer and anvil tried over and over in previous operations with minimal success. 
24
There would be three major thrusts: one by III ARVN Corps (with US advisors and air support) against the Parrot's Beak region, a second by the US 25th Infantry Division and ARVN into the Dog's Head border sanctuaries, and the third, the big one, by the American 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile) and ARVN Airborne forces into the Fish Hook area. This coordinated corps attack was to be the main effort for the Cambodian campaign. 
25
26
All the units tagged for the offensive continued daily combat operations. Most were already patrolling on the friendly side of the Cambodian border; proximity had governed the selection of the majority of Allied battalions chosen for the operation. Even so, beyond the three-stars and the few insiders at corps level, American division, brigade, and battalion commanders remained in the dark, busy carrying out day-to-day combat missions. But there were indicators that the Cambodia gambit was still in play. During April, maps were ordered for Cambodia. That got attention all right. 
27
28
Be that as it may, the ARVN efforts certainly got North Vietnamese attention. A PAVN message from March was reissued for immediate action. "When facing enemy forces," it read, "attempt to break away and avoid shooting back." It went on: "Our purpose is to conserve forces as much as we can." 
29
For the Americans and the bulk of ARVN forces, risk increased as each day went by without a decision from Washington. The enemy seemed to be tipped off. Clearly, something was up. And whatever PAVN knew or suspected, Mother Nature had her own timeline. Come the first days of June, the monsoon rains would make cross-country armored movement and helicopter flights very dicey indeed. 
30
31
Yet almost as soon as the broadcast ended, the word came. Get ready to go. In II Field Force, Lieutenant General Michael S. Davison had taken over from Ewell on 15 April 1970, a routine change of command that would have never happened had anyone really thought the Cambodian offensive to be imminent. Well, now it was. On 24 April, Davison was asked for his revised plan of attack. He and his staff jumped to it. In the confusion, personnel turnover, strict security, and limited time (about two days), II Field Force didn't make use of most of the March planning work. They did the best they could in pulling something together, underscoring the old Army adage of "you want it bad, you get it bad." Davison and his harried staff forwarded their hastily drawn plans to MACV. Abrams barely had time to read them. He sent them on up. In the White House on 26April 1970, aide Larry Lynn commented on the operation plan's "sloppiness." 
32
At the business end, Davison and all the other US and ARVN commanders scrambled to issue orders, stage forces, and prepare for battle. Most brigades were lucky to get 48-hours notice. Battalions got even less. Unfortunately, the enemy had a lot more warning. 
33
At the last minute, somebody well up the chain, possibly Nixon himself-he certainly approved it-decided that the ARVN must go first. It would emphasize the progress in Vietnamization. So the South Vietnamese III Corps kicked off in the Parrot's Beak on 30 April (29 April in Washington). The Americans followed 24 hours later. 
34
Back home, at 2100 Eastern Time on 30 April 1970, Nixon himself went on television to explain the offensive. Later, stories circulated that the president had steeled himself by watching the famous war movie Patton. Maybe so. In any event, Nixon's delivery exuded confidence and vigor. With the aid of a big map, the president walked the American public through the operation already underway on the far side of the world. He asserted that American and South Vietnamese forces would "go to the heart of the trouble." "Tonight," he continued, "American and South Vietnamese units will attack the headquarters for the entire Communist military operation in South Vietnam." So the hunt for the white whale, COSVN itself, was officially on. There was more. Nixon spoke in terms rarely heard during the Vietnam War. After stating baldly "we will not be humiliated," he went on. "We will not be defeated," he said, then added "We will not allow American men by the thousands to be killed by an enemy from privileged sanctuaries." He concluded by saluting the Americans fighting as he spoke. 
35
Yet the president's address included one decidedly mixed signal, some sentences that largely flew past the folks back home, but meant plenty to those pushing into Cambodia. "This is not an invasion of Cambodia," said Nixon. Americans and South Vietnamese would go in, drive back the enemy, and destroy the opposition's supplies. Then they'd pull back. 
36
Within days, the orders came, right from Nixon. Go across the border, but not too far across. A limit of 30 kilometers (just under 19 miles) was imposed. Destroy the adversary's supplies in the sanctuaries, but don't stay there. The time limit became 60 days. 
37
38
39
The South Vietnamese went first. Observers often found ARVN units tentative and slow to act. Not this time. Lieutenant   
42
East of the ARVN armor thrusts, in the Fishhook, Brigadier General Robert M. Shoemaker commanded the American/ARVN main effort for II Field Force. A violent series of powerful B-52 Stratofortress bombings initiated the US attack at 0600 sharp on 1 May. Additional fighter-bomber strikes came next, then the 94 guns of II Field Force Artillery opened up. Finally at 0730, Task Force Shoemaker followed. American helicopters inserted ARVN paratroopers and 1st Cavalry Division infantry elements into key blocking positions across the border northwest of PAVN Base Area 352. Powerful US ground columns pushed across the border, with tanks and mechanized infantry (attached from the 25th Infantry Division) to the west and the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment to the east. The idea was to use the armored hammer to smash PAVN against the airmobile anvil. Supposedly COSVN was in the vicinity. 
43
It didn't happen. As in the Parrot's Beak, most of PAVN wasn't there. Those few who were fought bitterly to hold up the US tanks while the rest of the hostile forces backed off. The 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment lost two troopers killed tangling with a dug-in enemy outfit. Those losses were the only US dead on the first day of the campaign. In the words of a senior MACV intelligence officer, "The great battle was on-except there was no great battle." 
44
The one big smash-up occurred in and around the ramshackle road junction of Snoul. On 4 May, the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment banged into dug-in defenders from a battalion of the 141st PAVN Infantry Regiment. If they were supposed to leave, somebody forgot to tell them. Enemy rocket-propelled grenades and land mines took a toll. The firefight sputtered on all afternoon. With nightfall imminent, the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment leadership reassessed. The regiment lacked dismounted strength and the senior officers were rightly wary of being enticed into a house to house meat grinder in Snoul's few but tightly packed streets. Instead, the US cavalry troopers stretched a cordon around Snoul and waited for daybreak. All night and into the morning. American artillery, helicopter gunships, and airstrikes pounded the encircled opposition. 
45
When the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment rolled into Snoul on 5 May, the enemy was not there. The battle cost 16 US wounded and one South Vietnamese interpreter killed. Although the Americans claimed 144 PAVN dead and grabbed two prisoners, accompanying American correspondents saw only four bodies, all in civilian clothing. One was a teen-aged woman. In this war, they might have been enemies. 
46
Even as the confrontation in Snoul sorted out, 1st Cavalry Division troopers began finding PAVN facilities and supplies. As early as 2 May, scout aviators of 1-9 Cavalry saw something that looked man-made in Base Area 352 south of Snoul. The next day, rifle platoons from 1-5 Cavalry landed and found a well-disguised assembly area. Dubbed "The City," the rudimentary facilities spread across three square kilometers (a bit more than a square mile). The place had tons of munitions in 182 bunkers as well as 18 mess halls and even a chicken farm complete with live fowl. 
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
In any case, the Americans were out on schedule as June ended. The South Vietnamese followed by 22 July 1970. Behind them, PAVN drifted back into their old base areas. American cross-border special forces reconnaissance and aerial bombing resumed. 
54
From President Nixon on down, the Americans called it a victory, and a big one. For once, the Americans and South Vietnamese took the initiative. About 30,000 Americans and 48,000 Southerners went after PAVN's border sanctuaries, and did so to the tune of rumbling tanks and thundering bombs. For most Americans, in and out of uniform, this was war as it should be-firepower and maneuver, not scrabbling through nondescript village manure piles hunting booby traps and rice bags. Nixon himself called the operation an "immediate military success" and went on to state "We have inflicted extensive casualties and very heavy losses in material on the enemy." He then ran through a scoreboard of enemy killed, prisoners taken, and supply stockpiles removed or destroyed. 
55
Going all the way back to the time of Gilgamesh, commanders have judged victory by which side held the field. By that standard, the North Vietnamese won. The American and their Saigon allies never blocked the Ho Chi Minh Trail, let alone destroyed it or held it. Instead, the offensive did the equivalent of tearing up the shoulder and one or two lanes of an eight-lane superhighway. And even that was temporary. North Vietnamese supplies lost totaled 16,300 tons, a hefty amount. But PAVN could replace all of it, every bullet and bandage, with two weeks of average effort on the Ho Chi Minh Trail. 
56
57
Whatever the scale of damage to the Ho Chi Minh Trail, the human losses mattered more in the near term. While the sad American casualty numbers were all too verifiable, ARVN's own reporting was always suspect. As for the hostile dead, who really knew? The body count of 11,349 seemed conveniently precise, but most of the figure came from estimates tied to air and artillery bombardment. Even the prisoner tabulation, a respectable 2328, probably was greatly inflated, as most of the total came from the South Vietnamese. The 1st Cavalry Division and its attachments (including the 11th Armored Cavalry regiment) took only 49 prisoners. When seizing prisoners, ARVN units tended to scoop up whomever they could, civilians and refugees too, and counted them all as PAVN. Not sur-prisingly, the Central Intelligence Agency cast shade on the entire balance sheet. They didn't buy it. 
58
And the Americans? Tankers Abrams and Davison finally got to run their major armor offensive, with full integration of airmobile blocking forces and heavy fires. But their North Vietnamese enemy didn't play along. They rarely did. Done earlier in the war, or done more often, cross-border ground attacks might have changed the complexion of the war. Or not. Nobody really knew. They never would, because it was not repeated.
Abe Abrams probably understood the Vietnam War better than any other US general. His entire command tenure amounted to losing as slowly as he could, hoping something might work to arrest the downward slide. The chance to get into Cambodia might have been it. But it, too, got bogged in half measures and arbitrary restrictions, crippled by porous operational security, and tied to a hapless ally. These faults seemed as endemic to Vietnam as stink to a swamp. Looking at the map in MACV headquarters on 3 May 1970, Abrams mused aloud: "What we need right now is another division-go in deep. We need to go west from where we are. We need to go north and east from where we are. And we need to do it now. It's moving and-goddamn goddamn." 
59
On 6 October 1973, the Egyptian and Syrian armies launched a surprise attack against Israel. Meticulous planning, massive acquisitions of new weapon systems, and intensive training paid off, bringing the Arab armies significant achievements during the first days of combat. 
1
2
After the Six Days War, the Egyptian army started to analyze the reasons for its severe defeat, where the lessons of 1956 were added on top of the lessons of 1967. The conclusions formed by the Egyptian army were that the IDF used combat formations, consisting of several armored brigades, backed by massive CAS from the IAF, which had achieved almost complete air superiority over the war zone. These combat teams surprised the Egyptian forces by moving through areas that the Egyptians considered as impassable for armored forces. Thus, in the opinion of the Egyp-tian army, the IDF had achieved tactical and operational surprise, throwing the Egyptian defensive formations in Sinai into an operational paralysis and causing their collapse. 
3
4
The formulation of the lessons of the 1956 and 1967 wars became a significant component in the preparation of the Egyptian army for the next war. Anwar Sadat, who took over the presidency following Gamal Abdel Nasser's death by a heart attack (September 1970), recognized the fact that his army could not overcome the Israeli advantage in armored maneuvering and air power. 
5
6
The Egyptian war plan apparently included two phases. The first phase consisted of crossing the Canal and setting up defensive positions on the eastern bank; the second phase consisted of reinforcing the forces on the eastern bank of the Canal, strengthening the defensive positions, and repelling Israeli counterattacks. This two-step plan was fully executed during the first days of the war. 
7
The defensive zone established by the Egyptian army was 8 to 12 kilometers deep, and consisted of four layers, based on combined arms methodology, and emphasizing fire-power against the IDF's superiority in maneuvering. The first layer consisted of minefields, laid at the front and at the flanks of the defensive zone. The second and most important layer was a dense array of various anti-tank weapons, mainly AT-3 "Sagger" anti-tank guided missile (ATGM) and RPG-7 rocket launchers, but also including anti-tank guns of various calibers as well as tanks and APCs carrying Sagger missiles in order to strengthen the defense against Israeli attacks. 8 Additionally, there were tanks on the western bank, providing direct fire support. The anti-tank set up also included "tank hunter" teams, mostly based on commandos, which often came out of the defensive zone and laid ambush to the Israeli tanks, moving toward the crossing zone. 
9
10
11
12
13
The IDF victories over the Egyptian army in 1956 and especially in 1967 were mainly achieved by rapidly maneuvering armored units, which had broken through the Egyptian defensive lines, enjoying ample CAS. Thus, after the 1967 war, the force building of the IDF focused on strengthening its armored corps and air force. Israeli doctrine stated that stopping an Arab assault must be achieved by the regular armored forces, with the air force serving as flying artillery, immediately followed by a counterattack, with the help of reserve forces. Thus, the number of armored brigades was increased from nine to 16, while the infantry and artillery did not enjoy similar increases in their force. The experience of the previous wars had demonstrated that wars could be decided by the armored forces alone and that the enemy's infantry could not withstand the onslaught of the IDF maneuvering units. The IDF doctrine also stipulated that the most efficient weapon against the Arab armor was the might of the Israeli armored forces and that only a maneuvering armored force could break through the enemy's defensive lines. 
14
15
Because of these various reasons, the IDF did not acquire new ATGMs for use by the infantry. The combat capability of the mechanized forces was also neglected. Consequently, just before the Yom Kippur War, this force building process created a situation in which the IDF maneuvering divisions were based on tank brigades only, rather than a balanced force mix, including also mechanized infantry and artillery. 
16
17
18
19
20
Many factors account for the failure of the Israeli counter-offensive of 8 October. One of the explanations is the fact that the division launched the attack without infantry support, with hardly any artillery and no CAS. Thus, for example, the division had only three batteries of artillery at its disposal, and the 113th Armored Battalion, which was attacked by an anti-tank and artillery ambush and lost 18 out of its 25 tanks, could not obtain any artillery support. In comparison, the Egyptians employed an effective combined arms doctrine, which included occasional bombing and strafing runs by Egyptian attack planes. Ultimately, the division failed to fulfill its mission: the attack failed completely, costing it heavy losses in terms of both personnel and equipment. 
21
The failure of the Israeli counter-offensive brought a standoff to the Southern Front, especially since the IDF moved its operational focus to the Golan Heights front in order to cause a retreat of the Syrian forces and later even to invade Syria. During the following days, the General Staff instructed the Southern Front to maintain the defense, rebuild the force and avoid attrition battles. However, during 10-11 October, both sides launched several local and limited attacks. These attacks failed to bring significant gains to either side or to change the front lines; however, they are interesting in the context of the current chapter, since their success or failure can be explained in terms of combined arms: for example, an Egyptian armored brigade launched an attack on 10 October in the southern sector of the Canal Zone. During the attack, the brigade went out of  The IDF forces used those days for developing tactical means against the Egyptian use of combined arms. The armored units started integrating machine-gun carrying M-113 APCs, which operated on the flanks of the attacking armored battalions, made extensive use of smoke screens, and improved the collaboration between the armored forces and the artillery. 
23
The reason for the assault was probably political-an attempt to relieve the military pressure that Israel was putting on the Syrian army. It was decided over the objection of several senior Egyptian officers who had acknowledged the inferiority of the Egyptian army in maneuvering battles against the Israeli armor. 
24
25
The Egyptian offensive was executed in multiple efforts across the front, attempting to reach the Mitla and Gidi passes, which would allow the charging forces to advance into the depth of the Sinai Peninsula. The main effort was carried out by armored forces, which, in some cases, were preceded by infantry units riding APCs armed with ATGMs. As soon as the IDF forces detected the advancing columns, they opened artillery fire on them, and armored units, operating in conjunction with infantry units armed with mortars and various anti-tank weapons, especially M40 106mm recoilless rifles and French-made SS.11 ATGMs hit the Egyptian tanks. As the Egyptian armored columns had come out of the IADS umbrella, they became vulnerable to aerial attacks, so that the defending Israeli forces also benefited from effective CAS. 
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
In 1976, TRADOC published the "Active Defense" doctrine, which received harsh criticism within the Army; especially because it was seen as a doctrine focusing more on preventing defeat that on achieving a decisive victory. 
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
Generals are often described as preparing for the last war. This was painfully true when describing the Israeli generals in the years before the Yom Kippur War but did not apply to the Egyptian army. It would be more correct to say that the generals of the victorious side were still fighting the last war. In the years following the Six Days War, the IDF high command adopted the concept-promoted by Major General Israel Tal-that an armored force can operate independently, relying on the high gunnery skills of its crews and the ability to shoot while in motion as well as concentrating the tanks into powerful Iron Fists. This concept was formed based on the lessons of the Six Days War, causing the IDF to form uniform divisions consisting solely of tanks and depending on CAS for fire support but, however, vulnerable to foot soldiers armed with ATGMs. Meanwhile, the IDF neglected the development of its artillery, as compared to a significant strengthening of its armored forces. The lack of artillery forces was justified by treating the IAF as "flying artillery." However, the Egyptian IADS neutralized the IAF, preventing it from providing effective CAS to the ground forces.
The humiliating defeat of the Egyptians in 1967 caused them to analyze the operational and fighting strength of the IDF and discover its weak points. This analysis later generated the concept of a total war with limited objectives, i.e. crossing the Canal in force and being able to establish a defensible zone on the Eastern Bank. The Egyptian army correctly identified the IDF advantage in operating its armored units and understood that this almost absolute advantage would pose a critical operational problem to the forces crossing the Canal, and would further threaten the consolidation of the bridgeheads on the eastern bank. The operational solution to this problem was the planning, establishment, and operation of a defensive array based on a combined arms concept and consisting of a wide variety of anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons. The first forces to cross the Canal-consisting mostly of infantry soldiers-managed to destroy about 100 tanks, a third of the IDF's regular armored forces in the Sinai Peninsula in the first day of the war. This inhibited the Israeli counterattacks in the first days, allowing the continuation of the crossing and the consolidation of the defensive zones on the eastern bank of the Canal. By relying on its defensive force, the Egyptian army succeeded in defeating several Israeli armored counterattacks, especially the attack launched on 8 October, and caused severe losses to the IAF and armored units. However, the abandonment of the combined arms doctrine by the Egyptians-together with rapid battlefield adaptation by the IDF, followed by the development of an improvised combined arms doctrine-brought about the failure of the Egyptian offensive on 14 October.
Although the American army was not defeated in Vietnam, the American senior officer corps had no intention of fighting another war having the characteristics of the Vietnam War, let alone when the enemy was the massive war machine of the Soviet Union in Central Europe. After Vietnam, the critical problem facing the Army was the lack of knowledge of the characteristics of the next war. The Yom Kippur War gave them a view of a modern war-where sophisticated weapons would be employed in large quantities and the battlefield would become more intensive and lethal, with a high attrition rate for both troops and weapon systems. The Yom Kippur War demonstrated that all types of conventional weapon systems must be integrated into combat and that the mobility of all the forces, both combat and supporting forces, had increased considerably. These observations found their way into the new American doctrines, In other words, the American reformers studied the Yom Kippur War in order to avoid a repetition of past errors made by all the fighting parties.
Lieutenant General Michael D. Lundy
While our Army learned invaluable and enduring lessons over the last 17 years of sustained limited contingency operations, the experience culturally imprinted a generation of Army leaders and the entire institution for one type of warfare. An increasingly dynamic and volatile operational environment characterized by great power competition demands that our Army adapt to the realities of a world where large-scale ground combat against a peer threat is more likely than at any time in recent memory. We must prepare for the most lethal and challenging threat to our nation: the increasing likelihood of great power conflict across the full range of military operations and the conflict continuum. This requires continued changes in how we man, equip, train, and employ Army forces, especially those forces at echelons above brigade.
Our peer and near-peer competitors have studied us as we reshaped our force while conducting operations over the last 17 years. They have adapted and improved. They are fielding more professional forces with advanced capabilities, improved training, and combined arms formations designed to contest us and our multi-national partners across all of the domains. The current and foreseeable future strategic environment is defined in large part by Russian, Chinese, North Korean, and Iranian revisionism, as well as violent extremist organizations with global reach. It demands a US Army prepared to continually (and persistently) shape the security environment to our advantage, deter adversary aggression through strength, and-when necessary-prevail in large-scale ground combat as a member of the Unified Action team. We are in heavy competition and at risk of conflict today; this is not just a problem for the tomorrow's leaders. Success in large-scale combat operations requires that we continue to evolve the Army's capabilities and readiness culture from a focus on predictable rotational deployments for stability operations to expeditionary operations against a peer or near-peer threat with few indicators or warnings-operations we have not conducted since early 2003. The number of leaders with large-scale ground combat experience was not large relative to the size of the Army then and most are now senior leaders or retired. With little of that experience remaining in the force, we must continue to focus on the mastery of the atrophied or non-resident skills that enabled us to seize Baghdad but were less important to subsequent operations in Iraq, Afghanistan, and elsewhere. There will always be tension between readiness for the worst case of large-scale ground combat and the requirements of current operations the Army conducts around the world. Retaining what we've learned over the last two decades is critically important, and the Army cannot afford to walk away from that experience.
The Army is on the right path to developing leaders and units with the requisite skills and attributes to prevail in large-scale ground combat against peer threats. Our combat training centers (CTCs) have increased the intensity and realism of our unit decisive action rotations, unit home station training occurs at higher operational tempo and under more demanding conditions, and we have made significant adjustments to the rigor and focus of our professional military education and functional training. However, the skills and experiences acquired during training, education, and operations are perishable-sustaining and improving what we are doing now is our challenge. Preparing and certifying leaders, hardening the force physically, ethically, and morally-and reorganizing our formations while fielding advanced technologies and new equipment-requires an enduring and persistent focus. These adjustments will be at least as difficult as those made by our predecessors after Vietnam. Unlike post-Vietnam, however, as we make these adjustments we will be careful not to eschew the lessons of Iraq and Afghanistan.
To drive this cultural change, we are shaping the future of combined arms operations in large-scale ground combat with our newest doctrine, Field Manual (FM 3-0), Operations. FM 3-0 is the Army's capstone tactics manual for execution of unified land operations against peer and near-peer threats in contested environments. It serves as a pivot point to steer the Army toward both persistent competition below armed conflict and, when necessary, armed conflict against highly lethal and adaptive enemies. FM 3-0 does not disregard what we've learned over the last 17 years. In fact, it reinforces and provides deeper context to the value and necessity of persistently competing and prevailing across the range of military operations and the conflict continuum. To address the continuum, FM 3-0 is organized in accordance with the four strategic roles that the US Army uniquely performs for the Joint Force: shape the security environment, prevent conflict, prevail in large-scale ground combat, and consolidate gains. It emphasizes that maintaining positions of strategic advantage requires enduring outcomes favorable to US interests. FM 3-0 acknowledges we will not always enjoy the full domain superiority we have come to expect since the early 90s. It recognizes that with only a fraction of the forces forward-deployed just 20 years ago, we must optimize available force posture and activities to successfully compete below the threshold of armed conflict. We do this by improving our own readiness for armed conflict and that of our partners around the world. Demonstrating the capability and will to win as part of a larger team prevents conflict. Multi-national and joint operations are essential to this approach. How we build capacity and maintain access with our allies and partners-while denying adversaries positions of cognitive, virtual, temporal, and physical advantage-are increasingly important to a largely CONUS-based Army. To assure allies, we must be able to deter. To deter, we must be able to prevail. FM 3-0 addresses the challenges of current and future multi-domain operational environments and guides our approach to winning against all possible competitors. Aspects of emerging multi-domain capabilities which can be executed with the current force have been integrated into FM 3-0, including space, cyber, electronic and information warfare. These capabilities reinforce our combined arms approach to the traditional aspects of warfare in the land, air, maritime domains. FM 3-0's new operational framework provides an expanded physical, virtual, cognitive, and temporal perspective to account for the multi-domain extended capabilities of friendly and threat forces. The physical and temporal considerations pertain to space and time, while the cognitive considerations apply to enemy decision-making, enemy will, and population behavior. The virtual considerations address friendly and threat cyberspace activities, cyber-enabled capabilities, and the entities that exist in cyberspace. Collectively the considerations allow commanders and staffs to better integrate multi-domain capabilities at echelon with tempo and intensity necessary to present the enemy with multiple dilemmas from positions of tactical, operational, and strategic advantage.
Central to the challenge of evolving the Army's culture is re-enabling our division, corps, and theater armies to operate and fight as combat formations. Beginning with a perception in the mid-to late-1990s of a reduced risk of great power conflict and bolstered by the pressing need to sustain ongoing limited contingency operations in the early years of this century, the Army transformed from a division-based to a brigade-based modular force. As a result, echelons above brigade (EAB) transformed from highly capable warfighting formations to mere headquarters which could be force-tailored with warfighting "modules" to accomplish a variety of missions. Over time, the separate modular components were further optimized for the prevailing fight-counterinsurgency and other stability operations. When coupled with heavy reductions during directed downsizing, EAB headquarters became much less capable of supporting anything more than limited contingency operations. While justified at the time, the degradation of echelons above brigade formations and their capabilities significantly reduced the Army's ability to meet the entirety of its primary function-to execute prompt and sustained land combat to defeat any threat throughout the range of military operations.
As we adapt today's EAB headquarters into warfighting formations, we must also keep an eye on tomorrow. Future EAB formations require complementary organizations with the appropriate capacities and capabilities necessary to create cross-domain positions of advantage across the competition continuum. Future theater armies must be uniquely tailored to the specific theater to conduct their critical theater management responsibilities, see and understand the threats in their area of responsibility (AOR), and conduct operational preparation of their environment to allow the US Army to succeed in any of its four strategic roles. In AORs with the highest risk of large-scale ground combat operations (LSGCO), a standing field army must be task-organized organically to the theater. Its focus must be on deterring a specific peer threat and, if necessary, rapidly transitioning to a land component command (LCC) with multiple corps to defeat the enemy in armed conflict. The future corps must be organized as the Army's most agile and versatile echelon capable of commanding multiple divisions as an intermediate tactical command as well as accepting augmentation and conducting operations as a land component or joint force command in limited contingency operations (LCO). Future battlefields will be complex, chaotic, highly-lethal, and unforgiving; the cost of avoidable tactical mistakes is unacceptably high. Accordingly, future Army divisions must be specifically organized, equipped, and trained to dominate the close fight against a peer adversary in LSGCO.
Uniquely-tailored future theater armies must maintain enduring operational initiative. The theater army is unique as it is the only persistent Army echelon for a geographic area of responsibility. As an army service component command (ASCC), all theater armies share the same basic set of theater management tasks distilled to five primary categories: setting conditions in the theater for the employment of landpower (setting the theater); Army support to theater security cooperation; Army support to other services; administrative control over all Army forces in the AOR; and operational control and sustainment support of any assigned or attached Army forces until the combatant commander attaches those forces to a subordinate joint command. In peer adversary theaters, theater armies require greater operational warfighting capabilities-including threat-specific intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR), electronic warfare (EW), air and ballistic missile defense (AMD), cyberspace, space, information warfare, and hardened command and control-to defeat adversary aggression in competition below armed conflict. Theater armies enable freedom of movement during the transitions from competition to armed conflict and back. In the future operational environment (OE), theater armies will be central to winning in competition below armed conflict and ensuring that Army and Coalition forces can operate from distributed and protected positions of advantage during armed conflict.
Threat-focused future field armies must provide credible deterrence, execute multi-domain competition against peer threats, and enable rapid transition to LSGCO. While all theaters require an operational capability, some theaters have adversaries which present enough risk of LSGCO that they require an additional standing echelon to manage specific operations within the AOR and then transition rapidly to a land component command. Historically, this has been a field army commanding two or more corps. A field army is employed to relieve operational burden on the theater army, where attention to a specific operation in a subordinate geographic area would detract from the theater army's ability to support strategic objectives in the theater as a whole. The field army is forward-stationed to account for higher probability of LSGCO or other vital geopolitical considerations that may require partner assurance. It is required in areas of persistent, intense competition with a peer threat capable of conducting large-scale land combat. The field army can serve as the foundation for a joint task force (JTF) or joint forces land component command (JFLCC), or merge into a standing-but under-resourced-alliance headquarters. A standing field army allows rapid transition from competition to conflict. The presence of a field army changes the threat's risk calculus and helps prevent conflict or sets the conditions for success in LSGCO.
The future corps must be the linchpin of EAB versatility and agility. The corps of tomorrow must be the most versatile echelon in the Army because no other echelon can. Since future theater armies will be tailored to their respective theaters, and operational support of Army missions will define their functions to a great degree, their versatility will be limited. Similarly, a future field army must be sharply focused on succeeding in competition below armed conflict against a specific peer threat within the theater and setting conditions to rapidly transition to armed conflict as a land component command. Meanwhile, future divisions must maintain an uncompromising emphasis on readiness for the task of integrating multiple brigade combat teams (BCTs) and enabling formations as a highly lethal tactical formation to win the close fight during armed conflict. This limits some aspects of versatility at the division level. The future corps-functioning as the link between the operational and tactical levels of war-will emerge as the echelon that affords the greatest potential for adaptation in response to uncertainty of both future threats and environment. This agility will mitigate the operational risk naturally found in warfare when predictions of the future OE frequently fail to match reality.
Highly versatile, future Army corps must be foremost tactical warfighting formations-assigned with redundant capabilities and capacities to see and understand, decide, shape, strike rapidly, and endure. The corps of tomorrow must have assigned military intelligence, multi-domain reconnaissance and security, fires (artillery and air defense), maneuver support, space, cyberspace, information warfare, EW, sustainment, and aviation formations as principal capabilities to deploy on short notice to conduct operations immediately upon arrival. Future capabilities must enable the corps to conduct deep operations physically, temporally, virtually, and cognitively, and must enable subordinate tactical formations to dominate the close fight. While assigned to the future corps, these capabilities can be task-organized to directly support the main effort of a subordinate division.
Tactically focused future divisions must shape, dominate, and win the close fight. The division's role of commanding and sustaining multiple BCTs and enabling formations in tactical operations remains its primary focus and is the crux of the Army's ability to gain and maintain contact and defeat an enemy maneuver force in violent combat. This demands that future Army divisions singularly focus on lethal, tactical warfighting; it is the principal tactical echelon above brigade. Future Army divisions must have assigned reconnaissance and security, aviation, fires, maneuver enhancement, and sustainment formations in addition to capable brigade combat teams. When properly force-tailored, postured, and positioned, divisions are a powerful, credible, and devastatingly lethal deterrent to any would-be threat.
Large-scale ground combat is more likely today than at any point since the end of the Cold War. As the Army prepares for the future, it must evolve and adapt both its culture and capabilities to stay ahead of our nation's adversaries. The Army must recast the current EAB headquarters into interdependent, echeloned multi-domain warfighting formations. While the 17 years of limited contingency and counterinsurgency operations were largely brigade-centric, the future battlefield against peer and near-peer threats will rely on divisions, corps, field armies, and the-ater armies to shape the security environment, prevent conflict, prevail in large-scale combat, and consolidate gains to make tactical success strategically enduring. These formations will require organic capabilities and organizations optimized for large-scale combat operations while maintaining the flexibility needed to respond to other contingencies across the range of military operations. EAB formations need to be able to see and understand, decide, shape, and strike faster than our adversaries, across all domains, to endure and win in the future. Preparation of our Army for the demands of large-scale ground combat operations and adaptation to the multi-domain battlefield of tomorrow must begin now. Only through enhancing its EAB formations and evolving its warfighting culture can the US Army remain as the world's preeminent ground combat force.
Figure 4.1. Baltic Russia 1914: German Amphibious Operations Baltic Island 10-12 October 1917 and Hutier's Offensive at Riga 1-5 October 1917. Map recreated by Army University Press.
the infantry became increasingly crucial to keeping casualties low as the Americans advanced through the city, and effective task organization is emphasized in Chapter 4 of the Army's current Army Training Publication (ATP) 3-06, Urban Operations, from December 2017.
To facilitate the coordination of fires in Manila, XIV Corps ordered both the 37th Infantry and 1st Cavalry Divisions to "be prepared to place the fires of at least two (2) artillery battalions in the zone of action of the other." 
48
49
50
51
22
Tal Tovy is an associate professor at Bar Ilan University in Israel and also teaches in the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) Tactical Command College. He holds a PhD in history from the University of Haifa. Tovy has published extensively on a variety of military history topics, including the