# ID: 9ae3b032f19f49308edfd51073a25f7d
# Title: War No Longer Exists
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information.
Australia, and Germany as well as Russia and China. Second, it will question if America's military, as it is now organized and equipped, reflects its emerging, "Smithian" National Security Policy. Third, it will present some thoughts on the strategic way ahead in this time of increasingly constrained military budgets and ambiguous and constantly-shifting national threats.
Theoretical Underpinnings and Supporting Data of Smith's Thesis Smith does not claim to be a strategic theorist, nor was the purpose of his book to introduce a new theory of war. Instead, he freely characterizes the book as a product of personal reflection, "…not a work of definitive research" and more of a "…thematic discussion rather than a definitive history…" 
4
5
Smith cleverly intertwines history, recent personal experiences, and the challenges of modern conflicts to convince readers of his thesis. General Smith's forty years of military service, often commanding at the most senior levels, provide a wealth of experience to draw upon. He commanded a British Armored Division in the 1991 Gulf War, UN Forces in Bosnia in 1995, British Forces in Northern Ireland from 1996-98, and finally as the NATO Deputy Supreme Allied Commander from 1998-2001.
As a result of this command experience, Smith offers a compelling argument of a paradigm shift between the advent of the atomic age and the face of war in the twentyfirst century due to the following six major trends:
1. The ends for which we are fighting are changing to objectives having to do with individuals and societies that are not states.
2. The tools of industrial wars are often irrelevant to war amongst people.
3. Conflicts seek a condition that may take years or decades to accomplish. 4. We fight so as not to lose the force rather than fighting to achieve the aim. 5. We tend to conduct conflicts in multinational groupings.
6. We fight amongst peoplein the living room and in the streets. 
6
Smith's central thesis is that warfare today rarely involves two states, as it did in Westphalian times. Instead, wars are fought between governments and terrorists, warlords, separatists, and in and among nations' populations. Mary Kaldor echoes this view, arguing that states are no longer the primary actors in war. 
7
8
9
10
11
Superficial comparisons of study results can lead to erroneous conclusions since study parameters are often significantly different. Examples include: not including all countries, dismissing conflicts because of insignificant casualties, or how a particular study categorizes a conflict. Many studies exclude countries with less than 500,000 inhabitants and thus only examine approximately 162 countries (the U.S. State Department recognizes 194). Other studies vary on whether they categorize approximately 19 post-WWII wars of colonialism and liberation as being interstate, intrastate, or "extrastate. 
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
However, Russia also armed and employed local militia units as well as paramilitary forces, including Cossack volunteers who assisted in ethnically cleansing Georgians from the breakaway provinces. 
21
22
[20 th
23
24
25
26
Sources of current and future conflicts include: scarcity of water, natural resources in contested territorial areas, poverty, proliferation and rise of local warlords, ethnic strife, insurgent groups operating in neighboring territories, a growing international economic divide, and international intervention for humanitarian reasons. However, none of these issues or tensions predetermine war as the inevitable outcome. The international community has grappled with each of them for decades and, at least since the Second World War, has generally been able to find peaceful resolutions in the end. However, these international efforts have varying degrees of "success." Nigeria's withdrawl from Cameroon's oil rich Bakassi Peninsula after the International Criminal Court ruled in Cameroon's favor, was completely peaceful. A less successful effort is the United nations peacekeeping in Sudan's Darfur region where conflict and violence continue.
Finally, the political solution in Cyprus remains in limbo as the 1964 ceasefire between Greece and Turkey remains. These efforts though there are numerous examples of this capacity for peaceful conflict resolution should continue to increase as more nations adopt democratic governmental institutions and mature in their use. Erica Frantz, from the Center for International Development and Conflict Management, found the risk of coups and internal or external wars was roughly three to four times higher in autocracies and anocracies (hybrid states exhibiting characteristics of both democracies and autocracies) than democracies. 
27
29
30
Recent American and other nations' national security policies and planning doctrine reflect an overall acceptance of Rupert Smith's paradigm shift from conventional wars between nations to operations in a wide variety of enduring and emerging intrastate conflicts. The U.S. 2010 Quadrennial Defense Review recognized this change of paradigms, finding "…it is no longer appropriate to speak of "major regional conflicts" as the sole or even the primary template for sizing, shaping, and evaluating U.S. forces." 31 America's 2009 Joint Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States claims, "Irregular warfare (IW) has emerged as a major and pervasive form of warfare." 
32
33
Army doctrine defines "[a] hybrid threat is the diverse and dynamic combination of regular forces, irregular forces, terrorist forces, criminal elements, or a combination of these forces and elements all unified to achieve mutually benefitting effects." 
34
35
The United Kingdom's 2010 National Security Strategy provides a historical background to today's environment, describing the transition from the existential threat posed by the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact to today's myriad complex threats, including terrorism, cyber attack, and unconventional attacks using nuclear, biological of chemical weapons. 
36
38
39
40
41
43
44
45
46
47
48
50
51
52
54
55
The tank embodies the technology necessary in waging conventional war, as well as the industrial capacity to produce such a weapon. Tanks are expensive, possess ever-increasing technology, and exist in most armies. Nations buy tanks for their mobility, firepower and ability to defeat other tanks. Today, however, they are seldom used in large formations against other armored forces. In fact, Smith convincingly points out that this last occurred in 1991 during Operation Desert Storm; yet in 2011 America possesses 6,242 M1 Main Battle Tanks 56 with a further 8,800 M60 tanks in reserve/storage status. 
57
Fifty years later the American Civil War marked the first truly industrial war when both sides fully mobilized their resources (population, industry, and technology) to support the war. Smith wrote that "[t]he Civil War also established the U.S. way of war; the clear understanding that industrial ability decides a war…" 
58
59
60
61
62
63
By every measure, the United States Department of Defense has embraced this industrial warfare tradition and created a leviathan. America's robust ─ some would argue exorbitant ─ defense budgets has enabled US armed forces to be equipped with an absolutely overwhelming number of the highest technological weapons available.
The 2010 U.S. defense budget of $693 billion was twice the size of the next six nations (China, France, U.K., Russia, Japan, Germany) plus India combined. 
64
65
66
67
The U.S. Navy boasts 11 battle-ready carriers, whereas the rest of the world combined has four much smaller versions. America's fleet of 538 aerial refueling tankers is larger than the total French Air Force of 328 aircraft. 
68
12. 69
70
71
Unlike the Napoleonic period and the great world wars, "…[war] is no longer a single massive event of military decision that delivers a conclusive political result." 72 Instead, Smith's third major trend indicates that nations enter conflicts seeking a condition for individuals and societies that may take years to accomplish. Examples include promoting democracy, preventing genocide, ensuring rights for ethnic groups, reducing drug trafficking, promoting nation-building and the elimination of terrorists. If Smith's six trends are valid, and interstate wars are and will be virtually non-existent, it is difficult to envision how preparation for an industrial war will easily accomplish these tasks. In today's world, whether or not the military-industrial complex and certain military leaders will admit it, most politicians seek to employ their nations' military forces "…for humanitarian and policing purposes for which they are neither trained nor intended." 
73
74
War amongst the people… is different; it is the reality in which the people in the streets and houses and fieldsall the people anywhereare the battlefield. Military engagement can take place anywhere; in the presence of civilians, against civilians, in defense of civilians. 
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
The recent civil war in Libya, February-October 2011, is the embodiment of Smith's new reality of war. First, the conflict in Libya was not an interstate war fought between nations employing their full industrial capacity. Instead it was a civil war between forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi and those supporting the loosely-formed rebel government in Benghazi. The forces doing most of the fighting against the Libyan government were lightly armed Libyan civilians who initially had no centralized military or political leadership; they simply fought Libyan police and military forces to oust Gaddafi. NATO intervened on behalf of the UN "…to protect civilians and civilian populated areas under threat of attack…including Benghazi…" 
86
87
88
89
90
The war in Libya is just the latest example of the evolution in warfare described by Rupert Smith. America and its allies and partners should take careful note of this campaign when determining national security goals (ends), strategies to meet these goals (ways), and the resources required (means). The United States no longer has the luxury of continuing its cherished preference of procuring the means to fight a "rich man's" war anymore. In an age of constricting national economic power, the alignment of strategies, weapons procurements, and force structures with national goals must be rigorously evaluated. Outdated strategy must be rewritten and reanalyzed and excess or unnecessary force structures and weapons systems ruthlessly reduced or eliminated as necessary to shift resources where needed to accomplish national objectives.
The most serious single threat the US faces to its national security does not come from foreign threats, but from the pressures on defense spending created by these domestic and social and economic trends, and the rising cost of US federal entitlements spending. 
91
Recent budget cuts forced the US to begin reshaping its armed forces. Several major weapon procurement programs are being eliminated or delayed, and almost 100,000 military personnel will be cut. In the decade ahead, additional budget cuts are almost guaranteed, forcing difficult, and sometimes painful, decisions to be made about force size, composition, and roles. In addition, America should build partner nation capabilities more aggressively to meet local and regional security requirements.
America's senior military and political leadership have not yet determined how the armed forces will be cut or reshaped due to known budget cuts. Future cuts are highly likely, further complicating budget planning. But, it is clear that every service has been forced to cut/reduce personnel, equipment, training, and procurement funds.
Preliminary announcements seem to indicate several procurement and force structure decisions changes contrary to U.S. strategic policy and military doctrine.
To its credit, America's military leadership is making minor reductions in some areas of over-capacity. The US Army will stop building new tanks or even upgrading current tanks for the next three years. The Navy is cutting or delaying a few vessels.
The Air Force cut two small programs: a strategic unmanned reconnaissance program called Global Hawk, and the C-27 twin engine tactical transport aircraft. America is increasing funding for Special Operations to counter terrorism and aligning forces with geographic areas. Aligning units has many benefits. It provides geographic combatant commanders with a ready pool of forces to draw upon for operations. Over time, units will gain significant regional experience. However, despite significant budget reductions America continues to procure expensive weapons systems in areas of overwhelming overmatch such as fighter aircraft and combat helicopters. America's dominance in fighter aircraft, both technological and numerical, is unquestionable, yet we are procuring over 2,400 F-35 JSF fifth generation fighters in the coming years. The F-35 is an incredibly capable aircraft. It is built with "stealth" capabilities that reduce its radar signature. It can attack ground targets with the most advanced munitions while still retaining the ability to defeat any aircraft in air-to-air combat. It is the "Porsche" of fighter aircraft. However, using the F-35 in many intrastate conflicts would be like driving a Porsche to the grocery store… it could get you there and transport your groceries, but maybe a different car would be cheaper and better suited for such a mundane task.
Why do we need over 2,400 F-35s? Could America's armed forces employ a more economical mix of aircraft and still accomplish national strategic goals? For example, the F-15C, America's premier air-to-air fighter for decades (its air-to-air kill/loss ratio is 95-0), could be upgraded to extend its service life beyond 2030. The cost to upgrade the engines, structure and avionics of the F-15 fleet of approximately 400 aircraft is three billion dollars. 
92
93
The US Army also intends to spend billions increasing its over-capacity in helicopters. America has the largest fleet of transport and attack helicopters in the world yet it wants to build a thirteenth Combat Aviation Brigade (CAB) in the active component (AC). The Defense Department FY2012 budget proposal lists "[f]unding the equipment for a 13 th Combat Aviation Brigade" as part of the "Army Modernization plan." 
94
97
Procuring weapons and equipment (the means), is only one facet of national security, but due to political lobbying, domestic employment needs, and the American military tradition of heavy firepower, it receives an inordinate amount of thought and energy among leaders-often at the expense of developing sound long term regional security strategies.
Africa has long been a low priority for the United States as reflected in the paltry amounts of annual US economic and military aid dispensed. However, there are compelling reasons for America to take a more active role developing the economic, military, and human capital capabilities available throughout this continent. Africa is in urgent need of various whole-of-government assistance and increased economic development, and has the greatest number of weak or failed states of any region in the world. Nowhere is the concept of hybrid threats more clearly manifested, or comprehensible, than on the African continent. Clearly, if the United States wishes to practice a more Smithian-type of military strategy on par with recent national security statements, Africa is a place where that is possible.
Africa is unfortunately a poverty stricken, war-torn continent, and will remain so until its nations can consistently provide security and basic services to their citizens.
Unfortunately, Africa has more conflicts and crises than any other region in the world.
The 2010 Center for Strategic Peace study found Africa had the highest concentration of risk factors (security, governance, economic and social dimensions) to initiate or escalate intra-or interstate wars. African nations accounted for six of the eight extremely fragile states, and sixteen of nineteen high risk states worldwide. 
98
99
100
101
In recognition of these facts, America established U.S. African Command (AFRICOM) in 2008, to provide a more focused and integrated combatant command for U.S. interests in Africa. AFRICOM's mission is to strengthen the defense capabilities of African states and the effectiveness of the AU. These preconceptions are unfortunate because the AU is a highly respected and successful regional organization.
The AU frequently demonstrates a strong political willingness to take actions promoting stability and human rights throughout Africa. Some of its more recent actions include an intervention in Burundi (2003) to impose order, overturning coups in Togo The African Union (AU) is strongly committed to conflict prevention and resolution on a regional level using member nation assets. However, the large number of fragile states, systemic economic weakness overall on the continent, and lack of military resources severely hamper the AU's strategic and operational efficacy. The combined (what year?)GNP of the 52 AU member states equals that of the Netherlands. The AU's 2011 budget was only $260 million but its member nations struggled to resource 40 percent of that amount. Furthermore, economic wealth is concentrated in five member nations that provide 75 percent of all AU revenue. 
103
104
However, while economic development can potentially eliminate economic and social causes of African conflict, fragile and corrupt governments often frustrate these efforts, as America has rediscovered after spending hundreds of billions of dollars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Unfortunately, the risk of conflict in Africa is immediate and requires a swift resolution thus facilitating longer-term economic developments to mature.
In 2003, the AU established an African Standby Force (ASF) of five standby brigades, with one multi-national brigade from each of Africa's five regions. These forces are intended to deploy in advance of the UN as they recently did with the African Union Mission in Sudan in the Darfur and the AU mission in Somalia. The primary motivation for a rapid response by African military forces (with organic civil, political, and police elements) "was largely 'never to allow another genocide like Rwanda'…" with its widespread genocide and crimes against humanity. 
105
There are many programs providing training, aid, and assistance to Africa from various countries and international organizations. Perhaps it would be more beneficial to focus resources on one sub-regional force at a time rather than risk spreading resources so thin that they fail to adequately train any of the forces. Several nations Second, of the AU's five regions, the Western region has the highest level of political willingness to engage in peacekeeping operations. Member nations such as Ghana, Senegal, and Nigeria are firmly committed to UN and AU peacekeeping missions, and consistently provide large numbers of peacekeepers. The Western region's serious commitment to peacekeeping is a reflection of Nigeria's regional leadership. Nigeria sets the example by having military or police personnel deployed in every UN and AU peacekeeping mission. The South regional force is the next best force but the East, North and Central regions are beset by so many crises that our strategic means would be wasted supporting difficult ways toward almost unattainable ends, at least for the short-term.
Third, the stability of West Africa is more important to U.S. interests economically and politically by defeating Al Qaeda-linked terrorist groups in Nigeria and Mali. Nigeria is America's largest trading partner, more than twice as much as the next country, South Africa. Also, importation of Nigerian oil continues to increase while Ghana is just beginning to exploit its offshore oilfields. These oil revenues are vital to the economic growth and stability of West Africa. Home-grown Nigerian terrorist organizations such as Boko Horam seek to cooperate with Al Qaeda, encouraging violent extremism and the creation of an Islamic state. This would clearly imperil American interests.
The best strategy to increase the capability of the ESF is focusing on training Soldiers rather than giving or selling large amounts of high-tech equipment. Training should focus on the critical skills required to perform peacekeeping missions as part of a UN or AU force. Peacekeeping forces should be light, infantry-centric, sufficiently armed to defeat lightly armed forces but have the ability to call upon and deploy heavy armor, artillery, and vehicles when required. After all, the national armed forces of many African nations are equipped with some heavy equipment, albeit obsolescent and in small numbers. Unfortunately, some first-world countries want to sell advanced weapons systems to generate money and make African nations into a mirror image of the exporting countries' armed forces. This is extremely dangerous policy, both to African regional stability and to African economic growth, as a nation's armed forces must be economically sustainable over the long term. Significantly increasing manpower or buying large numbers of high-tech weapons can become economically burdensome for poorer nations. This burden may force governments to take funds from the economic developmental programs that ultimately would have created long-term social and political stability and spend it to maintain their armed forces. The United States should discourage nations from creating unaffordable armed forces that require foreign aid to maintain. As a result, African naval forces are increasingly capable of combating piracy and enforcing rule of law. America donated a surplus 368 foot high Endurance Coast Guard Cutter to Nigeria in 2011 which significantly increased the ability of Nigeria to long range sustained maritime patrols. Another benefit was that by donating this vessel America will saved "…approximately $10 million in disposal costs for [the] cutter." 
108
The U.S. should further focus its development and training resources into a few countries within sub-regions. Comparing the desired end state with existing capabilities will allow for identification of specific deficiencies, their early correction, and proper resourcing requirements.
Nigeria plays an important role supporting the AU in peacekeeping operations and in the West African force (ESF). Nigeria is the most populous African country, has re-embraced democracy, and is blessed with a vibrant economy. Nigeria is a very dynamic and influential regional leader and is largely responsible for the ESF being such a capable multi-national force, as evidenced by two largely successful operations in Sierra Leone and Liberia. Nigeria is also the primary force provider for ESF and the biggest contributor for UN/AU peacekeeping missions. Further, Nigeria is the world's fourth largest contributor of UN peacekeepers (5,667), spending "about $10 billion on peace-keeping ventures in Liberia and Sierra Leone and [losing] 1,000 in the process." 110 Economically, Nigeria is a growing hegemonic power with a GNP growth rate of 21 percent over the past three years. U.S. Nigerian trading totaled $34.5 billion; ten times the amount of 2000. In testimony before the Senate, Johnnie Carson, the Assistant Secretary, Bureau of African Affairs, testified "…Nigeria is simply too important to Africa and too important to the United States and the international community for us not to be concerned and engaged. Widespread instability in Nigeria could have a tsunami-like ripple effect across West Africa and the global community" 
111
Despite some shortcomings, General Smith's thesis convincingly challenges several core tenets of current strategic thought regarding the demise of interstate war and the industrial war mindset of the U.S. Many western nations are at a pivotal point in time where budget constraints are forcing leaders to cut and reshape their forces. Today's decisions will impact the ability of national armed forces to successfully achieve their national strategic policy objectives.
The preponderance of research confirms Smith's thesis that intrastate war is the predominant form of conflict, both currently and in the future. National strategies agree that hybrid threatswith terrorism, Weapons of Mass Destruction/Proliferation, and cyber attacks are the greatest challenges to the security environment today. Despite this shared vision, nations have adopted widely divergent ways and means to meet these threats. Germany is reshaping its army by reducing the number of Soldiers and creating a tiered Army, consisting of 1/3 high intensity units, and 2/3 stabilization forces.
Of all the national policies discussed in this paper, Germany's strategy and force structure best mirrors its strategic policy. The UK's actions to reduce its overall military, cutting armored forces, and increase funding for Special Forces follow its national policy. However, the UK is still committed to expensive high-tech weaponry including the Euro Typhoon Fighter, the F-35 JSF and its two Queen Elizabeth-class aircraft carriers. China and Russia's procurement plans and questionable funding make it nearly impossible to speak with confidence on what they will actually procure and what military capabilities they will likely have. However, Russia continues to exhibit paranoia regarding NATO and is apparently investing heavily in conventional forces. Australia stresses the threats of terrorism and cyber attacks but has committed to obtaining hightech weapons systems with seemingly little direct application to counter terrorism or defending against hybrid threats. America should take three actions. First, military leaders should critically examine their procurement strategies and ensure the means available correspond to national security policy. Current and anticipated future budget cuts present an extraordinary opportunity for each of the services to question what capabilities must remain in their service, be shifted to another, or possibly be reduced or eliminated. The Chiefs of Staff must scrutinize areas of redundancy and overmatch beginning with the JSF, Army helicopters, and Marine Corps capabilities. America can no longer afford the luxury of wasteful redundancies and unnecessary force structure.
Second, America should continue to strengthen international and regional security organizations, particularly in Africa. As Smith wrote, due to the paradigm shift underway nations seeks to take action as part of a multinational force authorized by an international body. Africa remains the most likely region to experience intrastate conflict and regional instability. The UN has found that the ability to send a force of approximately 5,000 personnel within 7-14 days of a conflict's commencement can significantly reduce or prevent casualties and possibly stop the conflict. Ensuring such a force is trained and prepared for deployment is a more fiscally prudent and effective solution than deploying US Soldiers, Airmen, or Marines after the local situation on the ground has gone critical. Third, America should select key partners in Africa and develop appropriate strategies that build their capabilities and contribute to an increased regional capacity to resolve conflicts and instability quickly. Nigeria in particular offers an excellent option in this regard as it is one of Africa's major powers and currently leads the continent in conflict prevention/resolution. Acceptance of General Smith's paradigm that interstate industrial wars are now obsolescent will necessitate an enormous transformation in American military strategy and supporting procurement policies. This transformation, perhaps already underway in some respects, is woefully incomplete but will ultimately create a military force better-suited to successfully operate in the new paradigm of Smithian warfare. Africa, a continent at once replete both with strategic promise and strategic threats, will be a likely stage upon which this new paradigm will be played out. The United States and its allies cannot afford to allow the African nations to slide into intrastate chaos and instability and must immediately begin to implement a successful continent-wide strategy focusing on strengthening the AU by increasing the capabilities of its regional stand-by forces. Failure to implement this strategy will result in an ominous realization of the worst of Rupert Smith's theoretical predictions, not only for Africa, but perhaps for the world as a whole.
WAR 
NO LONGER EXISTS by Colonel Nick Snelson United States Army Dr
Strategic Studies Degree. The U.S. Army War College
Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools
Market Street
215
662-5606
U.S. Secretary of Education
Council for Higher Education Accreditation
The views expressed in this student academic research paper are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of the Army, Department of Defense
U.S. Government