# ID: 9ae3b032f19f49308edfd51073a25f7d
# Title: War No Longer Exists
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
Of all the national policies discussed in this paper, Germany's strategy and force structure best mirrors its strategic policy.
The UK's actions to reduce its overall military, cutting armored forces, and increase funding for Special Forces follow its national policy.
However, the UK is still committed to expensive high-tech weaponry including the Euro Typhoon Fighter, the F-35 JSF and its two Queen Elizabeth-class aircraft carriers.
China and Russia's procurement plans and questionable funding make it nearly impossible to speak with confidence on what they will actually procure and what military capabilities they will likely have.
However, Russia continues to exhibit paranoia regarding NATO and is apparently investing heavily in conventional forces.
Australia stresses the threats of terrorism and cyber attacks but has committed to obtaining hightech weapons systems with seemingly little direct application to counter terrorism or defending against hybrid threats.
America should take three actions.
First, military leaders should critically examine their procurement strategies and ensure the means available correspond to national security policy.
Current and anticipated future budget cuts present an extraordinary opportunity for each of the services to question what capabilities must remain in their service, be shifted to another, or possibly be reduced or eliminated.
The Chiefs of Staff must scrutinize areas of redundancy and overmatch beginning with the JSF, Army helicopters, and Marine Corps capabilities.
America can no longer afford the luxury of wasteful redundancies and unnecessary force structure.