# ID: 9ae7b93f0dde4e71bfe173b8baa64b00
# Title: Pride, Prejudice, and Pejoratives at Peenemünde: Interservice Rivalry and Terror Weapons in the Third Reich
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
An abundance of information regarding organizational theory and the reasons for inter-service rivalry
The undersigned certify that this thesis meets masters-level standards of research, argumentation, and expression.
COL MICHAEL KOMETER (Date)
ABOUT THE AUTHOR MAJ Alex Fuerst is a 1996 graduate of George Mason University and holds a Master's degree in Business Administration from Webster University as well as a Master's degree in Military Arts and Science from Air University. MAJ Fuerst was commissioned in the US Army in 1996 and has served in a variety of command and staff positions at all levels of the Army. His tactical experience includes operational assignments in Bosnia and Iraq.
Major Fuerst will serve with ISAF CJ35 in Afghanistan following his graduation from SAASS.
This thesis discusses terror weapons and interservice rivalry. It describes terrorism, places it in historical perspective, and illustrates that the phenomenon of terrorism that politicians and individual citizens refer to is in fact an act of war covered by the smoke and mirrors of pejorative references and political rhetoric. This is half of the reason for writing. The second purpose is to examine the role of inter-service rivalry for producing technology and innovations. World War II provides the perfect backdrop for examining these phenomena. Hitler's rockets developed at Peenemünde are often referred to as terror weapons and there was substantial inter-service rivalry between the Army and the Luftwaffe programs while these weapons were being developed. These two phenomena rarely if ever at all appear alongside one another in security studies literature; their juxtaposition explains why an innovation is considered a terror weapon and provides a useful framework for examining why foreign powers develop new technologies and what a likely US response would be.
This thesis concludes that interservice rivalry was the primary impetus for the Luftwaffe to develop the Fi 103 flying bomb, the precursor to the modern cruise missile. A considerable number of different factors reinforced the rivalry between the services: military culture, loss of prestige, and an array of individual personalities that ranged from bumbling sycophants to scientific prodigies to solemn and humble servants of the Fatherland. Motivations to employ the Luftwaffe's flying bomb, as well as the Army A-4 rocket, its primary competition, were completely different. A strong sense of nationalism and obedience to country initially provided a strong impetus but were later overcome by more nefarious and insidious aspirations.
The overall lesson is that nothing is ever really what it seems; only through critical inquiry can an objective truth come to the forefront and provide a greater degree of clarity to explain various phenomena in the world.
You can't say civilization don't advance... in every war they kill you in a new way.
-Will Rogers
There are very few regimes throughout history that can compare to the evil of the Nazi party and the Third Reich. Hitler was responsible for the deaths of millions in his attempt to destroy the Jews in his Final Solution; he initiated World War II which was the most destructive war ever fought; and he led a once proud and honorable nation into complete and utter destruction which perpetually changed the landscape of Europe. Had Dante Alighieri written his Divine Comedy after WWII, surely he would have secured a place for Hitler next to Brutus and Judas. Not only did Hitler terrorize his own citizens with concentration camps and extreme brutality, but he intended to inflict terror on the British population as well as other European states with his flying bombs and rockets. As noted by esteemed author and historian Stephen Ambrose, rockets and flying bombs were not weapons at all but terrorist devices. 
1
2
The A-4, a ballistic missile, was developed separately by the Army and would later be known as the V-2. Together, both weapons comprised the Vergeltungswaffen, known to the world as the German reprisal weapons. The group responsible for such innovations consisted of notable scientists, some of whom were world renowned for their involvement with rockets during the inter-war period. Of note, Hermann Oberth had previously published a book on rocketry titled Wege zur Raumschiffahrt. Years later another Peenemünde scientist, Wernher von Braun, the program's technical director, would claim fame and glory while leading the US rocket program in the space race with the Soviets during the Cold War. Cloistered on a small island along the Baltic coast, the scientists as well as military officers from the German Army and the Luftwaffe produced fantastic weapons of war.
From the outside looking in, the behavior exhibited by Germany would appear to be deliberate acts spurred by rational decisions, referred to as the rational actor model in the parlance of international relations. This is certainly a logical conclusion given that Joseph Goebbels, the Nazi propaganda minister, referred to the rockets and flying bombs as -awe-inspiring murder weapons.‖
3
4
It is very important to note that this thesis does not intend to sympathize with or condone any of the heinous acts committed by the Nazis during World War II. The author condemns the Third Reich's Nazi ideology, racial intolerance, and commission of heinous acts. The author understands that the Holocaust remains a sensitive subject in many circles. While the use of several books by a historian who purportedly sympathizes with Hitler is referenced, the author's use of such literature should not be construed as anti-Semitic nor does it infer that the author is sympathetic towards contemporary neo-Nazi movements. This thesis merely offers an alternative hypothesis for the development of a technological innovation during World War II in order to better understand the mechanisms by which such developments occur.
Consider the official name of the weapons. The name of the rockets in German,
Vergeltungswaffen, translates into a -reprisal‖ or -vengeance weapon.‖ The name alone suggests that their intended use was for punishing populations with death and destruction.
Populations lived in fear of these weapons because of their unpredictability and devastating effects. Weak or nonexistent defenses against them created a sense of helplessness within the population-a major factor for instilling terror. Thus, a succinct question is, -How can insights gleaned from studying the German actions apply to the contemporary security environment and world writ large?‖ Many of the issues that confronted leaders during the 1940s also face leaders today.
The current tensions between Iran and Israel seem especially relevant, with the recent successful launch of an Iranian rocket into space and the IAEA's announcement that the Iranians might be close to developing a warhead. 
5
6
Analyzing the development of the Third Reich's -terror weapons‖ from the perspective that they were not terror weapons but technological innovations naturally requires defining several terms starting with the use of the word terror. The use of the word terror in this thesis is synonymous with terrorism. Chapter one goes into great depth regarding terror and terrorism and argues that the use of those words is pejorative;
thus by extension a terror weapon is also a pejorative term. In the discussion of terrorism, the chapter points out that what the general public typically considers terrorism is actually an act of war. Another term that is very important throughout this thesis and requires defining is interservice rivalry. Interservice rivalry is the continual competition between military services within one nation's military such as that between the US Army and the US Air Force. Chapter two will provide greater depth regarding inter-service rivalries and also illustrate that they have existed for much longer than one may think.
This thesis will first ascertain whether Germany's employment of rockets can be regarded as terrorism. To do so requires an analysis of historical antecedents from both state and non-state actors and subsequently the determination of what constitutes a -terror weapon‖ will logically follow. Following the analysis of terrorism and terror weapons, the thesis will proceed to -peel back the layers of the onion‖ and ascertain the underlying causes for interservice rivalries and how they maintain their strength and ferocity. It will then assess how Germany's Prussian heritage influenced inter-service rivalry, and organizational power struggles emerged as dominant forces in the development and employment of the V-1 and V-2 rockets. Analysis will primarily focus on the personalities and character of the key leaders in each organization as well as external influences that may have had an impact on the programs. Assessing the strengths of the internal and external influences will ascertain whether inter-service rivalries were a dominant force in rocket development and employment.
The literature on Terrorism is plentiful since it is the security issue du jour. Bruce Hoffman, Gérard Chaliand and Arnaud Blind, and Hugh Gough all provide notable works on terrorism and its history. Of note, the memoirs of Bertrand Barère, the chair of the after the historical anecdotes to illustrate there is substantial subjectivity involved in the definitions, and that often terrorism is in the eye of the beholder. Definitions of terrorism are just as numerous and diverse as the historical accounts and provide a backdrop to the chapter's main argument that the contemporary perception of terrorism is merely war on a smaller and more limited scale.
Chapter 2 first demonstrates that inter-service rivalries have existed for centuries, although the evidentiary past is predominantly from the twentieth century when there is much more literature on military history. Following a look at historical examples of inter-service rivalry, the chapter then delves into the issue of perspective and perceptions and their impact, not only within the rivalry but outside as well. The chapter then tackles the issue of why inter-service rivalries exist and how organizational theory helps explain their permanence in military culture. In doing so, it makes a distinction between a
-rivalry‖ and what this chapter refers to as an -inter-service dispute.‖ This chapter argues that changes in the security environment are the catalysts for inter-service disputes. The chapter concludes by illustrating that although rivalries and disputes appear negative and may have strong repercussions there is more than one perception to consider and perceptions from other parties may differ significantly. At the end of the chapter the reasons for the ferocity between the services and why the Luftwaffe developed the Fi 103 will become increasingly clear.
Chapter 3 continues to lay the foundational framework for the inter-service rivalry and the development of technological innovations at the Nazi rocket development center at Peenemünde. It first illustrates how Prussian influence shaped the German military culture which provided a sense of deep pride and nationalism in the fatherland as well as a source for latent aggression. The second portion of the chapter discusses the factors that led to the Luftwaffe's deterioration and why it was incapable of protecting German cities from the onslaught of Allied airpower. When the German military culture and inability to defend the fatherland are coupled with the fierce inter-service rivalry between the Luftwaffe and the German army that was discussed in the previous chapter, the reasons for the development of the Fi 103 and A-4 rockets-the so-called -terror weapons‖-become much clearer.
Chapter 4 provides the narrative to the inter-service rivalry between the Army and the Luftwaffe. It proceeds chronologically and discusses the motivations behind the development of the Fi 103, continued struggle for resources, and transition to morale bombing while tying in the concepts discussed in the previous two chapters. The chapter concludes with a technical description and operational assessment of the two weapons.
This chapter will illustrate that between the start of the war and the point Germany initiated its barrage of rocket attacks interservice rivalry spurred the Luftwaffe to develop the Fi 103, which in turn increased the competition between the two services.
Chapter 5 is the last chapter of the thesis. It first summarizes the main points of each previous chapter to illustrate the broad array of forces that motivated the Army and Luftwaffe to develop their technological innovations. It then analyzes the main elements of the thesis's primary argument by assessing the role of interservice rivalry between the Luftwaffe and the Army and how it influenced the development of the Fi 103 and A-4.
The chapter then discusses German intentions to cause terror.
Geoffrey Brooks in his 2002 book Hitler's Terror Weapons argued that Hitler was developing everything from flying saucers to rockets. Brooks categorized them all as terror weapons of the Third Reich--a part of Hitler's plan for world domination. 
1
3
Given the disparity in time, type, and technological requirements between the V-1 flying bomb and V-2 rocket and WMD (nuclear weapons are technologically advanced, 1 Geoffrey Brooks, Hitler's Terror Weapons: From V-1 to Vimana (South Yorkshire: Leo Cooper, 2002), 1-3. 
2
Thus, the real question is, -What is terrorism?‖ Determining what constitutes terrorism will undoubtedly assist in formulating a useful definition of a terror weapon.
Since time immemorial, terrorism has flourished under disparate and diverse conditions. It transcended race, culture, religion, and geography and appears ubiquitous.
In some instances, terrorism was concomitant to war, yet, in others, it was completely separate. As Hannah Arendt poignantly noted, -As a means of frightening people into submission, terror can and does appear in an extraordinary variety of forms.‖
4
This chapter flows chronologically with an assessment of past instances of terrorism.
It primarily focuses on state terrorism but does not discount the role of the non-state actor on the world stage. It then assesses several historical examples of terror weapons and ascertains whether there are any trends relevant to the discussion of terror. After assessing various historical accounts of terrorism, this thesis delves into the controversial topic of defining terrorism. This chapter purposefully defines terrorism after the historical anecdotes to illustrate there is substantial subjectivity involved in the definitions and that often terrorism is in the eye of the beholder. Definitions of terrorism are just as numerous and diverse as the historical accounts and provide a backdrop to the chapter's main argument that the contemporary perception of terrorism is merely war on a smaller and more limited scale and that that the terrorism label is often applied pejoratively.
To westerners, and perhaps a majority of the world, Al Qaeda is probably the most Flourishing during the eleventh and twelfth centuries in the Middle East, the Assassins, a secessionist faction of Shia Islam, were another group that foreshadowed contemporary terrorist organizations. Primarily motivated by the ideology that an illegitimate Sunni government was in control, the Assassins also adopted assassination as their primary tactic against their enemies. According to Gérard Chaliand and Arnaud Blin they were unrivalled in their techniques. Not only did the Assassins execute attacks against their own government but also tried to repel a foreign power-namely Christian crusaders trying to reclaim the holy land. Although many of their assassinations were successful, like the Zealots, they did not lead to their control of the government or the expulsion of Christian Crusaders from the West. 7 More concerned with the Christian threat in the West, it was from the East where the Assassins met their demise. During the thirteenth century, the Mongol incursion into the Muslim world was beginning of the end for the Assassins. 8
Instead of waging open warfare against their enemies in the conventional sense, the Zealots and Assassins resorted to an asymmetric strategy of assassination commonly referred to as a decapitation strategy. Such a strategy relies on the notion that assassinating an enemy leader will facilitate an organization's ability to achieve its objectives. According to coercion theorist Dr. Robert Pape, -the main assumption is that these targets are a modern state's Achilles' heel. Regardless of the strength of a state's fielded forces or military-industrial capacity, if the leadership is knocked out, the whole house of cards comes down.‖ 9 Contemporary terrorist organizations also have  1996), 79. 
10
Nigerian national with Al Qaeda links to destroy a US jetliner illustrate this. 
11
State terrorism, the notion that the polity could commit acts of terror to achieve its ends, predates the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia even though it is widely accepted as the point that denoted the beginning of the modern nation state. Because non-state actors commit a preponderance of terrorist activity today, there may be a strong propensity to think that they are the sole proprietors of terror campaigns; however, Chaliand and Blin observed that states have always been the largest perpetrators of terror through the ages. 
12
One of the earliest known examples of state terrorism occurred in what is now modern day China. In 518 BC during a battle between the Chinese armies of Wu and Ch'u, the Viscount of Wu ordered three thousand condemned men to line up in front of his formation. In full sight of the opposing army, the condemned men committed suicide by cutting their own throats. The Ch'u army was so terrorized that it fled in fear. 
13
15
Just like the Zealots and Assassins, the Viscount of Wu and Tepes used -terror as an instrument‖ to instill irrational fear in their adversaries. The notion that an organization can exploit irrational fear is often part of many terrorism definitions but is also a key factor in deterrence. Typically, deterrence revolves around nuclear weapons and not around impaling prisoners; however, the theoretical framework is the same. Deterrence relies on the notion that the other side possesses the capability to inflict such extreme suffering that the benefits of aggression will never outweigh the costs. Thomas
Schelling, the famed strategist and economist, remarked that pain and suffering are contingent upon the adversary's behavior-the threat of violence could be an extremely powerful motivator for not acting. 
16
Terror inflicted on a state's own people is not rare in history; however, terror inflicted on a state's own people-especially by impalement-intended to deter foreign aggression is. Although the Ottomans were his sworn enemies, there is reason to believe that Tepes did not deliberately intend his heinous acts as a deterrent to invading Ottoman armies.
Romanian scholars agree that Tepes enjoyed having people impaled, and that much of this gruesome activity was for personal amusement. 17 Unaware that he was demonstrating, in the modern sense of deterrence, both capability and resolve, perhaps Tepes' acts were so horrific that they indirectly provided a strategic deterrent for Wallachia. Thus, acts of terror intended for Tepes' amusement were perceived differently, albeit rationally, by an external actor.
One of the most well known instances of terror inflicted on a state's own people was during the French Revolution-aptly named -the terror‖ or -reign of terror‖ by many historians. Historian Hugh Gough observed that governmental use of terror and violence was common prior to the revolution, but its use by a secular, democratic, and constitutional regime was something new in history. 
18
19
20
Purges. The acts committed by the French revolutionaries and Stalin appear similar to those advocated by Niccollo Machiavelli in his 1523 treatise, The Prince. Machiavelli wrote that actions to protect the state are completely justified even if they are cruel. 
26
27
However, questions remain. Why are these events regarded as terrorism, and why are other mass purges not considered terrorism? Numerous books document these eras as state or top-down terrorism, but if the French Revolution and Soviet purges constituted terrorism, then an obvious conclusion is that all state purges constitute terrorism. Few suggest that the great purges in China orchestrated by Mao Zedong between 1967 and 1969 constituted state terrorism even though Mao was responsible for the deaths and torture of millions. 
28
29
Was the French and Soviet government's use of terror deliberate? In his 1825 memoirs, Bertrand Barère, the chair of the Committee of Public Safety during the period, lamented that M. de Calonne and the author Marat were bloodthirsty. Barère remarked that Calonne, a French noble seeking refuge in England during the revolution and the reign of terror, directed Marat to pen the L' Ami du People, an ultra-revolutionary article circulated in Paris. 
30
31
32
According to Edmund Burke in his 1790 Reflections on the Revolution in France, the French population during that period consisted of approximately twenty-two million people. 
33
Given the hysteria during that era, perhaps the French population cascaded fear by continually increasing the numbers of those who faced the guillotine out of sheer paranoia. That is not to say that the French population was to blame, but if an individual didn't know if he will be next to face the guillotine, the chances that he will accuse an innocent person to save himself exists. Stalin's motivations are more personal than preserving the sanctity of the Soviet Union, yet the Soviet purges appear to have a similar theme to that of the French Revolution.
When viewing an act of terror there is an automatic assumption that the act or behavior was the result of a rational decision. 
Just like terrorism, terror weapons possess a rich history of creating panic and instilling fear in an adversary. As early as the fifth century BC, the Athenian historian Thucydides documented the Syracusans' use of warships during the Peloponnesian Wars to -cause a terror to the enemy, the advantages of which would far out-weigh any loss…‖ 34 However, seeing a weapon and feeling its effects are very different. During the middle ages, the Trebuchet and Ballista were popular siege weapons that instilled fear in an adversary population because of their destructive capability. Henry of Livonia provided the following excerpt in his Chronicle of Livonia as he described the weapon and its effect on the adversary during the siege of Mesoten by Teutonic Crusaders in December 1219:
At last, the larger machine was put up and great rocks were cast at the fort. The men in the fort, seeing the size of the rocks conceived a great terror. The duke took charge of the machine, shot the first stone, and crushed the enemy's balcony and the men in it. He shot a second one and dislodged the planks and the logs of the rampart. He discharged a third one and pierced and shattered three large logs in the rampart and struck some men. After seeing this, the people in the fort fled from the ramparts and sought safer places. But since they had no refuge, they asked for quarter so that they could come down and make their plea to the bishop. 35
34 Landmark Thucydides, page 440. The Athenians were widely known for their sea-faring capabilities.
The sight of an Athenian vessel struck fear into their adversaries. The Syracusans were attempting the same tactic and assumed that any state that was so bold as to directly sail towards an Athenian vessel would strike fear in the Athenians when they viewed such a daring deed. 
35
48
49 Text of Miller v. California, vol. 413 U.S. Supreme Court (1973)
definition of terrorism will not appear in the near future. 
50
Academics are not the only ones to disagree on the definition. In fact, many US 
The unlawful use of force or violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a Government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives. The FBI further describes terrorism as either domestic or international, depending on the origin, base, and objectives of the terrorist organization. 54 Each definition is slightly different and emphasizes different aspects. DoD emphasizes that the acts are unlawful alluding to the notion that US involvement on foreign soil are indeed lawful. If, according to Ken Waltz, the world is anarchic, then who determines if an act is lawful or unlawful? 55 It is certainly not the United Nations as US invaded Iraq without UN permission. A state must determine whether its actions are lawful or not.
Thus, according to the DoD definition, all members of the US armed forces are not 
50
51
52
Military and Associated Terms, 19August 2009
, 550. 53 2008
National Counter-Terrorism Center Report on Terrorism, 30 April 2009, 1. 54
The National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC) explicitly states that terrorism only involves acts committed against civilians and non-combatants. As a product of the 9/11 investigations, the NCTC serves as the primary organization in the Government for integrating and analyzing all intelligence pertaining to counterterrorism even though their definition is different from that used by many other agencies. Ostensibly, a governmental agency could identify what the NCTC defines as an act of terrorism; however, if it does not fit its own definition, it may not report it. Even though the NCTC uses the definition listed above, there is still a significant amount of subjectivity. According to the NCTC website, -determination of what constitutes a terrorist act can be more art than science.‖ 56
In the same sense as the pornography analogy, the NCTC knows what terrorism is when they see it. Because of their subjectivity any incident that smells like terrorism must be.
With their subjectivity, the NCTC paradoxically hampers their counter terrorism efforts because anything can be considered terrorism whether there is any evidence to substantiate the claim.
An entry in the NCTCs database, Worldwide Incidents Tracking System (WITS), provides an example of their subjectivity. The NCTC claims that the data provided in WITS consists of incidents in which -sub-national or clandestine groups or individuals deliberately or recklessly attacked civilians or noncombatants.‖ 57 However the following 2009 WITS entry regarding an incident in Arkansas illustrates otherwise: 
56
58
This thesis rejects the generally accepted academic definition of terrorism because there is far too much political rhetoric associated with contemporary definitions of terrorism. Sami Zeidan, a Lebanese diplomat and scholar, wrote in the Cornell Law Review that political reasons are the impetus for a lack of consensus on a definition.
Zeidan explained as follows: -The difficulty of defining terrorism lies in the risk it entails of taking positions. The political value of the term currently prevails over its legal one.
Left to its political meaning, terrorism easily falls prey to change that suits the interests of particular states at particular times.‖
59
Bruce Hoffman, author of Inside Terrorism and renowned terrorism expert, agreed and made a similar argument. Hoffman observed that, -Terrorism is a pejorative term.‖ 60 According to Hoffman, governments or people generally apply the term to an enemy, adversary, or with whom one disagrees, because of the word's intrinsically negative connotation. 
61
The pejorative nature of terrorism is apparent in the different perceptions that Al Qaeda and the US have of each other. Although Al Qaeda is not a state, in 1996, Bin Laden issued a fatwa declaring war against the west and called on all Muslims to join Al Qaeda's struggle against the West: -My Muslim Brothers of The World: Your brothers in Palestine and in the land of the two Holy Places are calling upon your help and asking you to take part in fighting against the enemy-your enemy and their enemy-the Americans and the Israelis. They are asking you to do whatever you can, with one's own means and ability, to expel the enemy, humiliated and defeated, out of the sanctities of Islam…‖ 63 Subsequently, Al Qaeda perceived its acts of violence against the US as acts of war. However, even though the opening lines of the National Strategy for Combating Terrorism state, -The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001…were acts of war against the United States of America and its allies...‖ the US perceived them as acts of terror. 
64
Why is it that a nation can declare war against an organization but an organization, i.e. a non-state actor, is unable to declare war against a nation even though the statement above acknowledges the organization's acts as acts of war? Furthermore, the US considers Osama bin Laden a terrorist after the African embassy bombings and 9/11; however, it labeled Osama bin Laden et al as Freedom Fighters during the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan when it suited US interests. The different perceptions also exist with states. Prior to toppling the Baathist regime, the US labeled Iraq as a terrorist regime and state sponsor of terrorism, but between 1980 and 1988 the US supported Iraq during the Iran-Iraq war. 
65
66
Robert Bisset, referring to the British reformer movement, applied Jacobin indiscriminately to those he either did not like or did not agree with his beliefs or values.
Bisset wrote in his Anti-Jacobin review that a Jacobin was an -enemy of Christianity, natural religion, monarchy, order, subordination, property, and justice.‖ 67
If terrorism is a pejorative label for political rhetoric, then what is the common definition of terrorism really defining? Carl von Clausewitz, the great Prussian philosopher, defined war as a continuation of political intercourse carried on with other 65 Sam Sasan Shoamanesh, -History Brief: Timeline of US-Iran Relations Until the Obama Administration,‖ Massachusetts Institute of Technology 66 University of Notre Dame Latin Dictionary. http://www.archives.nd.edu/cgibin/lookup.pl?stem=barbarus& ending 67 Michael T. Davis, -The British Jacobins and the Unofficial Terror of Loyalism in the 1790s,‖ Terror: From Tyrannicide to Terrorism, Edited by Bret Bowden and Michael T. Davis (Queensland: University of  Queensland Press, 2008), 99.  means in his magnum opus, On War. 
68
A major issue to address is whether non-state actors can prosecute a war. Clausewitz wrote in the early 19th century prior to the industrial revolution and is primarily referring to states and their militaries in his tome. Given that his theory is now almost two hundred years old, it is easy to understand why one can relegate war to states alone. However, times are different and sub-national organizations exert substantial influence over the state in which they exist, as well as other international actors. Consider the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah conflict now referred to as a hybrid-war. Hezbollah, a non-state actor in Lebanon initiated a 34-day conflict against Israel, a state. By all accounts on the Israeli and Hezbollah sides, the conflict constituted a war. 
69
The second issue to deal with is the deliberate targeting of civilians. This component of the definition allows the actor using the term terrorism to stand on the moral high ground as if they would never target non-combatants or civilians. However, warring parties targeted civilian populations with violence for thousands of years. Author
Stephen Turnbull observed that a civilian massacre usually accompanied a Mongol Conquest. 
70
71
72
73
The pejorative nature of terrorism has spread to more than organizations and people. Now, with such widespread usage the terror label often extends beyond the organization to its actions, tactics, and even weapons it may possess, i.e. cyber terrorism, terror tactics and terror weapons. But what is a terror weapon? If an individual uses a gun to commit a crime, is the gun a terror weapon if the perpetrator intended to create fear in the people he was accosting? No, of course it is not. Assessing something as a terror weapon is using the word terror pejoratively because one does not agree with the manner in which the weapons were used. Thus, instead of terror weapons, the rockets and flying bombs developed at Peenemünde were traditional weapons, albeit technological wonders that later paved the way for space exploration. This thesis illustrated that the term terrorism is pejorative and what politicians are really referring to is war initiated by non-state actors yet the issue whether terrorism really exists still remains. This thesis posits that terrorism is violence that is not tied to a political, ideological, or religious end. Essentially terrorism is when an actor inflicts harm on another simply because they possess the capability to do so or perhaps even enjoy it. Vlad Tepes might be the best example of this. He impaled many of his adversaries but he also impaled many of his own people. Although difficult to determine for certain, if Tepes conducted his horrific acts simply because he could then they would have constituted terrorism. Another example is some of the acts that the SS committed in the very last months of the war. Neufeld provided the following account: -Nothing, however, compares in horror with the worst single massacre in the history of Mittelbau.
At Gardelegen, SS guards herded into a barn 1,016 evacuees exhausted from marching and set the building on fire, burning them alive.‖ 74 Violence that is not tied to a political end actually warrants the terrorism label, because terror is now the end and no longer the means to an end.
The brief summary of past accounts of terrorism and terror weapons sketched above depicts events that are often misconstrued in their cause and effect relationship, or that a preconceived notion about an actor or its motivations exists. Hitler committed the most horrific and heinous acts in the twentieth century thus there is a natural tendency to think Germany's behavior during WWII was nefarious. Additionally, politicians often refer to terrorism in a pejorative sense and opine that terrorists -don't like our way of life,‖ -hate Americans,‖ or -hate us for who we are.‖ The intention of the pejorative label in a political statement intends for the public to ostracize the group that the label is referring to. Hitler intended to ostracize the British population by referring to allied bombing as terror bombing. Additionally, were the German rockets terror weapons or were they simply weapons for war? Stripping away the labels and seeing an event for what it is, instead of how another intends to describe it, provides a greater degree of clarity for understanding why an event happened in the first place. Additionally, removing the terrorism label illustrates what it is in actuality: war. 
74
The next chapter delves into the complex area of inter-service rivalries and begins to lay the foundation for the crux of the argument that the innovations at Peenemünde were spawned from rivalries between the Luftwaffe and the Army. In doing so, the chapter illustrates that interservice rivalries have existed for centuries and are likely to continue for perpetuity. Depending on the perspective one takes, a rivalry can either be beneficial, detrimental, or even something completely different.
Authors of military history have a tendency to point out inter-service rivalries, yet they rarely go into great detail about the genesis of such competition, assuming that the reader already understands that it is a given in military circles. After reading a considerable amount of military history, one soon notices that inter-service rivalries are quite commonplace in the military and should discover that for whichever reasons services simply cannot co-exist without squabbling like children. After visiting the United States during WWII, Sir John Slessor accurately assessed the inter-service rivalry that existed in the US when he stated, -The violence of inter-service rivalry in the United States had to be seen to be believed and was an appreciable handicap to their war effort.‖
1
In a 1959 edition of TIME Magazine, a columnist wrote -in the sticky midsummer heat at Washington's Boiling Air Force Base last week, 3,000 Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps servicemen, high civilian brass and Congressmen turned out for a unique demonstration of interservice unity…to salute two four-star Air Force generals.‖
2
This chapter provides the theoretical framework for the reasons interservice rivalries persevere through time. It first illustrates that inter-service rivalries have existed for centuries, although the evidentiary past is predominantly from the twentieth century when there is much more literature on military history. Following a look at historical examples of inter-service rivalry, the chapter then tackles the issue of why inter-service rivalries exist and how organizational theory helps explain their permanence in military culture. This chapter then argues when services make changes to their DOTMLPF in order to reflect a change in the security environment, those changes exacerbate the competitive environment services exist within and create conflicts. The chapter concludes by illustrating that although rivalries and disputes may appear negative, they may in fact be beneficial but there is more than one perception to consider and those perceptions from other parties may differ significantly.
It often appears that only modern industrialized nations with independent military services experience inter-service rivalries, but in fact such rivalries have existed for hundreds of years. One author even suggested that rivalries between land components and naval components started several millennia ago when militaries first began to use the sea militarily. 
3
4
5
Although the Sultan knew of the rivalry between the two groups, his inclination to remain on the periphery of their affairs later prevented him from quelling the violence in the city.
Even Napoleon experienced inter-service rivalry between his army and Navy during a time when England posed a serious threat. A serious dispute arose between the Army and Navy over coastal defense that Napoleon later adjudicated. Napoleon's army was responsible for engineering work at the ports as well as coastal defense elements, yet the Navy wanted them moved to different locations to protect coastal navigation. 
6
During WWII, inter-service rivalry was rampant and existed in almost every fighting force. In the British military, there were sour relationships even before the war started.
During the interwar period, the British devoted limited funds to defense; however, the services still squabbled over issues of fairness. There was strong resentment by the Army and Navy towards the Royal Air Force, as they suspected that the RAF was receiving more than its fair share of resources.
7
Murray suggested that senior RAF leaders were still faithful to Air Chief Sir Hugh Trenchard's ideological belief in the efficacy of the bomber, which negated the need for cooperation with the other services. 
8
9
Sandwiched between determined personalities and unable to shake loose from their own service interests, the Joint Chiefs deliberately chose a divided strategy of dual command in the Pacific instead of placing the entire theater under one commander. 
10
The Axis powers were not immune from inter-service rivalries or their negative effects on the services. The Imperial Japanese Navy bore most of the burden during the China War for four years, even though it was a continental conflict and fell within the purview of the Army. Consequently there was a large disparity in doctrine and operational skills between the Japanese Army Air Forces and Naval aviation that continued to fuel inter-service rivalry, which dated back to back to 1910 when many Japanese officers withdrew from the Army's research committee to form its own aviation research agency. 
11
12
13
14
Luftwaffe commander Hermann Goering and Admiral Erich Raeder, Commander of the 
10
11
12
13
14
15
Inter-service rivalries are not restricted to periods of war, and are just as fierce during times of peace. Following the birth of the independent US Air Force in the aftermath of WWII, rivalries between US military services only worsened. Captured in Jeffrey Barlow's book, Revolt of the Admirals, the rivalry between the recently independent Air Force and the Navy is now military lore. Spurred by numerous arguments over funding and the dubious cancellation of the Navy's top priority, the super carrier USS United States, the incident provoked Air Force and Naval leadership to engage in some questionable leadership practices. One of the most egregious examples was when the Secretary of the Air Force lied to Congress about the quality of weapons testing on the B-36, the USAF's top acquisition. 
16
As recently as 2003, when the US launched Operation Iraqi Freedom, the Air Force and Army could not agree on the optimal location of the Fire Support Coordination Line (FSCL). Used as a fire support measure to prevent fratricide, the FSCL's location was disconcerting to the Air Force, which believed it restricted its bombing campaign. In accordance with Army doctrine, the Army had placed the FSCL far enough out to ensure there was ample clearance to conduct helicopter operations. According to one senior officer, there was such tension over the issue that it caused the environment in Washington D.C. to become -downright ugly.‖
17
The underlying reasons for inter-service rivalries are rooted in organizational theory. Inter-service rivalries are primarily the result of continual competition generated by organizing military services along functional specialties. This provides a competitive environment where services, just like thoroughbreds in a horse race, continually jockey for position against one another. Other factors such as funding, institutional identity, service culture, and prestige reinforce polarization, strengthen competition and resolve, exacerbate issues, and provide catalysts for increased conflict.
To determine the roots of rivalry, one must first view the military as an organization that consists of a hierarchy of bureaucracies. The Department of Defense (DoD) is not monolithic and although it contains various organizations that are external to the services, the majority of the DoD's composition is from each component. This is true of most nations' defense establishments. According to Max Weber's description of bureaucracy, the US military writ large, and the services that comprise it contain a clearly defined set of rules and procedures, a division of labor according to functional expertise, a clearly defined chain of command, a system of meritocracy that promotes those who adequately perform, and professional managers. 
18
The military is known for its rules and procedures that are outlined in the thousands of regulations that dictate everything from appearance to the type of letterhead acceptable in correspondence. The military is organized into functional services that specialize in a different medium and possesses a defined chain of command. Those who form the chain of command are placed in those positions based on their performance as lower level managers and evaluated through a system of promotions based on merit.
The goal of bureaucracy is to maximize efficiency, which is the reason for the delineation of functional specialties in the criteria above. Starting with the organization of a separate Army and Navy in the early 1800s, each service was organized separately into functional specialties according to its operating medium, i.e. air, land, and sea. The creation of the navy was intended to maximize efficiency by creating a separate service for the sea. Even the word -navy,‖ which is derived from the Latin term navigiom meaning a fleet of ships, implied that a separate service was a necessity. 
19
20
According to Weber, bureaucracies are -technically efficient instruments of administration‖ because functional specialization enabled its employees to learn to perform their duties optimally. However, Gareth Morgan pointed out that instead of the cooperation functional specialization is intended to foster, it paradoxically increases competition. 
21
Predicting the future is difficult and services do not know whether they will continually receive the same amount of funding or what events will lead to a reduction in their budget. In order to hedge resources, services will at times conduct themselves in less than an honorable fashion-Morgan that organizations often pad their budgets to defend their own interests and projects. 
23
25
Competition between services is also fueled by organizational identity. According to sociologists Stuart Albert and David Whetten, when members of an organization respond to the question, -who are we?‖ organizational identity is the result. 
26
When two organizations exist within a larger organization such as military services within the military writ large, organizational identities have a tendency to polarize individuals into their respective services. Due to the connection between an individual's identity and self-esteem, the service member cares about the perceptions others make about their organization or service. 
27
28
Organizational identity fuels the notion of cognitive identification, which is more than mere identification with an organization. Cognitive identification is an individual's cognitive perception of oneness with an organization. 
29
Cognitive identification is much stronger then organizational identification because the service member has been inculcated with not only the service's identity but also with its values, history, essence, and sense of pride. Essentially, cognitive identification occurs when the service member adopts the culture of the service he belongs to.
Every organization has a culture. In the military this is referred to as service culture and is different than military culture, which is addressed in Chapter Three. According to James Wilson organizational culture is a -persistent, patterned way of thinking about the central tasks and human relationships within an organization…culture is to an organization what personality is to an individual.‖ 
30
31
Subsequently, service members have gained a greater sense of service identity and have strengthened their cognitive identification through years of service. Therefore loyalty to that service has also increased when individuals achieve high positions of authority because they have spent, in most cases, the majority of their life in that service. Thus, 
29
30
Certain types of organizational personalities may increase the likelihood of conflict between services. According to several researchers, within the military there are greater numbers of individuals who favor competition and conflict as a means of dispute resolution than those who do not. 
32
Another powerful factor that contributes to the competitive environment of interservice rivalries is the notion of prestige. Robert Gilpin appropriately observed, -The reputation for strength is what we call prestige.‖ 33 In his statement, Gilpin was equating strength to power, which is a strong motivator for organizations to gain additional prestige. To a military service, gaining prestige provides considerable ability to influence other services and organizations, or even the decisions of the state. It also provides organizations with numerous benefits such as additional funding, competitive people, notoriety, and fame. However, the prestige an organization has garnered may not provide the hoped-for power and sway. According to one political scientist, it is easy to exaggerate the emotional significance of prestige. 
34
35
36
37
Inter-service rivalries seem to be ubiquitous; however, they are always over something different. Whether it is the budget, equipment, each service's role in the nation's defense, or some other issue, each instance of interservice rivalry is a different issue.
Why then, are inter-service rivalries not referred to as inter-service disputes? Disputes are not long term, personality dependent, and are usually resolved after a relatively short period. The disagreement between Goering and Raeder was merely a dispute between senior leaders over the appropriation of air forces. Yet, the issues that Goering and Raeder were debating go much deeper than simply the numbers of aircraft.
Functional specialization, organizational identity, and attempts to gain prestige provide a corrosive environment and spur competition between the services, but they are not the root cause for disputes. Moreover, there are a number of different causal explanations for a particular dispute, but each one is traceable to a service seeking to maintain its existence by staying relevant. Because the environment is continually changing services continually assess and change their doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, and facilities (DOTMLPF) in order to remain relevant.
Consider a pot of water that is sitting on the stove. The water will never boil until heat is applied. In the boiling water metaphor, inter-service disputes resulting from changes in DOTMLPF provide the heat that intensifies the rivalry until it boils over. As a service adapts to the changing environment, it changes various, though not necessarily all, aspects within the DOTMLPF.
In the late 1920s Karl Becker, the head of the ballistics and munitions section of the German Army's Weapons Testing Division, was enthralled with the rocket's military industrial technology base. 
41
The changes in the DOTMLPF that result from the introduction of a new radical technology provide the catalyst for interservice disputes. As the system expands and grows it begins to infringe on areas that another service considers to fall within its own realm as a functional specialty. Consider the tree metaphor that was previously used. As the tree grows it competes for resources and funding with the tree that is beside it, i.e.
another service. There is competition over resources but not necessarily any conflict.
However, when large branches begin to develop, in this example it is the radical new system, they will soon be physically touching the tree that is next to it. When the branches begin to come in contact with one another the contact represents overlaps in a service's DOTMLPF. Consider the Navy's intention to develop the flat deck carrier during the Revolt of the Admirals episode which would have enabled it to operate longrange attack aircraft capable of carrying atomic weapons. The Navy adjusted their DOTMLPF and the result was the development of the carrier. As this system grew, i.e.
the large branches, it began to come in contact with another service's DOTMLPF, the Air Force bomber. Conflict naturally ensued. Similarly, when the Army began developing its rocket the system continued to grow until it began to come in contact with the Luftwaffe.
Do service perceptions matter? Before answering this important question, a definition is in order. Robert Jervis defined perception as a process of cognition in which observation of the world forms the actor's beliefs resulting in the actor's psychological milieu-perception forms the world as the actor sees it and becomes the actor's reality. 
42
Determining why it matters is perhaps more important. Service perceptions are important because they shape the service's behavior in response to how it perceives the world around it. A very powerful relationship exists between perception and the resulting behavior. Indeed, Ap Dijksterhuis and Ad van Knippenberg, two Dutch psychologists, posited that perception is perhaps the strongest influence to behavior. 
43
Perception is certainly important to those who have something at stake in the rivalry.
Based on their perspective, actors will form different perceptions and draw different conclusions about the outcome of an inter-service rivalry. For example, the Army's acquisition of organic attack helicopters during the Vietnam War illuminates the importance of perception and illustrates how an organization perceives an outcome influences other decisions. Moreover, the services in the midst of the rivalry are not the only ones that matter. Using the Helicopter example, four perspectives were especially significant: those of the Army, Air Force, DoD, and the Soviet Union.
The drafters of the Howze Report, sometimes seen as the Magna Carta of Army aviation, were clearly aware that in proposing a massive increase in Army aviation, including the use of Army rotary-wing aircraft in an attack role, that they were treading on extremely sensitive ground with regard to the division of roles and missions between the Army and Air Force. 
44
45
46
47
The first perspective is that of the Army. It is certainly easy to argue that the helicopter gunship was a positive outcome. Essential in past as well as current conflicts, the Army considers it imperative to its overall force structure. The Army would certainly agree that the gunship, having proved itself in combat, and the eventual development of the attack helicopter, were overwhelmingly positive additions to the force.
The second perspective is that of the Air Force. From its vantage point, the Air Force leadership did not agree that the Army should acquire attack helicopters and fought their acquisition. The Air Force argued that attack helicopters provided close air support (CAS), an Air Force mission-incidentally, it remains an Air Force mission today.
According to the 1947 Key West Agreement, the Air Force claimed the Army did not have the right to usurp the mission. Thus, from the Air Force perspective, the Army was infringing on its role in national defense. Air Force perception of the matter was an even larger pill to swallow. Analyst Ian Horwood recounted that the Air Force sought to cash in on the Vietnam conflict's escalation as a source of growing potential for prestige and budgetary largesse by carving out a role for itself in Southeast Asia. 
48
The third perspective is that of the Department of Defense. Given its position in the government's structure, its perspective was necessarily from the top down. As the oversight agency for all major military acquisitions, DoD either approved or disapproved the funding. However, DoD was also concerned with prosecuting the Vietnam War as well as meeting the larger Soviet threat through the US's containment strategy.
Subsequently, DoD's perspective provided a broader perception of the rivalry and influenced the outcome. Even though DoD evaluators determined that attack helicopters 
46
47
48
could not respond to a prolonged Soviet armor threat and they added a considerable increase to the defense budget, Army attack aviation did support the Kennedy administration's transition from massive retaliation to flexible response. 
49
Thus, DoD's perception was that the rivalry served the greater good of US strategy.
This was not the only time DoD drastically increased its defense budget to duplicate capabilities in order to support the larger imperatives of US strategy. In the 1950s, both the Army and Air Force competed to produce a functional ICBM. Even though the Air Force and the Army possessed competing programs, the DoD adopted both systems at considerable cost to support President Dwight Eisenhower's massive retaliation strategy. 
50
52
The healthy tension that interservice rivalry produces is not harmful as it forces another service to do something better, faster, or develop an entirely new process.
Without competition, organizations have a tendency to stagnate. 
53
Consider the Air Force's development of the ICBM in the 1950s. Not only was the Army developing a rocket, which provided substantial tension, but there was also considerable intra-service rivalry in the Air Force as well. Both sources of tension provided the impetus for creativity and innovation.
According to Owen R. Cote, disputes over various aspects of the DOTMLPF can produce innovation. 
54
The U.S. Navy and Fleet Ballistic Missiles,‖ Cote argued that competition works independently of other influences and spurs innovation amongst the individual services.
Each service wants to maintain its perception of itself as an independent and relevant organization, thus when other services encroach upon its perceived area of expertise, tensions rise and a reaction occurs. Take, for example, the -Revolt of the Admirals‖ where a new technology, the atomic bomb, had been introduced into the security environment. The Air Force and the Navy had an -interservice dispute‖ over service roles and missions regarding the delivery of the atomic device. The Air Force was able to remain the sole proprietor for strategic bombing. Shortly afterwards, the Navy was developing the Trident missile for its submarines. In return, Cote chronicled how the USAF responded to the Navy's newly emerging nuclear role by enhancing missile accuracy and developing the counterforce doctrine. 55
Inter-service rivalries have spanned oceans, time, and cultures and are not going away.
With the increase in price for advanced technologies and as services expand into the 
53
Tactics reigned supreme in Prussia. The system concentrated on the nuts and bolts of the military profession.
-Holger H. Herwig
Colin Grey once wrote, -Germans cannot help but be Germans.‖
1
This powerful influence, along with the role of inter-service rivalry and numerous other factors that degraded the Luftwaffe, provided the impetus for the Luftwaffe to develop the Fi 103 in an attempt to re-establish its own prestige and that of Germany.
This chapter continues to lay the foundations for the ferocity of the inter-service rivalry and the development of technological innovations at Peenemünde. It first illustrates that Prussian influence shaped the German military culture, which provided a sense of deep pride and nationalism in the fatherland as well as a source for latent aggression. The second portion of the chapter discusses the factors that led to the Luftwaffe's decline and why it was incapable of protecting German cities from the onslaught of Allied airpower. When the German military culture and inability to defend the fatherland are coupled with the fierce inter-service rivalry between the Luftwaffe and the German army that was discussed in the previous chapter, the reasons for the development of the Fi 103 and A-4 rockets-the so-called -terror weapons‖-becomes much clearer.
Ironically, for all of the influence that Prussia wielded in the German military as well as with other nations throughout the world, Prussia was not a nation. Although Prussia was the most powerful and largest state within the German empire and later the Weimar Republic, it never aspired to become a nation and was content with its current status.
2
For all of its efforts during the Napoleonic Wars and in fighting three swift, decisive wars against Denmark, Austria, and France between 1864 and 1871 that accompanied the process of German unification, Hitler dissolved it in 1935 when he formulated a German national state. 
3
To see why the Prussian military overwhelmingly influenced German military culture, one does not have far to look. Prussian military campaigns, their military education system, great officers, and organizing principles display a strong and proud military heritage. The military successes are easily discernible. Victories over Napoleon at Leipzig and Waterloo; quick and decisive mid-19th century triumphs over Denmark, Austria, and France; as well as a -near victory‖ against overwhelming odds in World War I establishes a trend that victory is still possible when up against what appear to be insurmountable odds. 
4
The Prussian military education system and the Kriegsschule were just as noteworthy.
Academically rigorous and demanding, the educational system produced tactically proficient and well-educated officers. There should not be any shock in that. When the -icon‖ himself, General Carl von Clausewitz, was the director of the academy and oversaw and ensured that the educational system was befitting a Prussian officer, only the best and brightest would have gained entrance to the school. In fact, one scholar noted that Prussian officers from cadet to corps commander must have felt harassed by the army system due to numerous hurdles: entrance and term exams, written and oral exams, continuity in values, military thought, systems, and institutions from the Prussian to the German armies created a common reference point to a Prusso-German Army that, aside from technological advances and other obvious differences such as uniforms, greatly resembled its Prussian forebear. 
10
11
12
13
The first institution was that of Beruf: the sacred notion that every individual has a greater, almost mystical calling. There are no words in the English language entirely equivalent to the word Beruf although -calling‖ comes close. In his The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Max Weber asserted that Beruf originated in Luther's translation of the Bible and then spread throughout the Germanic world. 
14
Much of the German philosophy views the state as the instrument of the Universal Will in the eternal progress-a conception that exalts patriotism. The Emperor rules by divine right, is answerable only to God, the Prussian god, partial to his chosen people. Officials are trained to loyalty and obedience. Higher education prepares for public service in the departments of justice, medicine, and instruction. Everything is woven into the fabric of the state. The history of the people is glorified, their mission is proclaimed, their culture must extend throughout the world. The military system enforces loyalty to the Emperor and the fatherland. Allegiance is imperative, obedience must be unquestioned, devotion to the state is, first and last, the duty of every citizen. 
15
abandoning personal and egoistic goals in order to obtain the goals of the national community, and the prized place of duty and its execution with devotion and unrelenting thoroughness. 
16
From Beruf, Germans acquired a sense of duty to serve their nation in whatever capacity they could muster, whether as a member of the military or in some other fashion that contributed to the nation's greater good. The strong sense of duty that permeated society cannot be underestimated. Discussing the degree to which Germans were faithful to their nation, one observer described the German people as -animated by a sense of duty and an earnest devotion to work which are hardly to be surpassed in the world.‖ 18
Especially evident in the military, a soldier's duty was an -iron necessity‖ bound by his moral obligation to his nation and to fight for whatever cause his leaders championed. subordinate leaders. 
26
27
28
29
Isabel V. Hull makes an argument similar to Citino's but carries it even further. Hull argues that the German army developed a uniquely violent and genocidal military culture, characterized by institutional extremism, which she referred to as Vernichtungskrieg, the doctrine and warfare of annihilation. 
30
Stimson, the Secretary of War under President Roosevelt, accused the German people of not only being aggressive but having an aggressive nature. 
31
32
33
Angriffsgeist with his aggressive tactics applied in armored warfare against the allies in North Africa. Only through the relentless pursuit of the offense could a commander achieve what Clausewitz wrote as -the principal way to achieve our object‖ in war which was the -destruction of the enemy forces.‖ 34
Perhaps the clearest manifestation of Angriffsgeist is in the German conquest of Poland and France during the Blitzkrieg: lightning war that focused on short and sharp decisive battles to overcome an adversary. Although many have thought that Blitzkrieg originated in order to avoid trench warfare, the concept of short and quick decisive wars was first instituted by Moltke the Elder. 
35
36
37
38
33
39
40
46
47
Dornberger's hostility towards the Luftwaffe was also evident in his comments.
Although he wrote in his book that he and his team worked with the Luftwaffe in the closest bonds of camaraderie, his description of their relationship was a poor assessment. 
48
49
50
51
Although von Braun consistently denied that he took an active role in Nazi party politics, his sense of duty ingrained from Beruf, instilled German nationalism deep within him. Von Braun's comments in 1972 confirm his pride in the fatherland: -I deeply and sincerely regret the victims of the rockets; but there were victims on both sides. I repeatedly raised protests against the misuse of the rockets as tools of destruction. But war is war, and since my country found itself at war I had the conviction that I did not have the right to bring moral criteria into the matter. My obligation was to help win the war, whether I had sympathy for the government or not. I had none.‖ 
52
53
These three men were aware that Germany was losing the war and they undoubtedly knew of the allied bombing of German cities that was happening on almost a daily basis.
Their sense of nationalism and ferocity imbued by Beruf and Bewegungskrieg increased the competitive spirit within the German inter-service rivalry and drove them each to develop weapons to gain back Germany's glory.
Initially, Hitler thought very highly of the Luftwaffe and believed it to be a major factor in Germany's archi-prêts for war. 
54
56
Once thought to be the crown jewel of the Wehrmacht, the Luftwaffe's performance gradually declined, and with it the air force's privileged position. Its decline can be attributed to a plethora of complex issues: inadequate preparations, myopic doctrine, a 
55
56
Hitler's lack of accurate battle damage assessments also contributed to the Luftwaffe's decline. Senior leaders, well aware of the negative reports documenting losses coming from the front lines, were not always forthcoming with bad news. 
64
Unaware of many of the losses, Hitler pushed his forces harder because he did not possess accurate information. The Luftwaffe felt the repercussions of these decisions for years to come.
Hitler's lack of operational aviation experience was another issue with which the Luftwaffe leadership had to contend. His only military experience consisted of duty as an Army corporal during WWI and his lack of familiarity with aviation issues inhibited his comprehension of aviation logistics, maintenance, and training issues. 
66
Leadership was another major factor that contributed to its demise and loss of prestige. Sociologists have noted that leaders in authoritarian regimes often possess considerable power stemming from their personal relationships and ability to build power and prestige within the organization-an accurate assessment of Nazi senior leadership. 
68
64
65
Hermann Goering, the number two man in the Third Reich and commander of the Luftwaffe, was one such individual. Murray portrayed Goering as a man with a -mental framework…of a squadron-level fighter pilot…ignorant of supply, logistics, strategy, aircraft capabilities, technology, and engineering-in other words, just about everything having to do with airpower.‖ 70 What Goering lacked in experience and common sense, he made up for with anti-Semitism, poor leadership, dismal managerial skills, and nonexistent strategic foresight. Goering, who was more concerned with his personal conquest for prestige and power, contributed more to the Luftwaffe's demise and loss of prestige than any other leader in the Luftwaffe.
Prior to the war Goering, in his capacity as the head of the air ministry, determined the direction for industrial and technological advancements. He disliked dealing with the highly technical matters of aircraft maintenance and production and did not put much thought into the decisions he made. In fact, many of Goering's decisions were simply echoes of Hitler's will; Goering's refusal to analyze the Führer's directives provided a lack of direction to the poorly led air industry. One such decision occurred early in the war. On 7 February 1940, Goering signed a decree that would have disastrous effects on the Luftwaffe. The order stopped all Luftwaffe developmental in order to prioritize aircraft that only showed promise of - [completion]  Another individual who lacked strategic thinking was Ernst Udet. Chosen to lead the Aviation Technical Office, Udet was a fine actor, cartoonist and noted bon viveur but lacked the requisite experience to handle the technical requirements of advanced aircraft.
When one of the radar program developers explained to Udet that radar would locate an aircraft in a fifty-kilometer area at night or in fog, he reportedly exclaimed, -If you introduce that thing you'll take the fun out of flying!‖ 73 Udet, as well as Jeschonnekanother senior officer with a pivotal role in the leadership-committed suicide after succumbing to Goering's leadership abilities. Other senior Luftwaffe leaders included a former cigar salesman and a former inmate confined for morphine addiction. 
74
Poor decisions, lack of leadership, and the Luftwaffe's inability to regenerate considerable combat power proved a significant disadvantage as it entered the Battle of Britain. Historian Edward Westermann observed that when Germany entered the Battle of Britain in 1940, the Luftwaffe was already short of pilots and aircraft from its losses in previous campaigns, but its flak arm possessed a numerical strength of nearly half million men-a example of an operationally lopsided military. 
76
78
79
in particular of the industrial workers.‖ 84 Bombing of German targets would continue through the war and would not ease until after the destruction of Dresden. By October of 1942, Goering was already retiring from the war effort and devoted much of his energy to acquiring art and other priceless artifacts from the different corners of Germany's occupied lands. No matter--Hitler had already lost faith in the Reichsmarschall and his once powerful and technologically advanced air force.
According to Michael Walzer, combat contains latent fear and hysteria and presses individuals towards fearful measures and criminal behavior when they are faced by what they perceive as a -Supreme Emergency.‖ 85 As an example, Walzer cited allied terror bombing and argued that since -Nazism was an ultimate threat to everything decent,‖ the ends could justify the means. However, after the allies gained air superiority and Operation Overlord had been deemed a success, were the Germans still an imminent threat? 86 Although much of the German people's resilience can be attributed to Beruf, and their fighting spirit remained high, one could hardly claim that they were. What about German reprisals against the United Kingdom and other targets in Europe?
Germany was in a supreme emergency indeed and by the time the first weapons were launched, Operation Overlord was a week old and the Russians were nearing Warsaw.
Beruf and Angriffsgeist were powerful factors that that drove Dornberger and von Braun onward to produce an operational rocket. Dornberger, who had nobly served his nation in two world wars, was a proud officer that knew what the inside of an enemy prison was like. Von Braun, the aristocratic Prussian, was acculturated within the Army program at Peenemünde. Both saw the effects of allied bombing on German cities and mustered every effort to preserve and protect Germany. Additionally, Milch watched his beloved Luftwaffe crash in flames over the course of several years which allowed Germany to suffer greater and more intense bombing as the allies gained air superiority.
84 Alan Levine, The strategic bombing of Germany, 1940-1945 (Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers, 1992), 36.
85 Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars (New York: Perseus Books, 1977), 251. The term supreme emergency is from Winston Churchill's 1939 speech about Britain's predicament. Walzer argues that within the political rhetoric is a fear that is far beyond the ordinary fearfulness of war and thus, there is a danger to which that fear corresponds a certain measure that can be taken. 
86
Chapter 4
The following points may be deemed of decisive significance in the history of technology: we have invaded space with our rocket and for the first time--mark this well--have used space as a bridge between two points on the earth; we have proved rocket propulsion practicable for space travel.
-Walter Dornberger
It is possible, even probable, that the enemy may be able to launch something else at a longer range and of a different type than the V-1.
-Lord Dudley, Midland Civil Defense Commissioner
After the initial German campaign successes between 1939 and 1942, the tide of the war began to turn in favor of the allies. The industrial strength of the US along with its almost limitless strategic resources enabled the allies to rapidly replace losses on the battlefield and maintain persistence in the bombing campaigns against German industry. 1
The Germans did not possess the internal capacity to conduct prolonged campaigns; indeed, the German way of war intended to secure victory quickly and decisively. The strategic resources required to continue development of the technologically advanced V-2 rockets were soon in short supply, and the Führer's initial lack of interest in the program did not help the situation. When the Luftwaffe introduced the Fi 103, the fierce, preexisting rivalry between the services escalated into a battle for precious resources in order to save the fatherland from allied destruction.
Additionally, there was a change in German thinking over the efficacy of morale bombing. In the doctrine manual Walther Wever developed for the Luftwaffe, The Conduct of the Aerial War, he rejected Giullio Douhet's assertions that morale or -terror‖ 1 When America entered the war its industrial capacity was only at 30% due to the effects of the Great Depression on the economy. The war effort enabled hundreds of thousands to return to work that had previously been unemployed.
bombing would secure victory.
2
3
This chapter describes the fierce inter-service rivalry between the Army and the Service pride had increased the rocket program's annual funding to what von Braun referred to as -the big time,‖ when it had previously been much lower. 
5
6
The rocket program at Peenemünde was intended as a -joint‖ venture, and the services initially worked together in an amiable relationship. The Luftwaffe's effort in support of the rocket venture was met with enthusiasm by those in charge of the Army program, who were impressed by the air force's willingness to advance their cause. 9 Arthur Rudolph, one of the Peenemünde scientists, was amazed at how -new, fantastic, [and] un-bureaucratic‖ the Luftwaffe systems were. 
10
11
The Luftwaffe's construction department, which had a reputation for producing lavish yet functional buildings, planned to execute the majority of the construction. Although the services were convivial towards one another, the rivalry was still present. The Luftwaffe was soon lured away by other priorities, namely airfield construction, requiring the army to pick up the construction slack. 
12
Subsequently, cooperation between the services was short-lived and the Air Ministry officially separated Peenemünde-West from the joint command on April 1, 1938, after notifying the Army that the 1937-38 payment of 1 million marks into the development and test budget of Peenemünde-East would not be continued. Perhaps the most symbolic representation of the inter-service rivalry was the fence that the Luftwaffe erected around Peenemünde West shortly thereafter. 
13
-separation was neither a direct product of interservice rivalry nor of a Luftwaffe policy to assert its independence.‖ 
14
The Versailles Treaty did not necessarily forbid the rockets, which Dornberger originally conceived as a more powerful extension of artillery; therefore the army was technically within its rights to pursue the rocket systems. 
15
16
18
19
20
17
18
Concealment and Revelation (New York: Vintage, 1989), 46. 20
21 Dornberger,
88.
22
24
The primary force behind the development of the Fi 103 was the competition between the Army and the Luftwaffe spurred by either actual or perceived threats to the Luftwaffe's DOTMLPF. 
25
26
27
The immense resource requirements that the A-4 required for development threatened to reduce the Luftwaffe's funding for its own programs. Milch, who was experienced in aviation matters, knew that resources were the lifeblood of an air force and saw the problems the A-4 program could create. Cote identified the budget as a primary source of contention between services, and argued that budgetary concerns motivated services to adapt. Between 1925 and 1933, Germany allocated a modest 10 million marks annually for aircraft purchases, but that rapidly increased when it began allocating almost 35 percent of its industrial production capability to war materials. 
28
29
30
Milch, in his role as the Generalluftzeugmeister, undoubtedly knew that the Luftwaffe was decreasing its independent operations and increasing its ground support mission along the Eastern Front in Russia. 
32
34
35
The development of the Fi 103 was a gamble because it was developed rapidly during a time of war. Its benefits were unknown, it was costly (although nothing compared to the V-2), and enemy counter-measures had not been adequately considered. Having observed this, Rosen noted the risk involved with wartime innovations: -This type of innovation is strongly characterized by the need to develop strategies for managing 
31
33
34
(Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 2002), 178. 35
uncertainty.‖ 36 Milch must have known he was assuming great risk when Hitler, after seeing the A-4 rocket at Kummersdorf, was not impressed by the displays and issued his backhanded compliment of -es war doch gewaltig -well, it was grand.‖
The Luftwaffe's move to begin the development of the Fi 103 naturally alarmed Dornberger. On 9 October 1942, several months after Milch directed the RLM to fund the A-4 program, Dornberger sent a memorandum to von Braun requesting a status on the Luftwaffe's program. Dornberger's memorandum read: -Lately there have been many remarks from government offices, firms, etc that the A-4 program no longer possesses the importance ascribed to it by the people who work on it. In that connection, confidential hints have been made that -Cherry Stone‖…is far more valuable and has every chance of catching up and passing the A-4 program, if not making it altogether illusory.‖ 37 Von Braun reassured Dornberger that -the poor accuracy and shorter range of the cruise missile made it less than competitive‖ with their rocket. 
38
Having been a member of the original team at Peenemünde, Dornberger should not have been surprised by the Luftwaffe's attempts to start its own program. Dornberger was already very alarmed at the state of his own program's resources. Dornberger said that the program was allotted only enough to keep it alive and that their current level of resource allocation -prevented us from living and did not allow us to die.‖ 39 Although the rocket program was already one of the top funded projects in the German military, Dornberger knew that the Fi 103 could potentially reduce the resources the Army received and required for the A-4. This was an astute observation, since the highest echelons in the German military held unfavorable opinions of the rocket program due to its exorbitant cost. Hitler, who was technologically savvy and normally in favor of 
36
37
38
39 Dornberger,
70.
Concerned that the Fi 103 would drain resources from his rocket program, which he assessed as already underfunded, Dornberger argued that the A-4 was a better substitute for the bomber:
Ever since the huge bomber losses during the attack on England in 1940, my colleagues and I had been firmly convinced that defeat in the air on the western front could be prevented, if at all, only by the employment of guided missiles of very great range and effect. In the long run the Luftwaffe would not be able to afford the continued loss of valuable flying crews. A bomber was shot down after an average of five or six flights over England, [sic] if it could carry only a total of six to eight tons of bombs during its active existence, and if the total loss of a bomber, including the cost of training the crew, were estimated at about thirty times the price of an A-4 (38,000 marks), then it was obvious that the A-4 came off best. 
40
41
42
Dornberger's comments are indicative of an Army officer in the midst of a fierce inter-service rivalry that was trying to ensure the success of an Army program as well as defend the Fatherland. His comments illustrated disdain for the Luftwaffe when he suggested that the Luftwaffe bombers would always be shot down. Whether Dornberger knew that the cost of one A-4 equaled one hundred V-1s is unknown but he was definitely notified by von Braun that the Luftwaffe program was substantially cheaper. 
43
40 Dornberger,
71. 41
42
Those who advocate accelerated development of aerial weapons are proceeding on the principle that terror is best answered by terror and that rocket attacks against England will necessarily lead to a decrease in missions flown against the Reich. Even assuming that the large long-distance rockets were available in unlimited quantities, which it so far is not, previous experience suggests that this reasoning is unjustified. On the contrary, those elements in England who formerly opposed the use of terror-bombing against German's civilian population…have been moved, since our rocket attacks, to urge their government to launch massive raids against our densely populated areas. 
61
Hitler. 62
After the bombing of Hamburg, the intensity of the rivalry between the Army and the Luftwaffe increased to its highest levels. Each service viewed their Wunderwaffen as the panacea that would save the Fatherland. Additionally, both the Fi 103 and A-4 had gained powerful advocates in the highest echelons of the Third Reich. of the Luftwaffe, naturally wanted his service to be the first to inflict terror on the British. Never having any talent for procedural processes or an understanding of resource allocation but greedy for revenge, Goering increased one particular order of Fi 103s from 5,000 flying bombs to fifty thousand. 
63
Speer's continued support for the rocket program through the remaining years of the war caused a major diversion of German production capacity and raw materials from other manufacturing requirements and continually raised the ire of the Luftwaffe; they knew their program cost was only a fraction of the rocket program. The allocation of resources to both programs is almost incomprehensible; after the war the USSBS estimated that the industrial effort and resources expended for the production of both the Fi 103 and A-4 was the equivalent of 24,000 fighter aircraft. 64 Although Speer's diversion of resources has often been criticized by WWII scholars for leading to the demise of the Wehrmacht, the loss of production facilities from allied bombing would have been unable to process a large percentage of resources had the diversion never took place.
The population of Peenemünde was not the only ones who knew that separate programs existed during the summer of 1943. Obtained by a dissident German, the -Oslo Report‖ informed the British government of a -top-secret research establishment…for long-range rockets...‖ 65 Initially thought to be products of nothing more than imagination of the -Jules Verne variety,‖ the RAF soon learned that the programs were indeed genuine. 
66
67
Hydra brought the realities of war home to everyone at Peenemünde. Up until that time the inhabitants had undergone air raids and seen numerous enemy aircraft; however, none had ever directly attacked the facility. The reality of war might have been a greater shock had the members of both services not been assimilated into their service culture and grown closer to one another. Having served as a part of the Army team since before the inception of Peenemünde, von Braun et al had been acculturated into the Army's institutional culture. Anthropologists refer to enculturation as the steady, relentless internalization of a particular set of group norms and ideals. 
68
69
Walther. Even in the midst of the aftermath, inter-service rivalries were still strong. 
67
70
71
74
the A-4 into full production. According to Dornberger, Kammler professed his disbelief in the project and described the rocket as a -chimera without prospect of realization,‖ yet he was ironically the one man Himmler charged with A-4 production. 75 With Himmler's installment of Kammler, it was only a matter of time until the SS would fully control the A-4 program. After a futile attempt to assassinate Hitler in July 1944, Himmler gained full control of the rocket program when the entire Army officer corps was placed -permanently in the dog house.‖ 76 Dornberger and von Braun viewed the rockets as weapons; however, their motivations were based on obligations that arose out of Beruf and Angriffskrieg. Although both certainly had some personal interest in the rockets, national pride and a sense of duty were the paramount concerns that provided the impetus for their work once the war started.
Himmler, on the other hand, saw the A-4 as a means to increase his power base in the Third Reich. Described by his biographer Roger Manvell as -perpetually militant and power loving,‖ Himmler wanted to control the Third Reich himself. 
77
78
As Himmler increasingly gained control of the Army rocket program, the Luftwaffe initiated the second blitz on London with several Fi 103s on 13 June, only one week after the allied landing at Normandy. This proved an inauspicious start at first, as only a small number of the total flying bombs landed in London. Soon afterward, however, the Luftwaffe was rapidly launching them and passed the thousand-mark point only ten days 
75
77
78
87
88
89
90
91
Approximately 2,759 V-1s threatened the port directly; guns and balloons destroyed 1,766 --a rate of sixty-four percent. In total, the Germans only hit the port with 211 Fi 103s causing minimal damage to the strategically important asset. 
92
Producing over 35,000 Fi 103s, the Germans actually launched less than a third because the allies overran their launching positions as they moved east towards Berlin. 
94
95
When Himmler took control of the Volkssturm, the citizen's militia, late in 1944, Goering tried to regain his prestige and planned to incorporate members of the Hitler Youth into flight training. 
96
93
V-2s at England from various locations in Europe. 
98
99
Hardly decisive in a war where resources mattered, the A-4 rockets were coveted more by the Americans who realized their potential against a future adversary in the East.
The Germans were unable to learn from their own war experience. They should have realized that the British did not succumb to the blitz during the battle of Britain four years earlier. Furthermore, they should have recognized that they themselves were still fighting fiercely after both the RAF and USAAF razed a long list of German cities. Hindsight being 20/20, the weapons more accurately represented each service's pride. However, that pride blinded them to devote immense resources towards their respective programs at the expense of other potentially more valuable endeavors.
Inter-service rivalry was but one of many problems besetting Germany during the war; however, it was one of the worst. Initially the rivalry concerned whether one service would be out done by the other. When there were signs of cooperation, competition took over. The secrecy of the programs simply polarized the groups further. As the war continued, the Luftwaffe's ability to protect the Fatherland was in jeopardy and 98 C.R. Williams, United States Strategic Bombing Survey-Report on the -CROSSBOW‖ Campaign: The Air Offensive Against V-Weapons, EW #60 (24 September 1945). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1945., 2 99 Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War, Volume VI: Triumph and Tragedy (New York: Houghton  Mifflin Company, Original printed in 1953, Reprint 1985), 47.  subsequently its prestige declined. The loss of prestige coupled with the perceptions of threats to its roles and missions, reinforced by individual notions of obligation and duty to Germany, created the Fi 103.
The two systems, intended to ensure the security of the fatherland, paradoxically reduced it by draining resources that could have been used elsewhere. Not only were the services in a race for resources but with the continual decline of the Luftwaffe, they were in a race to produce terror. Perhaps it is ironic then that although their hard work paid off and the rocket was employed, it was not the army that launched them, but the SS. continually fight for the sake of the fatherland, even while Jews by the millions were dying in camps. The great irony is that a workforce consisting of Jewish, as well as many other purported Untermenschen from the Dora-Mittelbau camp, provided much of the labor force to construct the A-4 rocket, the primary competitor to the Luftwaffe.
The second institution was that of Angriffsgeist, the spirit of attack. The rockets themselves were a reflection of the continual pursuit of the offensive as they provided Germany with an ability to strike the enemy at any time or place of its choosing.
Angriffsgeist also instilled an aggressive spirit in those involved in the Fi 103 and A-4 programs as well as the Wehrmacht writ large. Individuals in both service programs were imbued with an aggressiveness that motivated them to continually strive for an advantage against their fellow service whether it was Dornberger's attempt to use the rocket as a replacement for the bomber or Milch's attempt to thwart Army production. However, since aggressiveness was such a powerful force, it also provided Himmler and the SS with the impetus to seize the rocket program.
The chapter also argued that the Luftwaffe's loss of prestige was another factor that spurred the rivalry and motivated the Luftwaffe to develop the Fi 103. The loss of prestige, albeit not a primary factor, was the result of poor decisions, unpreparedness when the war began, doctrine that primarily supported Blitzkrieg, and leaders who were unfamiliar with the technical details of air power. When these factors, which individually would not have had a significant effect, were combined it created a cascade that had an overwhelmingly negative effect on the German Air Force.
Chapter four provided the narrative of the interservice rivalry. It incorporated the previous chapters' framework to depict a highly competitive environment fueled by the notions of Beruf and Angriffsgeist, the loyalties of senior officers to their services, the role of separate service cultures and identities that shaped perspectives, and the continual loss of prestige by the Luftwaffe. All of these powerful influences coalesced during the world's most destructive war to produce weapons considered by some as innovative wonders yet considered by others as devastating weapons that were meant to destroy lives and inflict terror.
The primary argument of this thesis was that Germany's rocket attacks were the result of an intense inter-service rivalry between the Luftwaffe and the Army and not necessarily the deliberate acts of a totalitarian regime that intended to inflict terror. The primary argument of this thesis can be rephrased to form three questions. The first question is -were Germany's rockets the product of an intense interservice rivalry?‖ The Army clearly did not develop its rocket program as a result of interservice rivalry.
When Becker first received permission to begin rocket development in 1929, the Luftwaffe did not even exist and Milch had not returned to the Air Force from Lufthansa.
Military culture provided a strong sense of nationalism, duty, and obligation to the Fatherland which powerfully influenced the rocket's initial development as a form of security as well as a boost to national prestige once it was completed. Von Braun's assertion that he was dreaming of space during the program's initial years is in all likelihood valid. Dornberger, having previously worked with Becker on the Paris gun, was determined to develop the rocket as a much larger artillery system. Individual motivations stemmed from a thirst for scientific and technical knowledge; a desire to move beyond the atmosphere, an interest in rockets, and a desire to advance mankind.
The development of the Fi 103 is much different. The environment that existed between the Army and Luftwaffe was caustic and wrought with distrust, jealousy, and contempt. Although the services possessed a congenial relationship at Peenemünde in the 1930s, it was short-lived and soon dissolved after cooperation failed. From that point on competition between the services was exacerbated by the war, the struggle for resources, individual personalities, service culture, and organizational identity. During the early years of the war the Luftwaffe was motivated to maintain its prestige and retain its self-anointed title as the most elite service in the Wehrmacht. In 1942 when the decision to develop the Fi 103 occurred, the Luftwaffe perceived that it was threatened by the Army in a number of different ways: loss of independence, roles, missions, resources, and service pride. With Goering's decree that everything that flies should be a part of -his‖ Luftwaffe, the rocket was a legitimate threat even though Dornberger envisioned it as an extension of artillery, a traditional army role.
Although Cologne had recently been bombed, the death toll and destruction was much lighter than other cities later in the war and the allies were not bombing with impunity; thus it is unlikely that the Fi 103 was initially developed as a reprisal weapon.
Furthermore, the destruction of Hamburg did not occur until the middle of 1943, nearly an entire year after Milch held his meeting with Fieseler to lay out the development plans.
Most of the discussion by Luftwaffe and Third Reich leaders involving the Fi 103 as a terror or reprisal weapon did not occur until much later in the war. Hitler did intend to -revisit‖ the invasion of England; however, there is little evidence to suggest that the Fi 103 was intended solely for this purpose. Thus, the Fi 103 was not developed purely as a terror weapon, although the idea was most likely ruminating. Clearly there is sufficient evidence to support the assertion that the Fi 103 was developed primarily as a result of the rivalry between services.
The second question is -did Germany intend to inflict terror?‖ To determine the answer we must first define our terms. When Hitler, Dornberger, and others in the Third Reich referred to the Fi 103 and A-4 as a replacement for the bomber they were referring to terror bombing. Terror bombing and morale bombing are synonymous and both terms refer to the intentional bombing of civilians in order to compel the government to surrender.
2
3
4
Von Braun did not specifically articulate that the rockets were intended for terror, but did acknowledge that Germany was at war and he supported the war effort by developing the rockets. He knew exactly what they were intended for but probably chose to place that in the back of his mind. Dornberger's comment that he wished -to pay the English back for the terrible sorrow that they have caused‖ has a more sinister connotation and speaks directly to the weapons as reprisal weapons. 
5
The third question is -Did the Germans inflict terror?‖ Intentions and actual behavior are drastically different. Hitler intended to drive the British to the point of surrender with his -strategic attacks‖ against London. Additionally, as illustrated previously in chapter four, not every target was within the purview of morale bombing. Striking targets such as Antwerp clearly were intended for operational purposes such as preventing the use of the deep water port, an important logistical hub for the allies. Hitler soon realized, however, that the weapons did not provide the results he wanted either operationally or strategically, yet the attacks continued. The sheer numbers fired as the war neared its end raises an interesting question regarding the employment of the V-weapons late in the war.
Once the Germans realized that the weapons were ineffective against strategic and operational targets, did they continue to inflict terror simply for terror's sake? In other words, did Hitler continue to use the rockets as a means to an end or did terror become the end?
There is some evidence to suggest that when the Germans realized that the war was unwinnable, they continued to fire the Fi 103 and A-4 merely to inflict damage on the Allies. First, consider the name of the weapons provided by Goebbels, Vergeltungswaffen. The name alone suggests German reprisals intended to terrorize the British population by inflicting a great degree of pain and suffering. Indeed, this is what Dornberger most likely meant when he stated he intended to repay the English for the sorrow they caused. Intended to punish the other party, reprisals satisfy an emotional need but they do not yield any additional benefit towards achieving military objectives.
The allied bombing of German cities for the duration of the war would have provided a powerful motivation to punish the British and the destruction of Dresden in February of 1945 would have only reinforced it. Furthermore, the German leadership would have known that morale bombing was ineffective during the Battle of Britain. Therefore, they would not have placed much faith in the rockets to achieve any strategic effects. If they did rely on morale bombing to effectively change the course of the war, it did not last for very long even though they fired thousands of Fi 103s and A-4s at London. One wonders what the Germans hoped to achieve by firing the A-4 at London after thousands of Fi 103s were unable to break the will of the British populations during the preceding months. Clearly there was no objective in mind and the Germans merely intended to inflict as much pain and suffering as they could on the populations.
Whether the Germans intended to inflict terror for terror's sake as a reprisal weapon or intended to use the Fi 103 and A-4 as a means of morale bombing is extremely difficult to determine. Different targets, nearly a ten month span of time, and de-centralized execution by the SS all contribute to different interpretations whether the weapons were linked to an objective or were simply for the sake of terror. Thus, subjectivity determines whether the rockets were merely a part of war, terror weapons, or terrorism. That, after all, is the point. magnetic compass monitoring an automatic pilot that contained a displacement gyro and two rate gyros for stability. A rudder prevented it from rolling since there were no ailerons on the wings. An aneroid pre-set in millibars of atmospheric pressure controlled the altitude. When the propeller made a set number of revolutions, a counter fired a detonator in the tail that locked the elevator in a neutral position, cut off rudder control, and deployed two hinged spoilers from the underside of the weapon, causing the missile to a dive onto its target. 
8
Pressurized gas caused a piston on the ramp to thrust forward, hurling the missile into the air. Once the missile had attained an initial operational speed of 200-mph, the pulsejet engine activated. At times, the Fi-103 was also air-launched by a modified Heinkel He 111 aircraft carrying the weapons below the fuselage of the aircraft. 
9
Known to the world as the V-2, the Germans referred to the rocket as the A-4. The -A‖ was the German word Aggregat (-unit‖ or -device‖), the -4‖ represented the fourth 8 Information provided by the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum 9 Information provided by the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum series of rocket, and the -2‖ in V-2 denoted that the rocket was the second vengeance weapon launched against England. Constructed of thin sheet steel around a wooden framework, the rocket was almost four stories high. Carrying a smaller warhead than the Fi-103, the nose cap was a fuse for detonating the 1,650 lb explosive upon impact. The instruments for guidance, control, radio, and electrical systems were underneath the warhead. The center of the rocket consisted of two half shells containing the propellant and fuel tanks and the tail section contained the motor, turbo pump, steam-generator, and associated plumbing. The motor, comprising the combustion chamber and nozzle, was made of steel, while the pumps consisted of steel and an aluminum-silicon alloy. 
10
13
12
11
Another episode of state terror occurred in the Soviet Union during the twentieth century. Although the Soviet Union did not exemplify democracy in any manner, Joseph Stalin possessed thoughts similar to Robespierre's when he purged a large majority of the military and other elites within the Soviet population between 1934 and 1938. By most accounts, Stalin's personal desire for power resulted in at least a million people executed with millions more arrested who later died in the gulags and work camps throughout the Soviet Union.
Another episode of state terror occurred in the Soviet Union during the twentieth century. Although the Soviet Union did not exemplify democracy in any manner, Joseph Stalin possessed thoughts similar to Robespierre's when he purged a large majority of the military and other elites within the Soviet population between 1934 and 1938. By most accounts, Stalin's personal desire for power resulted in at least a million people executed with millions more arrested who later died in the gulags and work camps throughout the Soviet Union.
22 Paul Ingram, -Structure, Affect and Identity as Bases of Organizational Competition and Cooperation,‖ The Academy of Management Annals Vol. 2, No. 1, 2008, 275-303, 277. 23 Gareth Morgan, Images of Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2006), 30. 24 The Hoover report, 1949-1953: A Citizen's Guide to the Progress of Federal Reorganization, from creation of the original Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government to the end of the first session of the 83d Congress, Volume 1, p. 6
17  
17  
which sprang the final solution to exterminate the Jews, was remarkable because Milch was part Jewish and Goering was aware of it! Walter Dornberger was the Army officer in charge of A-4 development during the war and had served in the Army since enlisting in 1914. Although he possessed a science background after earning a degree from the University of Berlin, Dornberger was a career military officer who served over four decades due to his love of Germany. Although there are numerous references to Dornberger as a dreamer of space exploration, Dornberger clearly articulated what his efforts in the rocket business aimed to achieve in a speech he gave to nearly 6,500 employees at Peenemünde in June of 1943: -the Third
senior leadership held the Luftwaffe in high regard. In fact, the Luftwaffe held itself in high regard. The Luftwaffe wanted only men -willing to risk life and limb for the Führer and Folk.‖ 58
57  
57  
70  
70  
74  
74  
82  
82  
Stephen Ambrose, D-Day (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1994), 31.   
British House of Commons Home Affairs committee. Project CONTEST: The government's counter terrorism strategy. Ninth report of2008-2009, 13.   
Irving, The Mare's Nest, 138   
Graham T. Allison and Philip Zelikow, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis. 2nd ed. (New York: Longman, 1999), 8.
National Security Newswire, -IAEA Worried That Iran Might be Pursuing Nuclear Warhead,‖ Nuclear Threat Initiative, 18 February 2010, http://www.globalsecuritynewswire.org/gsn/nw_20100218_7848.php
Nazila Fathi, -Wipe Israel Off the Map Iranian Says,‖ New York Times, 26 October 2005, http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/26/world/africa/26iht-iran.html
Bret Bowden and Michael T. Davis, Terror: From Tyrannicide to Terrorism (Queensland: University of Queensland Press, 2008), 1.
Gérard Chaliand and Arnaud Blind, -Assassins and Zealots‖  The History of Terrorism from Antiquity to Al Qaeda (Los Angeles, University of California Press, 2007), 55.
Chaliand and Blind,‖ 57.   
Chaliand and Blind,‖ 72.   
Sun Tzu, The Art of War, 115.   
Adrian Axinte, -DRACULA: Between Myth and Reality,‖ Stanford University Romanian Student Association, http://stanford.edu/group/rsa/_content/_public/_htm/dracula.shtml.
Hoffman, Inside Terrorism, 3.    
Hoffman, Inside Terrorism, 3.   
Hoffman, Inside Terrorism, 3.   
Robert Conquest, The Great Terror: A Reassessment (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990),485-487.   
Conquest, The Great Terror: A Reassessment,
53.
Hoffman, Inside Terrorism, 15.   
Niccolo Machiavelli, The Prince and the Discourses (New York: Modern Library, 1950), 63.
Niccolo Machiavelli. The Prince.
Roderick Macfarquar and Michael Schoenals, Mao's Last Revolution (Boston: Harvard University Press,  2006), 257.
Robert Gellately & Ben Kiernan, The Specter of Genocide: Mass Murder in Historical Perspective (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 267.
Bertrand Barère, Memoirs of Bertrand Barère (London: H.S. Nichols, 1896), 266.
Bertrand Barère, Memoirs of Bertrand Barère (London: H.S. Nichols, 1896), 266.
Barère, Memoirs of Bertrand Barère, 267.   
Edmund Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France and on the Proceedings in Certain societies in London (London: J. Dodsley in Pall Mall, 1792), 190.
Hoffman, Inside Terrorism, 23.   
Sami Zeidan, -Desperately Seeking Definition: The International Community's Quest for Identifying the Specter of Terrorism,‖ Cornell International Law Journal (2006) 491-492, #36.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, Rev. ed. Michael Eliot Howard, and Peter Paret, (Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton University Press, 1984), 87.   
For a succinct review of the 2006 Israel-Hezbolah conflict: William Arkin, Divining Victory: Airpower in the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah War (Maxwell, AFB: Air University Press, 2007).
Stephen Turnbull, Ghengis Khan and the Mongol Conquests 1190-1400 (Oxford: Osprey Publishing,  2003), 76.
John Nagl, Learning to Eat Soup with a Knife (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002), 26.
Nagl, Learning to Eat Soup with a Knife, 26.
Alexander B. Downes, Targeting Civilians in War (New York: Cornell University Press, 2008), 7.
Eric Larrabee, Commander in Chief: Franklin Delano Roosevelt, His Lieutenants, and Their War 1st ed.  (New York: Harper & Row, 1987), 105.
-Armed Forces: Interservice Affection.‖ TIME Magazine, 10 August 1959. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,811187,00.html
Eric Ash, -Purple Virtues: Curing Unhealthy Interservice Rivalries,‖ Unpublished thesis for graduation from the US Air Force Air War College, 1999. The author suggests that rivalries may have first started by Indo-European -Sea Peoples,‖ such as the Philistines around 2000 BC.
Rhoads Murphey, Ottoman Warfare, 1500-1700 (Rutgers, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1999), 140.   
Murphey, Ottoman Warfare, 1500-1700, 140.   
Alan Schom, Trafalgar: Countdown to Battle, 1803-1805 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992),110- 112.  
 7  WilliamsonMurray, War in the Air 1914 -45 (London: Cassell, 1999), 78
.8  Murray, War in theAir 1914 -45,  
88. 9 Thomas Hughes, Overlord (New York: The Free Press, 1995), 66.
Sonke Neitzel, -Kriegsmarine and Luftwaffe Co-operation in the War againstBritain, 1939-1945‖ War  In History #10, Vol. 448, 2003, p. 451.   
Jeffrey G. Barlow, Revolt of the Admirals (Dulles, VA: Potomac Books, 1989), 215 & 266.
Eric A. Ash, Purple Virtues: Curing Unhealthy Inter-service Rivalries. Master's Thesis, Air University, 1999.
Max Weber and Sam Whimster, The Essential Weber: A Reader (London: Routledge Press, 2004), 245- 260.   
University of Notre Dame Latin Dictionary. http://www.archives.nd.edu/cgi-bin/lookup.pl?stem=navy
US National Security Act of 1947. For further information visit: http://intelligence.senate.gov/nsaact1947.pdf
Gareth Morgan, Images of Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2006), 30.   
Karim Mignonac, -A matter of prestige? Examining the role of perceived organizational image in turnover intentions of key people.‖ A paper presented at the International Conference on Management held in Geneva,Switzerland 13-16 June 2006.   
Amitai Etzioni, -International Prestige, Competition and Peaceful Coexistence,‖ Archives Europeenees deSociologie, Vol. 3, No. 1 (1962), pp. 21-41. p. 22   
Neufeld, -The Guided Missile and the Third Reich,‖ 57.
Robert Jervis, Perceptions and Misperceptions in International Politics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton  University Press, 1976), 7.   
Ap Dijksterhuis and Ad van Knippenberg, -The Relation Between Perception and Behavior, or how to win a game of trivial Pursuit,‖ Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 1998, Vol. 74, No 4, 865- 877, 866.  
 44  In 1957, General Hamilton Howze conducted a series of studies on the efficacy of helicopters in combat based on map exercises from CGSC and Ft. Benning. In his report, Howze recommended numerous additions of different forms of aviation to the Army's inventory. The example discussed in this thesis focuses on attack helicopters but Howze recommended much
more. 45 Ian Horwood, Inter-Service Rivalry and Airpower in the Vietnam War (Ft. Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2006), 45.
Colin Grey, -Strategic culture as context: the first generation of theory strikes back,‖ Review of International Studies (1999),
25, 55   
Christopher Clark, The Rise and Downfall of Prussia (London: Penguin Group, 2006), 556.   
Clark, The Rise and Downfall of Prussia, 556.   
Holger W.Herwig, -The Prussian Model and Military Planning,‖ Joint Forces Quarterly, 67-75, Spring,  1998, 67.   
Robert Citino, The German Way of War (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2008), 236.
-Polish Theater: Blitzkrieger‖ Time Magazine, September 25, 1939.   
Irving, Hitler's War, 20.   
David Fraser, Knight's Cross: A Life of Field Marshal Erwin Rommel (New York: Harper Collins, 1994), 98.
Isabel Hull, Absolute Destruction: Military Culture and the Practices of War in Imperial Germany (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2006), 28.
Frank Trommler and Joseph McVeigh, America and the Germans:  The relationship in the Twentieth Century (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985), 76.
Adolph Galland,  The First and the Last: the German Fighter Force in World War II (London: Methuen Publishing 1955), 59.
AFHRA Command and Leadership in the German Air Force (K) Report No 174, no date, typed transcript, 512.6521, in USAF Collection, Historical Research Agency, Maxwell AFB, Alabama,
Irving, The Rise and Fall of the Luftwaffe, 219.
Irving, The Mare's Nest, 81.   
Michael Neufeld, Von Braun (New York: Vintage Books, 2007), 172   
Irving, The Rise and Fall of the Luftwaffe, 177.   
Clark, Iron Kingdom: The Rise and Fall of Prussia 1600-1947, 221.   
Michael B. Petersen, Missiles for the Fatherland (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 101.
Petersen, Missiles for the Fatherland, 101.   
Dennis Piszkiewicz, The Nazi racketeers: Dreams of Space and crimes of War (Lansing, MI: University of Michigan Press, 1995), 20.
Walter Dornberger, V-2 (New York, NY: The Viking Press, 1954), 79.
Dornberger, 47.   
Neufeld, Von Braun, 55.   
Neufeld, Von Braun, 5.   
Petersen, Missiles for the Fatherland, 101.   
Irving, The Mare's Nest, 19.   
Irving, The Rise and Fall of the Luftwaffe, 84.   
James Corum, The Luftwaffe: Creating the Operational Air War, 1918
-1940
Corum, The Luftwaffe: Creating the Operational Air War, 146.   
Neufeld, The Rocket and the Reich,  
Wolfram von Richthofen was a Generalfeldmarschall (Field Marshal) in the Luftwaffe during the war and a distant cousin of the famous Manfred von Richthofen, the famous Red Baron of WWI fame. Manfred von Richthofen was killed in 1918 during a combat flight.5  Neufeld, The Rocket and the Reich, 50. 6 James S. Corum, Wolfram von Richthofen: Master of the German Air War (Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 2008), 34. 7 Dornberger, V-2, 41. 8 Neufeld, The Rocket and the Reich, 33. 9 Michael B. Petersen, Missiles for the Fatherland (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 55. 10 Thomas Franklin, An American in Exile: The Story of Arthur Rudolph (Huntsville, AL: Christopher Kaylor Publishing, 1987), 48. 11 Petersen, Missiles for the Fatherland, 101.
Martin Middlebrook, The Peenemünde Raid (New York: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1982), 15.   
Neufeld, The Rocket and the Reich, 63.   
Neufeld, The Rocket and the Reich, 63.   
Edward Westermann, Flak: German Anti-aircraft Defenses 1914-1945 (Lawrence, KS: University of  Kansas Press, 2001), 34.   
Wayne Biddle, The Dark Side of the Moon (New York: Norton and Company, 2009), 117.
Neufeld, Rocket and the Reich, 148.   
Williamson Murray, -Adaptation in War,‖ Published by the Institute for Defense Analysis, 18 June 2009, 6-22.
It is important to note that the perception of change was just as powerful as change itself.
DOTMLPF refers to doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, and facilities.
Other forms of bombing consist of targeting military forces, industrial centers, or the nation's leadership Targeting military forces ranges between Close Air Support (CAS) and interdiction. Robert Pape refers to interdiction as a part of a denial strategy. Targeting industrial centers was advocated by the Air Corps Tactical School as its industrial web theory during the inter-war period. Decapitation strategies were in Chapter one's discussion of terrorism and relate to the targeting of state or military leadership. Risk strategies also exist although not discussed in this thesis. A risk strategy consists of escalating the pain a state can endure until it executes the will of the coercer.
Robert Pape, Bombing to Win (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996), 135.
Richard Overy, The Battle of Britain (New York: Norton Publishers, 2000), 109.
Michael B. Petersen, Missiles for the Fatherland (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 2009), 101.
Technical information provided by the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum. For more information please see V-1 in the Space Race exhibition or visit online at http://www.nasm.si.edu/collections.
Technical information provided by the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum. For more information please see V-1 in the Space Race exhibition or visit online at http://www.nasm.si.edu/collections
Technical information provided by the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum. For more information please see V-1 in the Space Race exhibition or visit online at http://www.nasm.si.edu/collections
Technical information provided by the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum. For more information please see V-1 in the Space Race exhibition or visit online at http://www.nasm.si.edu/collections
My research and thesis advisor provided valuable insight and guidance throughout the entire process of developing and then writing this thesis. His depth of knowledge and personal experiences were instrumental to my research and without them, this idea would never have come to fruition. I thank him them for his interest, mentorship, and guidance throughout the entire process.
My wife deserves many thanks for her role in this thesis. She proofed the manuscript several times, made invaluable suggestions at each iteration, and provided motivation when I was discouraged and felt overburdened. Supportive and patient throughout the entire academic year, she was my inspiration for everything.
Errors of fact and deficiencies in my analysis in this work belong to me alone.
US Government, 
Department of Defense
United States Air Force
United States Army
Air University
Department of State, Department of Defense
National Counter-Terrorism Center, Research Agency at Maxwell Air Force Base
US National Archives
Sidney Whitman
The Origins of Interservice Rivalry Too often in this war did the leaders fight each other while the troops fought the foe.
-B. H. Liddell Hart and field exams that measured tactical proficiency. 
5
Erich Ludendorff, to name only two, in the pantheon of Great Prussian Captains. For example, Moltke implemented Auftragstaktik, later to become the pre-eminent command and control mechanism for the German Army. Directing that subordinates operate within his intent, Moltke's innovativeness spurred leaders to think independently. 
6
Led by General Gerhard von Scharnhorst and August von Gneisenau during the Military Reform Movement, the Grosser Generalstab-Great General Staff-aimed to place intellectually strong officers near mediocre generals that provided, -the talents that otherwise might be wanting among leaders and commanders.‖ 7 Having seen the prowess of the Prussian military, Germany was not the only nation to adopt its practices and by the end of the nineteenth century most countries-including the United States--had to some extent adopted the Prussian General Staff model.
The Prussian system was so strong that much of its influence remains within the US military today. Drill and ceremony, taught to every individual entering the armed services, is traceable to Baron von Steuben, a Prussian General and the Continental Army's Inspector General. He instituted drills from his Regulations for the Order and Discipline of the Troops of the United States, also known as the -Blue Book.‖ 8 Although very few are aware, the discipline and drill that is taught to new recruits is essentially the same that von Steuben provided to the continental army.
Denoting the powerful influence of its Prussian heritage, one historian noted that the military under Hitler was -truly German.‖ 9 Because of the substantial influence, perhaps a more accurate statement may have been that Hitler's military was truly Prussian. The His obligation to the fatherland coupled with the ferocity of the inter-service rivalry was a powerful motivation to develop and produce the Fi 103.
The next chapter is the narrative of events starting in 1936 when Peenemünde was first established. The chapter ties in many of the foundational issues discussed in chapters 2 and 3 and it concludes with the addition of the SS to the rocket program near the end of the war. The addition of the SS did not end the rivalry, but only changed some of its dynamics.
program succeed. After all, by late 1942 Dornberger and his team had been working on the rocket program for seven years. After the successful October launch Speer drafted a decree for mass production that Hitler signed a week prior to Christmas. Too close for coincidence, the Luftwaffe successfully catapulted a Fi 103 only five days later on Christmas Eve. 
44
Speer's decision to gain approval from Hitler to produce both weapons was political maneuvering. According to Neufeld, Speer wanted to both protect his friendly relationship with Milch and see the rocket produced. 
47
44
26. 45
46
47
Army for Wasserfall had been pulled into A-4 work. Because of the pressure on Dornberger and von Braun to produce operational results, the Army had exploited the initial cooperation between the services to enhance their program.
The allied destruction of Hamburg on 27 and 28 July 1943 was an attack that would secure the A-4 and Fi 103 in their roles as -Vengeance Weapons‖ later in the war.
According to one author, the destruction of Hamburg, a city with a population of nearly one million residents in 1943, -shook the Nazi hierarchy to its very core.‖ 
48
49
50
51
52
Milch's -mills of retribution‖ were also grinding after the destruction of Hamburg: -If we do not succeed in smashing these terror attacks by day and by night very soon, then we must expect a very difficult situation to arise for Germany.‖ 
54
55
57
58
59
54
55
The total number of Fi 103s fired against all targets was 22,480. 
84
85
The primary argument of this thesis was that Germany's rocket attacks were the result of an intense inter-service rivalry between the Luftwaffe and the Army and not necessarily the deliberate acts of a totalitarian regime that intended to inflict terror. To develop that argument, this thesis first tackled the issue that has the most contemporary resonance, and was perhaps, the most difficult chapter due to the preconceived notions people possess regarding terrorists. The chapter made the point that a substantial degree of subjectivity involves categorizing an event as a terror event. It illustrated that past historical occurrences could be regarded as terror but are frequently not for various reasons. For example, the Zealots are referred to as one of the first terrorist organizations, but there is no mention of Vlad Tepes. Additionally, Chaliand and Conquest referred to the French revolution and the Soviet purges as state or top-down terror, yet Mao killed just as many of his own people and his genocidal actions were deemed the Cultural Revolution and not an incident of terror. This same subjectivity permeated into the US government definitions of terrorism; consequently there is a plethora of different definitions.
The subjectivity of the term terror allows it to flow pejoratively, spurred by political rhetoric. Thus, a state, organization, or individual that possesses conflicting ideologies or goals can be deemed a terrorist. The second point this chapter makes is that the pejorative term terrorism obfuscates that these entities have in fact engaged in war. For example, why is it that Al Qaeda conducts terrorism but the US conducts war? The answer is Al Qaeda conducts terrorism because the US stated that it conduct terrorism and considers Bin Laden and the rest of his ilk as terrorists. Characterizing members of Al Qaeda or any other groups for that matter as soldiers hardly contains the same impact as the term terrorist.
Chapter two laid the theoretical framework for the existence of interservice rivalries and explained why they continue to endure. The chapter first illustrated that rivalries have existed for centuries-one author even suggested for millennia. That interservice rivalries have existed for centuries across different cultures, eras, religions, and technological advances within the military illustrates that they are a part of every military and will continue to hamper cooperation between services. Rivalries endure due to the competitive environment created by the manner in which they are organized as separate services along functional lines; therefore they must compete for resources. But resources are only one source of conflict; organizational identity, service culture, the notion of prestige, and even individual personalities reinforce and strengthen rivalries.
Just as organisms adapt to the environment to ensure their survival, military services must also adapt and adjustments to a service's DOTMLPF are the natural result. 1 Thus, when the German Army began developing the rocket, the entire system began to grow.
Ultimately, as the system continued to enlarge it came in contact with Luftwaffe DOTMLPF, its own system, and conflict ensued. The chapter ends by pointing out different perspectives and perceptions of an interservice rivalry and illustrating that each service's perspective is unique; thus the perceptions will vary greatly.
The chapter pointed out that an interservice rivalry does not always have negative consequences and can be beneficial because it provides a -healthy tension‖ between the services. The tension created from the perpetual competition between services forces services to innovate and continually adapt. This tension also can lead to new technologies, which in some instances may create a paradox. The innovation that was developed as a result of the tension could potentially lead to greater conflict and eventually continue the cycle.
Chapter three argued two points. First, two Prussian concepts overwhelmingly influenced the German military culture and permeated all levels of the German military.
The first institution is the notion of Beruf, which instilled in the German people a powerful sense of obligation and duty to the Fatherland that fostered nationalistic pride. This intangible force was so powerful that it influenced Milch, who was part Jewish, to Appendix 1
Commonly referred to as the V-1, the actual nomenclature assigned to the weapon was the Fi 103 flying bomb-the -Fi‖ was short for the Fieseler company, the primary designer. Similar in design and shape to modern era cruise missiles, the Fi 103 contained a much smaller warhead. At only 1,870 pounds, its destructive capability was far less than a typical cruise missile of either the US Navy or US Air Force today. Often called Flying Bombs and Robot Bombs; the British also referred to them as Doodle Bugs and Buzz Bombs due to the buzzing noise emanating from their engines. Easily heard when in flight, the Fi-103 was much harder to locate when stationary on the ground. Painted in pattern of greens and light blues, their camouflage effectively concealed them amongst the ground cover during allied campaigns against them. 
6
7
11