# ID: 9b609c68501c405b86a8b6e2f315e8bb
# Title: Crossing the Lethal Distance
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
The sensors and shooters of tomorrow's battlefields could bring about a new no man's land. Given trends in all-domain capability development, how should US Army forces cross the 25-kilometer lethal distance of tomorrow's battlefields? Development of sensor and shooter capabilities now and within the next ten years may imply denied spaces which transcend local tactical battlespaces. Understanding the nature of what such lethal areas look like is vital in shaping the US Army's future development. Simultaneously, it is just as important to clarify the intent of operational concepts and capabilities through the application of relevant military theory. The combination of this analysis helps identify areas of asymmetry and whether or not force modernization is on the right track.
In his book, The Art of Maneuver: Maneuver Warfare Theory and Airland Battle, Colonel Robert Leonhard describes the defeat mechanism of dislocation as "Instead of having to fight or confront the hostile force on its terms, the friendly force avoids any combat in which the enemy can bring his might to bear." Further, the application of dislocation is applied through technology, tactics, or some combination of the two. This work posits the hypothesis that the best way for Army forces to cross future lethal distances is to design and orchestrate all-domain capabilities to functionally render any adversaries' system strengths irrelevant.
As the location and nature of future armed conflicts is unknown, this monograph describes the warfighting concepts and capability developments of US near-peer adversaries. The all-domain concepts of US service branches and relevant materiel capabilities provides a point of comparison. Using the military theory observations of John Boyd and Robert Leonhard, this work draws implications on the nature of combat in the 25-kilometer lethal distance by 2030. To address these consequences, the monograph suggests solutions in the fields of leader development and education, doctrine, and materiel.
I would also like to thank Rob Jones, John Ervine, Phil Webster, Charlie Pierce, Harold  Gilbert, Jim McNeely, Nick Kelly, Michael Rahimian, Corinna Carter, Tiffany McCoy, Patrick  Mardis, LTC Lisa Reyes, MAJ Matthew Lees (U.K.), and the whole team at the Missile and Space Intelligence Center. You opened me up to worlds larger than I ever experienced and prepared me very well for these previous years of academic work. I am humbled by your dedication and devotion in defending this country and our multinational partners.
I want to express gratitude to Mr. George Hodge, Bill Knight, Mrs. Joyce DiMarco, LTC Stuart Nance, and LTC Romae Araud. You provided a great learning environment in the Command and General Staff Officers Course and will continue to carry your legacy forward. Thanks to you, I have been able to attend this cognitively rewarding course of study.
Thank you to Dr. Jim Greer for your mentorship, guidance, and constructive critique during this process. I have been truly humbled by your knowledge and experience. Your confidence in my ability to assemble this body of work drives me forward, and I will be continually grateful.
Finally, I would like to thank COL Michael Kopp (DE) and all of Seminar 9. This was truly a momentous year, due in large part to the time I spent with you exploring history, theory, and doctrine. Alongside the brilliant SAMS teaching staff, you delivered a curriculum which continually challenged my understanding of the world and the military's place in it. I will be eternally grateful for the time you spent away from your family and home to selflessly spend it on our development as military officers.      
The challenge is not whether tanks are obsolete, but how a system of capabilities can be fielded and trained that gets the force to where it needs to be, with enough combat power to achieve the desired result. It is the system, not the platforms, and the balance within that system that we need to get right.
-Jack Watling, "The Key to Armenia's Tank Losses: The Sensors, Not the Shooters"
The United States military no longer enjoys systems capability overmatch over its potential adversaries. Too bold of a statement, or hard truth to accept? Consider recent events from the last six years alone. A militarized annexation of the Crimean Peninsula, highly lethal proxy wars across the Middle East, competing spheres of influence along global commons of the South China Sea, and recent border disputes that explode into regional force-on-force battles in Nagorno-Karabakh. Each event points to a challenge of the post-Cold War US led world order, which includes assumed US military dominance. Consequently, the US military finds itself at "a historical inflection point" in which great powers once again compete to achieve worldwide influential parity and advantage.0 F 1 To be competitive with the United States in the military sphere, regional hegemons are taking advantage of readily available information and technology to advance their military capabilities, and operational concepts. Simultaneously competitors observe US actions from the 1991 Gulf War to counterinsurgency efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan. "The result is a US military, and an Army in particular, that may find itself with the very real challenge of being out-gunned, out-ranged, out-protected, outdated, out of position, and out of balance against our adversaries."1 F 2 Should United States deterrence fail in such an environment, and a regional crisis moves the continuum of conflict from competition to armed conflict, the US military faces fundamental challenges due in large part to established yet predictable capabilities and patterns of operations.
The purpose of this study is to explore a particular element of one of these fundamental challenges, namely all-domain operations (ADO) in close combat. In the context of modernizing adversaries, the US military faces heightened competition in land, air, maritime, space, and cyberspace warfighting domains. "Adversaries possess significant integrated air defenses and long-range fires, as well as sophisticated intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance and information, electronic warfare, and cyber capabilities."2 F
3
Herein lies a major problem for the US Army. In large scale combat operations (LSCO), how might all-domain systems enable Army forces to close the lethal distance (last 25-kilometers based upon emerging technology) to engage enemy formations? To answer this question, this study attempts to define and explore three research tasks. First, it is necessary to understand the threat characteristics of a future operational environment (OE) that expands lethal distances from a Cold War four to a modern 25-kilometers. Second, investigation into current materiel capability solutions and proposed conceptual warfighting models supply the basis for an answer. Finally, an evaluation of concepts based on warfighting theories enable assessment of any solution's potential to overcome the maneuver problem in the forecasted OE. To cross the lethal distance of future battlefields, Army forces must design and orchestrate its all-domain system capabilities to functionally dislocate adversarial system strengths.  Additionally, the study uses abstract terms used with specific meanings and applications to specific contexts. The term capabilities is used often to describe materiel resources that give url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=41932.
combatants the means to carry out military action. Further the study uses the term systems as a grouping of capabilities designed to conduct specific functions like intelligence or maneuver.
Additionally, it is important to remember the meaning and application of concepts and theories.
Ultimately the study strives to understand and explain a phenomenon of interest, in this case warfighting in a future environment. To do this, the study uses concepts (ADO, threat analysis, military theorist writings) to sort, organize, and store information relevant to the phenomenon of interest.4 F
5
6
This monograph is organized into six distinct sections to explore the value of functionally dislocating enemy systems to cross the 25-kilometer lethal distance. The first section introduces the topic, problem, and thesis of the study. The second section briefly reviews the prevalent sources used to research the topic. The third section defines the 25-kilometer lethal area through threat analysis. The fourth section explores current US capability modernization efforts alongside ADO conceptualizations. The fifth section uses the military theories of John Boyd and Robert
Leonhard to analyze the forecasted operational environment. Finally, the last section provides recommendations in the fields of leadership development, doctrine, and materiel before concluding the monograph.
The purpose of the following literature review is to provide a brief description of the prevalent sources related to the topic, how they apply to the study, and if there are any gaps in current available information. In an effort to answer how Army forces cross the future 25-kilometer lethal distance, the research centered around three major categories: threat analysis, US modernization efforts, and military theory.  freedom of maneuver to defeat enemy systems, formations and objectives."1 0F 11 The key challenge is to specifically define where and how the all-domain concept fits into closing the lethal distance.
To help define specifics, the monograph uses Army Futures Command's US Army Concept for Maneuver in Multi Domain Operations 2028-2040. The conceptual release is a subset in a series of concepts covering everything from fires to sustainment. The product attempts to solve the problem of, "how Army forces achieve positions of relative advantage and generate overmatch," in the future operational environment.1 1F
12
13
In addition to discovering the theories and concepts that enable future all-domain success in the context of the close area, research must also include the materiel capabilities that support the concepts. Herein lies a major research gap. Given the futures context of the topic, much of the detailed information into future US capabilities is classified. In addition, what is released to the public is often published in disparate journals and articles. The US Army Futures Commands Cross Functional Teams (CFT), and US Army Combat Capabilities Development Command (CCDC) generate unconsolidated releases on the status of the programs. The monograph assumes that the research cannot provide a complete picture of capability development and considers that gap in the analysis of how future capabilities help US forces cross the lethal distance.
In order to provide an analytical framework for the previous two research objectives, the final research goal focuses on military theory. The first consideration is Colonel John Boyd's Patterns of Conflict. The two products utilized in the research is the 1986 rendering of the presentation and a 1989 transcript of Boyd's briefing to the Marine Corps University. The goal of the presentation by analysis and synthesis is to, "unveil the character of conflict, survival, and conquest," and to, "discern a pattern of successful operations."1 3F 
14
The second military theorist considered is Robert R. Leonhard. The monograph considers Leonhard's loosely connected series of three books published from 1991 to 1998. The Art of Maneuver: Maneuver-Warfare Theory and AirLand Battle investigates doctrinal trends in the US Army and that by, "defining them, exposing their weaknesses, and breaking the cognitive logjam," attempts to inject new recommendations into doctrinal development.1 4F 
15
16
14
Our adversaries and potential adversaries have studied and learned from our battlefield successes since the first Gulf War. With that knowledge, they are adapting their methods of warfare, while accelerating the modernization and professionalization of their combat forces.
-General David G. Perkins, "Multi-Domain Battle: The Advent of Twenty-First Century War"
One of the first steps of preparing a military operation is to understand the threat. In this case it is crucial to know the methods and capabilities that create the 25-kilometer lethal distance.
It is assumed that the warfighting systems and supporting capabilities in this section remain relatively constant over ten years. Further, those capabilities can exert their influence over multiple extended battlefields, the assessment of which then moves from the purely tactical to that of the operational. Since current and future pacing capabilities are discussed, the classified nature of the material inhibits a full understanding. Any system or capability details that China and Russia release to the public should be consumed with partial skepticism, considering many of the same capabilities are also available for export. Using China and Russia as pacing guides, this section attempts to objectively understand threat effects into the 25-kilometer lethal area by discovering their general warfighting methods and the current/future capabilities which support it.
Given China's geopolitical situation, how would they envision fighting in the 25kilometer close area? It might be of help to take a top-down approach from the strategic to the tactical view. The general direction of the country is that of mass modernization in an effort to, "expand China's national power, perfect its governance systems, and revise the international order."1 7F 
18
China's general military strategy seems to be a familiar defensive concept from our own doctrine. China characterizes its military strategy as one of "active defense", a concept it describes as strategically defensive but operationally offensive.1 8F 
19
Once on the ground, how would those PLA elements involved create a lethal 25-kilometer lethal area?
In the PLA 2013 publication The Science of Military Strategy, the Chinese military indicates an all-domain system approach to shaping a lethal close area. The document recommends "fusing" joint operational strength and integrating at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of war.1 9F 20 This fusing occurs via what the PLA call "informatized warfare", which is the process of acquiring, transmitting, processing, and using information to conduct joint military operations across warfighting domains.2 0F 
21
Systems confrontation and/or systems destruction warfare is the Chinese concept of two or more opposing warfighting systems interacting on a battlefield. An operational system is made up of five components: the command system, firepower-strike, information confrontation, reconnaissance-intelligence, and support systems.2 1F 22 To execute systems confrontation, the PLA relies upon Target Centric Warfare (TCW) which is the concept of attacking critical points in an enemy's operational system to achieve decisive effects with minimal collateral damage.2 2F 23 TCW envisions a procedural sequence of events in space and time which involves: degradation and disruption of information flow, operational systems, operational architecture, and eventual disruption of the recon-control-attack-evaluate process.2 3F 24 Translated into the 25-kilometer lethal area, the PLA would capitalize on precise and lethal, long-range fires (direct and indirect) from dispersed weapon platforms connected by advanced communications.2 4F 
25
Russian warfighting also seems contingent on warfighting systems. As opposed to the PLA, the Russian military actively fights in many parts of the world which enables further and tactical artillery to destroy high-value targets in near-real time.2 6F 27 In the context of the 25kilometer lethal area, cross-domain capabilities enable the application of the reconnaissanceintelligence and firepower-strike systems by fixing or isolating elements within that zone for queued destruction. Taken together, the Chinese and Russian warfighting systems require alldomain capabilities that can do four things: find, fix, finish, and protect.
Based on the perception of Chinese systems confrontation and Russian ISR-Strike, finding adversaries in the 25-kilometer lethal area is of paramount importance. On land, the ability to find in 2030 is characterized by advanced autonomous sensors linked by a commandand-control capability. Chinese reconnaissance platforms like the upgraded WZ551 armored personnel carrier or modern Type-08 wheeled armored vehicle are modified for special reconnaissance roles having been fitted with extensive communications equipment and a mastmounted sensor pod containing day and night target acquisition and designation equipment.2 7F 
28
31
Through the cyberspace and space domains, China and Russia hope to employ capabilities which provide a more complete tactical and operational picture through the monitoring of the electro-magnetic spectrum (EMS) and multi-spectral global imaging. In the cyberspace sphere, Russian analysts determined that future ground forces require a system of seismic, acoustic and electro-optic reconnaissance sensors.3 2F 33 Like the traditional ground and air platforms, the systems that monitor the EMS and other environmental indicators will likely link into a battlefield network. To supplement these sensors, Russia and China will likely continue to build their electronic intelligence and early warning system constellation of satellites.3 3F
34
Given the mobility of current and future combat formations, China and Russia employ cross-domain capabilities to fix or isolate enemy elements in the 25-kilometer lethal area. On the land and in the air, China and Russia currently field advanced long-range anti-tank guided 
31
32 US Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2020, 142-143. 
33
35
36
While maintaining their own cyberspace systems to enable a networked battlefield, China and Russia employ cyber attacks to deny its use to an adversary. Military academics have suggested the Russian fusing of electronic warfare with their cyber operations, allowing offensive entry into enemy computers and networked systems and disrupt the use of the EMS.3 8F 39 In addition, Russian military journals observed Western operations that rely on long-range, spacesupported precision-guided munitions.3 9F 40 Denying the linkage between ground and air-based weapons systems with space could render condition setting capabilities useless. China expands the demonstration of this denial through the testing of DN-2 and DN-3 orbital interceptors in low earth orbit (LEO) and medium earth orbit (MEO). A Chinese counter-space operation, "could 
35
42
43
In addition to traditional fires, Short-Range Ballistic Missile (SRBM) systems equipped with conventional high-explosive or cluster munitions could supplement areas where China or Russia do not have enough aerial assets to compete. While Russian maneuver brigades do not have organic SRBM capability, "they can be expected to support maneuver brigade commanders in high intensity conflict situations."4 3F 
44
42
43
44
4/5 UAVs leverage long loitering times and Blue Arrow ATGM capabilities to combine finding and finishing functions as a means of systems destruction. Chinese designers note, "We demonstrate the CH-5s's ability to win the initiative in any battlefield with its reconnaissance and strike capability."4 4F 
45
46
48
Key to the protection of critical capabilities in the 25-kilometer lethal area, China and Russia invest heavily in echeloned air defense. To support a kill chain of detection, identification, tracking, assignment, engagement, and assessment both pacing threats employ redundant and overlapping system capabilities.4 8F 
49
45
46 Charlie Pierce, ATGM Guidebook, 34-35. 
47
48
50
51
52
2
50
51 Ibid., 
92. 52
53 US Department of the Air Force. Operational Level Doctrine Annex 3-1, Department of the Air Force Role in Joint All-Domain Operations (JADO), (Washington DC: Government Publishing Office, June 2020), 1. 
54
An effective way in describing the US Air Force's application of JADO in the 25kilometer lethal area is through the war fighting functions of intelligence, fires, and maneuver.
Through intelligence collection efforts, JADO envisions continuous ISR sensing through the warfighting domains to "feed multiple decision loops."5 4F 
55
56
The US Air Force and JADO sees movement and maneuver in two distinct ways. First, as a supporting element around the 25-kilometer lethal area, JADO advocates for schemes of maneuver that, "create opportunistic convergences."5 6F 57 A supported ground unit exercising flexible courses of action in concert with the Air Force could enable the timely exploitation of fleeting opportunities in the 25-kilometer lethal area. Second, JADO envisions movement and maneuver through the lens of the EMS, in space, and in cyberspace. Critical actions tied to those domains include: changing spectrum bands, frequency agility, re-positioning or re-orienting orbital asset optimization, and accessing adversary networks in support of offensive and defensive actions.5 7F 58 Each of these movement and maneuver actions, converged on a 25-kilometer zone, could allow a supported commander the ability to shoot, move, and communicate while disrupting an adversary's ability to fight with their own methods of warfare and capabilities. 
55
56
57
58
The US Navy views future all-domain warfighting as an evolution of concepts, the current of which is Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO). The precursor to DMO is the concept of Distributed Lethality, "in which each surface combatant, amphibious warship, and logistics ship should have an offensive capability," thereby introducing multiple dilemmas to an adversary.5 8F 
59
DMO attempts to address the limitations of Distributed Lethality by, "integrating naval forces across the domains throughout a theater to provide targeting and coordinate fires."5 9F 
60
Admiral Scott H. Swift (Retired) published a series of articles detailing concepts rendered possible by the US Navy's input into all-domain operations. Swift describes a tactical grid of capabilities, overwatched by a fleet-level Maritime Operations Center (MOC) which is directed by a Joint Forces Command (JFC) to implement various "effects" at specific times and places.6 0F 
61
As a component of its Force Design 2030, the US Marine Corps recognizes a shortage of specific capabilities needed to compete in future war. The Commandant of the Marine Corps notes that in conjunction with Navy DMO, the Marines should affect the, "generation of technically disruptive, tactical stand-in engagements that confront aggressor naval forces with an array of low signature, affordable, and risk-worthy platforms and payloads."6 1F 
62
63
MDO describes how corps and divisions are tiered elements in penetrating, disintegrating, and exploiting opportunities in the close and deep-maneuver areas. The corps shapes the close area for divisions through their multi-domain capabilities to penetrate and dis-integrate enemy long/mid-range fires and integrated air defense systems that would converge their effects into the 25-kilometer lethal area. The divisions likewise shape the deep maneuver area for the brigades through their own multi-domain capabilities.6 3F 64 Each echeloned effort is a proactive 62 David H. Berger, Force Design 2030, United States Marine Corps Headquarters, (Washington DC: Government Publishing Office), March 2020, 3. 
63
MDO concepts further describe an abstract sequencing of events, echelons, and efforts through time and space. During the penetration effort, "Forward presence maneuver forces and partner nation conventional forces use the advantages of the defense," to deny an enemy its objectives.6 4F 
65
Exploitation describes another series of potential tasks that would help a formation cross the 25-kilometer lethal area shaped by previous efforts. MDO indicates the use of division maneuver for two tasks: maneuver to isolate enemy elements, then maneuver to defeat those elements.6 7F 68 That maneuver, much like the Air Force's conceptualization of JADO maneuver, involves the convergence of cross-domain capabilities to further shape the 65 Ibid., 34. threat input. This adaptability allows for next-generation systems the time to mature before implementation on the end product.
In the air, the US Army UAS Center of Excellence defines the mid-term timeframe of UAS upgrades as 2016-2025. By that period the Army expects to field, "the future-armed aerial scout aircraft whether manned, unmanned, or a combination of both."7 2F 73 Like the aims of several pacing threat capabilities, the combination of reconnaissance and attack roles into a single airframe furthers the goals of counter-reconnaissance and reducing the time between target identification and engagement. While these capabilities exist at a US Army division level through a combat aviation brigade, the ability to apply that capability to individual maneuver brigades assists the shaping of low echelon maneuver in the exploit phase of MDO.
With evolving capabilities like the ARV or mid-term UAS upgrades, a robust and sophisticated intelligence network which operates in space and cyberspace is needed to link sensors to the right shooters. The Tactical Intelligence Targeting Access Node (TITAN) intends to, "serve as a ground-based intelligence system designed to rapidly process data and disseminate targetable intelligence directly to tactical weapon systems."7 3F 74 The TITAN system is capable of integration with other cyberspace systems like the Terrestrial Layer System (TLS). By linking disparate shooters from across extended battlefields, it generates options for battlefield commanders on how best to shape access into the 25-kilometer lethal area throughout each phase of the MDO sequence. In the cyberspace domain, the US Army is beginning to form Cyber Warfare Battalions and Intelligence, Information, Cyber, Electronic Warfare, and Space (I2CEWS) detachments. In an effort to explore the targeting of adversary networks, these units leverage capabilities to, "conduct offensive operations through radio-frequency-enabled cyber effects," and, "demonstrated ability to conduct over-the-air operations targeting Wi-Fi nodes."7 5F 
76
The actual ability to functionally defeat or finish an enemy in the 25-kilometer lethal area will likely still materialize via ground maneuver forces. While fires capabilities are vital to reducing adversary strengths, ground maneuver forces represent the US Army physical ability to render them ineffective through offensive and defensive operations. As the NGCV portfolio does not currently project a successor to the Abrams Main Battle Tank, upgrades to the platform stretch its lifespan well into 2030. The M1A2C (M1A2 SEPv3) and M1A2D (M1A2 SEPv4) are planned successive variants of the tank which allocate for MDO upgradability. "This program began early enough to on-board any technology the Army deems critical to the future battlefield to include artificial intelligence, autonomy, APS (Active Protection System) or advanced sensors."7 6F 
77
The Soldier Lethality CFT attempts to further maneuver force mobility. In the near to mid-term the CFT hopes that, "Given the rapid development of technology innovations, robotic and autonomous systems (RAS) will provide critical capabilities to infantry rifle companies that will enhance the companies' ability to accomplish their combat mission."7 7F 78 One of the primary goals of RAS in maneuver forces is to reduce the load burden on the individual soldier. This ability could enable ground forces to rapidly infiltrate through 77 "Abrams Tank Upgrade," United States Army Acquisition Support Center, Last modified 2021, accessed November 17, 2020, https://asc.army.mil/web/portfolio-item/gcs-m1-abrams-main-battle-tank/.
78 John J. Bastone, 2019,"Focus Modernization Efforts on Rifle Companies" Army 69, no. 2: 9-10, accessed October 2020, https://lumen.cgsccarl.com/login?url=https://www-proquest com.lumen.cgsccarl.com/trade-journals/focus-modernization-efforts-on-riflecompanies/docview/2193091880/se-2?accountid=28992., 9.
heavily restricted terrain, either bypassing the 25-kilometer lethal area or using the restricted terrain itself as cover.
One of the US military's greatest strengths to defeat combined arms forces is its ability to provide fires from the air. The AH-64 represents one of the primary means of destruction in the US Army's inventory. However, the standoff of the 25-kilometer lethal distance limits the ability to implement Hellfire Longbow fires through semi-active laser guidance. The Future Vertical Lift (FVL) program continues upgrades to current platforms to address this issue. In the summer of 2020, FVL fired the Israeli SPIKE NLOS ATGM from the Apache. The 25-kilometer ranged SPIKE NLOS, "could provide an interim solution that exceeds the range of currently fielded systems."7 8F 79 The missile system is designed to provide long-range and accurate precision strikes against heavily armored targets, even behind terrain coverage.
Even though MDO provides substantial conditions setting through the penetration and dis-integration stages, US Army forces still must protect themselves as they cross through the 25-kilometer lethal area. Active Protection Systems (APS) like Trophy and Iron Fist are good examples of this effort. The intent behind APS is to defeat incoming precision munitions with mutually supporting modular components. The Trophy APS currently being fielded on the Abrams tanks is a hard-kill system. These APS implementations detect incoming (non-kinetic) munitions through radar and defeats them via an explosive interception projectile. A soft-kill system attempts to defeat the guidance of a precision munition through electro-optical or infra-red countermeasures as it approaches the target.
Currently, only hard-kill systems are fielded which protect US combat platforms. 
79
concepts of those theories are then synthesized with the findings of threat and US all-domain systems and supporting capabilities. From that synthesis we can create a new understanding of how all-domain systems and capabilities can help US Army forces cross the 25-kilometer lethal distance.
Patterns of Conflict is Colonel John Boyd's attempt to describe, "the nature of moralmental-physical conflict," and, "discern a pattern for successful operations."8 1F 
82
83
Selecting the right operations and weapons that enable fast-transients is then key to success. Boyd argues that one should, "Generate a rapidly changing environment" through the use of operations and capabilities that allow for quick observations, enable decisions, facilitate fast-tempo and transient maneuvers, and affect quick kills.8 3F 
84
Boyd continues theorizing about successful military operations by attempting to categorize historical conflicts as either those of attrition warfare, maneuver conflict, and moral conflict. Boyd reminds his viewers that these are not "exhaustive" examples and that historical practitioners like Napoleon or Ulysses S. Grant could apply each category at the tactical, 82 John R. Boyd, "Discourse on Winning and Losing," Transcript of "Patterns of Conflict" presentation to USMC Command and Staff College, Marine Corps University, MCB Quantico, VA, 25 April and 2-3 May 1989, 7-8. 
83
84
operational, or strategic level of war.8 4F 85 Attrition warfare and maneuver conflict are of most interest given the subject of this monograph.
Attrition, as defined by Boyd, is the creation and exploitation of destructive force, protection, and mobility to compel an enemy to sue for peace. Destructive force is generated through weapons that kill, maim, and enable widespread destruction.8 5F 
86
87
88
89
To Boyd, maneuver conflict is different from attrition in that the means of defeat stems from the mental state of an adversary, not the physical condition. The aim of maneuver conflict is to, "Generate many non-cooperative centers of gravity, as well as disorient, disrupt, or overload those that adversary depends upon, in order to magnify friction, shatter cohesion, produce paralysis, and bring about his collapse."8 9F 
90
91
92
93
Retired US Army Colonel Robert Leonhard is also a modern military theorist who conceptualizes the nature of maneuver conflict and future warfare. In his book The Art of Maneuver, Leonhard postulates three means of defeat which are achievable through maneuver.
The first means is preemption, which "relates to seizing an opportunity before the enemy does."9 3F 
94
95
The second means of defeat is dislocation. Rather than fight a hostile force on its terms, dislocation implies that, "the friendly force avoids any combat in which the enemy can bring his might to bear."9 5F 
96
98
The final means of defeat Leonhard suggests is disruption, which, "is the practice of defeating the enemy by attacking his center of gravity."9 8F 
99
93
94
Leonhard,
62. 95
96
97
98
99 Ibid.,
73.
Leonhard also wrote theories about future war in The Principles of War for the Information Age. After discussing current principles of war and their mutation over time, Leonhard proposes additional principles to add given the changing characteristics of war. At the heart of the new principles is the concept of knowledge and ignorance. Knowledge concerns the information that a combatant has or intends to receive about themselves, the enemy, or the environment.1 01F 102 Ignorance is naturally the opposite end of the spectrum, dealing in what is not known. Leonhard suggests that the capabilities of recent years "adjusted the balance (of war) toward knowledge."1 02F 
103
The first category of principles Leonhard suggests is that of aggression. In this context aggression means what a combatant intends to do to an enemy to accomplish their goals.1 03F 
104
4
Using mobility and multi-functional capabilities, like armed UAVs, a combatant using attrition can protect their forces through spatial distribution while simultaneously exerting destructive power on key enemy capabilities. This precludes the need to close with an adversary. Take, for example, Russian ISR-Strike in relation to their direct fire capabilities. In this context, advanced ATGMs like the Kornet-EM are not used to affect destruction, but keep adversarial maneuver forces at bay until an indirect strike can affect their destruction. As capabilities evolve (APS) an adversary also adapts their own capability (salvo fire) to account for potential changes that would inhibit their method of war (Figure 
5
6
That aggression and activity sews further ambiguity and novelty in an adversary's method of war. The orchestrated application of dislocation, confrontation, dispersion, and concentration erode the strengths of an adversarial system and its capabilities (Figure 
6
A byproduct of sending more leaders to broadening opportunities outside of their career paths is that they become more adaptable and flexible. Adaptability for a team is having a variety of skills within that team and knowing when or how to use them.1 19F 120 Adversaries use all-domain capabilities on Army forces to create ambiguity. That level of uncertainty creates paralysis and fixes elements inside a 25-kilometer lethal area. To mitigate the chance of paralysis, leaders at the junior level must be taught to experiment and accept risk to gain opportunity. Most leaders today understand risk from the perspective of hazards, this thinking must change. FM 6-22 states the need to create a culture where there is freedom to fail.1 20F 121 Yet as units prepare to deploy to combat training centers or rotational employment, the leadership that would actually cross a 25-kilometer lethal area are certified through a pass/fail standard in which risk taking for potential gain is shunned or even punished. During these train-ups and certifications, leaders at all levels should be allowed to wrestle with undefined problems without fear of job loss. The application of new measures of performance could allow units the time and maneuver space to enable experimental failure and eventual long-term success.
Considerations for all-domain concepts and estimated threat or friendly capabilities must be incorporated into current doctrine as soon as possible. This builds familiarity and specificity 120 Ibid., 5-7.
121 US Department of the Army, Army Field Manual (FM) 6-22, Leader Development (Washington DC: Government Publishing Office, June 2015), 5-8. with current trends, which translate into how units train. For example, FM 3-90-1 provides guidance for the warfighting functions in the offense. Nowhere in the text do the considerations identify the nature of a constantly observed 25-kilometer lethal area through the domains.
Additionally, considerations for all warfighting functions would need adjustment to reflect the nature of actions during the exploitation phase of MDO. All battlefield functions must understand and emulate the dispersion, concentration for attack, then immediate dispersion after actions on objective. This is general guidance that units can take out to the field and practice with now.
As a doctrinal extension of training, the Combined Arms Task List (CATS) is often used as an evaluative tool for training. CATS should reflect changes in the operational environment and capability capacity. Certain tasks like 'React to Direct Fire' or 'React to Indirect Fire' might not reflect the nature of advanced precision munitions. For example, take long range ATGMs and APS. As such a task or sub-task that includes 'React to Guided Weapons Fire' could account for the stand-off long range direct weapons provide or actions to take should the APS engage an incoming munition. This is only one example and working groups could potentially establish more task for more units should they be provided the contextual information to do so.
The ever-evolving operational environment is often reflected through the capability developments of friendly forces and competitors. As such CFT efforts should continually consider material capabilities which are cross-domain, cross-functional, and modular in nature.
Cross-domain and cross-functional capabilities like armed UAVs cut down on the lag time between the identification of critical targets and their neutralization. In addition, the condensed time frame also reduces the risk of becoming decisively engaged. Continuing to promote manned and un-manned teaming should continue. It allows multiple task options to the forces that are tasked to cross the 25-kilometer lethal distance. Take the ARV for instance. If there were a modality for the vehicle to conduct autonomous sentry missions, it could serve as a reconnaissance node while their dismounted soldiers could actively conduct counter-reconnaissance roles. Additionally, real-time command and control software connected into the combat platforms of movement and maneuver could assist removing uncertainty from the battlefield. A potential application of this would the integration of mission command software with combat platform optics. This could provide formations the level of knowledge needed to exploit opportunities in real time.
Modularity enables the adaptability of material platforms over time. A good example of this are the APS implementations onto combat vehicles. Eventually, the system should account for both hard-kill and soft-kill technology. The APS would then be able to defeat a multitude of different incoming munitions simultaneously. This singular effect of capability adaptation, could disrupt a recon-strike execution by allowing friendly capabilities continued freedom of maneuver in the face of fixing effects. Protection via air defense should also expand to the lowest echelons.
Competitor's capacity to field large and small UAVs highlights the need to innovate material capabilities that can offset each type of threat. The adaptability to intercept each size of target further inhibits an adversary's ability to collect information in which to act upon. Further, expanding the capabilities of units like the 915 th Cyber Warfare Battalion into the lowest maneuver elements enable friendly forces to attack, disrupt, and mitigate an adversary's networkenabled operating system.
To cross the lethal distance of future battlefields, Army forces must design and orchestrate their all-domain system capabilities to functionally dislocate adversarial system strengths. To validate this claim, the monograph provided an understanding of competitor methods and capabilities into why the 25-kilometer lethal distance is indeed lethal. This monograph is only a snapshot in time of what it might take to dislocate an adversary's strengths from the 25-kilometer lethal area. Continued further study is necessary to continually update the assumptions behind the understanding of all-domain operations in the close and deep maneuver areas. The recommendations and options provided are only surface level and would need further research to make applicable. For instance, given force billet constraints, what is the best methodology to enable leader broadening? How prescriptive does future doctrine need to be now that battlefields are becoming more complex, using specialized cross-domain capabilities? Which level of autonomous or semi-autonomous technology works best to enable cross-domain and cross-functional capability application? These are just a few of the questions that could provide further clarification on the fluid requirements for crossing the 25kilometer lethal distance. Ultimately, a force which can best understand the various methods and capabilities of all-domain systems through theoretical comparison sets itself in a favorable position to adapt to the ever-changing climate of war.
Grau and Charles K. Bartles at Fort Leavenworth's Foreign Military Studies Office authored each product after Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea. Both works relay the systemic and "substantial differences between the Russian and US ways of warfare."6 F 7 The topic of the study relies on an understanding of the divergent methods countries use to prosecute warfighting at close range, and how those methods changed over time. Particular to this study is a recognition that Russian warfighting evolved from Soviet doctrine, and while some systems and supporting capabilities are the same, others changed with technological capacity. Unlike Russia, products on Chinese warfighting concepts and doctrine are more difficult to come by. Research reports authored by the RAND Corporation admit that analysis is, "Lacking examples of the PLA (People's Liberation Army) in combat."7 F 8 People's Liberation Army
39  
39  
US Department of the Army, Training and Doctrine Command Pamphlet 525-92, The Operating Environment and the Changing Character of Warfare (Washington DC: Government Publishing Office, October
2019), 5.2 Ibid., 6.
David G. Perkins, "Multi-Domain Battle: The Advent of Twenty-First Century War," Military Review (November-December 2017), 11.
Ardant du Picq, Battle Studies in Roots of Strategy: Book 2, Edited by David Jablonsky (Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 1987), 114, accessed October 2020, http://lumen.cgsccarl.com/login?
Mary Jo Hatch and Ann L. Cunliffe, Organization Theory: Modern, Symbolic, and Postmodern Perspectives, 4th ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018),
6 Ibid., 6.
Lester W. Grau, and Charles K. Bartles, The Russian Way of War: Force Structure, Tactics, and Modernization of the Russian Ground Forces (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2016), XIV.
Edmund J. Burke, Kristen Gunness, Cortez A. Cooper and Mark Cozad, People's Liberation Army Operational Concepts (Arlington, VA: RAND, 2020), 2.
Ibid., iii.
US Department of the Army, Army Futures Command Pamphlet Version 1-0, US Army Concept for Maneuver in Multi Domain Operations 2028-2040 (Washington DC: Government Publishing Office, July 2020), 1.
Ibid., 1.
US Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2020, Annual Report to Congress, (Washington DC,2020), v.
China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win (Washington DC: Defense Intelligence Agency,
2019), accessed 02 AUG 2020. www.dia.mil/Military-Power-Publications., 23. 20 Burke, Gunness, Cooper, and Cozad, People's Liberation Army Operational Concepts, 6. 21 Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win China Military Power, 24.
Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win China Military Power, 57.
Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations, 34.
Lester W. Grau, and Charles K. Bartles, The Russian Reconnaissance Fire Complex Comes of Age (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2016), 3.
Janes, "Military & Security Assessments Intelligence Centre China", Country Military Capabilities, accessed September 8, 2020, https://customer-janes com.lumen.cgsccarl.com/Military SecurityAssessments/Country/China.
Janes, "Military & Security Assessments Intelligence Centre Russia", Country Military Capabilities, accessed September 8, 2020, https://customer-janes com.lumen.cgsccarl.com/Military SecurityAssessments/Country/Russia.
Grau and Bartles, The Russian Reconnaissance Fire Complex Comes of Age, 14.   
Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations,
Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations, 63.
I wish to acknowledge my father, 
Randy D. Weidner. Your
Todd Bradley
Fort Leavenworth. Even
__//Signed/6 April 
2021/JKG//_________
Monograph Director James K. Greer
2021/MGK//_________
Seminar Leader Michael G. Kopp
School of Advanced Military Studies Brian A. Payne, COL
As US capabilities evolve into artificial intelligence, robotics, and (semi) autonomous systems, the networks in cyberspace and space that support them must also be protected. The I2CEWS detachments conducts cyber defense via "defensive kits provided to Cyber Command's cyber protection teams. These include deployable defensive cyber systems and tactical defensive cyber infrastructure."7 9F 
80
81
By discovering the intent and meaning behind all-domain operations through US service branches, it is possible to deduce a general understanding of all-domain implementation around the 25-kilometer lethal area. Observing near and mid-term crossdomain capability trends allows for a practical look at what assets enable penetration, disintegration, and exploitation. The next derives an evaluation of US and pacing threat alldomain warfare concepts through the use of military theory.
In order to evaluate all-domain system effects into the 25-kilometer lethal distance, it is necessary to introduce applicable military theory as a guide. As theories themselves are conceptualizations of a particular phenomena, they are highly subjective in nature. The following paragraphs introduce select military theories of John Boyd and Robert Leonhard. The component Finally, when military forces apply knowledge/ignorance and aggression into their schemes, they could exert control specifically into a 25-kilometer lethal area. This enables option acceleration in which multiple courses of action could be used to act upon opportunity or react to unforeseen circumstances. Such control also implies an effortless application of fast-transients, as changes in the 25-kilometer lethal area are planned for and even expected.
Now that potential operating environments are explored through theoretical application, it is possible to encapsulate the ideas into recommendations.
Based on presented observations and the creation of new understanding, it is now possible to make recommendations into which actions help Army forces in crossing the 25kilometer lethal area. Naturally, the recommendations must be feasible, suitable, and acceptable within the next ten years. Also, it is important to remember that time as the basis for technology maturation or military personnel turnover might constrict applicable options. It should be reasonable to assume that there is not a single-factor approach into crossing the 25-kilometer lethal area. In fact, multiple approaches pursued by connected stakeholders increase the chances of viability.
Knowledge is power, especially in the context of information warfare. This requires a certain level of leader broadening. According to ADP 6-22, developing military-technical expertise is the foundation of competence, which in turn serves as a significant basis of professional trust in teams.1 18F 
119