# ID: 9d20adaa12ed450ca096724d1c065ca2
# Title: Air and Space Power Journal. Volume 21, Number 2, Summer 2007
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2007.0
# Fulltext:
Granted, the text suffers from problems that typically arise when authors attempt to turn an aca demic thesis into a book-that is, too many quota tions, poor layout, and wordiness that makes it dif ficult for the reader to follow the author's key points.
Nevertheless, these flaws should in no way stop the intelligence professional, historian, or po litical scientist from studying the data therein.
The Intelligence Archipelago is a gold mine of information, and the annexes-a collection of executive orders and legislative bills-show the path of reform to the current intelligence community.
I highly rec ommend it to officers, intelligence professionals, and anyone interested in government reform.
Historians have well documented the defeats of armies and navies but have paid far less attention to the defeat of air forces.
What does exist is usually in histories of the greater conflict of which the air campaigns were a part.
In Why Air Forces Fail, per haps the first study of its kind, 11 well-known histo rians of aerial warfare take on this noteworthy task with short but detailed and engaging essays.
The contributors consider the defeats of the air forces of Poland (1939), France (1940), Arab countries (1967), Germany and Austria-Hungary (1914-18), Italy (1939-43), Imperial Japan (1942-45), Ger many (1940-45), Argentina (Falklands War, 1982), Russia (1941), United States (1941-42), and Brit ain (1941-42).
Through these essays, the book ex plains the complex, often deep-seated foundations for these catastrophes.