# ID: 9dc72c722a744c40a5ed586bc8eaadba
# Title: Peace-keeping and FM100-5: do they match
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1994.0
# Fulltext:
C stmatea to average i hour per reworite. inciuaing vie time for reviewingIcn rtructIon$. ealching existing data ore Jdr~eno the collection of .nfoermaiion Sena comment, r?.jrding tni.I burOct estimate or anly other aspecs offthsi ths Oddoeno iaslingtofi eadquarlers Srice. ort
The collapse of the familiar bipolar structures of the Cold War is creating a new world order symbolized by events in Russia, Somalia, Bosnia, and other countries. To keep pace with this change Operations Other Than War (OOTW) has come to be a formal part of United States Army doctrine.
OOTW, which includes peacekeeping operations, are addressed in the June 1993 edition of the U. S. Army Field Manual 100-5, Q liog. As National Military Strategy and Army doctrine attempts to define peacekeeping there is increasing concern focused on policy and strategy of UN directed peacekeeping operations. The number and difficulty of recent UN peacekeeping operations greatly exceeds the previous 40 years of UN activities. FM 100-5 lays out post-Cold War OOTW principles for military commanders and planners. The roots of peacekeeping as we know it today are, however, found in the Cold War past. Peacekeeping was in a large respect a response to the environment and conditions of that time. Of importance to military decision makers and planners is an understanding of the current OOTW principles of objective, unit of effort, legitimacy, perseverance, restraint, and security in a historical context. Understanding these principles in a historial context should lead to a better understanding of their utility and true worth in current and future peacekeeping operations.
This paper seeks to examine the utility ol the 01TW principles in supporIt of the requirements ror peacekeeping operations. An historical perspective is achieved by appJying the OOTW r.incipes to a Cold War UN pes.cake A=* operation. The selected operation is the United Nations Operation in the Congo (ONUC) from 1960 to 1964. ONUC is important because it historically sets the foundation for all following UN peacekeeping operations. It also falls |I into an area called chapter 61/2 or "enforced peacekeeping."( 1) An evaluation of the current OOTW principles in this operation is done by using an adaptation of the five step process used by Eliot A. Cohen and John Gooch in their book Military Misfortunes. 
(2)
Although the OOTW principles are written for the military, the principles are important enough to be considered at all levels in peacekeeping operations.
The principal findings and conclusions are summarizein the last section. 
Congo, 1960
Congo, -1964
(5)
(6)
The a'etgiaw" he'd ,, e view that the lack of technically trained Congolese would mean continued Belgian control Belgian expectation's and attitude's toward the new Congo were graphically reflected by the Force Publique comnmander, Lieutenant General I Emil Janssens, who wrote "Before Independence -After Independence." 
(8)
A'
The Round Table Conference proposed a four year transition to independence, but Congolese leaders sought and won a compressed six month plan. An "Executive College" was established in March 1960 and comprised six Congolese leaders to serve as a transitional regime and drafters of a constitution. Among the six are three that played a major roles in the futuca Congo crisis: Joseph iasavubu, Patrice Lumumba, and Moise Tshombe.
Joseph Kasavubu, at the time 50, was a leader od the Bakongo tribe which was centered along the Atlantic coost and included the area of the national capitol, Leopoldville. His Alliance de Ba.-kongo (ABAKO) favored federal structures with a large degree of autonomy in the provinces. Patrice Lumumba, than 35, was a nationalist and leader of Movement Nationale Congolaise (MNC) whose power base was in the northeast around Stanleyville. MNC's goal was for one nation with strong unitary structures.
The US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), however, "suspected Lumumba of planning a communist takeover."(9) Moise Tshombe, 42, lead a coalition party of southern Katangan tribes, the Confederation des Associations Tribales du Katanga (CONAL•AT). Considered pro-west, he tried to secede before independence day, but was prevented by the Belgian government. As the future leader of Katanga he appointed Belgians to Katangan civil administration and military (Katanga gendarmerie) leadership positions.
Elections to provincial assemblies and national parliament were held in   Hammarskjold also sees the role of the Secretary-General in a speciai way.
His concept of shared responsibility is not one of shared decision making, but The Cohen and Gooch model consist of five steps:
1. What is the failure?
2. What were the critical tasks that went incomplete or unfulfilled?
3. Conduct a "layered analysis" of the different levels of the organization involved in the misfortune.
4. Construct an "analytical matrix" that presents the key problems graphically.
5. Derive the "pathways to misfortune" from the matrix.( 
69
They develop their three basic failures by applying their five step method to five historical cases.(70) Their remedies for these failures are to learn, anticipate, and adapt.
Learning is linked to historical study and an ability for the organization to tread the middle road between slavish acceptance or unthinking rejection Uf the models presented. Anticipation as developed by Cohen and Gooch is more than just predicting enemy action, it includes comparing the enemy action with one's own way of war. To overcome this problem of anticipation many nations use doctrine. A failure in doctrine is likely to result in a failure to anticipate. Failure to adapt is linked directly to Clausewitz's concept of chance and the opportunities that can be presented. To seize these opportunities the "conception of command" of the military organization must be part of the organizational makeup. "Some systems .1 command made adaptation to unexpected or unforeseen circumstances relatively easy, while others made it virtually impossible."( 
7
The Cohen and Gooch approach is modified to examine the principles of OOTW as applied to ONUC. The question for step one is therefore modified from, "What is the failure?", to "Are the principles of OOTW required for peacekeeping operations supported by the historical events in ONUC?" The critical tasks for the analysis, step two of the Cohen and Gooch model, become the OOTW principles themselves: objective, unity of effort, legitimacy, perseverance, restraint, and security. These terms are defined in Appenux A. Constructing step three,the "layered analysisW uses the various echelons involved in ONUC. The "layers" selected for analysis are: the UN and Security Council; the Secretary-General and his office; the Congolese;
ONUC's civilian level; and, ONUC`s military level. After the layered analysis of the critical tasks an analytical matrix will be constructed and conclusions drawn.
Of importance to this modified analysis is the relationship between failure to anticipate and doctrine. Anticipation as used by 
Cohen
86
'Unity of effort in the ONUC forces are less than acceptable. ONUC is plagued with numerous problems that affects its ability to operate in a united manner. The effort is multinational with varying quality of officers, specialized units, and troops. The political orientation of some troops also influence their effectiveness. 
(87)
:.: mi~:--. -ROUND THREE is a result of the use of mostly Indian troops, a forerunner of the "lead nations" concept, and US transportation support .Wtfmaey. The legitimacy of peacekeeping operations in accordance with FM 100-5 is a function of perceptions. The force is perceived to be functioning within the standards that constitute a genuine right of the host government or a recognized agency. The peacekeeping force is not to undercut the legitimacy of the host government by performing acts that detract from the host government. Impartiality is critical to suce.sss and must be demonstrated at all times. In the absence of a legitimate government, operations must be conducted in such a manner that the peacekeeping force does not inadvertently legitimize one faction while alienating another.
Assembly are the foundation for the legitimacy of ONUC. The passage of these resolutions empowered the Secretary-General to act on-behalf of the UN and the world body. No direct opposition is mounted against thest actions in the United Nations. Although legitimate, the abstention vot some countries (see Figure 
1
November resolutions, the mandate did not formally use Article 39, 41, or 42 of the UN Charter. The resolutions therefore are not "enforcement measures." The Security Council really set the conditions for this principle by charging the Secretary-General with implementation of the mandate.
However, as the Security Council seeks to loosen this restraint they appear less able to do so. The Congo is the only time the Security Council voted to end a civil war. 
(95)
As already seen Hammarskjold adherence to selected principles acted as a restraint. His personal commitment to the UN Charter and non-use of force were transmitted to his representatives and military commanders in the field. Hammarskjold preference was always for the diplomatic approach.
When information on the mercenary recruitment system be was found in April 1961, he uses a personal approach to the countries concerned to close down the centers.(96) Hammarskjold's death did not reduce the diplomatic approach, even though U Thant was less opposed to the use of force. In The UN special representatives showed restraint as directed by New York.
Their restraint was however interpreted by one Congolese faction as support for the other. This type of restraint added to the uncertainty of the situation and to a large degree the chance to achieve the end state ONUC would eventual withdrawal and transfer the UN operation to some local authorities.
The failure to aggressively pursue the role of military assistance from the first resolution undercut the ability of the UN to transfer ONUC's mission at a later date. The inability of ONUC and the Congolese to build a more loyal and effective ANC was a major short fall Their failure to ensure that ROE especially on the issue of self-defense was well understood added to the perception of weakness.
The greatest impact, was felt at the troop leveL The complexity of the Congo operation has been called "enforced peacekeeping" or 'Chapter V1 1/2."(98) The restraint placed on the force was compounded by the poor training and quality of some of the force. Well trained units, Indian and Nigerian, had less difficulty under the"self-defense" only rule. Most apparent was the lack of understanding about "self-defense." Failure to understand that ROE lead to some ONUC forces surrendering their arms. This leads to a perception of weakness. However, when force was applied ONUC  
,
,
•,
,
;
,
•,
This review and analysis of ONUC reinforces the observation that this was a complex, difficult, and controversial operation. Its "success" is subject to the individual criteria use and emphasis placed on its various results or lack of results. The evaluation of how much support the OOTW principles provided ONUC is likewise a subjective evaluation by the author. There are two parts to this conclusion: the support for the OOTW principles in ONUC, and some considerations for future peacekeeping operations.
As in war all the principles of OOTW were not equally important. The Cohen and Gooch method brings out the dynamic relationship of the principles to each other, and the dynamic effect the layers have on the principles. A weakness or strength at one layer can be negated at another.
The more critical principles in ONUC were objective, legitimacy, and restraint. Although not all the objectives proved attainable, it is clear that the mandate tried to more clearly define the objectives and be flexible and decisive as events changed. However, complexity increased with each resolution. Unique to ONUC was the vision that the Secretary-Generals imposed on the operation. Their objectives decided the road for achievement of the end state more than the written mandates. The consistent objectives of Belgium troop withdrawal, the territorial integrity and political independence of the Congo, and removal of mercenaries were accomplished. Legitimacy while more complex was also consistently supported. Despite the withdrawal of consent by the Central Congolese government and Soviet and French support, ONUC continued. The Secretary-General used the "threat to international peace" to legitimize the UN actions.
This interpretation was accepted and supported. This thus became the underlying theme of legitimacy for the majoriiy of member nations regardless or the real threat. Restraint is supported in ONUC but it is driven by political principle versus prudent and appropriate military capability.
Non use of force is so prominent that it affects the interpretation of self-  47. 
Lefever,
64,
[91]
[92]
Verrier,
[61]
[62]
[63]
[66]
[67]
[107]
[108]
[109]
[110]
[111]
[112]
and Verrier,
Lefever,
195. 76
Belgian troops except those seconded in Tshombe's gendarmerie (in reality the Katangan Army) depart Kamanga in September 1960. The Katang& gendarmerie was set up after Belgians neutralized the ANC in Katanga.(23) As Tshombe backed down a new crisis started in Kasai province that continued to under cut the Central Congolese Government and lead to months of confused action and reaction by UN and Congolese forces. Albert Kalonji, leader of the Baluba tribe in Kasai, proclaimed statehood for his tribe. He joined Katanga in succeeding form the Central Government. Lumumba responded on 23 August by using 100 Soviet trucks and 16 o, l1yushin transports and crews to move ANC soldiers into southern Kasai to crush the newest rebellion. Their subsequent movement was to be into KatangaL Lumumba's forces, however, committed atrocities in south Kasai A• that caused a leadership crisis in the Central government.(24) On 5 September Kasavubu as Head-of-State announced the dismissal of ~ consulting with the Cabinet or Head-of-State. In Kasavubu's eyes, Lumumba I8 was a dictator.(25) Lumumba countered by "firing" Kasavubu. In an effort to calm the situti.a Cordier closed all airports and radio stations under UN control. This acdion was perceived as being pro-Kasavubu because Cordier's
"
"
o(Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace, 1993), "60 2 _ _ _ __,
perception is that MORTHOR exceeded the authority of the mandate and the guidance of the Secretary-General.
ONUC's forces acted within the guidance provided. They responded to the requirements placed upon them by their civilian higher headquarters.
Operation MORTHOR was conducted under the understanding that it was authorized. The only example of when military operations exceeded the authorization of civilian authority is in ROUND THREE. Brigadier ItS. Naranha forced his way across the Lufira River near Jadotville due to military necessity. His action was supported later by U Thant.( 
90
A-General Assembly
The following terms are defined in FM 100-5, Q•ffitnI (Washington, DC:
HQ Delpa'tment of the Army, 1993) pages 13-3 to 13-4.
Objective: Direct every military operation toward a clearly defined, decisive, and attainable objective.
UniWy,) Effort, Seek unity of effort toward every objective.
Leziimla* Sustain the willing acceptance by the people of the right of the government to govern or of a group or agency to make and carry out decisions.
SRr M s Prepare for the measured, protracted application of military capability in support of strategic aims.
Rsraint Apply appropriate military capability prudently.
Security: Nover permit hostile factions to acquire an unexpected advantage.
Security Council to the General Assembly does not always mean that the SGeneral Assembly will act faster or more impartial. See also eaceng Handbook. I11/17-III 
/18,
[19]
[20]
Lefever,
41,
[39]
[40]
[41]
[33]
[34]
Lefever,
35. 57
Lefever,
[49]
[50]
and Urquhart,
[457]
[458]
[459]
[460]
[461]
[462]
[463]
[464]
[465]
[466]
[467]
[468]
[469]
[470]