# ID: 9e6844ac20504251ae63799cf09e011b
# Title: Educating the post-modern US Army strategic planner: Improving the organizational construct
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2003.0
# Fulltext:
Professional attainment, based upon prolonged study, and collective study at colleges, rank by rank, and age by age... those are the title reeds of the conunanders of the foture armies, and the secret of future victories 
(Winston Churchill)
The secret of future victory in future warfere will, as Churchill cautioned, depend largely on how military leaders are educated in war. Reviewing the current status of the US Army's 'prolonged collective study' of war is an important contributor to an effective transformation to twenty-first century warfare -ihe dawn of an era that brings war closer to its Clausewitzian ideal, as a "continuation of politics by other means."^ The challenge to military theorists, scholars, and decision makers -governors and their generals -has always been to rationalize the theory, the history, and the doctrinal practices of war, as policy, during any period or qpoch of warfare, in order to effectively prosecute war policy and win in war, whenever and wherever war might come. As the purposes of war changes over time political leaders and their miUtary lieutenants must releam war. Success in the education of martial experts is a key ingredient to success in future vrar.
Theorist and scholars alike have recognized throughout history, occurrences of "profound, discontinuous changes in the conduct -sometimes even the nature -of warfare." Such "Revolutions in MiUtary Affairs,"^ or RMAs, fimdamentally alter the character and the conduct of mihtary operations.'* the late 1980s and 1990s took place amid this environment of "limited" wars of self-determination, ethnic cleansing, environmental degradation, forced population displacements, narco-terrorism, etc. In feet, the debates and the policy reforms that have commenced since the late 1980s found their genesis in the recognized shortcomings of the United States and its miMtary services to effectively meet the security challenges of the times.
The Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 (GNA'86) was the seminal legislative-led reform; largely the response to the lackluster performance of US armed forces during the Iran hostage rescue attempt (Desert One) and the Grenada invasion (Urgent Fury).'^ On the heels of the GNA '86 came the Panel on Military Education of the House Armed Services Committee 
(1987)
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2002)
(New York: Vintage Press, 2001)
GPO, 1996)
(Skelton Report)
Em p h a sis Level
4 STA R 1 0 0 % 7 10 0% 0 % / 0 % 3 STA R 1 0 % / 6 0 % 90% / 40%
2 STA R 8 % / 5 0 % 92% / 50%
1 S TAR 5 % / 4 0 % 9 5% / 6 0% 0-4/0-6 2 % / 2 0 % 9 8% / 80% 0-2/0 -3 0% / 5% 1 0 0 % / 9 5 % These figures are approxim ate "■■"■■■■" ■ Ill' ■"!
But the shortfall has been identified and actions are currently underway to rectify the problem. What is the current 'scorecard' regarding strategic planner education? Does it reveal an educational gap similar to the joint specialty officer shortfall? If so, what is missing in the current master strategist curricultun and education system?
Where Congressman Ike Skelton, in a lead article for the May 1992 edition of Military Review, asked, "JPME ... are we there yet?," this monograph asks the question, "mastery in strategic art and planning ... are we there yet?" More direct, this monograph ponders over whether or not the current (modem) JPME system, is joint enough, civilian-based enough, and operationally-focused enough to adequately meet the demands of information-age war pohcy and warfare. While anti-intellectualism" still haunts the culture of the US military to a significant degree, the complexities of the post-modem intemational politico-miUtary environment have awakened the US military to the broader context of warfighting, and has opened military minds to the notion that expending time, effort, money, and other resources to the education of officers in the widening domain of functions and fields of study that increasingly fell within the context of "war" is not only a worthwhile expenditure, but is a necessary area of competency that must be incorporated into the PME system if the US military hopes to dominate in future war.
The military services have achieved great success in their efforts toward joint effects-based operations, with those successes tested and largely proven through the experiments of real battle and campaign in the deserts of the Middle East (Operation Desert Storm), and in the jungles and urban terrain of Panama (Operation Just Cause). Yet, the US experience with war during the 1990s did not manifest the 'decisive' victories of the type that the Gulf and the Panamanian experiences did. There were successes '* A lack of expertise in the joint integration of service capabilities for joint effects was the specific finding, yet, the more general and substantial learning point that following every major war, the United States military was compelled to establish new and/or redesign existing educational programs. After the American Civil War, the US Army established the School of Application for Infantry and Cavalry in 1881, and the US Navy established the Naval War College in 1884. During World War U, the Joint Staff created the Army-Navy Staff College, followed up after the conclusion of WWII with the creation of the National War College and the Industrial College of the Armed Forces (ICAF). Positive and negative experiences in the execution (implementation) of war policy have not only led to new institutions and institutional designs; they have also led to new procedures for the education, training, and experienced-based learning (hereafter referred to, in combination, as 'education') of individual ofBcers and small cohorts of speciaUzed war policy experts. The GNA'86 and the Skelton Panel gave birth to, and have continually emphasized since the late 1980s, the Joint Specialty Officer (JSO). Again, the emphasis has consistently been more about the integration of multi-service effects rather than about joint capabiUties themselves. See,... " See Colonel Matthews, "The Uniformed Intellectual and His Place in American Arms," Military Review (July/August 2002).
during the 1990s, and failures; however, 'decision' on these post-modem 'battlefields' was political and strategic, coining about only as an indirect result of direct military actions on the battlefield. In Somalia 
(1993)
Tracing America's experiences in "major war" since, and including, the Revolutionary War, the historical record leaves the nation with a foreboding reality: much of America's innovations in both its capacity to make war and its capacity to understand and accommodate the changing nature of war have come late in the day, after the "loss" of the 'first battle'. ^^ Armies generally fight along lines of how they were prepared.^' Therefore, it is important to examine how the US Army has developed its organizations, equipment, war planning, training, and rules for war -its battle doctrine. This monograph argues that transforming the educational system is the critical first-requirement among equals in affecting an effective revolution in military affairs.
'^ Kenneth Allard, Somalia Operations: Lessons Learned (University Press of the Pacific, 2002); Jonathan Stevenson, Losing Mogadishu (New York: Airlife Publishing, 1995); Colonel Lawrence E. Casper, ed.. Falcon Brigade: 
Combat and Command in Somalia and Haiti (New Yoik: Lynne Riener Publishers, 2000)
Stoffl, eds., America's First Battles: 1776
-1965
From the Need for JSOs to the Call for 'Uniformed Strategists'
In 1989, General (Ret.) John R. Galvin^^ added a critical literary piece to a then growing body of literature that recognized and debated over an evident shortfell in the knowledge and understanding of strategic affairs within the armed services; a shortcoming somewhat similar to Congressman Skekon's recognized gap in joint-specialized war experts. General (Ret.) Galvin wrote:
The strategist in uniform provides advice to political authority in the development of national policy (what is to be achieved) and national strategy (how to achieve it). He has a role in forming national strategy and policy by explaining capabilities, the limitations of armed force, and how military power can be used as an element of national power.^
The very title of General (Ret.) Galvin's Parameters article, "What's the matter with being a strategist?," spoke to the prevailing skepticism of anything "political" and therefore, "strategic" within the military culture of the 1970s and 1980s.^ General (Ret.) Galvin recognized the prevalence of a systemic gap between national strategic aims in war policy, the capacity of the military experts to effectively translate those often ambiguous ends into tangible military objectives, and the ability (and willingness) of senior military leaders to advise political authorities on the policy setting, planning, and execution of war policy.^^ Earlier, in 1984, Thomas J. Crackel had alluded to where the gap between the capability to understand the national strategic aims of war and the capacity to translate strategy into tactics might reside:
American military education has at its heart two crucial processes -the making of lieutenants and the making of colonels. How we prepare young men [and women] to lead others into battle, and how we ensure that those who assume the highest commands are well-qualified, are issues that must be addressed with utmost seriousness, because failure here can have the gravest consequences.^ ^^ See John R. The two processes -the making of lieutenants and the making of colonels -continue to define, albeit in broad terms, the current (modem) professional military education system of the US armed forces in general, and for sake of emphasis in this monograph, the US Army, more specifically. 
From an organizational perspective,^^ the division of educational labor, authority, and responsibility within the US Army^^ seems to affect the operationalization and integration of tactical, operational, and strategic education, and therefore, effects in war policy implementation. As the figure above depicts, there are considered to be three distinct levels of war, each overlapping the other and arrayed in a hierarchical manner. The primary responsibilities for education and training within the tactical band lies with the Army's "basic" and "advanced courses." This tactical band emphasizes platoon through division "battles and engagements."^' At the higher end of the tactical band and overlapping with the operational level is the Command Arms Services Staff School. At this stage. Corps-level battles and "operations" are the primary educational and training focus.^° The seam between the operational and the lower-end strategic band fells within the educational and training responsibility of the Command and  
and Calvin Jillson (Boulder, Co: Westview Press, 1993);
and Theda Skocpol, Protecting Solders and Mothers (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993)
General Staff College (CGSC). CGSC focuses on "subordinate campaign plans, and joint, services and combined operations."^' The US Army War College (AWC) is the primary institution for strategic level education (theater strategy and campaign plans).
One expert and faculty member at the AWC makes the point succinctly when he states that,
[T]he 'compartmentalization of skills' so typical of earlier training and education (civilian as well as military) is less and less adequate for the roles and responsibilities today's security practitioners and certainly senior military leaders must assume.^^ Experts seem to be coming to the same conclusions; that what is needed for success in the twenty-first century security environment are practitioners with the commensurate skills, knowledge, and capabilities that enable them to effectively practice the strat^c art. Scholars and practitioners agree that to practice this "strategic art"^^ success&lly requires the integration of three related roles: strategic theorist, strategic leader, and strategic practitioner,^ or rather, the usefiil merging of leadership, management, and action.
The word strategy is one of the most ill defined and errantly used terms in the mihtary lexicon.
The term has had a different context during different time periods in military history; what was once termed "strategic" today refers to a whole other domain of warfare -the operational. Strategy is about both product and process.^^ '"Ibid. 
'' Ibid.,
22. '2 Ibid.,
25. '^ See Richard A. Chilcoat,
Strategic
The experts are noticing that there is a need for strategic leaders who can coordinate ends, ways and means, strategic practitioners who can apply ends, ways, and means (and translate non-or extra-martial objectives into miUtary objectives that are feasible, acceptable, and suitable), and strategic theorist that can formulate ways, ends, and means, all on behalf of fulfilling US national security interests.^^ What is desired and demanded are "complete strategists,"  
John Shy,"*' in his retrospective on America's "First Battles," found that the pecuUarity of this nation's experiences in first battle Ues mainly in "the lack of recent, relevant combat experience by forces engaged."*^ Testimony of senior military leaders regarding their first contact with post-modem warfare in the early 1990s spoke directly to a "lack of knowing" and understanding of the new ways and meanings of war .''^ War as they once knew it, had changed; these leaders had to releam war, or at least some aspects of it, "on the fly." Shy also noted that political circumstances still appear to have two major effects on first battle experiences: politics limits the military possibilities to certain resources and locations, and pushes strategy in certain directions at certain times."** Understanding, appreciating and then learning to wield these "political limitations" as an effective war tool seems to be an important element of success in fiiture war. This can be achieved through an officer education experience that emphasizes the civiUan-political aspects of war policy.
As Shy notes, "when doctrine lacks clarity or credibiUty, soldiers at every level will fall back on other notions of warfare, whatever their source -prior experience, film images, even ^* Morris Janowitz, The Professional SoldierQiew York, NY: The Free Press, 1971), 428. ^^ For Janowitz, the "warrior-scholar" is the collective of all three military typologies. '"' Janowitz, 428. 
A Review of the Theory, the History, and the Literature Edward Luttwak, arguably one of the preeminent experts of modem military strategic thought, found in his long years of study a paradox in the logic of strategy."** As in 'normal' politics and poUcy, there is a horizontal and a vertical dimension to strategy making. In the horizontal dimension one finds war and strategy's true nature -policy and plans, the result of contention between adversaries "who seek to oppose, deflect, and reverse each other's moves" in war."^ Along the vertical, one sees the multi-dimensional nature of strategic policymaking -the vital interplay between the different levels of conflict -the tactical, technical, operational. Like in policy making, there is no natural harmony betwixt and between these aspects of strategy. The paradoxes that define the overall process of strategy are only rationalized as policy is rationalized -through the operationalization of strategic aims and vision into tangible and executable plans and policies.^" The operational domain facilitates the effective dialogue between strategy and tactics; it permits the dialectic to take place in a fimctional and effective way.
In his study of strategy, operations, and tactics, B.H. Liddell Hart noted the following:
History bears witness to the vital part that the 'prophets' have played in human progress -which is evidence of the ultimate practical value of expressing unreservedly the truth as one sees it. Yet it also becomes clear that the acceptance and spreading of their vision has always depended on another class of ^' Shy, 349. ''* Ironically, the same non-linearity that one finds in the world of policy and policy making exist in the realm of strategy, strategic planning, and strategy making. ^° This is done within normal policy circles through the apparatuses of bureaucracy. In the world of strategy, the contrariness of strategic ends and resources available are rationalized through the use of operational art and science. It is the procedure -the fimctions and formulas -at the operational level of war policy that allows for a logical fitting together of strategy and tactics. ^' This monograph puts forward an argument. It contends that this natural paradox that always persist between grand and national strategic vision and the means and resources available to any national state or other sovereign entity can oidy be effectively brought into coherence through the processes of planning at the operational level of war policy. Moreover, this lashing together of the ends, ways, and means of war policy must be accomplished by individuals and small bodies of individuals educated, trained, and experienced in all three domains -both dimensions -of war poUcy.
men -'leaders' who had to be philosophical strategists, striking a compromise between truth and men's reactivity to it/^ What Liddell Hart reveals is the core elements to war itself-war as theory, war as history, and war as it is practiced at any given time and under any given conditions. He acknowledges the need for both prophets and leaders in war policy making -those able to understand war in the broad and the abstract; those capable of putting war's plans into action. *^ This chapter intends to build support for this latter pr(q)osition by first discussing the history of strategy, as theory and practice, from the late-eighteenth century until tod^. This short histiography of strategy, operations, and tactics will provide a review of the literature surrounding the issue ofmilitary strategy and operational art and science. It wiU also introduce some of the more prominent writings and musings on the subject of how to educate strategists, operational planners, and military tacticians. What is strategy? What is meant by 'operational art'? How do the two differ, relate, and inform each other? Answers to these questions are important in and of themselves, yet they take on a particular importance in the context of this stady. What these domains of war policy are, separate from and in relation to one another and the tactical realm -execution) informs the alternative approaches to the education, training, and ejqperiencing of specialist, expert in strategy, operational planning, and poUcy formulation and implementatioa Whether or not (and how) the knowledge, skills, attributes of strategist differs from the core competencies of operational artists is the question that must form the baseline of any redesign of the strategist education system. The evolution from eighteenth to twentieth century witnesses a shift from the agendasetting, policy formulation, and execution of war poUcy being vested in one or a small body of ruler-generals (soldier-kings) to a growing separation of war and warfighting into separate entities -the setting of war policy into the hands of the ruler and the power of execution of war plans (tactics and techniques) into the hands of the general. By the turn of the twentieth century, the compartmentalization and separation of the domains of war expands even fiirther, with theorizing over issues of strategy felling to the purview of academics, vice the poUcymaking felling to civihan leaders and the execution of war policy remaining with the imiformed experts.
The emergence of a formally recognized 'operational' domain of war, first defined simply in terms of logistical lines of communication (supply), but eventually expanding to include the command and control of forces within particular geographic theaters of war/operation, and the array offerees in time, space, and purpose for realization of the higher war (grand strategic) aims.
The shift fi-om tactical (execution based) driven stratagems to capabilities-driven strategizing (planning). The rise of force development and modernization (research, and development; programming and budgeting; acquisition and procurement) of weapons systems and related technologies, normally specific to a particular miUtary arm or service.
The expansion of the lexicon, by the twentieth century, to include and distinguish between grand strategy (multi-national; extra-national and extra-governmental) and national strategy; fi-om national strategy to the military strategy; toward theater-specific campaign strategies and the development and husbanding of service-specific, force-based stratagems advocating particular operational methodologies and tactical techniques and procedures.
54 This point is an important one not only to the arguments put forward in this study, but more importantly, to the relationship between strategy and policy, how that relationship has changed over time (due to many fectors, not the least of which was the effect of technological advancements on the growing scope and scale of military operations), and how the shift in the relationship can affect war policy itself. B.H. Liddell Hart makes the point more clearly: "to break down the distinction between strategy and policy would not matter much if the two fimctions were normally combined in the same person, as with a Frederick or a Napoleon. But as such autocratic soldier-rulers have been rare in modem times and became temporarily extinct in the nineteenth century, the effect was insidiously harmfiil. For it encouraged soldiers to make the preposterous claim that policy should be subservient to their conduct of operations, and, especially in democratic countries, it drew the statesman on to overstep the definite border of his sphere and interfere with his military employees in the actual uses of their tools. See 
B.H. Liddell Hart (1954, 319-320)
The evolution of the lexicon, particularly in western political-military society, and the commensurate complication of the issue of strategy, operations, and tactics derived logically from the growing complexity of war policy itself What could once be studied, written about, understood, taught, planned, put into practice ... .and more often than not won through a single decisive battle or engagement by single individuals (soldier-rulers)^^ evolved into a complex policy issue that expanded well beyond the power and capacity of a single person -or nationand equally, could not be determined through single battle. By the mid-twentieth century, it had become all too clear that war pohcy could rarely be determined even through a series of battles and engagements (operations and campaigns).
Understanding this progression is important. The growing complexity of war policy altered the civil-miUtary relationship defining war making.^^ The challenge of the twenty-first century is to develop an educational system that can produce in one expert or small body of experts, all those skills and attributes endemic to the planning and execution of war policy, while maintaining the delicate civil-military balance vital to American republican, representative democracy.
Defining the three policy domains.
For better or for worst (and beyond the subject of argument here), the philosophy and works of Carl von Clausewitz provides the baseline of western military thought and United States military practice. His treatise on war was, by his own definition, a continuation of politics and ^* Again, Liddell 
Hart (1954, 319)
In the war vernacular, implementation or execution of policy falls within the context of tactics. According to Thomas E. Griess^^, tactics is "the planning, training, and control of the ordered arrangements (formations) used by military organizations when engagement between opposing forces is imminent or underway."^^ Taken fi-om the Ghreek taktos, meaning 'ordered or arranged', tactics is the art of fighting battles. The nineteenth century saw the need to distinguish between two levels of tactics. The first level, grand tactics, spoke to the tactics of large organizations; the second -that of minor tactics-related to small organizations and/or organizations consisting entirely of one military arm (i.e., infantry, cavalry, or artillery).* Being the most practical and identifiable domains of policy, implementation, or tactics, is left at this level of definition. Three important points must be made with regard to the implementation level of policy and war before moving on to the more complex (and for this study, the more relevant) domains:
• While war (policy) is an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will (Clausewitz, On War, p. 75), it is vital that we remember that "essentially war [policy] is fighting, for fighting is the only principle in the manifold of activities^' generally designated as war."*^ • That is to say, the de facto policy is the implemented policy.
• And to risk overstressing the point, execution is a key determinant in the prosecution of "good" policy.
* Suffice it to say at this point, that a vital ingredient to all successful strategist and planners of the past (and arguably for the future) was an experience and training-based education in policy execution, or tactics, techniques, and procedures.
While the term, 'strategy' derives from the Greek word, strategos (meaniog "die art and skill of the general), modem definition of strategy transcends the military reabn. Even within the military policy sub-field, miUtary leaders generally work closely vnth civilian officials in the field of strategy. Contemporary understandings of 'strategy' and that which is 'strategic' prevail in this monograph for three main reasons. First, from a comparative study of eighteenth and nineteenth century conceptions of strategy, what was then regarded as strategy, today more describes the higher operational level of warfare. These nineteenth century definitions of strategy will be used to describe the contemporary operational domain of policy and war. Second, modem conceptions of strategy are the most relevant, in a practical sense, to this study's purposes. It is the production of the strategic planner of today and tomorrow that is of concem here.
Correspondingly, it is the contemporary political-military conception of strategy that is of importance. Third, modem understandings of strategy are most relevant due not only to the transcendence of the term beyond the purview of the military professional, but also because of the practical expansion of the military domain itself beyond that which has imtil recently been more comfortably defined as "purely military." The notion of war and foreign policy as being a policy domain exercised "beyond the water's edge"*' is outdated. It is no longer quite as useful (except perhaps in an academic sense) to distinguish between that which is domestic and that which is foreign; what is politics and what is war. This modem conception is the one that tomorrow's strategic planners will be forced to face and contend with.  
, 2000)
Thomas E. Griess provides a useful and usable definition of strategy. Griess defines strategy as "the planning for, coordination of, and concerted use of the multiple means and resources available to an alliance, a nation, a political group, or a commander, for the purpose of gaining an advantage over a rival."^ While some have defined strategy as "position" 
(Porter 1980
(Porter :1985))
The following chart summarizes some of the more prominent works in the fields of classical and modem thought on the subject of strategy ^ Griess, p. ' The preceding summary of classical and modem thoughts on strategy reveals:
The ever-present connection between policy aims and execution of (realization of) those aims at the level of tactical battles and engagements.
A progression of the concept of strategy to a point where the art and the science both reach a complexity where command and control over both are rarely found in the genius of one individual ruler-general. As the distinction between the art and the science of strategy becomes more evident and clear, the need for specialization in strategy, versus operations, versus tactical implementation becomes more evident.
An ever-present and growing relevance of geography in the conception and realization of strategy. As military operations expand geographically, the complexity of the conception of strategic aims, the formulation of strategic and operational plans, and the design and implementation of (military) objectives, operations, and missions takes a more formal shape; the importance of geography changes the command and control of war poUcy geometrically.
The emergence of a formal, operational level, domain of war policy is of particular importance, for it is the level of operational planning and processing where a nation or entity translates its often intangible and unquantifiable strategic aims, interests, and goals into actions; where resources are rationalized with strategic ends and purposes.
The following table summarizes what some of the seminal works in the fields of strategy and military operations have to say about operational art, science, and planning: 
The use of military forces to achieve strategic goals through the design, organization, integration, and conduct of theater strategies, campaigns, major operations, and battles (para 2-5) Operational framework -the arrangement of friendly forces and resources in time, space, and purpose with respect to each other and the enemy or situation. It consist of the area of operations, battlespace, and battlefield organization.
Operational art -The employment of military forces to attain strategic and/or operational objectives through the design, organization, integration, and conduct of strategies, campaigns, major operations, and battles. Operational art translates the joint force commander's strategy into operational design, and, ultimately, tactical action, by integrating the key activities of all levels of war.
The link between strategy and tactics; our aim at the operational level is to get strategically meaningful results from tactical efforts; involves deciding when, where, for what purposes, and under what conditions to give battle -or to refuse battle -in order tofulflU the strategic goal; operations govern the deployment of forces, their commitment to or withdrawal fi-om combat, and the sequencing of successive tactical actions to achieve strategic objectives; although the operational level of war is sometimes described as large-unit tactics, it is erroneous to define the operational level according to echelon of command.; regardless of the size of a military force or the scope of the tactical action, if it is being used to directly achieve a strategic objective, then it is being employed at the operational level (pgs. 5-9)
Operational level of war -the level of war at which campaigns and major operations are planned, conducted, and sustained to accomplish strategic objectives within theaters or areas qfoperations. Activities at this level link tactics and strategy by establishing operational objectives needed to accomplish the strategic objectives, initiating actions, and appfying resources to bring about and sustain these events. These activities imply a broader dimension of time or space than do tactics; they ensure the logistic and administrative support of tactical forces, and provide the means by which tactical successes are exploited to achieve strategic objective.
The operational level concerns forces collectively in a theater (pg. 16) The sklllfiil employment of military forces to attain strategic goals through the design, organization, integration, and conduct of campaigns and major operations; requires the commander to identify the military conditions -orEndstate -that constitute his given strategic objective; to decide the operational objectives that must be achieved to reach the desired Endstate; to order a sequence of actions that lead tofulfiUment of his operational objectives; and to apply the military resources allocated to him to sustain his sequence of actions.
While this typology of operational art and the operational level of war begins with modem (twenty-first century) U.S. and NATO alliance definitions and understandings of the operational domain, as a reminder, the formal distinction of the operational domain begins to take shape in the nineteenth century (perhaps with the rise and fall of the Napoleonic way of war) and develops from that period onward.
The above summary reveals the following about the operational domain of war poUcy.
First, the operational domain is about planning and process, albeit to serve the purpose of the commander and/ or the ruler (leader or leadership) in the making and execution of strategic decisions. It is focused on the operationalization of strategic endstates into realistic actions and obtainable (sustainable) objectives.^^ Second, the operational level of war is about the relating of aims, capabilities, and resources available in particular time, space, and purpose configurations.
War takes on a particular geometric, geographical, and temporal form at the operational (policy formulation and legitimization) reabn.^° Third, the operational domain synchronizes and/or sequences individual or intermediate actions and objectives, systematically, into coherent operations, campaigns, theater strategies, and grand war plans. National, regional, coalitional, non-governmental assets are interrelated and synchronized through operational art and science.
Fourth, the specific operational art and science of war policy has evolved (that is, moved forward and changed, albeit not always and necessarily in a 'progressive' manner which is typically thought of when the word "evolution" or "progression" is used) over time, with different periods of modem warfare typifying a particular formula of operational art and science.*' That is to say, the ways and means of working war aims into achievable miUtary objectives have changed over time, largely the result of improvements in technological means available and the consequential development of organizational and operational processes, procedures, doctrines for commanding '^Luttwakl987,88. *° Current U.S. and western military doctrine conceives of the operational domain in very specific geographical ways. See Joint doctrine (JP 3.0 and JP 5.0); U.S. Army Field Manual (FM) 3.0, Operations; etc. *' Dr. James Schneider provides a most useM definition of the operational art of nineteenth century, western (European), conventional force-based warfare. See Schneider 1988,2. and controlling these advances in technics in ways that are contributory to the realization of strategic aims through tactical actions 82
The Dialectic Between Strategic Purpose and Tactical Action Two of the more modem and widely accept definitions of strategy that capture the dialectic between strategy making and the realization of strategic aims through tactical action found in Harry Simimers', On Strategy, and John Lewis Gaddis' Strategies of Containment.
Summers^^ tells us that strategy, in its simplest definition, is a balance of national ends, ways, and means.^ The most prominent and popular academic accounts tend to agree.*^ For Gaddis,^^ strategy is "the process by which ends are related to means, intentions to capabilities, objectives to resources."" Of all the modem conceptions and definitions of strategy, this Gaddis perspective most adequately captures the ironic, simple complexity of strategy that Carl Von *^ Alexandr Svechin's detailed description of the operational art still seems most relevant to and descriptive of the capabilities and limitations of modem, western conventional force military operations. His understandings of the nuances between a nation's historical, geographical, cultural, economic, political, social, and military attributes and that nation's strategic goals and availability of resources -and how these factors are or must be combined through a sequencing of intermediate operational Clausewitz spoke to in the eighteenth century.*^ In feet, this author proposes that Gaddis was quite successfiil in capturing much more than the simple complexities of strategy; he was successful in describing the dynamism that exist between strategy aims and the particulars of war policy implementation, through the mechanisms of the operational domain of warfare. Figure 
4
to MEANS, or rather, j. those resources (diplomatic, ^Stnformational, military, '^ economic) available ....to CAPABILITIES, or rather, abilities that give power to a nation, organization, or other governance-based entity .... to RESOURCES oh rather, the raw materiel that can be applied toward the achievement of particular objectives
The Gaddis conception or strategy is hohstic of all three domains -and both dimensions -of war (policy). Strategy is both a product of ends, ways, and means, as weU as the process through which ends are logically related to ways, and then translated into executable and resourcable plans. Strategy, to restate, is both product and process; ideas "operationalized" into effective and ** Clausewitz: "everything in strategy is veiy simple, but that does not mean that everything is very easy." Carl von Clausewitz, On War, trans. Michael 
Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ, 1976), 178.
How one educates, trains, and experiences strategists, planners, and tacticians seems to reflect the conception and operationalization of strategy and plans of a given historical epoch. The dynastic period of warfare saw the education of the soldier-king in strategy and the martial arts and sciences, by the rise of the industrial age of warfare, the complexities of warfare has already forced a division expertise between the ruler and the military expert. The complexities of war pohcy begin to demand a bureaucrati2ation and professionalization of warfare -the specialization of some in the strategic arts and sciences, while others are versed in the martial aspects of policy implementation, or warfighting). This growth in the complexity of war (as politics and policy) has continued through the mechanized age of war and now into the beginning decades of the informational age of war. The rise in complexity has contributed to a practical need to separate the strategic from the operational from the tactical. Unfortunately, this practical need to specifically specialize expertise and experts in one of these three domains (strategists, operational planners, or tacticians) has carried over to a felse understanding and conception of the three domains of war as separable domains of war policy. Nations and their national militaries have structured themselves organizationally along these false divisions; nations and their militaries have designed their professional military education systems along these arbitrary jurisdictions. One of the primary arguments posited in this monograph is that such an arbitrary and divided approach to the education of military strategist, planners, and tactical experts can be harmftil to national security strategy making. Civilian decision makers and strategists are typically educated and experienced in the extra-military aspects of war policy while the military experts, advisors, and decision makers are all too often limited in their education and experience to the martial realm of war policy. ._ _ .  
1966,
(Chandler 1966,133-191)
eighteenth and nineteenth century education in warfere confinned the importance of self-study, a liberal arts study, and a study regimen grounded in practical experience in war fighting.
Shifting to the American Civil War experience, education in warfere begins to distinguish itself from the education of war policy. The education of warriors and future generals begins to take a more particular, methodical track fi-om the education pedagogy of the future political, war leader. The United States Military Academy curriculum of the nineteenth century (indeed since the Academy's inception in 1802) takes on a particularly scientific and methodical (technocratic)
approach to the study and practice of war policy. ^^ The education of the American Civil War military leaders (Grant, Lee, Sherman, and others) is the education of specialist in the material and martial aspects of war policy -somewhat more distinguished and disjointed already by this time from the poUtical, social, and strategic aims underpinning the war's purpose.^ Somewhat ironically, the influences on the West Point curriculimi and approach to the education and training for war came from those Jominian heritages so emblematic of a time and age when the methodology and technocratization of warfare was only one part of a greater symbiotic whole of war policy in late-eighteenth century and early-nineteenth century European warfare
The "cold rationalism'*^ of the Jominian art of war transcended not only across the pond to America, but also across the European continent to Prussia during the early to mid-1800s. An aloofiiess from matters of the political as a vital and positive trait in the military expert seemed to take root as an important tenet of military professionalism in these early Prusso-German examples.^ This apolitical ethos amongst the Prussian officer corps somewhat permeated the ^^ It must be noted that this "hard science" approach to the education of junior officers, though still present, has undergone significant renewal. Today's curriculum at the U.S. Military Academy, as well as the other national service academies, has adjusted to meet the demands and complexities of post-modem war; complexities that call a greater emphasis on the humanities. See, James M. ^ Molke was noted for his general aloofiiess from politics, becoming best known perhaps in his reputation as a trustworthy, yet ambiguous confidant and advisor to King William I. This trait is indeed evident from manner in which officers were to be formally educated, trained in those things martial and related to warfare, and experienced in war policy. The study of mathematics, literature, science, history and culture -all begin to take on the "military" prefix in the professional officer education systems of modem, western national militaries.'^
The 'Modern' Education System
The modem. United States military education system is emblematic and symptomatic of the American and westem societal approach to war and war policy. The civil aspects of war policy are considered, even stractured, separate fi"om the martial aspects of war. The professional military education system reflects this separation in its design to a significant degree. This hierarchy of educational and experience opportunities is tied to the seniority-based promotion and assignments processes. Officers are typically not endorsed or resourced for the attainment of operational or strategic level education until a certain point in their careers. Even then, few are selected for such opportimities, and of these, few are able to remain competitive in the normal, progressive command track upon their return fi-om these extra-ordinary education and experienced based learning opportunities.^^ the peculiar war planning, technocratic focus of the Prussian-German officer development system. '^ In short, the modem military officer education system tnmcates the study and experiencing of war for its leaders largely to the tactical and operational domains. Those officers fortunate enough to study and fiilfiU assignments outside the normal system tend to do so at their own risk -foregoing operational and tactical level assignments deemed by the organization as "career enhancing" in order to study and experience the other-than-military factors of war policy. Those officers able to balance the tactical, operational, and strategic aspects of their education and assignment career are a rarity.
President John F. Kennedy, in his words that follow, correctly captured the signs of the security times of his generation -a security environment that has only become more complex since his days, demanding even more that the military adjust its ways of educating its officers in the strategy, operations, and tactics of war:
You [military professionals] must know something about strategy and tactics and logistics, but also economics and politics and diplomacy and history. You must know everything you can about military power, and you must also understand the limits of military power. You must imderstand that few of the problems of cm-time have... been solved by military power alone.
A return to a time where the divide between politics and war -the foreign and the domesticwere less recognized seems to have returned. Ironically, it is at this very point in time, that the U.S. military (and the U.S. Army in particular) seems intent on compartmentalizing war into separate domains in the education of its future war experts. In these times of strategic ambiguity, the United States needs officers that are both prophets of strategy and the theorizing of war and practitioners (leaders) of war policy.^ The twenty-first century demands a return to a time when much of the policy, planning, and execution of war poHcy was vested in one or a small body of experts. Now is a time to educate and experience future imiformed strategic planners. 
Examining senior military leader experiences in "stability and support operations" (SASO) during the 1990s can help identify what shortcomings (if any) exist in the way the US Army educates its strategic leadership for post-modem warfare. Examining the US Army's most recent attempt at formal, organizational and procedural change in the way it educates for expertise in strategy and high-level operations -Functional Area 59 -provides a practical source for evaluation of how the Army is "scoring" in regards to post-modem educational reform.
Finally, a brief glance at the US Army planning of its campaign for the war on global terrorism provides some insights to the challenges that remain in strategic planning education -problems that the FA59 "experiment" may or may not resolve given its present organizational and procedural direction in strategist education and development.
The RAND Arroyo Center conducted an exploratory study of senior military leader experiences in the Balkans and Somalia, assessing how well the Army prepares its senior leaders for future missions involving joint, coalition, and "full spectrum" operations.'°° The increase in United States involvement in stability-and-support operations (SASO) since the end of the Cold War has raised several new areas of concem in how the Army educates its war experts. The RAND study revealed the following:'"'
• Army leaders thmst into the SASO environment found that their 'warfighting' skills had to be complemented by other attributes, eg., political and diplomatic skills; • Army leaders could not coimt on the presence of staff officers with joint and/or combined experience or training -such qualifications being not normally an assignment consideration for duty in Army units; David E. Johnson, "Preparing Potential Senior Army Leaders for the Future," (Santa Monica: RAND Arroyo Center, 2002), 3. "" Ibid.,8.
Army leaders discovered that their organizations had to be adapted to the operational and poUtical realities of the situation to which they wee deploying -too often on the fly. Army leaders found their units (Divisions and separate Brigades) tasked to assume missions for which they were not designed, equipped, or organized.
In 1995, elements of the US Army I'' Armored Division deployed to Bosnia-Herzegovina as part of Operation Joint Endeavor to implement the Dayton Peace Accords. The T* Armored Division, under the command of Major General William Nash, was part of a larger multinational Implementation Force (IFOR), charged with overseeing the military aspects of the Dayton agreement.'"^ IFOR's mission, albeit predicated on its warfighting competencies, did not end at the martial aspects of war policy; the mission also presented the Army with a multitude of nondoctrinal challenges, including: enforcement of ceasefire; supervision of boundaries and zones of separation; enforcement of the withdrawal of combatants to barracks areas; and the movement of heavy weapons to storage sites. The Army, and its warriors, found themselves in an environment that required them to "deal effectively with complex, politically dominated, multidimensional, multiorganizational, multinational, and multicultural peace and stability • Division staffs tended to focus on tactics, while ARFORs required operational focus and perspective; • Divisions were not organized to deal with the type and level of relationships typical of an ARFOR; • Divisions are not designed to be joint headquarters General Arnold and his Division was faced with a mission demanding complex multidimensional and multilateral coordination and facilitation -activities that went well beyond the martial realm -but was ill-equipped to handle the tasks. General Arnold came to realize early on that "coordination would not be easy and cooperation would not be automatic, particularly with the non-governmental organizations, since each of these organizations had different views toward the use of military forces."'"^ Some Common Negative Trends.
First, both field commanders (Generals Nash and Arnold) saw their mission as the Army has traditionally taught all of its warriors to think about stability and support operations -as operations other than war. In the Clausewitzian sense of holistic war, this notion of war is not only erroneous, it is critically flawed and has the potential to lead the Army astray in its war policy mandate. This conception of war limits the relevancy of the Army to only "tip-of-thespear" aspects of war; to only one area of warfare. General Nash presented the errant conception himself In Bosnia, US Army doctrines were largely inadequate in an environment that forced American commanders to wrestle with the political, diplomatic, and military demands of stability operations. Almost from the inception of the IFOR operations, US commanders found themselves in uncharted territory. Having trained for thirty years to read a battlefield, general ofBcers were now asked to read a 'peace field'.'"* Seeing their education, training, and experiencing in this bifurcated way is the root of the problem.
'*^ Steven L. Arnold, "Somalia: An Operation Other Than War," Military Review, Vol. 73, No. 12 (December 1993), at http://calldbpub.leavenworth.anny.mi1/cgi-bin/cqcgi@doc exp .5555.evn. accessed 11 February 2003. '"* Howard Olsen and John Daves, Training US Army Officers for Peace Operations: Lessons from Bosnia Second, both cases indicated that there was a problem of "mission creep" inherent in these stabiUty and support operations. While both Nash and Arnold foimd operations at the company level and below as being "right out of the tactical field and drill manuals," they found their more senior leaders caught in an environment for which they were largely untrained; battalion commanders and higher being 'stretched' a little beyond conventional operations due to the complexities and the many players involved in operations other than war.'^ Our initial operation was to provide security. As the operation developed, we assisted in standing up councils and governments, rebuilt schools and orphanages, conducted disarmament of warring factions, taught English in schools, repaired and built roads and provided assistance in many other ways. Some of this mission creep was directed, some was self-initiated. We found that our soldiers needed to see the effects of what they were doing. Getting them to assist in orphanages, schools, feeding centers and in other projects was one way of helping them see the importance of their mission. Additionally, to have aity credibility with local leaders, we needed the flexibility to address the problems of their respective communities.'"^ Again, a large part of the problem seems to be in how the Army itself has conceived of stability and support operations; in a maimer that allows the warfighter to see any deviation fi-om traditional warfighting roles and fimctions as a creep away fi-om the "fighting America's wars" mandate. By educating the inilitary profession and professionals within it that there is "war" and a separate policy domain of "operations other than war," and then by defining the professional ethos upon the first domain at the expense of the latter, the Army has trtmcated the profession's understanding of what is war and what is not war. The mission creep that senior leaders find themselves dealing with may be a false reality; the result of poUticians and their desire to costsave in the resourcing of war operations.
Third, and lastly, both cases recognized an ad hoc character to post-modem (post-Cold War) warfare and war planning. While war has always been a "come-as-you-are" exercise, these two post-modem experiences seem to indicate that come-as-you are has replaced to a large degree prior emphasis on deliberate war planning. Like in Somalia, the Army's results in the Balkans ^Special Report, United States Institutes for Peace, October 29, 1999), 2. '°^Ibid.
were mixed. There were systemic problems in the initial phases of both operations. One author has noted that both experiences indicated a propensity for "ad hoc problem solving" that resulted in "convoluted strategic planning and coordination."'"* The after-action reports noted that this "ad hoc-ery," ... was the result of a lack of institutionalized, hierarchical multi-national strategic planning and a disconnected sequence of plan development [that] caused a lack of synchronization and organizational confusion |I>]eployment planning processes were stove piped among services, other militaries, and agencies; and compartmentalized at various headquarters which stymied parallel planning and reduced imity of effort.*"' Both cases are indicative of a flawed perception of self, self-relevance, and selfimportance of Army officers and the Army. The lessons apparently learned from the Somalia and Balkan experiences has been that Army leaders were trained, equipped, and organized for warfighting, but were expected once on the groimd to do something quite different. In hindsight, and with this notion in mind, the Army applauds itself for successfully adjusting to an "abnormal" experience. Ad hoc-ery is seen as a successfiil adjustment to the "unknown" rather than seen in its broader relevancy -as a stop-gap procedure in place of a lack of process and procedure for dealing vvithwar&re in its Mlercoritext, prior t Notions of SASO's ad hoc, mission creep, and operations other than war character is a false reality; the result of a misperception of war and the result of the Army's failure to rightly structure its educational system to prepare post-modem warriors for post-modem warfare.
The two case studies indicate that shortcomings still prevail in the area of joint force integration. However, the operational cases also indicated a significant shortage amongst senior military leaders and their staffs in knowledge of the socio-poUtical and cultural aspects of postmodem war. Also indicative in these cases, and a shortfell derivative of those already mentioned, was a lack of planning expertise in the integration of martial tactics, techniques, and procedures '"^ US Army Peacekeeping Institate, Bosnia-Herzegovina After-Action Review Conference Report (Carlisle Barracks: US Army War College), 1996. 109 Ibid.
("tactiques") with socio-political (et al.) factors for national/coalitional strategic purposes and effects.
The US Army has come to realize, through its intervention experiences during the 1990s, the importance of maintaining strategic experts within the force. The establishment of Functional "° The Institutional Support Career Field (ISCF) was one of the three "breakout" career specialty fields developed under OPMS XXI. FA 59 is one of seven functional areas that comprise the Institutional Support Career Field. FA 59, strategic plans and policy, derives from a functional predecessor in the Army Strategist Program, initiated in 1974 by then Chief of Staff of the Army General Creighton Abrams, with the intent of developing a sufficient number of senior ofBcers "uniquely qualified by experience, education, and aptitude for assignment to key strategic planning and operations positions on Army, Joint, and combined staffs and other agencies and activities as appropriate." Prior to the new functional area, the primary means by which the US Army identified its "strategists" was through this Army Strategist Program by designation of the 6Z Additional Skill Identifier. The primary means by which Army still identifies what it calls "strategists" is through this program, as part of the officer study program at CGSC and the completion of the focused Strategist Advanced Application Program, attainment of the masters in military art and science (MMAS) degree, and completion of written and oral examinations. Though a worthy program, particularly for building a foundation of strategic level knowledge amongst the generalist population, the Army Strategist Program was not deemed a sufficient means for producing the quality of uniformed strategist desired and demanded by the US Army. See the Functional Area 59 Homepage [accessed online] at http://www.fa59/perscom.mil. '" "FA 59 Education," Accessed [On-Line] at http://www.aTmv.mil/fa59/Education.html. Internet. Accessed on 10 January 2003. "^Ibid. departmental, DOD, and US government positions on national security policy and national military strategy. These mature, seasoned specialists provide assessments and recommendations to senior military and civilian decision makers (e.g., unified commanders. Army leadership, senior DOD and governmental ofiBcials) related to national security. They prepare or contribute to key policy documents. They relate national security and national military strategies to Army, joint, and multinational force requirements and develop operational and strategic level Army and joint warfighting concepts and doctrine."^ In short, Functional Area 59s are intended to be the embodiment of those 'uniformed strategists' envisioned by General Gralvin. However, there is evidence that innovation in the development of Army 'uniformed strategists' is being stifled by some of the more negative legacies of the traditional, generalist PME and career development system.
The US Army Personnel System -the "assignments process" -has come under increased scrutiny over the last few years; the exodus of junior and middle grade ofiBcers during the mid-to-late 1990s was the original spark for the latest fire over the personnel system. Yet, this would not be the first time in modem history that the pathway to recognized failures in the education of martial experts led to problems embedded in the assignments process. If the last "interwar period" can be considered as a reliable point of measure, periods of interim peace seem to find the personnel apparatuses of the times lagging behind the changing times and changing needs of the services. Dwight D. Eisenhower railed against what seemed at various times throughout his long and illustrious career, one consistent hurdle in a sea of change throughout his careers: the prevailing seniority system of promotions, and consequently, career opportunities."'* General George C. Marshall not only railed against the arbitrary administrative strictures of the times, but instilled ad hoc methods around many of those structures, and instituted formal reforms •"Ibid. "" 
(Eisenhower 1948;
Holt and Leyerzapf 1998
Moves are underway within the current George W. Bush Administration and the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) to review and, if deemed necessary, revise the standing military personnel system."* Many reformist ideas have come into there own of late due in no small part to a recent manuscript offered by one young military victim of the current system: Major Donald Vandergriflf. In his book. The Path to Victory, Major Vandergriflf identifies the 'industrial-age personnel system' as the root to the problems now facing the army and the US military more generally."' In addition to finding the current system calibrated in its promotion and career advancement processes on the wrong measures of success (what he would regard as "peacetime administrivia" perhaps), Vandergriflf feults the prevailing personnel management system for its "ticket punching" versus "true readiness" promotion-based advancements, and its consequential privileging of "management expertise" over "combat expertise." His recognition of a rigor mortise affecting the current career management system, similar to that which constrained officer advancement during the times of Marshall and Eisenhower, are less provocative and emotive, and more relevant to the case at hand."^ "^Poguel963 "* Marcia Triggs, "Army to transform Officer Education System," Army News Service ($ February 2003). Also, see "New System for field grade officers," Army Times 
(16 December 2002)
The US Army's answer to the question of how, where, and at what point in the officer career development process to educate officers in the art and science of 'operations' is found in the Advanced Military Studies Program. Otherwise known as the School of Advanced Military Studies (SAMS), the AMSP is the Army's post-graduate (post-CGSC) solution to the tactical and operational level plaimer gap recognized in the 1970s and early-1980s (SAMS was foimded in 1982) and which to some extent prevail today. SAMS is a yearlong graduate level program at the US Anny Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas for "specially selected '^^ Robert A. Vitas, "Civilian Graduate Education and the Professional OfiScer," Military Review (May/June 1999, Vol. 79, Issue 3), 47-59.
volunteer field grade officers focused on producing leaders with the mental flexibility to solve complex problems in peace, conflict and war."'^ Since its inception in 1982, SAMS has taken on the responsibility and task -formally and informally -of producing tactical and operational level planners for US Army Divisions and Corps. SAMS annually graduates between 50 to 80 specialists possessing a breadth of knowledge in miUtary affairs, a common basis of tactical and operational concept understanding, and a common problem-solving outlook that makes these graduates premier battle staff leaders and planners.'^ The US Air Force, US Marine Corps, and most recently the US Navy have similar established programs.'^^ The current structural and procedural approach of Functional Area 59 finds the US Army unintentionally separating and narrow casting its efforts and its effects into at least two separate fimctions -strategy versus plans. ™ Operationalization is educated principally in only one half of itself The negative outcome might in feet be a design flaw within the specialty area, where one side of the branch is incapable of "speaking" to the other, much less the entire branch being capable of operationalizing national aims into executable orders for the Army and Nation on a whole. Recent experiences in the development of the US Army strategic concept for the war on _ global terrorism provides some interesting anecdotal evidence that this negative trend is alive and well and inhibiting the Galvin vision.
124 Accessed [On Line] at http://www-cgsc.anny.mil/dsa/iosd/courses/ams.asp '^Ibid. '^ Respectively, The School of Advanced Studies (SAS), The School of Advanced Warfighting (SAW). The Navy program -NOPSI ~ is the newest and still in development at the time of this writing. These four military programs, as best can be determined by research to date, are the only graduate-level programs focused on the operational elements of war policy. This is a significant gap in not only the martial domains of war policy, but in the civilian domains as well. The consistent inconsistencies between national policy intent and realized policy at implementation (between the NSS and the NMS, not to mention the other instruments of power strategic documents and plans) -the gap between civilian direction and military interpretation in war policy -aU can be attributed in some form or fashion to this scarcity in operational education. The lessons learned from the planning experience, from the perspective of both SAMS operational-level military planners and Army strategists directly involved in the process,*^" provide valuable insights into the challenges of bridging the gap between strategic intentions and operational-tactical requirements in twenty-first century war planning.
One lesson learned by the planning team was that planners at the strategic level needed to be "comfortable with making assumptions about what higher level decision-makers might decide."'^' Assumption-based planning is a required skill for all planners, perhaps most for the strategic-level planner, since national level guidance (and higher), even when given in an explicit and timely manner, still remains largely ambiguous and amorphous. Assumption-making implies risk. Planners must be effective risk assessors and risk managers. The level and degree of The challenge facing this strategic planning team was daunting and near unprecedented. The team was tasked with conceiving of, and constructing what was to serve as the US Army's strategic concept (campaign rabric) that would guide all further and future operations related to a national/global coalitional war against terrorism of a global reach; a war of ambiguous strategic aims and intentions, and undetermined duration. The final product was presented to the Army Chief of Staff six-weeks after the 9/11 attacks. "° From author's informal discussions with unnamed representatives fi-om both DAMO-SS and the SAMS contingent working on the 2001 ASCP.
understanding, knowledge, and comfort with strategic level ambiguity (the political realities of defense and security policy) that can come from "being there" -as a student, an intern, a collaborator, etc. -can make assumption-based planning more rigorous, more reliable, and less risky. Use of the military decision-making process (MDMP) demanded in this strategic environment that planners construct courses of actions (COAs) for not only the pending operations and tactical mission, but also for the national strategy, national military strategy (NMS), and the homeland security strategy (HSS) that had invariably been radically affected by the surprise assault."^ Having a conjBdence in this level of the political-warfere enviromnent -a confidence that comes from being adequately educated in its nuances -is essential to successfiil strategic planning.
SAMS planners recognized a trend amongst the planning group to gloss over, or skip outright, the first stage of the MDMP -mission analysis (MA) -and opt instead for an immediate and aggressive COA development. Thinking of the potential factors that compelled officers to default to the comfort zone of identifying courses of action prior to getting a comprehensive , picture of themission situation itself is instructive. It is a natural tendency to fell back on one's ^ comfort zone when feced with a new or ambiguous task; particularly xmder crisis conditions. The temptation to default to course of action development in the planning process may be proofpositive of this tendency. If military planners -be they strategic level experts or operationaltactical level experts -are made more aware of the new socio-political and cultural (et al.) aspects of post-modem warfere, then perhaps the cognitive dissonance against mission analysis can be overcome.
The following three excepts from the SAMS planner contingent raise significant concerns to the compatibility of officers educated and identified (organizationally-identified and selfidentified) as "planners" versus "strategists." '^' ASCP 2001.
One of the biggest lessons learned for the SAMS Fellows was the effect that different political environments have on the planning process at the strategic level. Obviously the politics of the civilian level leadership and different administrative agencies have a huge impact and that is what most plaimers would expect. Political considerations related to beltway issues, interservice rivalry, procurement programs, and transformation issues came into light as some staff ofBcers exhibited parochialism (either intentionally or inadvertently) in subtle ways through the process. "^ The first comments speak to the SAMS planner's recognition of the importance of the political fectors afiFectiag the ASCP process but at the same time, acknowledges their collective frustration with what they deemed as distracting parochialism.
Only days after the attacks on the WTC and the Pentagon, there were pressures to pursue or exclude certain COAs for what appeared to be political reasons 
[T]
In the case of the ASCP, there was a small group that thought the plan should be more of a corporate vision instead of a campaign plan. The challenge as a planner was to bend those flawed ideas into a better product"^ Clearly, there was a difference of perspective within the planning team, between "planners" and "strategist" over how to proceed in the development of the strategic campaign plan. While the military planners viewed the beltway military strategist as overly corporate and management oriented in their planning outlook and perspective on the "new war," the DAMO-SS Army strategists saw the SAMS planners as overly narrow and militaristic in their perspective and "^Ibid. '^^Ibid. 135 Ibid.
approach. The integration challenge rested somewhere between these two opposing perspectives, yet neither seemed capable of recognizing the relevancy of the other's point of view.
Mustering long-term public and foreign-diplomatic support for what promised to be "a campaign of years, if not decades," required more than only the influence of military force. The effective planning goal lied at the nexus of these opposing perspectives.
The ASCP team also noted lessons for future stiategic planners to consider in regards to future roles and responsibilities of the stiategic planner.
• A strategic planner is typically considered to be a doctrinal expert. Planners must be vigilant to ensure proper use of terminology and definitions. • Strategic planners must be team-builders and team-maintainers.
• Strategic planners must be comfortable with 'ambiguity'.
The fact that the SAMS-planners became, by-default, the planning leads is of interests only so far as it might be indicative of a fail-safe defeult of the overall US national security policy process to the "martial position." A military-heavy approach was the appropriate approach in the short-term aftermath of the homeland attacks, but a military-heavy approach may not be the most effective or efficient instrument of power to deal with the longer term, subsequent operational phases of the campaign.'^^
As the US Army Strategic Campaign Plan case shows, the strategy-tactics dialectic persist and afflicts effective war policy and planning with a martial and tactical level bias. The DAMO-SS stiategists seemed to defer to what they knew best -the management side of war planning -while the SAMS planners were focused on the tactical miUtary imperatives. Neither group of officers was any less devoted to waging the war and winning. Both, however, were "^ This years' International Studies Association (ISA) annual convention 
(Portland, Oregon, 23-27 March 2003)
(17 February 2003)
The dominant trend within universities and the think tanks is toward ever-narrower specialization: a higher premium is placed on functioning deeply within a single field than broadly across several. And yet without some awareness of the whole -without some sense of how means converge to accomplish or frustrate ends -there can be no strategy. And without strategy, there is only drift. "^ The gap betwreen the strategic aspects of war and the tactical actions in war and war planning has been well documented.'^^ Reviews of the 1980s called for a reform of the existing PME to facilitate more joint expertise within the armed forces. One of the answers, then, was the mandating of JSO development whhin the PME. This latest period of reform, review, and transformation may be indicative of a similar shortcoming in the prevailing PME, this time indicating an anemia with regards to advanced civilian, graduate level study in international affairs and operational planning.
Changes in the security dynamics of the post-modem international environment should have a significant vote in the election to round-out the educational experience of Army strategists with more civilian-academic and operational planning expertise, or to remain focused on the martial, tactical-level of warfighting. New trends have already influenced the redirection of US foreign and security policy and the rules and practices governing the interaction of nations, businesses, individuals, and transnational groups and organizations. '^' The military's inextiicable relationship witii politics and policymaking is not a contemporary phenomenon; there have rarely if ever been miUtary actions witiiout poUtical ramifications.^*^ Morris Janowitz parrots the positive and necessary requirements of an advance-civiUanized conception of war poKcy for tiie fiitiire martial expert, noting tiiat, «flie contemporary officer must relate national policy to the mihtary organization, ... tt]o assume international policmg and peacekeeping (PK) responsibihties, tiie postwar officer needs an understanding of national poUcy and objectives, which demands a broader scope of citizen attachment' -tiiat is, closer ties to society and state. ci. !J^""°T/^^" -^'^^ ^ ^'^^ ^^^ °^^^ ^^ mechanized age of warfare, drca 1950s. The shortfall m tiie civihan side of professional mihtary education is seen by many to still persist-to hinder tiie mihtaty m ite abihty to more efiectively contend witii tiie reahties of twenty-firet centmy waiWe the 'T)ig picture" -making cognitive connections among, and balancing, war's diverse components; Military Executive versus Combat Leader, being less distinguishable in this new age of warfare, calling for a good military education system, as well as an [assigimients] rotation system designed to enhance military oflHcer adaptability amongst the civil-military aspects of warfare.
How the Army develops (educates through experience-based learning) its war expertsits strategic planners -has promise of being one of the more effective treatments for curing the strategic planning anemia afflicting the service. Experiences seal and confirm (or deny) learning.
If war is about more than just its warfighting veneer, then the Army must do better at aligning the experiences of its ofiBcers with the foil domain of warfare.
Looking to the Future.
What post-modem warfere, and the threats that help to define it, demand in terms of competencies to deal effectively in the new enviroimient, should determine the Army's next moves in transformation. That includes the next steps the Army takes toward the education of the officer corps in general, but specifically, in terms of how the Army will produce and husband its core body of strategic plaiming experts. The experts all allude to what collectively form a loose set of core competencies and measures of effectiveness:  The need for a greater "international practitioner" competency in the generalist ofiBcer population, but particularly within the Army's strategic experts is acknowledged and emphasized.'''* A "beyond-the-martial" educational experience is explicit in the writings of theorist, scholars, and practitioners alike, and is implicit in the nature of the post-modem security environment. With the dwindling distinction between domestic and foreign security policy issues, the future Army strategists must be more than simply famiharized with both domains; they must be competent in both policy domains, a competency that can only be obtained and sustained through frequent and continued (periodic) academic study and experience-based learning in both domains.
A four-fold approach to an educational reform geared toward the creation and fostering of a small, manageable body of strategic planners in the US Army is one way of conceptualizing policy treatments and recommendations. Advanced Civilian Education.
Detection and designation of future strategic planners much earlier than the current system is admittedly difficult, if not impossible to achieve; particularly true if no significant trade-off in military tactical and technical learning is desirable. One way of overcoming the loss of an earlier civilian academic learning experience is through maximizing the opportunities, postgraduate school, to reinforce and add to that learning and knowledge through civilian and governmental (private, public, and international) experience-based and research-based outreach.
Participation in Department of the Army (DA), DOD/OSD research is conceivably possible during normal assignment cycles -even during operational assignments. The challenge is to integrate such activities into the guiding mission essential tasks of the parent unit, so as not to detract fi"om daily imit requirements. Operational Integration.
Of the treatments offered in the figure above, the establishment of a joint-combined, and interagency advanced waxfighting course (similar to SAMS, SASS, and SAW) and the move toward mobile strategic planner staff augmentee teams (MSPSAs) are two innovations that have some degree of empirical support through contemporary practical experimentation. Appendix three details the experiment within the JCS with a Joint Advanced Warfighting School (JAWS).
The mobile strategic planner team concept has some recent operational reinforcement, from experiences with the addition of ad hoc, modular staff augmentation to the 10* Mountain Division during Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan.
Experience is the best teacher. This popular statement does not consider enough, the fact that experience, if left to its own ends, can teach the wrong lessons as much as well-balanced experience can reinforce success. A purpose-based or "effects-based" approach to branch quaUfication should be considered as the new measure of educational and experienced-based learning success. Seniority, rank, and position may be adequate measures of success and effectiveness for some traditional branches, but should not be standard for all branches and specialties. New ideas on old negative notions of officer "homesteading" need to be reconceived.
Longer tours at a particular station or post could add the degree of officer stability needed from which short-and-near term "with assignment at..." opportunities can blossom. The Secretary of Defense has been considering ways of stabilizing the force (particularly 0-4/Majors) for efficiency and quality of life reasons.'^^ Stabilization can also be a ways towards increasing the experienced-based learning of officers in hoHstic war policy. Innovation in strategic planner ^''^Army 
Times, 17 December 2002.
The military experiences of US Army senior leaders during the 1990s revealed -by their own recollections and their own testimonies -that as good as Army education had been throughout their careers, the new warfare they faced found that education less effective than it need to have been; perhaps even irrelevant in certain respects.*^" Future success will depend on educating foture strategic planners adequately, appropriately, and hoHstically for the challenges of the twenty-first century.
US Army plans on manning a fiinctional area of strategic plans and policy officers that will nimiber no more than 200 "strategists" once the branch fiilly matures. Small numbers can have significant effects on policy. War policy is no different. In feet a digital, or informational age of warfare will increasingly find the tactical actions of direct level combat soldiers (war policy implementers) having a direct and near-real time strategic policy effect. Lieutenants and captains will be more than tactical warfighters in this new age; they will find themselves the de facto mayor, the "cop-on-the-beat", the social worker, the city manager, etc.
Increasing numbers of challenges such as new warfare forms, combined with the technical environment, will mean that [leaders] will have to be 'more comprehensively trained, less specialized' and will have to cycle back through school often during their careers. They will need a broader range of skills in order to be more flexible.*^'
Revising the PME for a small body of war policy 'translators' educated in the full spectrum of war policy could serve as the critical organic bridge across a persistent chasm between policy and practice; between civilian policymakers and miUtary poUcy executors. Until more systemic structural solutions to the strategy-tactics dilemma are realized hope of spanning this gap may rest within the military genius of holistically educated cohort of strategic planners.
' 
^^ RAND Study (2002)
Reserved for two to three junior officers per year. In-residence program at Harvard University. Attainment of a MFA in International Relations.
A National competition. One-year fellowship followed by two-year utilization assignment Prior graduate degree required. Branch qualification required.
On e-year competitive program. Service as staffassistants to members of Congress.
Opportunity to study issues of national importance in association with individuals and agencies, in and out of government, actively involved in influencing &s formulation and execution of US foreign and domestic policies. Reserved for senior FA 59 officers (minimum time in service of 19 years).
demands that wars' experts are better educated in war's multidimensional character and purposes, then the US Army will need to recalculate the benefits to cost in providing high-caliber academic study to its core war strategist. Again, the USMA has been experimenting with innovative public-private cooperative initiatives with prestigious academic institutions and civilian-based fotindations to find cost-effective ways of making graduate-level study available and aflFordable to Army oflBcers.
The time-available challenge is more an Army self-imposition. The 'arbitrariness of branch qualification' mentioned earUer greatly prohibits not so much the opportunities available to the officer in advanced civil studies, but rather prohibits the opportunity the officer has in taking advantage of these learning opportunities. If an Army officer wishes for a successful longterm career in the service, that officer cannot "afford" to deviate too far, nor too often, fi-om the command track; a track that has been shown to provide few opportunities for civilian graduate study. Distanced-leaming and co-op education programs may prove the only feasible, suitable, and acceptable means available for providing yoimg company grade officers advanced civilian learning experiences. It would be difficult, and potentially damaging to the tactical and technical training of officers in their core warfighting and leadership roles and fimctions, to offer much less mandate in-resident civilian study any earlier than the Army does now. However, the Army does need to consider whether or not it is maximizing the potential of the company grade years of a typical officer. Many yotmg officers, after completing the vital duty assignment of platoon leader or company executive officer move on to serve upwards of two years as assistant staff officers.
Might some of that time, after platoon leadership training but before branch qualifying company command, be used to provide these young officers with an advanced civilian academic learning experience? Again, if the need is recognized, the time is now to find ways of accommodating the need.
based context of "integration," the importance of operations-based education becomes even more evident.
Despite accomplishments by the Army and the other armed services in this area over the years (and with the helpful nudge of congress in 1986), there remain problems in both how the Army conceives of "operations," and how the Army therefore prepares its ofBcers for integration.
There is a prevailing notion within the US Army that the "operational level of war," and to some degree the notion of "operations" itself are martial constructs, and moreover, are relevant only to the martial domain of war policy. It is doubtful, though possible, that the former contention is a correct one; the latter contention is wholly inaccurate and limiting in its perspective, given the realities of post-modem policy in general, much less warfare. Chapter two detailed the various definitions and understandings of operations, the operational level of war, and operational art. The simple chart offered in chapter two reveals something most substantial:
while the official US Army, US Marine Corps, and even the Joint doctrinal definitions of "operations, et al." qualify the integration of force in "miUtary" terms, all other renderings avoid the martial qualifier. While the operationaUzation of "operations" as a formal domain or level of war during the eighteenth century did in fact take on a imique characteristic to the martial science and art, that particular operationalization, martial as it was, was of a particular time period and strategic-environmental context. This in no way was to mean that "operations" was to forever to be defined in the linear, mass-oriented military tactics, techniques, and procedures of that time, nor did it relegate operational science and artistry to merely the martial realm.
Appreciating the larger than military context offeree and power integration -operations -demands a larger than martial education for the martial expert. FEMA has its own integration process and artistry, as does NASA, and the FBI, and the INS. Foreign countries have their own unique ways and means for integrating strategic aims with resources available for operational effects. Tomorrow's uniformed strategic planner must be femiliar vwth, if not expert in, all these various operational methodologies; and more. Operational expertise must begin with formal The junior grade-^middle ranks gap in joint integration education has been substantiated in a recent Boos-Allen study, conducted under contract by the JCS. While the civilian-contracted study found an absence in joint integration education at the company grade levels, the revievs^ers acknowledged the continuing importance of focusing the majority of company grade training and academic study on service core-competencies -developing and reinforcing service expertise prior to joint education. However, the study did emphasize the need for improved joint education and femiliarization earlier in the officer career development timeline. The solution mentioned is becoming a popular panacea for the education dilemma: distanced learning.
The pros and cons of distanced learning are beyond the scope of this monograph.
However, self-study, no matter how enhanced through improved information technology and digitization, should not be considered as the cure-all for joint officer education 
This is not tiie first study to pinpoint major faults and shortcomings in effective officer development to the officer personnel management system. It will surely not be the last. Without belaboring the point, 'flexibility' in officer assignments, promotion selection, branch qualification crediting, and career development is an important fector in future educational success of war policy experts. The "command track" pathway to officer success needs to be relooked, reconceived, and redesigned, so that it accommodates the acquisition of core competencies and expertise that are now redefining success in the post-modem age of warfare. The Army's notion of 'command' itself is perhaps ready for a review. This latter point remains more of a philosophical discussion, but practical evidence is beginning to mount, supporting at least the plausible idea that notions of command in the past no longer fits nicely with the command needs of this new age of warfare. The US Army, though successfully evolving its tactics, techniques, and procedures to post-modem warfere, is already experiencing cognitive dissidence in transforming fully and confidently to the new emergent ways and purposes of war policy. Under such transitory conditions, the need for a small but capable body of strategic plaiming experts to serve as 'translators' and mediators between the traditional Army and the emergent onebetween the martial and the extra-martial halves of the war poUcy coin -is perhaps more important than ever before.
The US Army must rethink what it values as "relevant assignments" versus less relevant.
Three-year assignments in staff and command positions are important for the achievement of "mastery level" experience, confidence in operation integration and execution of plans and orders. However, there is no reason that three years spent in a particular duty assignment -to a particular unit of action -should relegate experience to the confines of the particular unit of assignment. Outreach opportunities should be incorporated into standard luiit operations. Threemonth, six-month and one-year internships/fellowship experiences should be infused in TDA and TO&E assignments, and seen for their staff and planning-relevancy. Perhaps longer stabiUzing timelines are the solution, with the caveat that oflBcers are parceled out to various outreach opportunities during perhaps a four to six year duty assignment, in a "with duty at" or "with duty with" status. This sort of recommendation would require innovations in the overall assignments philosophy and processes. Yet, if the nature of post-modem war calls for such innovation and adaptation, then innovation of existing educational and assignments-based processes must be given credence and consideration. One way to experiment, cost-efifectively, with such ideas is to forego the majority of traditional regulatory guidelines and mandates of the officer career management system for FA 59 officers.
Operational-level ~ normally dominates the tactical; details cftopography and disposition; the overall interaction of the rival schemes of warfare determine outcomes; events conditioned by the broader Operational art-path to the ultimate goal broken down into a series cfoperations separated by more or less lengthy pauses, which take place in different areas in a theater and differ significantly from one another due to the differences between the immediate goals one's forces temporarily strive for; an act of war if the efforts of troops are directed toward the achievement if a certain intermediate goal in a certain theater of military operations without any interruptions; a conglomeration of quite different actions, Tiamefy drawing up the plan of the operation, logistical preparations, concentrating one's forces at the starting position, building defensive fortifications, marching, fighting battles which lead to the encirclement or destruction of a portion of the hostile force and the forced withdrawal of other hostile forces, either as a result of a direct envelopment or as a result of a preliminary breakthrough, and to the capture or holding of a certain line or geographical area. Operational art also dictates the basic line of conduct of an operation, depending on the material available, the time which maybe allotted to the handling of different tactical missions, the forces which maybe deployed for battle on a certain front, and finally on the nature of the operation itself
Operational-level ~ normally dominates the tactical; details cftopography and disposition; the overall interaction of the rival schemes of warfare determine outcomes; events conditioned by the broader Operational art-path to the ultimate goal broken down into a series cfoperations separated by more or less lengthy pauses, which take place in different areas in a theater and differ significantly from one another due to the differences between the immediate goals one's forces temporarily strive for; an act of war if the efforts of troops are directed toward the achievement if a certain intermediate goal in a certain theater of military operations without any interruptions; a conglomeration of quite different actions, Tiamefy drawing up the plan of the operation, logistical preparations, concentrating one's forces at the starting position, building defensive fortifications, marching, fighting battles which lead to the encirclement or destruction of a portion of the hostile force and the forced withdrawal of other hostile forces, either as a result of a direct envelopment or as a result of a preliminary breakthrough, and to the capture or holding of a certain line or geographical area. Operational art also dictates the basic line of conduct of an operation, depending on the material available, the time which maybe allotted to the handling of different tactical missions, the forces which maybe deployed for battle on a certain front, and finally on the nature of the operation itself
art -the employment of military forces to attain strategic goals through the design, organization and execution of campaigns and major operations (2) "Attributes " (definitions) -distributed operation; distributed campaign; continuous logistics; instantaneous C2; operationally durable formation; operational vision; distributed enemy; distributed deployment
*' See Thomas R Phillips, ed. Roots of Strategy: The 5 Greatest Military Classics of Our Times fHarrisburg,
*' See Thomas R Phillips, ed. Roots of Strategy: The 5 Greatest Military Classics of Our Times fHarrisburg,
Howard and Peter Paret, Makers of Modem Strategy: From  
Howard and Peter Paret, Makers of Modem Strategy: From  
'^^ Accessed [On Line] at http://www.army.mil/fe59/Education.html ''^ Ibid. '^^Ibid. '''Ibid.
Ibid.   
Norman E. Hoehler HI, "The Unrestricted Line PhD: An Assessment," US Naval Institute Proceedings(February 1974), 110.   
This program began in November 2002, and can be accessed [online] at http://www.persom.gov.
Homepage. * Speech
President George W. Bush
Norfolk Naval Air Station
The Arbitrariness of Branch Qualification.
The branch qualification requirement poses a particular set of challenges. While most appropriate in some circumstances, prevailing branch qualification requirements are anachronisms in others. Considerations for how some of the otherwise-considered benign legacies of the traditional officer career development system may be unintentionally undermining positive efforts being made by branch managers and the Proponency to broaden the education of fiiture master strategists have not been given ample attention. The contention made here is that the branch qualification measure of effectiveness employed in the traditional system as the accepted means of progressing officers fi-om one rank to another -fi-om one level of responsibility to another -may not be the appropriate measure of effectiveness or measure of progression (expertise) for FA 59 and its officer corps. Not only does the branch qualification legacy prevail in fiinctional area 59 as the measure of progression, it centers so much on the specifics of this requirement to the point of missing learning opportunities that, though they do not conform to the prescribed BQ strictures, are by their nature, war poUcy-relevant learning experiences. Donald Vandergriflfs critique of the officer personnel management system that emerged from the then recognized demands of the post-World War 11 security and US defense environment (and promoted, therefore, by then Army Chief of Staff George C. Marshall) focused its contentions with the negative effects of the Officer Personnel Act of 1947 (OPA 47)"' on unit cohesion and the ciurent readiness of combat units.'^^ This author's criticism begins where VandergrifPs ends: the negative and unintended effects OPA47 and the present officer management system is levying on officer experienced-based learning. The legacy of OPA 47 negatively affecting how and when future Army 'strategists' are educated. The drawbacks of the old seniority system still haunt the US Army's approach to experienced-based learning. Operational and strategic level assignment opportunities come too late in an ofiBcer's career. Exacerbating the lateness problem, is the compartmentalized nature of the operational and strategic level experience to which these "late-bloomers" are subjected. Intermediate-level (0-4/0-5) assignments afford the fledgling strategist with joint and middle-management level parent service famiharization, but the fragmented and timeconstrained assignments process lends the system itself to a default to famiharization at best, rather than the synergistic effects desired from such e?q)erienced-based learning opportunities. "^ Charles Moskos, The American Enlisted Man 
(New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1970), 2-26.
Designing and defining the entire system by what many somewhat arbitrarily (and wholly inaccurately) define as the "command track" measures of success limits officers in the career and assignments choices they can afford to make along the seniority-based promotion path and still remain "competitive" for "command." Yet, as has already been discussed to detail, what is regarded today as the traditional command track and the warfighting model is only the implement of holistic war policy. Ensuring future war policy experts and senior military leaders are proficient warrior in this traditionalist sense is of great importance; it is a necessary condition, but not a sufficient one for the achievement of the Galvin vision in physical form. confined to their own perspectives due to their bifUrcated educations as planners versus strategists.
The post-modem security environment, and the information-based age of warfere emerging in its wake, both demand greater specialization in expert knowledge to deal effectively with the complexities of post-modem warfere; specialization that crosses multiple jurisdictional boundaries between the military and the non-miUtary domains of war policy. Operational integration across these various policy domains will prove tiie key to future victories in postmodem war; an integration that goes well beyond multi-service and multi-national cooperation.
The future war experts will need to be made comfortably conversant in the civil-military nuances of the information age of warfere. The future educational constmct designed to meet these challenges must be stretched beyond the traditional stovepiped and incremental designs that proved effective in the past, but may be out of date for post-modemity. military) must work together and collaborate in order to make these educational experiences more afifordable and benefiting to both domains of war policy development. Positive trends already abound. The national service academies as part of their processes and programs for acquiring high-quality company-grade officers from the fielded force for ACS and instructor/teaching assignments, have found ways, in coordination with civiHan academic institutions, of offering officers high-cost, prestigious educations for the cost of a standard mid-to-low cost program.'"*^
The seeds of greater civilian-military cooperation on the education issue have been laid for some time now. The Army needs to become more effective and efficient at reaping what has already been sown.
Joint/Combined Military Education.
Appendix four discusses the JSO/JPME transformation effort currently underway, and how these reforms relate to the subject of Army strategic planner education, in greater detail.
Those initiatives'''^ emphasize the need for movement toward a more universal and accessible JPMEI and n experience for JSOs specifically and the generalist population, in general. If career timelines and OPTEMPO rob officers of the time and opportunity to go to the resident courses, then perhaps bringing the course to the officer is the next best option. A combination of virtual (distance-learning based) and physical (Educational Management Teams concept, similar to the MMT design) remote learning alternatives could enhance the building of joint culture and joint capability within the Total Army Force. Reaching a higher level of joint cognition is one step "' This author supervised such an outreach program for the Department of Social Sciences, USMA, at West Point, from 1998 to 2001. Prestigious international relations, public policy, comparative politics programs (and the like) like Harvard's JFK School, Princeton's Woodrow Wilson School, Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs (SIPA), and others have been quite accommodating in lowering their annual tuition cost -as well as their in-residency degree requirement timelines -to help facilitate military officer attendance. These programs have also adjusted some of their requirements relating to Ph.D. research and dissertation preparation, increasingly allowing student officers to complete these requirements, in-absentia, during their military follow-on utilization tours. The added "time" this provides to officers makes attainment of the masters and Ph.D. more affordable than ever before. '"^ J-7 initiatives 
Functional Area 59. The following chart details the structure, attributes, and functions of FA 59.
Service at multiple levels on Field, Army, departmental, joint, and multinational staffs, and on interagency working groups and task forces in support of the fonnulation and implementation of national secunty sUategy and national military strategy. 
A senior professional's program.
The Brookings Institution. Grade 0-6 fellowship.
Senior Seminar 
Fellows serve on the staff of the School of Professional and Area Studies office of the Foreign Service /institute. Grade 0-5 fellowship.
Eight-week residency course at Syracuse University. Focus on the national security decision-making process. Open to Army Colonels.
Placement of senior fellows vwth civilian corporations to gain understanding of how revolutionary changes in information and related technologies are influencing American society and business.
The receding of existing duty positions throughout the Army and joint services, as well as the designation and creation of new duty roles and fiinctions throughout the armed services communities is an ongoing process; a process for which both the Proponency and the desk ofificers at PERSCOM must be applauded. These efforts have created and are fostering a flmctional area that breadths a new and much needed air of flexibility and opportunity within the larger Army and within the FA 59 officers themselves. The branch recognizes the importance of formal academic instruction as well as the importance of reinforcing that formal learning by way of self-directed study and experiences gained and learned from during FA 59 tours of duty.
Yet, problems still persist that are constraining these positive efforts being attempted currently, and that may compromise in the future. Three major shortcomings identified here bear detailed discussion: constraints inherent in the seniority-driven assignments process itself; limiters that derive from the branch qualification requirement 'legacy'; and the poverty that is allowed to persist in the FA 59 program in the area of formalized operational planning education for all its designated officers.
The US Air Force Approach to Strategic Planning Education
Learning from the Air Force Model -A Usefixl Approach?
While bifurcation in the approach to educating, training, and experiencing strategic planners in the US Army has been argued against in this monograph, the USAF has endeavored upon a trifurcated path commensurate with its own service ethos, its own service design and mandates, and service peculiarities. The technical and temporal aspects of the service alone justify more of a split approach to their PME. 
35% of pool = MS/MA degrees Desired focus on policy-relevant fields (eg. Politics; international relations; international economics public policy; area studies, military history, regional history, war studies, military strategic studies) Some (no more than 10%) educated in tedmical graduate degrees Some (no more than 5%) = degrees in Follow-on feculty duty desirable Language skills highly desirable (25% target) 30% of pool = MS/MA degrees Prefer major or minor focus on policy-relevant fields (eg. Politics; international relations; international economics public policy; area studies, military history, regional history, war studies, military strategic studies)
No more than 10%=technical degrees No more than 10% = management degrees Follow on facuhy duty desirable Language skills higjily desirable = 10% target 25% of pool = MS/MA degrees Major focus defined by operational core. Some focus (no more than 5% minimum) hi^y desired in policy/strategy-relevant fields (eg.. Politics; international relations; international economics public policy, area studies, military history; regional history, war studies, military strategic studies) The Air Force trifUrcated education model for its strategic planners is uniquely dififerent from the Army's current bifiircated approach. For one, the USAF approach sets quantitative and qualitative objectives (and measures of effectiveness) for its education progression; it also infuses academic, training, and experienced-based learning into all three of its functional models.
Graduate and post-graduate level, formal civilian-based academic learning is not only emphasized (at varying degrees) at all levels within all functional domains, it is resources accordingly and supervised (directed) by the USAF. Not only is academic education viewed as an important variable in the creation of war policy ejq)erts, academic education in top-notch, prestigious institutions, and in fields of study with a direct relevance to war policy is emphasized by and controlled. The Air Force has gone ferther than the Army in its education of war experts, emphasizing the need for policy relevant advanced degree achievement by its officers. The relevance of Ph.D.-level education is embraced more so by the USAF. Same is true for the US Navy, as evidenced by the work of Norman E. Hoeller;
The line officer is the personification of the Navy's ability to meet its national defense objectives. Does the line officer, then, need a Ph.D. degree to fiilfill his role within the organization? The answer is no. Is the total organization more effective, however, as a result of the intellectual potential he represents? According to the study, yes.'*'
The point here is not to compel the US Army to provision all its officers with doctoral degrees in war policy; though it is interesting to note that in all other fields of policy studies, the doctorate designation is the approved accolade for recognizing 'ejqjertise'. The point, however, is that the provisioning of a high-quality civilian-based advanced degree academic experience, for at least those officers designated to become the Army's premier experts in holistic war policy, does provide a much needed intellectualism to the institution and its approach and conception of what war policy is and how it needs to be approached in planning and in execution.
Yet as chapter introduced and chapter three expounded upon, despite the fact that the military as an institution recognizes the importance of civilian graduate education due to its positive impacts, the perception persist that advanced civilian education somehow diminishes miUtary expertise and professionalism.'^^ This virulent reaction against 'intellectual sophistication' haimts the US Army as both an institution and a profession, and hamstrings all efforts to educate, train, and experience a better and more effective crop of war experts for the twenty-first century.
'^^ Sam C. Sarkesian, Beyond the Battlefield: The New Militaiy Professionalism (New York: Pergamon, 1981), 189.
What follows is an offering of some new ways of thinking about how the US Army educates for production of the complete strategist; the strategic planner. It is an offering of some new ways of structuring these news thoughts and pedagogical methods into the education system of Functional Area 59. While most of the programs and programmatic ways presented here are not new in and of themselves, where innovation can be found is in the manner of redesign proffered in the following pages. Proposed Curriculum: Hum:.niti»an<)
The USMA has departed significantly, but not completely, fi-om its engineer-heavy and physical sciences traditions in order to (in hopes of) better accommodating the peculiar needs of warfere and nation-based politics of the twenty-first century. Stronger emphasis is given throughout a cadet's four-year experience, in this newly proposed curriculxrai, to issues of comparative politics, culture-based studies, information management and info-tech studies, history, and international relations. Of particular note, the new approach recognizes the importance of operational integration as a tool of success for fiiture Army ofBcers and fiiture strategists. Referenced as the 'Integrative Experience', the curriculum change currently under consideration cordons off time, space and resources within the four-year program dedicated to teaching the cadets how to "integrate" all that they have leamed and experienced together. This multidisciplinary, multifimctional operational planning experience could serve as the bedrock upon which an operational planning learning experience could be built, inculcating every stage of an officer's broad education experience. The formal curriculum is only part of what could be a universal pre-commissioning PME for all Army ofBcers, regardless of whether they access from the USMA, ROTC, or OCS.
Infiising experience-based learning into the undergraduate education experience is vitally important to the education of fiiture holistic war poUcy experts. Having the opportunity to intern, as cadets, within the US interagency process, with non-governmental and private organizationshaving the opportunity to learn about the joint service commxmity -would contribute immensely to the femiliarization of wars fidl and true nature to these young leaders, early on. Laying this seed of understanding early, can bud into an officer corps with a better appreciation for all aspects, ftmctions, and elements of war as policy.
Though the experts all seem to agree that, at least in theory or ideahstically, it would be of some benefit to afford all officers earmarked early-on as future strategists with a prestigious advanced graduate learning experience, two issues continue to stymie making this theory a reality: cost in dollars, and cost in time available in the current career developmental Ufecycle.
The dollar cost challenge will continue to inhibit tiie process of achieving the goal of better education for future war experts. In the pages that remain, no solution (no magic pill) can be offered. However, one thing is sure: if concerns with future effectiveness in war's prosecution
The shortfalls identified in this evaluation regarding post-graduate academic and research ("outreach") opportunities are not that there are too few opportunities available. On the contrary, the opportunities abound in terms of miUtary-based, civilian/govemmental-based, civilian/corporate/private-based, and international-based internships and fellowships for US army officers, and particularly designated "strategists" to take advantage of The shortfall is in time available in an already saturated 'normal' career progression. Not a whole lot of time can be allocated to such extra-tactical endeavors without taking valuable time away fi-om the technical and tactical training for warfare. Time "away fi-om troops" is also perceived as time that could be "better spent" within the dominant US Army culture. An officer can unintentionally take on the brand of "the intellectual" rather than be recognized as "the warrior" if too much time is spent thinking about war. Though uncomfortable to hear, these sorts of cultural biases, and the arbitrary administrative restrictions that largely derive from them, are well documented by senior Incorporating outreach opportunity for officers assigned to "fighting MACOMs" is a tougher challenge to overcome; but the problem is not insurmountable. All divisional units and below maintain "professional reading programs." It would not be aU that difficult to infuse some real-world relevancy to such programs, by integrating them into some ongoing TRADOC and/or DA/DOD research project. Integration of outreach opportunities into traditional intelUgence preparation of the battlefield (IPB) activities could greatly enhance the IPB process itself, again, adding relevancy and adding a means of educating the force on the new way of warfare.
Time and resources available are the standard excuses given to such ideas, and unfortunately, effective excuses at ending the discussions prematurely. Time is a relative thing; and is as much of a constraint as planners and decision makers want it to be. Why does an officer need to stabilize in a duty assignment for a minimum of two-years (with the exception of overseas short tours) in order for the officer to get "credit" for the work done, much less to get credit for the educational benefit of the experience? The requirement is arbitrary and is hmiting the educational opportunity of fiiture Army strategic plamiers to attain the requisite experiences and knowledge they will need to be effective and relevant as master strategist in the post-modem war era.
Learning how to operationalize strategic challenges into tactical, or implementation-level, plans and actions is perhaps the most important fector to consider in redesigning the US Army educational approach to strategists development. When one thinks of operations in its effects- 
The Skelton Panel was the first official governmental review of jointness in DOD; it was the first formal review to identify systemic shortfalls and the first statutory attempt to rectify some of those shortfalls. The current Joint Staff transformation initiatives in joint professional military education (JPME) continue to find shortcomings, and continue to strive toward possible solutions. One of the JCS's latest reviews find an educational (academic; training; experiential learning) gap between the captain and Ueutenant colonel ranks in joint integration. than a supplement may be a programmatic misstep toward a better more holistic educational system.
Despite the best efforts and outputs of SAMS, SASS, and SAWS, there remains a crucial shortage in operational integration expertise -both within the military domain and within the civilian sectors. The merging of the domestic with the foreign aspects of security policy, and the commensiuate rise of homeland security issues, makes the absence of a cross-cutting, civilmilitary operational integration education system all the more substantial and foreboding.
Attaining full joint integration between SAMS-SASS-SAWS remains a challenge; infusing fullcombined (muftinational) and fiill-interagency integration via some formalized educational system and/or institution remains an even more distant endeavor. The call for a joint advanced studies program is not a new one. Yet, there is a new initiative currently imderway within the J-7 of the Joint Staff to realize a joint equivalent to SAMS and the other service-based advanced warfighting programs. Tentatively labeled the Joint Advanced Warfighting School, or JAWS, this proposed program would supplement (not replace) the one-year service-based advanced studies programs, focusing academic, training, and experiential learning on joint operational integration -the development of theater strategic plans.
The same thought and effort needs to be committed to the establishment of strategic integration education, though a programmatic similar to the proposed JAWS initiative. Or better still, the JAWS concept could be reconceived and redesigned even before its development and implementation (anticipated for Fall of 2003)'^^ to go beyond the joint integration competencies, incorporating full-spectrum integration education (civilian; interagency; corporate; multinational; etc.). A broadened conception of the Joint Operating Concepts (JOCs) -one that incorporates martial and extra martial capabihties and competencies within the scenarios -could serve as the '^^ Discussions (electronic mail and telephonic) with the J-7 and staff, March 2003.