# ID: 9e945be1ceb54637a5938733751f5f35
# Title: Breaking the Phalanx: A New Design for Landpower in the 21st Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1996.0
# Fulltext:
Of Napoleon's campaigns, none is more important to an understanding of dominating maneuver than the Ulm campaign of September-October 1805.
Alerted by French intelligence agents in Germany to Austrian and Russian military mobilization, Napoleon moved his 200,000 troops 300 miles from their encampment in Boulogne in a wide envelopment along multiple axes across Western Europe to converge on the Austrian rear in Ulm.
Thanks to careful French diplomacy, strict security measures and the elimination of the French Army's dependence on fixed supply points, the operation was completed in only seven weeks!
Separate corps-size elements (25,000-30,000 troops) were given independent missions with mutually supporting objectives.
Occupied with a 30,000-man French cavalry screen in the Black Forest region, the Austrians unwisely discounted the possibility that the main body of the French Army would advance on a broad concentric front over difficult terrain.
Moreover, the Austrians thought, French forces would have to concentrate before attempting any significant attack and this French military build-up would provide the Austrians with adequate time to concentrate their own forces for a counter-strike.
Surprised and isolated by the crushing rapidity of the French advance and by the presence of the French Army far behind their front, the Austrian forces at Ulm were compelled to surrender.
Yet the Ulm campaign was not only an overwhelming victory for the French, it also decisively set the terms for Napoleon's subsequent battle with the combined Austrian and Russian Armies at Austerlitz in December-a titanic action which ended with the virtual destruction of the Austro-Russian Armies.