# ID: 9e945be1ceb54637a5938733751f5f35
# Title: Breaking the Phalanx: A New Design for Landpower in the 21st Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1996.0
# Fulltext:
On 22 January at 0400 hours, eight V22s carrying 144 Marines lift off from one Wasp-class LHD and one Tarawa-class LHA to begin the attack to seize the islands in the Straits.
They disappear into the night and report no contact with either Iranian air defenses or aircraft.
Iranian radars are off and Navy and Marine fighters over the target area report no activity in the projected landing zones.
Although nothing has been heard from the SEAL teams that went ashore 12 hours ago, the absence of air defense activity and the reports of no significant enemy movement from JSTARS and the UAVs is reassuring.
When the V22s reach the landing zones on the islands of Abu Musa and Tunbs, they are able to disembark their forces without much interference.
After a brief battle with Iranian infantry, the Marines gain complete control of the islands!
After completing the air insertion, however, Iranian line-of-sight air defense guns destroy two of the V22s as they pause in mid-air to make the transition from vertical to horizontal flight Also Iranian rocket artillery launches several attacks on the islands from positions on the mainland.
Still, the MEF Commander is elated and communicates the news of the Marines' success to CINCCENT.
CINCCENT urges the MEF Commander to reinforce his success as rapidly as possible.
This elation does not last long.
On 20 January, the Russians passed a note through their operatives in Tehran to Iranian military intelligence that three US "Carriers" were sited east of the entrance to the Persian Gulf.
The Russian information includes course, heading and last known location for the ships.
As in Iraq, the redundancy offered by conventional telephone cables, coaxial cable, and fiber optics defeats American air and missile power's attempts to effectively target critical Iranian C3I nodes.
Because the Iranian and Iraqi systems are really "nodeless," missiles and bombs on one particular target do not assure the destruction of the C3I system.
As a result, this information reaches the Iranian Military Commander in Bandere Abbas in time to be of value While remembering that Iran has a total inventory of only 67 cruise missiles, the Iranian Commander decides that these targets are important enough to justify their use.
The prize of sinking a large US Carrier is worth the entire inventory!
Just after midnight on 22 January, eleven light trucks carrying 23 missiles depart for a position on the Iranian coast just fifty miles from the Marine amphibious carriers.