# ID: 9ee03e14e2fa4d98bcf19a725a83e42d
# Title: Orchestra of Change: Strategically Harmonizing National Character, Military Forces, and the Character of War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
This study develops the theory that strategic harmonization of a country's national character, military forces, and the character of the wars in which it participates minimizes risk and creates conditions for success. The spectrum of socio-technological revolutions from revolutionary wave theory, to military revolutions, to revolutions in military affairs creates the structure for strategic harmonization. Harmonization occurs when the means, ways, and ends of military forces efficaciously translate the means, ways, and ends of national character into positive strategic effects in the character of war. The author applies this theory to case studies of the United States during the Industrial Revolution and the on-going Information Revolution. An analysis of the case studies determines that while the United States successfully harmonized during the Industrial Revolution, the US military forces' means and ways of organizing, training, and equipping that created this success are generating discord and causing strategic risk for the United States in the Information Revolution. The final section proposes a solution for strategic harmonization through investing in ubiquitous network architecture, training and empowering military forces to become a part of a complex, chaotic system at the edge of the battle space, and eliminating wasted bureaucratic overhead and organizational barriers to integration. vi
Lieutenant Colonel Scott Gunn was commissioned in the Air Force in 2001 after graduating from Harvard University, where he majored in Applied Mathematics with a focus in Economics. He was awarded his Master's of Aeronautical Sciences from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in 2011. Scott is a senior pilot with over 1,600 flight hours, including over 1,300 flying hours in the F-15. Most recently, he completed a year long Fellowship split between the Secretary of the Air Force and Chief of Staff of the Air Force Executive Action Group and the Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies.
We can thus only say that the aims a belligerent adopts, and the resources he employs, must be governed by the particular characteristics of his own position; but they will also conform to the spirit of the age and to its general character.
-Carl Von Clausewitz On War
As of mid-2014, 42.3 percent of the human population connects to the Internet, communicating over 30,000 gigabytes per second (GBps). 
1
2
3
4
Police Department enlists heterogeneous streams of data and algorithms to identify likely trouble spots in the city and would-be repeat offenders. 
5
6
7
Despite the global proliferation of the Information Revolution, the United States military has been slow to adapt and fully leverage the opportunities or cope with the challenges generated within the revolution. The Secretaries of Defense over the last fifteen years have demanded transformation, avoiding "Next-War-itis," innovation, or reaching for "third offsets," yet the military slowly adapts by adopting some elements of the information revolution, while generally remaining insulated to the broader fundamental shifts in society. 
8
Given the pressure from civilian leadership, the lessons of potential and near-strategic failures, and decreasing budgets, why is the US military still resistant to changing to fully leverage the fundamental shifts in the character of war and national power production brought on by the Information Revolution?
The answer is the pathways to success that made the United States and its military the dominant global power during the Industrial Revolution are also the source of its potential weakness during the Information Revolution. The harmony of national While presented as independent theories of revolution, they are intrinsically related, interacting with each other to create, grow, and progress socio-technological change. For the war-fighting strategist, these theories correlate to the three elements the strategist must harmonize to maximize military utility in an ever-changing world.
Chapter III links the theories of revolution to the three elements that govern a nation's effectiveness to achieve political aims through military means. Grounded in Carl von Clausewitz's trinity of violence, chance, and reason the three revolution theories describe significant shifts in the nation's strength, its military forces, and the character of war in which those forces operate. 
10
11
The Dynamics of Military Revolution, 1300-2050 (Cambridge, UK ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 6. The Toffler's elucidate their wave theory in a number of works, but the first is Alvin Toffler, The Third Wave (New York: Bantam Books, 1981). 
10
11
However, those successful processes also created pathways to success that are not as ideal in the Information Revolution.
Chapter V applies the theory to the present state of the Information Revolution.
The chapter begins by exploring the changes in resources and processes that create The United States was successful in many ways at adopting the means of the Information
Revolution at the RMA level in the conduct of war. Viewed through the lens of these conflicts, however, a schism between the transformations of national character into the character of war appears at the military-revolution level, where US military forces fail to adapt to the ways of the Information Revolution. This dissonance of military forces, national character, and the character of war cost the United States much blood and treasure over the last decade-and-a-half, but could be catastrophic if faced by more capable adversaries who harmonize for the Information Revolution.
Chapter VI recommends a course of action to harmonize military forces with national character and the character of war. Analysis of the discord produced during the transition from the Industrial to the Information Revolution suggests the United States must invest in a ubiquitous network that integrates forces at the front edge of the battle space, empower and train forces to operate in and on a complex system to create adaptable emergent behavior, and reform the military organization to reduce or eliminate unnecessary bureaucracy and undesirable hierarchical divisions and structures. Now is the time to make these changes at the convergence of emerging informationized threats, exponential growth of information generation and processing tools, and the development of theories of chaos and complexity. This chapter concludes with a summary of the paper and recommendations for future research to make the theory of strategic harmonization and its recommendations more robust.
This paper presents a generalized theory of strategy based upon Clausewitz's trinity of violence, reason, and chance applied to the harmonizing of national character, military forces, and the character and conduct of war. While the theory aims to be general, the case studies and focus rests on the United States. The reasons are two-fold.
First, the hope is that the US military adopts the recommendations generated by the paper to prepare the nation for the changes inherent in the Information Revolution. The second was simply to scope the paper to manageable limits. Future study should expand the case studies beyond the United States, potentially focusing on Maoist China, Stalinist USSR, Nazi Germany, or Al Qaeda insurgencies in the Middle East.
The paper also focuses on the Industrial Revolution in a more developed stage, post-1850. This date was chosen because the rapid growth of industrial productivity in the ensuing century more easily highlighted the shifts in national character and the character of war. An earlier study of the Industrial Revolution may be helpful to understanding the nascent nature of the Information Revolution, especially if one believes that the vast majority of revolutionary changes are just about to begin.
Additionally, this paper did not focus on the harmonizing that occurred between the Tofflers' first wave, the Agrarian Revolution, and the second wave, Industrial Revolution. 
12
Finally, the paper limits its scope to a few key internal processes nations use to develop strength and wealth. While many more internal factors affect how nation-states create wealth and strength, this paper highlights what the author assesses are the dominant pathways and the ones most pertinent with which to align the organizing, training, and equipping of military forces. This paper also limits its discussion of foreign trade and diplomacy, which though important, are less dominant features in the strategic terrain covered.
A major assumption of this paper is that the nation-state is the primary agent for Additionally, the paper assumes that the nature of war is immutable. The character and conduct of war may change, but as Clausewitz noted, "was is an extension of politics with other means." 
13
14
12
13
14
Chapter 2
Ever-newer waters flow on those who step into the same rivers.
-Heraclitus
The ancient Greek philosopher, Heraclitus, wisely observed that change is the natural order. Heraclitus' millennia-old concept of ever-present change, sometimes quoted as "the only constant is change" rings true even today. One sees change everywhere: in the commercial sector, government, or military. Change is the reason Apple rebounded from a nearly defunct business to number five on Fortune's top 500 corporations. 
1
2
Militaries and their supporting governments must perceive both that change is occurring and the character of that change. Not being present for change can result in military or societal devastation. The natives of both Africa and the Americas experienced this lesson at the hands of colonial Europe. Unable to adapt to or unaware of the changes occurring in their midst, such as the machine gun, accurate rapid-fire artillery, and the ability to rapidly shift forces across the battle front, led the militaries of Western Europe to the extended trench warfare of World War I. Perceiving change, but misunderstanding its character and implications is equally pernicious, as the French found out in the six weeks it took German forces to circumvent the Maginot Line at the outset of World War II. Recognizing, characterizing, and predicting the shifting sands of warfare can mean the difference between life and death, success and failure. The responsibility to do so rests with the strategist.
In Strategy for Chaos: Revolutions in Military Affairs and the Evidence of History, Colin Gray juxtaposes strategy and a social science interpretation of chaos theory to show that while difficult, complex, and non-linear, strategy is possible. 
3
More difficult still is the need for the strategist to predict how much, and what kinds of, military effectiveness will be required to yield the strategic effectiveness that matches political goals." 
4
The revolution in military affairs (RMA) and its technologically focused In 1994, Krepinevich described an RMA as "what occurs when the application of new technologies into a significant number of military systems combines with innovative operational concepts and organizational adaptation in a way that fundamentally alters the 
12
13
14
character and conduct of conflict … by producing a dramatic increase-often an order of magnitude or greater-in the combat potential and military effectiveness of armed forces." 15 Barry Watts highlights "it is not the speed with which changes in war's conduct occur but their magnitude as reflected in the emergence of new operational concepts and organizations, thereby generating new military competencies or obsolescing earlier ones." 
16
Richard Hundley, in a 1999 study for RAND states, "An RMA involves a paradigm shift in the nature and conduct of military operations, which either renders obsolete or irrelevant one or more core competencies of a dominant player, or creates one or more new core competencies, in some new dimension of warfare, or both." 
17
However, he remains true to RMA's impact on the "nature and conduct of military The National Interest, no. 37 (October 1, 1994): 30. 
16
17 Hundley,
Past Revolutions,
Future Transformations,
9
18
28
The Tofflers' revolutionary wave theory identifies sweeping changes in civilizations and, as an aside, their influences on militaries and war. The theory therefore focuses on the input into the framework of war. The RMA indicates changes in output, while the MR identifies changes in the instrument; wave theory addresses the input to the framework: civilization and its realization as nation-states.
The Tofflers describe civilization as including "such varied matters as technology, family life, religion, culture, politics, business, hierarchy, leadership, values, sexual morality, and epistemology." 29 Each nation uniquely exhibits traits within each of those varied matters, but categorizes into one of the three broad waves of civilizations the Tofflers identify: agricultural, industrial, and knowledge-based. The source of national wealth production is the primary distinction between the three waves as this determines the society's power holders, values, structure, and capabilities. 
30
The American Civil War provides an example when the second-wave industrial North fought against and defeated the first-wave agricultural-based South. 
31
30
31
32
33
DOD as the Pentagon's Director of Information. 34 A nation's education system also aids military transformation as the "work force and war-force change in tandem. Mindless warriors are to Third [Information] Wave war what unskilled manual laborers are to the Third Wave economy-an endangered species." 
35
The proposition that military revolutions occur in the "fullest sense" only when societies experience civilization transformations may be correct, but is less useful in its grandness. The interaction of Greek society between 750 and 650 BCE and its military's adoption of hoplites occurred in the heart of First Wave civilization, but provides good grist for studying military-society interactions. 
36
37
The most informative and important aspect of the Tofflers' theory of revolution is the linkage between society, its civilization characterization and sources of wealth, and the military forces it supports. The society provides the funding, the people, and processes that create, support, and equip its military. The society's wealth determines the level of funding it is willing and capable of providing. The people educated by the society become members of the military, with all of the biases, frames of reference, and habits brought with them from the parent society. Since most militaries do not equip themselves, the society's processes of wealth generation are the sources of production 
34
35
Change is constant. Adaptation, innovation, and sometimes-uncontrollable shifts occur in the outputs, instruments, and suppliers of war. RMA theory informs on change in the output, the character and conduct of war, generated by the instrument of war. 
There is but a single theory of strategy; its function is to educate those whose profession it is to hold open a bridge between politics and action.
-Colin Gray The Strategy Bridge
The spectrum of revolution theory spans dramatic shifts in national character, military forces, and the character and conduct of war, in turn offering a link to strategy. The spectrum's importance lies in the relationships it illuminates among the means, ways, ends, and risks of translating national productivity and culture through military forces into strategic effects within the constantly shifting terrain of the character and conduct of war. When the elements of means, ways, and ends are in-tune, the translation of strength through force into effect attains a strategic harmony allowing the nation's power to resonate while minimizing risk. When out of tune, strategic discord ensues leading to ineffectiveness and increased risk of failure.
Across the spectrum of revolution, the purpose of strategy is to harmonize national character, military forces, and the character of war. Military forces are the bridge used to communicate national character into strategic effect in the conduct of war.
Clausewitz identified violence, chance, and reason as the paradoxical trinity of war, with theory being "like an object suspended by three magnets." 1 The national character, similar to Clausewitz's violence, is the generally uncontrollable trajectory of a national polity. The character of war is replete with chance, being the shapeable but unbridled change. Through reason, military forces can be rationally organized, trained, and equipped to translate the violence of national character into the chance of the character of war. Strategic harmony occurs when reason creates military forces that coincide with, magnify, and translate national character into strategic effect appropriate for the everchanging character of war.
Strategy is many things to many people. From its humble beginnings as the Greek strategos and strategia, meaning general and generalship respectively, the modern concept of strategy originated in France in the late eighteenth century and has spread to other sectors of government, business, and even into sports. 
2
3
4
5
The theory of war proper, on the other hand, is concerned with the use of these means, once they have been developed, for the purposes of the war. All that is required of the first group is the end product, as understanding of their main characteristics."
6
Three of Clausewitz's five elements of strategy focus less on the engagement of military forces than on the composition of the forces themselves. The first element, moral, "covers everything that is created by intellectual and psychological qualities."
The general may be responsible for sustaining those moral qualities in war, but the foundation derives from the society and culture of the state that raised the army. The second element, physical, "consists of the size of the armed forces, their composition, armament, and so forth," all of which Clausewitz previously described as preparations outside of war proper. The third and fourth elements, mathematical and geography, describe how and over what terrain an army travels and fall well within Clausewitz's definition of strategy. The fifth element, statistical, covering support and maintenance, was specifically delimited out of strategy by Clausewitz previously. 
7
A twentieth-century strategist, B. H. Liddell Hart, expanded strategy beyond its wartime military application. Liddell Hart introduced the concept of "grand strategy [to]   coordinate and direct all the resources of a nation, or band of nations, towards the attainment of the political object of war-the goal defined by fundamental policy." 8 Grand strategy manages the economic and moral resources of the nation to support its fighting forces, regulates power distribution among the services and industry, and accounts for the other forms of national power including financial, diplomatic, commercial, and ethical pressure. 
9
10
Two other military theorists, separated by millennia, but both discussing naval matters, provide insight on the impacts of peacetime behavior and national capabilities on strategy. Alfred Thayer Mahan, writing in the late nineteenth century, wrote: "Naval strategy has for its end to found, support, and increase, as well in peace as in war, the sea power of a country." 
11
12
Two millennia earlier, Thucydides documented one of the pivotal orations of the Peloponnesian War and highlighted the importance of national character to foster strong military forces. Pericles, whom Thucydides considered "the first man of his time at Athens," spoke to the Athenians during their deliberations on war with Sparta. 
13
15
16
17
18
19
Even though Gray confines his study of strategy to wartime military applications, the abstraction of strategy as a bridge is useful for a broader definition of strategy, "A bridge, even a metaphorical one, has to connect two distinctive entities or phenomena that otherwise would be divided … this is exactly the function of strategy … The concept of the strategy bridge is extraordinarily significant because it draws attention to the vital distinction between means and ends." 
20
Pericles and Mahan both highlighted the importance of national character to develop the right military strengths for the potential war at hand. Clausewitz recognizes the importance of effectively organizing, training, and equipping the forces, and Liddell Hart connects the economic and military well being of the nation to these efforts. Gray clarifies how those military forces connect the desires of policy to strategic effects against specific opponents in times of war, but says little of strategy's purpose outside of war when policy, military forces, and the range of potential adversaries constantly shift.
Gray, however, provides the insightful strategy bridge analogy and the broader definition of strategy as connecting means through ways to ends.
Synthesizing the theoretical concepts of strategy and the spectrum of revolution creates the framework for understanding strategic harmonization. In the grandest sense, national character forms the means, military forces form the ways, and strategic effect in the conduct of war are the ends. Harmonizing among these three elements reduces risk by ensuring that military forces make optimal use of national character to generate appropriate strategic effects within the character of war. Strategic harmonization is not achieved simply by making sure the military employs the national product effectively against a specific adversary.
The challenge is three-fold. First, the three elements, national character, military forces, and the character of war, each consist of their own unique description of ends, ways, and means. Second, the ends, ways, and means in one element interact with those of the other elements. As an example, the ways of national character, such as specialization and vertical integration, provide models for the ways military forces organize into functionally specialized services, arms, and directorates. The means of national character during the height of the industrial revolution, in the form of resources such as oil and metal required for production, became the ends in the conduct of World War II, in the form of strategic bombing, is another example. Third, during periods of peace one cannot be certain of who will be the next adversary, and therefore any attempt at harmonization must consider broad generalities on the character of war, as shaped by the national characters of potential adversaries. 
21
The definition of strategy as using means in certain ways to achieve desired ends also serves as a general description of any process of translation or transformation. The means or resources are transformed by the ways into something that is of use, the ends.
The application of reason to this process by tailoring means and ways to achieve certain ends aligns with Gray's content-neutral definition of strategy. 
22
National character is the means in the broader strategic harmonization challenge.
The description of a nation's character includes many elements, the categorization and analysis of which are beyond the scope of this work. Luckily, Alvin and Heidi Toffler offer the concept of the wealth system of a nation as equivalent to the overall character or civilization, "No wealth system exists in isolation. A wealth system is only one component, although a very powerful one, of a still larger macrosystem whose other components-social, cultural, religious, political-are in constant feedback with it and with one another. Together they form a civilization or way of life roughly compatible with the wealth system." 
23 21
22
23
The Tofflers define wealth as more than just money or material possession, but the satisfaction of both tangible and intangible desires. 
24
The means of generating national wealth consist of the people of the nation and the primary resources they use to create wealth. 
25
More recently, information is flourishing as a resource within the means of national wealth production. 
27
24
25
26
28
29
The ends of military forces, whether in peacetime or war, are to make more secure the nation from which they were created. Military forces seek to achieve this end through generating strategic effects. 
30
31
The means of the military forces are the people inherited from the nation's population, the material produced and supplied by the nation, and the resources both , describes how information (authors use knowledge) differs from traditional physical resources. 
28 Toffler and Toffler,
Revolutionary Wealth,
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
30
31
know. One of the key differences, however, is that by the time individuals enter the military for indoctrination into military culture, they have been indoctrinated into the national character already.
Although for years the military has actively adapted its soldiers, sailors, and recently airmen to military culture, the national character of the people determine the ease of the indoctrination while the character of war determines its usefulness. The larger the difference between skills and knowledge required by the military and those developed by the nation, the more challenging and costly is the training of the forces. 
32
The nation supplies the majority of resources military forces use. The nation creates the wealth necessary to fund the military and produces or purchases the physical means the military forces employ. The national character determines the amount of wealth, but also how that wealth is generated. The materials, processes, and products the nation employs to create wealth result in an economy of scale for similar products. 
33
History, 1660
History, -1783, 45. 33 , 45. 33
One of the most significant contributors to the acceleration of change, and a bridging concept between the military forces and the character of war, is the increasing production of information by military forces. 
34
The nature of war, its political purpose, is immutable as proposed by Clausewitz when he wrote, "war is simply a continuation of political intercourse, with the addition of other means." 
35
36
Clausewitz theorizes on the character of absolute war first, and then tempers his theory with wars of more limited aims. As his starting point, the claims "the aim of war should be what its very concept implies-to defeat the enemy." 
37
38
Clausewitz makes a clear distinction between the character of war in theoretical absolute war and the more historically prevalent limited wars. In absolute war, where the aim of war is to disarm the enemy, he defines the spectrum of objectives as "the armed forces, the country, and the enemy's will." 
39
The political nature of war limits its scope and determines its character. 
40
41
42
The ends of the character of war are to generate strategic effects thereby eliminating the adversary's means, the ability to employ their means, the ability to generate more means, or the will to do so. The adversary's means equate to the means of the military forces and the ability to employ those forces equate to the ways and ends of military forces. On the other hand, the ability to generate additional means and the will to do so equate to the portions of the national character that supplies those means. The particulars of the adversary's national character and military forces define the ends of the character of war.
Paralleling this logic, the ends, ways, and means of military forces supply the means and ways available within the character of war. At the onset of war, the ends of military forces create the foundation for the means and ways of the character of war.
Military forces traditionally fight in war the way they train and are structured in peace. 
43
Innovation takes time and may not make available the ways or means necessitated by the character of war quickly enough. 
44
42
43
44
Strategy, as a translation of means through ways to create strategic effects that achieve ends, creates a framework to analyze and address the challenge of harmonizing across the spectrum of revolutions. The nation's processes to turn resources into wealth directly affect the people and materials available for the military to use, as well as the cost and flexibility of the military's methods for using those resources. The effectiveness of the ends of military forces, and their ability to generate strategic effects, is linked to the means and methods available to potential adversaries within the character and conduct of war. Simultaneously, the means and methods available to one's military forces in specific wartime scenarios derive from the means and methods developed in peacetime. In a period of change across the revolutionary spectrum of national character, military forces, and the character of war, these interactions create a very real risk for discord and ineffectiveness, as well as great opportunities for those who successfully harmonize across the spectrum. The United States' performance during the Industrial Revolution, culminating in World War II, was a spectacular harmonization.
The first essential condition for an army to be able to stand the strain of battle is an adequate stocks of weapons, petrol and ammunition. In fact, the battle is fought and decided by the Quartermasters before the shooting begins. The bravest men can do nothing without guns, the guns nothing without plenty of ammunition, and neither guns nor ammunition are of much use in mobile warfare unless there are vehicles with sufficient petrol to haul them around.
- or increasing the population, with division of labor slowly increasing as people invented more effective methods of farming. 
3
4
5
The Industrial Revolution changed the ends of wealth creation from the productivity man could generate with the land to the value man could create with The Industrial Revolution also transformed the resources required to power the new science and technology. Previously, water, wind, wood, and animals were the resources man harnessed to generate wealth. As the British ran out of forests to burn, they turned to coal as a source of energy. 
12
mechanical devices like the steam engine. 
13
Later, the steam engine gave way to the gasoline-powered reciprocating engine, with oil replacing coal as the most important resource in the Industrial Revolution.
The key traits of the industrial nation's means are the people's scientific rationalization and engineering and the destructive transformation of resources into more 
The character of military forces during the Industrial Revolution evolved in an upward spiraling dance of mechanization with the national character. Military forces led the national character in the use of replaceable parts by making the infantry soldiers interchangeable through drill and discipline, standardizing the parts of the weapons used by the infantry, and increasing the centralization of bureaucracies to control large forces.
It was the nation, however, that embraced, refined, and built a culture of people and products out of these concepts, then exported them back to the military forces for Maurice used drill and discipline to create uniformity within his infantry in which the "army became an articulated organism with a central nervous system that allowed sensitive and more or less intelligent response to unforeseen circumstances," setting the standard for most future successful militaries. 
27
28
From the dawn of recorded history, military forces have specialized their personnel. The ancient Greeks segregated forces into specialized foot soldiers, archers, and cavalry. 
29
Napoleonic armies included specializations of artillery, cavalry, and infantry. World War I saw the introduction of aircraft pilots, submariners, machine gun crews, grenadiers, and more. By World War II, most of the specializations from World War I were further subspecialized with limited ability to cross between sub-specialties. As the national character demanded greater specialization to efficiently produce its myriad mechanical devices, so too the military increasingly specialized to use them. The organizational bureaucratic structure necessary to coordinate and control the vast disparate forces evolved in military forces as well.
The nationalistic furor sparked by the French Revolution led to the levée en masse and created the largest military force the world had ever seen. By 1794, the French army totaled 750,000 men in the field and would raise over two million more men between 1800 and 1814. 
30
39
40
magazine rifle, machine guns, and, above all, quick-firing artillery." 41 Much like in wars of the past, the armies waging static trench warfare required resupply. The massive movement of these supplies required that railways move the new equipment from its production sites in the cities of the rear to near the front line, but still required man and horsepower to move it to the front. This slow process aided the devolution of combat into trench warfare as much as the defensive firepower of the time, and would have to wait until the next war and the proliferation of the internal combustion engine to change. 
42
43
44
The machines equipping military forces during World War II, products of industrialized nations, empowered mankind to act faster, farther, and more effectively than ever before. Just as machines allowed the nation to create wealth more quickly, effectively, and on a grander scale, so too it allowed military forces to destroy on a scale previously unimaginable. Use of machine guns, artillery, tanks, armored vehicles, aircraft, and mechanized air defenses emerged in World War I to support the infantry and expanded by World War II into their own corps and branches of service, attempting to 
41
42
43
44
service the ends of the character of war in their own right. 
45
46
47
The machines of military forces followed the same arc as the machines of national character in resources required to both build and power the new weapons of war. World
War II Germany illustrates the requirements of industrialized military forces. Between 1933 and 1938, the German agricultural workforce declined thirteen percent while the industrial workforce increased twenty-six percent. 
48
49
The ends of industrialized military forces were massive, specialized, and standardized forces centrally managed by large bureaucracies. Those bureaucracies controlled vertically integrated and horizontally coordinated applications of people and products to extend man's ability to go farther, faster, and more powerfully. Similar to the origins of national wealth creation, the increased capabilities of industrialized military forces hinged on new forms of motive power and the resources powering them, initially coal and steam, then increasingly oil and the internal combustion engine. It was the ends of these machines and the steel, oil, and industry on which they relied that led to the Industrial Revolution's character of war.
The nature of war may be immutable, but the character of war evolves along with the participants of war. War during the Industrial Revolution occurred among and between both agrarian non-industrial nations and industrial nations. Although many of the wars, such as colonial wars, occurred between industrial and non-industrial nations, the experiences of wars among industrial nations would define the character of war in the Industrial Revolution, indelibly etching themselves into the national and institutional memories of the states and militaries participating in them.
The era of the Industrial Revolution began and ended with great wars that redefined the scope and limits of warfare. The American Revolution and Napoleonic
War occurred just as the Industrial Revolution was beginning in England. While not influenced greatly by the industrialization of the nation, military, or war, these two great wars marked the beginning of the rise of the nationalism and its impact on the expansion of war to the entire population of the nation-state. 50
The Franco-Prussian War and the American Civil War both mark the middle of the Industrial Revolution. Warfare still predominantly resembled pre-industrialization at the tactical level, but the importance of industrial production, wealth, and transportation capabilities became more strategically important. The Prussian use of the railroad was essential to their initial rapid mobilization and deployment, although provided little additional capability once those forces began to engage the enemy and rapidly acquire territory. 
51
World War I, already noted as the turning point in the character of military forces, was also the turning point in the character of war. Previously, as Clausewitz noted, defeating the men of the armed forces was often the primary objective of war, since the men were the primary means with which nations fought. 
53
where neither side could hope to defeat the enemy's forces through battle or territorial conquest, the ways to win the war shifted either to exhausting the opponent of means, either men or the industrial resources required, or to breaking his will. 54 Although Germany's adoption of storm trooper tactics generated tactical and territorial gains, and predicted the development of combined-arms maneuver warfare, both sides discovered that the winner was the side whose national character could provide the most enduring means in both men and resources to the war. 
55
56
58
59
61
62
63
The ends of the Industrial Revolution aligned with industrialized versions of Clausewitz's objectives of military, country, and will, which became the centers of gravity against which the means and ways concentrated. Strategies to attack the enemy's will grew out of the musings of interwar air power theorists such as William "Billy"
Mitchell and Giulio Douhet who believed the war could be ended most swiftly by 
59
61 Boot,
War Made New,
[302]
[303]
Overy, The Air War, 1939
-1945
, 164. 63 Overy, The Air War, 1939
-1945, 165-166., and Tooze, The Wages of Destruction, 667-671.
70
71
74
75
76
77
The character of war in World War II, the seminal struggle of the Industrial Revolution, approached Clausewitz's conception of absolute war, the ends of which aligned well with the objectives of military forces, country, and will.  Naval Air Power, 1909-1941 (Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute Press, 2001), 193-195.,  and Eric M Bergerud, Fire in  The US economy is the vanguard of information economies that "are increasingly dependent upon the application of science and technology, as well as upon the quality of information and management, in the processes of production, consumption, distribution, and trade." 5 These dependencies create a "shift in advanced capitalist societies, from material production to information-processing activities, both in terms of proportion of [Gross National Product] and in the proportion of the population employed in such  
3
4 Dicken,
Global Shift,
23,
36. 5
activities." 
6
The outputs of the informationized national character revolve around processes and information. As such, the outputs are more cognitive, flexible, and additive than industrial outputs. The rapid growth of information, the networks on which it moves, and the processes that transform it into wealth shift value from muscle to mental, from mass to flexibility, and from destructive to constructive ends and require significant alterations  While all ten are important, the elements of information causing the most significant changes are that it is non-rival, non-linear, relational, and mates with other information.
The value of information is non-linear because a small amount of data can create disproportionate returns on investment, such as when Google's founders created the PageRank function in their search engine, BackRub, which would later become the premier Internet search engine and propel Google into the forefront of the Information Revolution. 
10
The non-rival, relational, mating, and proliferating aspects of information are what make it non-linear. A non-rival resource is equivalent to a constructive resource in that it is not destroyed when used to create value. 
11
12
13
The movement of the ends of national character from industrial-to informationbased shifts the skills and traits of desired workers away from the ability to perform standardized, specialized, and compartmentalized tasks that linearly add value to a physical product. Instead, the Information Revolution "requires well-trained, adaptable workers with authority to make their own decisions." 14 Information Revolution workers are still specialized, but the nature of information as a resource differentiates the usefulness of informationized specialization from its industrial purposes. Instead of compartmentalized and standardized specializations meant to send physical products in a linear vertical supply chain to add value, information specialization requires unique worker knowledge and horizontal networks of data sharing to create non-linear value growth. Information Revolution companies value specialists for their ability to add unique insight and values either by being cross-disciplinary specialists on their own or by participating on teams of specialists whose summed knowledge is greater than its parts. 
15
16
13
17
Flexibility is the ability to adjust the current system to a changing environment.
Industrialized institutions, centralized and standardized, could be very flexible, such as by increasing the production output of a desired product or by allowing the interchangeability of parts. 
18
19
20
21
22
19
20
21
22
Flatter hierarchies improve information flow within organizations both vertically and horizontally. 
23
24
Decentralization also allows empowered groups to respond to changing local conditions and markets through information-enabled feedback systems, essential given the pace and globalization of economies in the Information Revolution. 
25
The United States, its riches made through the auspices of the Industrial weapons, coupled with the intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), were the military culmination of the Industrial Revolution, reaching father, faster, and more powerfully than humankind ever had before. 
30
31
32
33
34
British code breakers developed Colossus, the "world's first digital, programmable computer," at Bletchley Park in order to crack Nazi ciphers during World War II. 
35
36
37
38
Although precision-guided munitions (PGMs) predated the digital computer, the miniaturization of computing capabilities, especially solid-state technologies greatly enhanced the accuracy and lethality of PGMs. 
39
40
41
42
43
62
64
65
66
70
approach it as a rational extension of game theory. 
71
72
74
71
72
73
The means and ways of the Information Revolution affords unconventional forces opportunities to accomplish these goals. Global and local digital networks, along with social media, allow terrorist organizations to decentralize within extremely flat organizational structures while still creating strategic effects to further their ideological ends. 
83
84
85
In Iraq, when the US forces empowered lower-level units to operate from small outposts within the community instead of from large and remote garrisons, the units could gather and react to local information feedback by building trust on a local level. vulnerable US government contractors' systems. 
90
American military forces continue to focus on the industrial war, investing too little in informationized warfare and leaving the cyber security of the nation to private individual or corporate entities. 
91
Chapter 6
Complex systems: a system in which large networks of components with no central control and simple rules of operation give rise to complex behavior, sophisticated information processing, and adaptation via learning or evolution.
-Melanie Mitchell Complexity: A Guided Tour Now is the time to harmonize. The convergence of more powerful and adaptive threats, exponential growth in data and ways to create value from the data, and emerging modes of chaotic and complex thought presents opportunity and advantage to those who harmonize the means and ways of military forces with the national character and potential conduct of war. Harmonization requires the US military to invest in the means of ubiquitous horizontal information flows, to train and empower the multi-functional groups that emerge from the horizontal network environment by decentralizing command and control authorities, and to reorganize the industrial structure of the military writ large so that a flatter, informationally-empowered system can emerge that is more flexible, adaptable, and harmonized with the national character.
The time is right for US military forces to harmonize means and ways with the informationized national character. The adversaries-real and potential-threatening the United States and its interests continue to adapt and become more capable. The insurgencies in Iraq and Afghanistan and the continuing struggle to tamp down global terror networks provide a window of insight to potential adversaries on the weaknesses of the industrial ways of American military forces. China's growing economy, increasingly capable military, willingness to use and effectiveness of informationized means against the United States to garner advantage illuminate the potential risks of not harmonizing.
Although Chinese culture may be less inclined to the decentralized ways of the informationized character of war, the risk of the Chinese nation harmonizing while the United States persists in ossified industrial structures is too great not to change. 1 Re-emergent Russia produces similar risks. Although the Russian economy and military lack China's vitality, Russia proved willing and capable of launching information attacks in conjunction with physical territorial conquest. Similar information attacks, directed at the centralized, vertically integrated information flows and command and control structures of the US military could prove devastating in conjunction with physical attacks against American allies and interests abroad. 
2
3
4
5
6
However useful these tools may become, much of the value will be lost without new ways of thought to make sense of and harness the tools.
The emerging schemas of chaos theory and complexity generate modes of thinking to manage and harness the incredible opportunities of information networks and emerging knowledge tools. Chaos theory describes the tendency of many natural systems to exhibit long-term non-linear behavior, implying that the ability to predict future states of a system are nearly impossible because minor changes in initial conditions vastly change long-term behavior.
7
Complex systems theory, also known as complexity sciences, investigates systems that appear to cope with chaotic behavior and environments to create order from 87 percent of the US population used the Internet. 
17
18
[sic] and emergent properties of the network." 
19
20
21
22
23
25
24
25
26
In the process of organizational adaptation, the US military must rework or eliminate the current concept of intelligence. The notion of information processing in support of the operational commander breeds centralization and vertical information integration. Although context application and information processing functions of intelligence are important, in a decentralized network environment, the raw data and its processed form are relevant to all, not just a central figure. 
27
Decentralized organizations of secure, interoperable networks fused across the front edge of the battle space suggest a diminishing desire or need for unique services.
When navies primarily fought on the seas and transported armies who fought on land, The United States must harmonize the means and ways of its military forces with the national character and character of war in the Information Revolution to minimize the risks posed by emerging and capable threats and to capitalize on the opportunities afforded by the rapid growth of information generation and processing tools coupled with the concepts of complex systems theory. During the Industrial Revolution America grew from a fledgling frontier country to the world's largest economy and possessing its most effective military force. The national character transitioned from an agrarian society relying on wind, water, wood, and rural craftspeople to an industrial society built on iron, coal, oil, and urban factory workers. Bureaucratic organizations expanded and centralized in order to coordinate and control increasingly massive production through standardization and functional specialization. The ends of industrialized society were machines that allowed humans to move farther, faster, and accomplish more wherever they went. These machines and the factory workers who built them provided the means of industrial military forces.
Industrial military forces, consisting of standardized and specialized machines and people harmonized well with the national character and the character of industrial war.
Centralized hierarchies proved just as successful coordinating and controlling military forces of men and machines as they did the nation from which those resources came.
Like the nations for which they fought, industrial military forces could go farther, faster, and more powerfully than ever before, and they relied on increasingly vast industrial resources extracted, produced, and supplied by their supporting nations. It was this reliance that shaped the character of industrial war.
Industrialized war approached Clausewitz's concept of absolute war almost completely, as military forces, now capable of reaching deep into an enemy's country, strove to destroy an adversary's ability to wield its military forces, to produce and supply those forces, and its will to do both. Military forces attacked these objectives through increasingly massive arsenals of specialized machines centrally coordinated and directed at destroying the adversary's ability to produce and supply their military forces. When even those objectives proved ineffective against the Japanese, US military forces resorted to attempting to break Japanese will through firebombing and delivery of two atomic weapons. The advent of nuclear weapons and the computers that made them possible ushered in the next revolutionary wave: the Information Revolution.
US national character changed slowly after World War II, but transformed with increasing speed as computers and the networks connecting them proliferated. The ends of national wealth production shifted from the mass production of standardized things to the cognitive, flexible, and additive creation of information, processes, and knowledge tools that allowed humans to expand and relocate information processing and cognition.
As information became the primary means of wealth production, successful companies became flatter, decentralized, integrated, flexible, and adaptable. The companies that failed to adapt often ceased to exist. The same cannot be said of US military forces.
US military forces adopted many of the means of the Information Revolution, but without the associated ways that created so much value for the nation. Fear of accidental escalation and destructive nuclear war bears much of the responsibility for this organizational stagnation as it drove increasing centralization of control, reinforcing vertical information channels and bureaucratic hierarchies. However, even as information means became more ubiquitous through the widespread employment of PGMs, networks, sensors, and computers, US military forces remained wedded to industrial ways and ends. The resultant discord with the nation and the character of war led to significant military setbacks and potential strategic failure. Actualizing the solution suggested in this paper also requires research into human behavior and organizational reform. The methods of discipline and drill used to create 32 US Joint Forces Command, "Capstone Requirements Document: Global Information Grid (GIG)" (Department of Defense, August 30, 2001), www.dtic.mil/cgibin/GetTRDoc?AD=ADA408877. desired industrial military culture have existed for centuries, but run counter to the informationized national culture and the ways necessary for today's military forces to harmonize. A study of the methods that might be employed to foster military discipline without the standardization of thought and behavior required by traditional training techniques and ways in order to shape a military culture that allows for increase individualism, diverse cross-functional emergent group behavior, and bounded risk taking could create concrete measures to achieve this vision.
Research into how to train informationized forces as well as the best organizational structure to empower those forces will require extensive experimentation and the assumption of some tactical and operational risk. Even in the informationized national character, different organizational structures abound, including hierarchical ones similar to the US military's. However, to achieve the complex system behavior this paper describes as necessary for the current revolution, significant changes must be made to the military's structure. The details of these changes, what vertical fissures to eliminate, and how to re-organize the forces without creating new cultural seams requires further investigation.
Additionally, this paper suggests further research to explore the generality of the theory of strategic harmonization. Did similar discord occur in nations transitioning from agrarian to industrial societies, and if so, how did they re-harmonize? Stalinist Soviet Union, Maoist China, or industrializing Great Britain provide potential case studies of such forced and natural harmonization. Other nations currently transitioning from agrarian to industrial or industrial to informational societies might also be studied.
Finally, strategic harmonization of military forces is essential to efficaciously translating national character into strategic effect in war. Although the nature of war is immutable and Clausewitz's violence, reason, and chance endure, the character of the Information Revolution suggests a re-evaluation of reason's purpose. Since Clausewitz's time and through the Industrial Revolution, many have attempted to apply reason to reduce the effects of chance and the inherent uncertainty of war. Complex system theory, however, suggests that chance is not something to be reasoned away, but something to embrace and reinforce. Chance and uncertainty are not the great unknowns of war to be dominated and tamed by human endeavors. Instead chance, randomness, and uncertainty are the creators of adaptability and evolution to be observed, nurtured, and harnessed, allowing our forces to out-change our adversaries and harmonize with the Information Revolution.
Knox and Murray's military revolutions accommodate such 6 Keith L. Shimko, The Iraq Wars and America's Military Revolution (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2010). 7 Shimko, The Iraq Wars and America's Military Revolution, 4-5. 8 Richard O. Hundley, Past Revolutions, Future Transformations: What Can the History of Revolutions in Military Affairs Tell Us about Transforming the U.S. Military? (Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 1999), iii. 9 Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler, Revolutionary Wealth, 1st ed (New York: Knopf, 2006), 7. 10 Gray, Strategy for Chaos, 31. change
, as well as Michael Howard, War in European History, Updated ed (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2009), 75-93.
, as well as Michael Howard, War in European History, Updated ed (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2009), 75-93.
Nations attacked an enemy's country by cutting it off from needed industrial resources, such as oil and steel, while attempting to cripple the nation's industrial capability to use what resources it 75 See Biddle, 77 See Boot, War Made New, 296-297., Mark R Peattie, Sunburst: The Rise of Japanese
8  
8  
15  
15  
Fortune, "Fortune 500  
2014," January 2015, http://fortune.com/fortune500/.
2
Colin S. Gray, Strategy for Chaos: Revolutions in Military Affairs and the Evidence of History (London: Routledge, 2004), 109.
Gray, Strategy for Chaos, 98.   
Gray, Strategy for Chaos,
91.
Krepinevich, "The Military-Technical Revolution: A Preliminary Assessment," 37.
MacGregor Knox and
Knox and
Knox and
Knox and
Knox and
Knox and
Knox and Murray's description of the RMA associated with their fourth MR, World War I, implies the revolution extended through World War II. The RMA include Blitzkreig operations, strategic-bombing, carrier warfare, radar, etc. While some of these were present during World War I, most reached maturation in World War II.
Colin Gray offers an effective summary and criticism of Knox and Murray's work, highlighting the addition of the fifth MR in: Gray, Strategy for Chaos,39-46.   
Knox and
Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler, War and Anti-War (New York: Warner Books, 1995),  23.   
Gray, Strategy for Chaos,
91.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton University Press, 1984), 89.   
Colin S. Gray, The Strategy Bridge: Theory for Practice (Oxford ; New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2010), 4.
J. Boone Batholomees provides an exceptional summary of different definitions of strategy and perspectives on its application from leading historical military strategists in J. BooneBartholomees, Jr., ed., U.S. Army War College Guide to National Security Policy and Strategy, 2nd ed. (U.S. Army war College, 2006), 79-106, http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/ssi/policy_strategy.pdf.
Clausewitz, On War, 128.   
Clausewitz, On War,[127][128][129] 
Clausewitz, On War, 132.   
Clausewitz, On War, 183.   
Basil Henry Liddell Hart, Strategy, 2nd rev. ed (New York, N.Y., U.S.A: Meridian, 1991), 322.
Thucydides, The Landmark Thucydides, 
Thucydides, The Landmark Thucydides, 1.143.   
Gray, The Strategy Bridge,  
 18  Gray, The Strategy Bridge, 18.
19
Isaac Porche III et al., "Data Flood:  Helping the Navy Address the Rising Tide of Sensor Information" (RAND Corporation, 2014), 3., in a RAND study of the challenges of Big Data for the Navy, noted that in 2011 the Navy produced 200 terabytes every other day. This is equivalent to the amount of information stored in the Library of Congress.
Clausewitz, On War, 605.   
Gray, The Strategy Bridge, 33.   
Clausewitz, On War, 595.   
Clausewitz, On War,[595][596] 
Clausewitz, On War,
90.
Clausewitz, On War,[603][604] 
Clausewitz, On War,
91.
Erwin Rommel, The Rommel Papers, ed. Basil Henry Liddell Hart, A Da Capo  Paperback (New York: Da Capo Press, 1982), 328.   
Pursell,  The Machine in America a Social History of Technology, 2.
For the reinforcing growth of population and industry, see Charles More, Understanding the Industrial Revolution (London: Routledge, 2000), 118,
Pursell,  The Machine in America a Social History ofTechnology, 92, 176.   
Pursell, The Machine in America a Social History of Technology, 109.
Pursell,  The Machine in America a Social History ofTechnology,[131][132] 
Pursell,  The Machine in America a Social History of Technology, 56.
McNeill, The Pursuit of Power, 117.   
Pursell,  The Machine in America a Social History of Technology, 210.
Pursell,  The Machine in America a Social History of Technology, 87-92.
Pursell,  The Machine in America a Social History of Technology, 92.
More, Understanding the Industrial Revolution,[164][165] 
Pursell, The Machine in America a Social History of Technology, 131-132.
More, Understanding the Industrial Revolution, 118.   
The Association of American Railroads, "Maps Showing the Progressive Development of US Railroads -1830 to 1950," Central Pacific Railroad Photographic History Museum, accessed April 17, 2015, http://cprr.org/Museum/RR_Development.html.
Pursell,  The Machine in America a Social History of Technology, 82.
Seymour Melman, Dynamic Factors in Industrial Productivity, 1st ed. (New York:  John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1956), v.   
Melman, Dynamic Factors in Industrial Productivity, 93.   
Melman, Dynamic Factors in Industrial Productivity,[93][94] 
McNeill, The Pursuit of Power,[126][127][128][129][130] 
See McNeill, The Pursuit of Power, 130., and John Lynn in MacGregor Knox and Williamson Murray, eds., The Dynamics of Military Revolution, 1300-2050 (Cambridge, UK ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 47-48.
Pursell,  The Machine in America a Social History of Technology, 87.
See Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds,[201][202][203][204][205][206][207][208][209][210][211], for an account of the value of informationized organizational structures over industrial.
Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds,[214][215][216][217] 
Amazon's ability to correlate various user's future desires based upon past purchases is an exemplar of informationized feedback in Mayer-Schönberger, Big Data, 51-52.
Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds,[206][207] 
Stephen Cohen in Carnoy, The New Global Economy in the Information Age, 109-110.
Cohen in Carnoy, The New Global Economy in the Information Age,[110][111][112][113][114][115] 
Dicken, Global Shift,[344][345][346][347][348][349][350][351][352][353][354] 
Watts, "Six Decades of Guided Munitions and Battle Networks: Progress and Prospects," x.
See Watts, "Six Decades of Guided Munitions and Battle Networks: Progress and Prospects," 258-265. Watts describes the change from the days of industrialized unguided bomb, when military planners had to determine the number of aircraft sorties needed to destroy a target, to the number of targets a single sortie could destroy in the informationized PGM era.
Toffler and Toffler, Revolutionary Wealth, 27.   
Reference this paper's earlier discussion on the human means of informationized national character. Also, for the importance of associative thinking and other elements of
Max Boot, War Made New: Technology, Warfare, and the Course of History, 1500 to  Today (New York: Gotham Books, 2006), 434-436.   
Jonathan Shaw, "Why 'Big Data' Is a Big Deal," accessed May 22, 2015, http://harvardmagazine.com/2014/03/why-big-data-is-a-big-deal.
"Cognitive Computing: Artificial Intelligence Meets Business Intelligence," CT400, (April 1, 2015), http://www.research.ibm.com/cognitive-computing/index.shtml.
Antoine J Bousquet, The Scientific Way of Warfare: Order and Chaos on the Battlefields of Modernity (New York: Columbia University Press, 2009), 164-173.
Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986
, 1986
  27  Alberts and Hayes, "Power to the Edge," 82-83, 101-102.
8 
Donald Rumsfeld
Donald H. Rumsfeld
Robert Gates
Department of Defense
Next-War-itis
Robert Gates
Heritage Foundation (Colorado Springs, CO)
Chuck Hagel
Cheryl Pellerin
Hagel Announces New Defense Innovation
Reform Efforts," U.S. Department of Defense
The conclusions and opinions expressed in this document are those of the author. They do not reflect the official position of the US Government, Department of Defense, the United States Air Force, or Air University.
breaking the national will through aerial bombardment. 
64
65
66
67
68
69
65
Biddle, Rhetoric and Reality in Air Warfare, 176-178. 66 Overy, The Air War, 1939
-1945
, 207. 67 Overy, The Air War, 1939
-1945, 34-35, 80-81. 68
69
44
United States military forces remain mired in the ways of centralized bureaucratic control of vertically integrated organizations. Fear of nuclear escalation stemming from tactical mistakes generating strategic blunders drove civilian leadership to not only sustain, but also accentuate these industrial tendencies. 
45
46
47
44
45
46
Press, 2006), 84-88, 118-119, 163-166. 47
The ways of operational planning and command and control, DOD's Joint Staff doctrinal organization, and the vertically-aligned intelligence collection, analysis, and dissemination process illustrate the enduring presence of vertically integrated, centralized industrial processes within the US defense establishment. The failures of the route package system in Vietnam contributed to the design of the USAF's the Joint Air Operations Center (JAOC) and its associated 72-hour Air Tasking Order (ATO) cycle, both aimed at centralizing control of theater air assets as part of a broader joint planning and execution process. 
48
49
51
48
86
87
United States' experiences in OIF and OEF hint at the future character of informationized war. The means will continue to evolve, but still rely on the people, products, and networks the national character shapes and produces. The ends, their upper limit still bounded by nuclear weapons, will still focus on influencing the national leadership's will through precision strikes and an international narrative shaping and isolating fielded forces by interrupting their networks of coordination and integration with each other and with higher leadership, especially when the forces are vertically 
86
87
12-17. 88
92
Friedman, Cybersecurity and Cyberwar: What Everyone Needs to Know (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2014), 193-211. 
92
The complex behavior of these systems emerge from the interactions of a multitude of less sophisticated parts through signaling and information processing that create very adaptable systems whose capabilities far exceed the sum of their parts. 
9
10
Harmonizing US military forces with the informationized characters of the nation and war demands a three-step process. First, US forces must invest in the network mesh that connects people and systems at the edge of the battle space. Second, the military must train and empower the networked individuals and groups at the edge of the battle space to horizontally share information, reconfigure themselves to solve problems, and adapt to local circumstances. Third, once the emerging systems of networked people prove capable of efficacious complex behavior, eliminate the bloated and unnecessary bureaucracy that stifles complex emerging behavior by demanding vertical information integration in an effort to control the chaos of war that refuses to be controlled.
Creating robust, resilient, interoperable networks is the first step to harmonizing.
One such network already exists in the World Wide Web and its Internet Protocols (IP). 11 8 Melanie Mitchell, Complexity: A Guided Tour (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2009), 13. 
9
10
11
12
13
Information, as a resource, is additive and non-linear in its value. Contrary to standard military security procedures, the nature of information demands more access to relevant information in order to maximize its value. 
15
16
Luckily for US military forces, America's informationized national character has prepared most recruits for the potential to operate in these networks. As of 2014, almost Control Research Program (CCRP), 2003), 82, http://www.dodccrp.org/files/Alberts_Power.pdf. 
12
13
15
72-73. 16