# ID: a070e66874624101ad7a8c741595f87d
# Title: " To Go, Or Not to Go. That is the Question": The Utility of Expeditionary Warfare in the Next Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1997.0
# Fulltext:
Ultimately we outspent our ideological opponent "the evil empire" of Soviet Russia in an economic war that left the eastern block countries in economic ruin and the U. S. the world's largest debtor nation.
Ironically, the end of the Cold War provides us with a macabre twist.
The true winners are those former Axis Powers defeated in W.W.H Safe under the protective umbrella of American expeditions turned security forces in a forward deployed stance, Germany and Japan have spent their treasure and energy on things economic.
We spent our money deploying an expeditionary force to fight for oil primarily used by Japan and Europe.
Ultimately, the result has been a boom in economic prosperity especially evident in the Pacific Rim nations.
And we have been left with a massive military structure built for the sole purpose of projecting our power overseas to combat another massive military power who might threaten our perceived or purported interests: economic interests of both our allies and ourselves.
But there is no threat, no matter how hard we search.
Yet we continue to project ourselves and protect our allies to the tune of $100 billion for Europe, and $46 billion for Japan and Korea... a year!
While this may not seem much in the larger sense of the entire budget, defense spending still makes up 50% of the discretionary budget!"
The American people have long taken for granted the patriotic call to spend on defense when there was reason.
Now there is no reason to continue spending as we have been.