# ID: a0cf1a427b2640f3b351d844098e169b
# Title: How the Bear Hunts Guerillas: The Evolution of Russian Counter-Irregular Warfare from 1994 to Present
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
As the United States faces a resurgent Russia with a line of contact stretching from the Baltics to the Caucasus as well as partners committed to resistance, the USSF community is sorely lacking a detailed understanding of Russian CIW. Unconventional warfare (UW) remains the cornerstone of USSF's capabilities, yet many of the current UW paradigms still rely heavily on examples from World War II, or (when updated) from
Afghanistan-two scenarios that fail to capture the evolutionary changes in technology and a near-peer threat respectively.
This study seeks to address the transformation of Russian CIW doctrine and methods from the Russian Federation's invasion of Chechnya in 1994 up through its current activities in the North Caucasus, the Middle East, and beyond. By identifying key principles and capabilities from across these case studies, this project aims to develop an improved understanding of the threat USSF and their partners would face executing UW against Russia or its proxies. Such an understanding would inform threat-based training scenarios and enhance the Special Forces regiment's understanding of how Green Berets might execute UW against a peer adversary.
This research seeks to answer the primary question: How has Russian Counter-Irregular Warfare changed in the last 25 years, and what impact will this have on U.S.
Special Operations Forces (SOF) and their partners operating in denied areas under Russian control?
This thesis deliberately uses the term "Counter-Irregular Warfare" as an umbrella term to capture multiple types of military operations (Counter-Insurgency, Foreign Internal Defense, Counter-Terrorism) executed by Russian forces against insurgents. Furthermore, the Russian tradition of Counter-Insurgency (COIN) diverges starkly from traditional Western concepts. Whereas Western COIN practitioners rely on an academic lineage built around a whole of government response to insurgency, Russian approaches are focused on targeting and destroying guerilla forces. The use of COIN as an umbrella term for such activities would be inaccurate and potentially misleading. This term is not intended to replace COIN in the Western lexicon, but to more accurately describe Russian approaches and methodology.
This thesis analyzes historical case studies and key pivot points to trace Russian CIW's evolution from 1994 to 2020. This evolution has enabled the "stumbling bear" of Afghanistan to emerge in recent years as a potent CIW practitioner, successfully intervening in Syria to tip the balance of power in favor of the Assad regime. At its core, this project seeks to understand both the continuities and shifts that have allowed Russia to enter the next decade with a proficient CIW force capable of executing expeditionary operations to support its partners.
To trace these continuities and shifts, the subsequent chapters explore historical Russian CIW through the themes of changes in CIW force composition, fires, and integration of technology. Force composition provides an opportunity to analyze the changing structure as the Russian CIW forces transformed from conscripted divisions to modular brigades complete with integrated SOF and enablers. Tracing the evolution of the Russian use of fires, both through the Russian air force and artillery, highlights the continued reliance on fires as a coercive blunt instrument while technological improvements increasingly allow for precision targeting. Finally, the integration of technology at the tactical level demonstrates the increasingly sophisticated tools available to maneuver forces on the ground.
The three themes are further described as outputs of Russian strategic culture in Chapter III. The subsequent chapters analyze changes in each of these categories across three case studies and two key pivot points. The First Chechen War (1994-96), Second
Chechen War (1999-2009), and Russian intervention in Syria (2015-present) comprise the three case studies. This work also analyzes the implications of Russian military reforms since 2008 and of Moscow exporting their CIW forces and methods following their success in Syria as key pivot points in this evolution.
These specific case studies and areas of emphasis were selected based on their relevance to understanding the evolution's scale, and the potential impact of these changes at the operational level. Russia has a robust history of CIW, beginning with the Yermolov era in Chechnya (1816). The strategic culture chapter provides a summary of the origins of this history, while briefly exploring the Soviet Union's occupation of Afghanistan as an example of its legacy. The First and Second Chechen Wars provide us two cases with the same opponents, same region, and strikingly different results. The Second Chechen War (in its later period) additionally highlights emerging themes of Russian forces when executing stability operations. Although it does not neatly fit the Western COIN model, Syria falls firmly in the realm of CIW due to Russia's use of SOF and conventional forces to hunt rebel groups arrayed against Bashar al Assad. Additionally, Syria provides the most current example of modern Russian CIW and incorporates its latest technological advances and subsequent doctrinal adaptations. While research on additional case studies may provide added nuance, the selected examples combined with an analysis of Russian modernization reforms and Russia's attempts to export this model provide ample evidence to the scale of Russia's progress in this arena.
CIW as defined in this work refers to the combating of irregular threats. As such, a noticeable absence from the selection of case studies is the Russian incursion into Crimea and subsequent support to the breakaway states in the Donbas. Whereas in the selected case studies Russian forces are executing CIW against irregular opponents, in Ukraine Russian forces are executing an irregular war against a uniformed force representing the Ukrainian state.
Chapter III focuses on Russian strategic culture towards CIW culminating in the Soviet-Afghan War. Up to this point, the Russian approach to CIW remained largely undefeated, and the Russians had never truly adapted their practices dating back to the Yermolov era. 
1
Chapter IV addresses the First Chechen War. This conflict marks the first significant CIW operation executed by the Russian Federation following the collapse of the Soviet Union. Universally regarded as a failure, this period serves as the beginning of a shift away from the traditional Russian CIW approach towards something new.
Additionally, approaching the First and Second Chechen wars as two independent case studies allows for a direct comparison between the Russian approach to two separate conflicts in the same geographic region against a nearly identical foe separated by only five years. However, in that short time, the Russian approach to fighting the same enemy improved significantly.
Chapter V discusses the Second Chechen War up to the end of active stability operations in 2008. This chapter focuses on how the Russian army managed to decisively win the second conflict without significant reforms by changing how it engaged the problem. The shift in the utilization of local partner forces (kadirovtsi, "Chechenization")
and the stylistic change in brutality against the local populace are assessed as a byproduct of a pivot in the Russian CIW force composition. Additionally, the chapter analyzes the operational impacts of pivoting to partner forces/local strongmen in CIW-namely, the ability to reduce Russian casualties while distancing itself from some of the brutality executed by its proxies.
Chapter VI addresses modernization efforts following the 2008 Georgian War. One cannot place the notable shifts in the Russian CIW approach without the context of the subsequent reforms of the Russian military. This section includes two halves-the first focused on the shortcomings highlighted during the conflict, and the second on the structural and technological changes to the Russian military to address these failures.
Emphasis is placed on the impact of kontraktniki (professional contract soldiers) versus prizivniki (yearling, recruit, or draftee) and reduction of the dedovshina ("grandfathering," brutal hazing of recruits). Additionally, this chapter highlights the transition to modular brigade formations and the focused efforts to integrate technology such as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and precision fires targeting.
Chapter VII covers the Russian intervention in Syria, specifically Russian forces assistance to Bashar Al Assad's CIW campaign against the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), and other breakaway factions. Due to the paucity of modern Russian CIW cases, this case study uniquely captures how the Russians have used the lessons learned from the Russo-Georgian War and incorporated them into CIW. Topics addressed include their use of precision fires, integration of aviation support, development of tailored CIW enablers, and a changing role for SOF.
Chapter VIII focuses on the Russian Federation's (RF) ability and propensity to export this model. Using the Syria case study as a foundation, it addresses examples of the RF exporting these CIW capabilities to foreign partners such as Mozambique, Libya, and Central African Republic. Themes that emerge in this chapter include the use of private military companies (PMCs) to augment advisory packages, willingness to conduct "advise, assist, accompany" operations at the battalion level, integration of Russian assets with indigenous forces, and the use of SOF as connective tissue with partners.
Chapters IX and X discuss the findings and implications of this research. Chapter IX analyzes the research findings across the three themes discussed throughout the thesis:
1. Force composition, 2. Joint Fires, and 3. Technological integration at the tactical level.
This thesis argues that the Russian military has undergone drastic changes in its CIW capabilities, while retaining a distinct Russian approach to defeating irregular threats.
Chapter X addresses the implications of these findings for policy makers, USSF, and future research. At the policy level, the chapter discusses both the challenges and opportunities available to the U.S. considering Russia's evolved CIW capability.
Pertaining to USSF, the chapter discusses some of the key takeaways for tactical and operational leaders preparing for potential conflict against Russia or a Russia -backed adversary.
A.
While Western academics and military professionals have recognized and written extensively about the threat posed by advances in Russian irregular warfare capabilities, most of this attention has focused on countering Russian irregular warfare, e.g., "Hybrid Warfare." 
2
and the strategic focus to prepare to do so against Russian or Chinese forces or proxies.
Critical periods and topics within the existing literature include Russian strategic culture, the First Chechen War (1994-1996), the Second Chechen War (1999-2009), Russian modernization following the 2008 Georgian War, and Russia's ongoing intervention in Syria (2015-present).
Modern Russian CIW experiences have been shaped by a long history of countering irregular threats, rebellions, and insurgencies. These forces in turn left their imprint on
Russian strategic culture as it pertains towards CIW. Strategic culture, defined as "that body of broadly shared, powerfully influential, and especially enduring attitudes, perceptions, dispositions, and reflexes that shape behavior and policy," continues to influence Russian operations today. 
3
4
5
A substantial body of literature addresses the impacts of Russian Strategic Culture writ large, but not specific to CIW. In his 2013 book Hard Diplomacy and Soft Coercion, Russian expert James Sherr (OBE) traces applicable cultural themes that have impacted Russian strategic culture through the Tsarist, Soviet, and post-Soviet eras. He argues that Russian actions abroad are a combination of strategy (albeit often discordant), inventiveness (often highly effective), and habit, driven across all three periods by cultural influences. 
6
Another important component of the applicable literature is Polish academic Anna Antczak's "Russia's Strategic Culture: A Prisoner of Imperial History." 
7
This nuance and perspective is valuable when addressing the causative nature of Russian Later, the fall of the USSR enabled unprecedented access to primary sources from within the Soviet Union. From this period (early 1990s), the cornerstones of the discussion on Russian CIW in Afghanistan emerged in Western literature. In addition to illuminating the Soviet perspective of the conflict, Grau, in collaboration with Ali Ahmad Jalali, published a companion piece, The Other Side of the Mountain. This second volume mirrors The Bear Went Over the Mountain's structure but draws on interviews with Afghan mujahedeen for its vignettes. 12 When combined, these two works provide a detailed account of tactical operations from both sides of the conflict and astute observations into the operational-level trends demonstrated by the Russians and observed by their Afghan opponents. Specific themes emerge from Grau's work, which serve as a baseline for understanding Russian CIW moving forward. Whereas the General Staff's commentary is (as expected) stilted by the culture of conformity standard in the Soviet Union, Grau captures some trends pertaining to Russian tactics, equipment, force structure, morale, and overarching attitudes. He depicts a Soviet army forced to adapt its tactics, testing new equipment, executing ad hoc force restructuring upon arrival, manned by conscripts with low morale, and led by officers who feared retribution. 
13
14
12 Ali Ahmad Jalali and Lester Grau, The Other Side of the Mountain: Mujahideen Tactics in the Soviet-Afghan War, 1995, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a376862.pdf.
13 Grau, The Bear Went Over the Mountain: Soviet Combat Tactics in Afghanistan.
14 Grau, 203-208.  the broader pattern seen in works on the 19th century campaigns in the Caucasus, such as Charles King's Ghost of Freedom. These works and many other publications from the period following the fall of the Soviet Union provide a detailed and thoughtful discussion of the Russian military's successes and failures in the conflict. Most importantly, they describe a baseline reference point of Soviet CIW in detail and mark the beginning of Russian realization that its approach to CIW was flawed.
Compared to the Soviet experience in Afghanistan, Russian counterinsurgency efforts in Chechnya and the North Caucasus are less systematically documented. Whereas the cornerstone works on Afghanistan are primarily qualitative analyses from a practitioner's lens, the First and Second Chechen Wars (1994-1996 and 2000-2009   respectively) received extensive attention from practitioners, academics, and journalists. 
16
Filling much the same role as Grau's two works, in The Fangs of The Wolf, Dodge Billingsley provides tactical and operational level insights from interviews with Chechen fighters and commanders who fought in the conflict from 
1994-2009. 17
In addition to operational military histories, the Chechen Wars have also spurred "troublesome, exotic appendage." 
24
25
Immediately Modern Unconventional Warfare, while others focused on preventing such an action elsewhere on Russia's periphery. 
26
27
28
In  implies a comprehensive, whole-of-government response to insurgent movements. 
38
39
40
41
Consider the matter of civilian casualties. In its ideal form, the acceptance of significant civilian casualties and toleration of war crimes are anathema to COIN. As General David Petraeus so famously stated: "You cannot kill your way out of an insurgency." 
42
43
1
60
2
Even after forced migrations of the Circassians, Ingush, and Chechens, the region still boasts 52 different languages as of 2020. 
61
Russian military elements, the Bashkir, and the Ashtrakani, among others. 
62
63
60 N. F.  Avrich, Russian Rebels:  1600-1800 (New York: Schocken Books, 1972); I.G. Akmanov, K.K. Karimov, and A.R. Khabibulinna, "The Bashkir Rebellion of 1704-1706 within the Kazan Road Administrative Unit," Herald of the Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Bashkortostan 27 (2018): 12-18; Avrich, Russian Rebels: 1600-1800.  63 The use of the term "small wars" in this context refers to a contest between asymmetrically empowered adversaries, often undeclared, and (in the case of Russia) not for the survival of the state. This is not intended to detract from the fact that the aggrieved party was often fighting a war of national, or even ethnic, extermination. This definition of small war is derived from the Small Wars Journal. Although it has morphed to fit the systemic constraints of respective regime types, the perception of Russia as a Messianic standard-bearer on a world scale has endured and contributed to Russia's brutal execution of CIW (see Figure 
3
66
67
68
69
70
74
75
76
77
78
Almost gravitationally, the Russian reliance on mass created an overwhelming deference to the military component of the DIME (Diplomacy, Information, Military, 74 Michael Ellman and S. Maksudov, "Soviet Deaths in the Great Patriotic War: A Note," Europe-Asia Studies 46, no. 4 (January 1, 1994): 671-80, https://doi.org/10. 78 EUTM Mali Press, "Young Malian Soldiers Become the Pioneers of the 614th Field Artillery Battery," accessed October 20, 2021, https://eutmmali.eu/young-malian-soldiers-become-the-pioneers-ofthe-614th-field-artillery-battery/.
Economic) in CIW operations. Within the Soviet Army, the officer corps further reinforced this by emphasizing the operational level of warfare. Soviet generals viewed the ideal as "a politics-free zone where commanders could demonstrate their mastery of managing large forces over wide areas." 79 Whereas Western doctrine defined COIN as a fundamentally political struggle, Soviet generals believed it existed in the exclusively military realm. As summarized by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, "Reliance on the military power of the state, acquired at great cost and organized like that of military powers of the past, was handed down to the Soviets by historical experience." 80 At a policy level, Russian strategic culture leaned towards diMe instead of DIME.
Finally, during all three periods of modern Russian military history (Czarist, Soviet, post-Communist), CIW has taken place against the backdrop of an autocratic regime.
Although this does not wholly remove domestic pressure, as evidenced by the Soviet antiwar movement of the 1980s, 81 Russia's domestic political structure does insulate the regime in several respects. Western forces are careful to pay at least lip service to collateral damage and international law. By contrast, in the Czarist, Soviet, and post-Communist period, Russian forces have not restricted the savagery of their CIW campaigns. 
82
83
Russian geographical pressures and historic experiences set conditions for recurring trends in Russian CIW. An expedient and useful way to determine both continuities and points of debarkation from the Russian CIW norm is by assessing the trends through the themes of force composition, application of fires, and development or integration of technology. These three themes are not comprehensive, but given their traditional role in Russian CIW, they are valuable.
Russian CIW force composition has been historically ill-suited to countering irregular threats. In the Czarist period, Russia's expansionist policies and small wars drove the demand for standing garrisons along fortified lines and contested frontiers. 
84
85
When rebellions occurred closer to the heartland, large untailored forces responded. Czarist and later Soviet forces made little to no efforts to placate targeted populations on the frontier, and CIW-specific forces and Civil Affairs elements did not exist. This case of illsuited tools is exemplified in the late Soviet period by the commitment of a preponderance of mechanized troops to bolster the Communist government of Afghanistan. Until recent history, reliance on mass and a lack of tailored units have defined Russian CIW forces.
Russian CIW has historically relied heavily on the use of massed fires. Although 
In 
Russian strategic culture has played as significant a role in shaping the Russian CIW. While not monolithic, Russian strategic culture is shaped geographic and historical influences that give it a distinctive timbre and influence on CIW. 
And savage are those canyons' tribes, Their god is freedom, their law is war 93 -Mikhail Lermontov, Russian poet and military officer writing of his encounters with the Chechen people, ca. 1832
The First Chechen War (1994-1996) marked the first significant test of the Russian Federation's military following the collapse of the Soviet Union. The Russian Forces entering Grozny in December 1994 were vastly underprepared for the task at hand. After an initial stunning defeat, Russian forces quickly adapted the tools at their disposal and deployed increasingly brutal tactics, resulting in the successful capture of Grozny.
Ultimately, the capture of Grozny proved a pyrrhic victory, and Russian forces struggled to retain hold of the capital, much less the rest of the country. Russian troops withdrew less than two years later; open hostilities returned in 1999.
While in one sense the First Chechen War stands out as the nadir of Russian Counter Irregular Warfare (CIW) capabilities and execution, it was a distinct turning point in the Russian CIW approach. It demonstrated unequivocally that neither Russia's extensive experience crushing rebellions on its periphery nor its Cold War preparations to battle NATO had adequately postured to the military to respond to contemporary asymmetric threats. The conflict laid bare the dilapidated state of the Russian Armed Forces after 1991. With poorly trained troops, ill-equipped units, and a complete lack of a modern counterinsurgency or counterterrorism strategy, the Russian experience in Chechnya echoes with similar failures as the Soviet-Afghan campaign of the previous decade. While the previous chapter discussed how critical themes of the Russian CIW approach have emerged as products of Russian geography and history, this chapter explores the first major CIW operation of the Russian Federation. Specifically, it discusses the limited successes and significant shortcomings of the Russian CIW force composition, fires integration, and incorporation of available technology in the conflict. In doing so, this 93 Mikhail Lermontov, "Измаил-Бей [Ishmael Bay]," 1832, http://lermontov-lit.ru/lermontov/text/ izmail-bej/izmail-bej-1.htm.
chapter also serves as a baseline to highlight how far the Russian military has advanced to reach its present capabilities just two decades later.
As with the Caucasus region more broadly, Chechnya has long been a flashpoint  Dudayev's forces allowed the loyalists to enter the city with relative ease before systematically ambushing and decimating the attacking armored columns. They decisively defeated the loyalist forces, killing or capturing 52 of the 78 Russian tank crews accompanying the Chechens. Dudayev's forces amplified their victory by parading the captured Russian soldiers on public television broadcasts, humiliating Moscow. 
104
While on paper the Russian Federation inherited the bulk of the Soviet Union's military power, in practice most of these forces had continued to steadily deteriorate as the Soviet Union dissolved and the Russian Federation struggled to salvage its core.
Insufficient funding and mass exemptions or deferments meant most Russian battalions remained manned at 55% or less. 
105
111
Army pivoted from its previous missions of guarding government installations to focusing more heavily on operational units, fast reaction teams, and special purpose detachments. 
112
115
Several sources point towards an initial Russian desire to limit civilian casualties and emphasize precision strikes during the invasion. On December 24th, President Yeltsin prohibited the bombing of Grozny in support of the ground assault, which at the time was still anticipated to largely be a show of force rather than a protracted fight. 
116
117
118
119
4
124
125
126
123 Grau, 2.
124 Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994-2000: Lessons from Urban Combat, 18.
125 Infrared night vision devices or function by projecting infrared light to actively assist the device in illuminating the targeted area for the user. These types of devices typically work well in environment in which the opponent does no possess night vision technology. However, infrared light is easily seen by other night vision devices, especially those operating passively-i.e., devices which amplify existing light without projecting a light source of their own.
126 Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994-2000: Lessons from Urban Combat, 16.
The First Chechen War marked a stunning and embarrassing defeat for a nation that had maintained such an impressive success rate at crushing rebellion along its borders.
Before Afghanistan, Russia had suppressed 16 of 17 significant insurgencies or rebellions in the 70 years following the Bolshevik Revolution. 
127
However, the political ramifications of the First Chechen War extend beyond the Russian military. The domestic frustration and sense of humiliation paved the way for more aggressive, assertive leadership in Moscow. Vladimir Putin would capitalize on these sentiments in spades as he consolidated his grip on Russian governance. Additionally, the ferocity of the fighting blended with ethnic and religious tensions in the surrounding region. The very nature of the conflict shifted from a political movement seeking independence to a jihad seeking battle with Russia on multiple fronts. In this way, the First Chechen War marks an interesting transition point between Glenn Robinson's first two "waves of global jihad": The first wave focused on liberating Muslim lands from foreign occupiers and the second wave coalescing around the desire to evict the United States from the Middle East. 
128
While Russian troops withdrew in 1996 and ultimately signed a peace deal with Aslan Maskhadov (the new leader of the Chechen independence movement) in 1997, both sides clearly understood that the matter of Chechen independence remained unsettled.
Russian and Chechen forces immediately began to prepare for the next confrontation.
When the two sides renewed hostilities in 1999, political and military developments in the respective countries would significantly shape the next conflict.
In Chechnya, divisions amongst the various Chechen factions left Maskhadov struggling to establish a functional government. With the departure of the Russian troops many of the former rebel commanders remained reluctant to put aside their weapons and integrate with the state. Instead, many of these factions established their own micro-states and turned to criminal activity to continue funding their organizations. 140 Chechenization refers to a concerted effort to transfer governance responsibilities in Chechnya from federal Russian control to local Chechen control. In practice this included the security forces, government administration, etc. Yuri Zhukov and Monica Toft address the efficacy of Chechenization in their 2015 article "Islamists and Nationalists." Linguistically, the term is derived from the U.S. policy of Vietnamization (1969-1975), coined by the Nixon administration to emphasize shifting more responsibility for security to the South Vietnamese rather than highlighting the "de-americanizing" inherent in Nixon's promised U.S. troops withdrawals. This event as well as further details of the U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam were documented first hand by Henry Kissinger in his book, Ending the Vietnam War: A History of America's Involvement in and Extrication from the Vietnam War.
141 Galeotti, Russia's Wars in Chechnya 1994-2009, 79.
The Russian force composition in the 1999 invasion consisted of a similar number of troops, and in many cases the same units as had participated in the first campaign.
However, in the interim period the Russian military had undergone limited, but significant changes which would impact the course of the second campaign. The Russian forces entering Chechnya in 1999 still relied heavily on conscripts but had refined their methods of incorporating specialized troops and maintaining the morale of the conscript-heavy motorized rifle brigades. 
142
The Russian army that entered Chechnya in 1999 included "the cream of the Russian military." 
144
145
150
150 Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994-2000: Lessons from Urban Combat, 43-44.  remarkably better than their predecessors only five years earlier, despite the lack of structural reforms.
Recalling the difficulties of urban combat from the First Chechen War, the Russian military entered the second conflict with a deliberate plan for avoiding fighting on city streets as much as possible. During the previous conflict, Chechen rebels had wreaked havoc upon Russian conscripts at close range, where experienced Chechen fighters shattered the loose unit cohesion of Russian conscripts. 
152
153
154
153 Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994-2000: Lessons from Urban Combat, 20.
Afghanistan conflict such as sweep and zone. 155 While these same techniques had been leveraged in Afghanistan less than a decade earlier, they had never been incorporated into formal training or doctrine and were therefore absent in the First Chechen War. 
156
157
158
159
160
161
156 Grau, 1.
157 Hodgson, "Is The Russian Bear Learning? An Operational and Tactical Analysis of the Second Chechen War, 1999-2002," 73.  158 Grau, "Technology and the Second Chechen Campaign: Not All New and Not That Much," 2.
159 "Thermobaric munitions are those munitions that, by design produce more heat and overpressure than conventional explosives by exploding a vapor in the blast zone. Their main use initially was in airborne fuel-air explosive bombs. Whilst the United States has concentrated on airborne weapons, Russia has produced thermobaric weapons and warheads, from airborne bombs to rifle grenades." Additional information on the history and medical effects of thermobaric munitions (to include the above quote) can be found in David Anders article. "Thermobaric Munitions and Their Medical Effects," published in the Australian Military Medicine.
160 Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994-2000: Lessons from Urban Combat, 26.
Grozny, while air delivered thermobaric munitions were authorized outside of city centers. 
162
163
The short interlude between the first and second Chechen wars did not provide much opportunity for the Russian military to enact large scale reforms or modernization.
However, it did provide ample time for military planners to consider how they would approach the conflict differently when the two sides came to blows.
The haphazard nature of the first Chechen campaign left intelligence preparations woefully inadequate. Lacking even the most basic maps, ground forces commanders rarely understood the layouts of the streets in which they were fighting, much less the locations of enemy strongpoints. During the second campaign, both planners and ground force commanders possessed detailed maps of the battlefield. These included maps of the sewage 162 Grau, 4.   163 Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994-2000: Lessons from Urban Combat, 59; Hodgson, "Is The Russian Bear Learning? An Operational and Tactical Analysis of the Second Chechen War, 1999-2002,"  72.  164 Jason Lyall makes the counterintuitive argument that Russian indiscriminate shelling against villages in the middle portion of the war (2000-2005) effectively suppressed rebel attacks compared to villages that were not shelled. Specifically, he observed a 24% reduction in rebel attacks surrounding villages which had been shelled when compared to similar villages which had not been shelled. Jason Lyall, "Does Indiscriminate Violence Incite Insurgent Attacks? Evidence from Chechnya," The Journal of Conflict Resolution 53, no. 3 (2009): 331-62.  and communications systems in urban areas. 
165
166
Equipment such as the experimental Arbalet-M radio-locational system allowed Russian forces to pinpoint enemy positions in the rural countryside and mountains. 
167
When combined with improved communications, these developments allowed Russians to occasionally execute sophisticated deception operations. In at least one case, Russian forces used false communications to convince rebels to attempt a retreat through what they believed would be a safe escape route from Grozny under the cover of night. In fact, the retreating rebels found themselves ensnared in a pre-established minefield, resulting in high casualties. 
168
169
The Russian military owed much of its tactical and operational success in the Second Chechen War not to major structural reforms or modernization, but to a recognition that it could employ its existing force structure and capabilities more effectively. Rather 165 Hodgson, "Is The Russian Bear Learning? An Operational and Tactical Analysis of the Second Chechen War, 1999-2002," 71.  166 Hodgson, 71.   167 Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994-2000: Lessons from Urban Combat, 52.
than the haphazard invasion of 1994, the 1999 military campaign to reassert Russian control of Chechnya represented the culmination of five years of planning and training for how to better defeat the Chechen guerillas. By leveraging more elite units to spearhead offensive thrusts, coopting local militias, liberally applying massed indirect fires, and better incorporating readily available technology, the Russian military managed to achieve a significantly better outcome by simply changing how it applied the tools in its inventory. Rights Watch as "brutal" and "ruthless" in its abuse of critics. 170 However, through its continued policy of "Chechenization," Moscow has successfully retained control of the breakaway republic, with the added benefit of distancing itself from the repressive tactics of the Kadyrov regime.
Beyond the brutality and instability, the Kadyrov regime also continues to pose a political dilemma for Moscow. Between 2001-2016, Moscow provided Chechnya with at least 14 billion dollars in reconstruction assistance, prompting protests in Moscow and calls 170 Kyle Knight and Tanya Lokshina, "Video Demonstrates Chechnya Leadership's Brutality," Human Rights Watch (blog), September 10, 2020, https://www.hrw.org/news/2020/09/10/videodemonstrates-chechnya-leaderships-brutality; Tanya Lokshina, "Kremlin Endorses Another Term for Kadyrov and His Brutal Chechen Regime," Human Rights Watch (blog), June 24, 2021, https://www.hrw.org/news/2021/06/24/kremlin-endorses-another-term-kadyrov-and-his-brutal-chechenregime.
In August of 2008, a combination of strategic and cultural tensions between Russia and Georgia boiled over into a Russian invasion of the Georgian region of South Ossetia.
Over twelve days of sustained combined arms combat, Russian forces drove back Georgian opponents in what appeared to be a Russian victory. Despite the objective success of the campaign, it revealed a startlingly unprepared Russian military. By all accounts, the Russian military complex strained to conduct a simple and well anticipated operation against an inferior force just across its own border. While not an example of Counter Irregular Warfare (CIW), Russia's struggles in the Georgian War catalyzed a series of watershed military reforms which laid the foundation for a different approach to subsequent CIW campaigns.
Mixed results in the Second Chechen War (1999 -2009) demonstrated a need for dramatic military reforms. Unfortunately for reform-minded individuals in the Russian MoD, a lack of clear priorities and resistance from the military bureaucracy handicapped this process. 
176
6
181 Ralph Boulton, "Russia Smashes Georgian Army, Sends NATO Message," Reuters, August 19, 2008, sec. Earnings, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-georgia-ossetia-military-idUSMCH95141120080819.
to the Russian Federation, the clear victor of the conflict, to not interfere with the aid. 
182
183
184
185
186
189
190
Key issues highlighted by the conflict were the need for more contracted volunteers (kontraktniki), 
191
192
7
193
Another factor that played a significant part in the force's composition was the system of dedovshina, "grandfathering." Brutal hazing within the enlisted ranks-a counter-intuitive point of pride in the conscript formations-served as a disincentive to service, hampering Russian ability to bring in kontraktniki. 
194
195
States. 196
In the aftermath of the Georgian War, the Russian military increased the authorization for numbers of kontraktniki. Less than one year after the cessation of hostilities, the Kremlin announced the removal of over 500 general officer positions within the military. 
197
Inability to synchronize and communicate at a tactical level resulted in friendly fire incidents, such as the MANPADS shoot-down of an SU24 fighter-bomber by Russian maneuver forces marching through Tshkinvali. 
208
As the Georgian War began, U.S. forces in Iraq and Afghanistan entered their 5th and 7 th year of combat, respectively. The Iraqi insurgency had catalyzed rapid technological advancements among Western militaries. 209 U.S. counter-insurgency forces regularly used armed unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to execute complete targeting cycles against insurgent forces. 210 The mass adoption of the Blue Force Tracker system provided U.S. Commanders the capability to digitally track their forces in real-time. 
211
208 Ruslan Pukhov, The Tanks of August (Moscow, Russia: Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies, 2010), 103.
209 This does not mean that the U.S. military industrial complex writ large had pivoted away from legacy systems. Rather, although many legacy systems were retained (e.g. A-10 Thunderbolt, AH-64 Apache, M1 Abrams), examples of rapid production or adaptation during the Global War on Terror (GWOT) abound. These include but are not limited to the movement of the naval Phalanx system onto land (Interesting Engineering Magazine online, "C-RAM, An Advanced Automated Point-Defense Gatling Gun), the development of the Lightweight Counter-Mortar Radar (US Army Acquisitions Center online, "AN/TPQ-50 Lightweight Counter Mortar Radar"), and the mass incorporation of UAVs into military operations (New York Times, "US Drones Crowd Iraq's Skies to Fight Insurgents").
210 Associated Press, "Military Relying More on Drones: Mostly in Iraq," News, National Broadcasting Channel, 2008, https://www.nbcnews.com/id/wbna22463596. 211 Timothy L Rider, "Blue Force Tracking to Expand Across Force," Army AL&T, no. September-October ( 
2004
The Georgian War catalyzed changes within the Russian MoD that continue to define the Russia CIW approach. Although a strategic victory, it revealed a series of tactical shortfalls. In 2009 President Medvedev highlighted the trajectory of military reforms to include: "bringing all combat formations to permanent readiness status (i.e., elimination of cadre units); raising the effectiveness of command-and-control systems (technological investments); and upgrading equipment with a focus on PGMs (fires integration)." 
218
219
In addition to an indigenous approach and the incorporation of CIW-focused units, the Russian integration of PMCs in Syria yielded arguable success, entrenching this technique into the Russian CIW playbook for years to come. The improvement of Russian precision fires-at least theoretically-decreased the level of collateral damage as compared to previous combat operations in the North Caucasus and Ossetia. These changes in results were not due to Russia shying away from the potential of collateral damage, but rather an incorporation of new technology which improved their ability to accurately target. 
243
244
The majority of advances in Russian aerial fires were attributed to the Russian Air Forces' (VVS) use of the SVP-24 bombsight. 
245
246
252
Another new piece of technology debuted en masse in Syria was the Russian Strelets ("archer," or "musketeer") mission command system. A command-and-control system similar to the Android Tactical Assault Kit (ATAK) in the U.S. military, Strelets represented a milestone improvement in Russian ability to track friendly forces, submit digital calls for fire, and manage the battlefield at a tactical level. 
253
254
COIN. For its part, Russia did not adopt the Western model writ large, but instead modified and bolted-on applicable aspects. Digital command-and-control, integration of drones, and robust enabler packages--none of which were part of the previous Russian model--were adopted and employed effectively on the Syrian proving ground. Russian CIW in Syria is a distinct blend of traditional approaches with Western-styled modifications. To illustrate this point, this chapter will briefly discuss the recent Russian CIW experiences in Mozambique, the Central African Republic (CAR), and Libya. Moscow has invested specific assets to each of these nations in support of both the host country and Russia's policy goals. These tailorable CIW approaches do not make conventional Russian military capabilities irrelevant, but they do provide additional options to attain the Kremlin's strategic goals.
support has consisted entirely of PMCs strengthening local formations and advising on operations.
Russian intervention in the CAR can be viewed as a mixed success. Although the CIW force succeeded in seizing key natural resources and inflicting casualties on various rebel groups, the Russian approach has been internationally condemned, accusations of human rights violations abound, and there are serious questions about the sustainability of Moscow's gains in the region. Whereas the Kremlin has stated that Russia is withdrawing these forces, similar posturing in Syria circa 2016 casts doubt on the veracity of this claim. 
261
For all its advantages, this PMC centric approach comes with limitations and Russia appears to be experimenting with how to best tailor these interventions. Much as in CAR, Russian CIW in Mozambique was restricted to PMC operations. Drawn in by natural gas, mining opportunities, and precious metals, the Kremlin committed approximately 200 Russian mercenaries in 2019. 
262
Although this ambush was small in casualties, it demonstrated a loss of confidence on the part of the Mozambique government. Russian forces went from being viewed as a professional CIW option to being referred to as "out of their depth." 
263
272
273
274
275
273 Paul Iddon, "That Pantsir-S1 The U.S. Acquired From Libya Isn't The First Russian Missile System Its Gotten Its Hands On," Forbes, 2021, https://www.forbes.com/sites/pauliddon/2021/01/31/thatpantsir-s1-it-acquired-from-libya-isnt-the-first-russian-missile-system-the-us-has-gotten-its-handson/?sh=153675c5371a.
274 Urcosta, Ridvan Bari. "The Revolution in Drone Warfare: The Lessons from the Idlib De-Escalation Zone." Air University (AU), August 31, 2020. https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/JEMEAA/ Display/Article/2329510/the-revolution-in-drone-warfare-the-lessons-from-the-idlib-de-escalation-zone/.
275 Sergey Sukhankin. "Russian Mercenaries Pour Into Africa and Suffer More Losses (Part One)." Eurasian Daily Monitor 17, no. 6. (January 21, 2020). https://jamestown.org/program/russian-mercenariespour-into-africa-and-suffer-more-losses-part-one/. option, Moscow currently has the capability to develop CIW packages tailored to the level of risk, attribution, and investment desired.
Historically, Russian CIW has been constrained to the Near Abroad. That is no longer the case. Expeditionary modularity combined with the need to secure natural resources have allowed Russian CIW operations to expand from its traditional sphere of influence-a trend that will likely continue. This research has traced changes within the Russian CIW approach, identifying three themes: composition of the CIW force, incorporation of joint fires, and integration of contemporary technology by maneuver elements. Across all three themes, the Russian military retains some elements of its historic tradition, such as conscription or its focus on destroying "terrorists" rather than addressing a population's core grievances. However, the Russian military has also undergone remarkable changes since 2008, making comparisons to their approaches in campaigns prior to 2013 perilous sources for properly understanding how Russia will likely execute CIW in the future. Regardless of the transformation, an understanding of the metamorphosis and evolution of Russian CIW provides a more thorough and accurate understanding of the current state of the threat. The following paragraphs highlight the key operational changes for each of the themes.
The professionalization of the Russian military has arguably enabled much of this rapid evolution. By pivoting away from a force reliant upon mass conscription and short terms of service, the Russian military has opened the door to increased readiness, specialization, and technical proficiency within its ranks. As of 2020, three quarters of the Russian army was composed of volunteers, and a ban on service abroad for conscripts has forced recent CIW efforts to be executed exclusively by professional soldiers. 
282
At the outset, this thesis asserted that existing paradigms (WWII and Afghanistan)
have limited utility for drawing conclusions and shaping preparations for IW against a contemporary Russian threat. This research has focused on a small portion of a much larger problem set: analyzing one of the multiple potential threats USSF may encounter if they are called upon to execute IW. The subsequent implications have reverberations at the national policy level but pertain most readily to USSF.
While the target audience for this research remains USSF leaders and practitioners, several implications do stand out at the policy level. The following will briefly address those before transitioning to the implications for U.S. SOF.
First and foremost, developing countries now have multiple options to provide them with foreign internal defense, security force assistance, or counter-terrorism capabilities against irregular threats. 292 Such choice is especially appealing to authoritarian or corrupt regimes who want a military answer to an irregular threat, but have limited interest in the oversight and pressure to reform that comes from Western support. This is especially relevant in Africa, where both Russia and China continue to increase their military involvement while the U.S. has begun to scale down. 
293
293 Herman Cohen, "Pulling Troops Out of Africa Could Mean Another Endless War," War on the Rocks, May 13, 2020, https://warontherocks.com/2020/05/pulling-troops-out-of-africa-could-meananother-endless-war/.
in Mali are indicative of this shift. 
294
Second, with increased Russian CIW deployments abroad comes increased opportunities to apply pressure against Moscow across domains and geography. The consistent violation of human rights by both indiscriminate use of fires and unaccountable PMCs opens the regime to scrutiny in the information space. The web of private and state actors enabling the expanding Russian footprint abroad also provides potential vulnerabilities for exploitation via cyber or economic levers. Any direct involvement of uniformed Russian military personnel in small wars abroad presents a significant risk to the Kremlin with its well documented aversion to Russian casualties. 
295
(3)
Understanding the various Russian CIW actors is essential to understanding the threat picture. Each of the types of forces Russia arrays against irregular threats comes with distinct strengths and vulnerabilities which have significant impact on the risks to their foes. A force consisting predominately of PMCs will most likely lack significant logistic support or joint fires capabilities but will likely be less constrained in their rules of engagement. A higher presence of uniformed Spetsnaz forces may indicate an intent to conduct partnered operations but will often come with a heightened sensitivity to casualties. As Russia employs these actors, it also must balance the tension between deniability and capability. While PMC centric operations have thus far struggled to attain results without uniformed military support, deploying servicemembers reduces Moscow's ability to avoid attribution-thereby increasing the risk of either unintended escalation or humiliation.
There are at least two potential branches for future research on this topic. One This is to say nothing of the benefit of more detailed area-focused analyses, specifically on Africa. Then-Secretary of Defense Mark Esper's 2020 decision to "optimize" U.S. force posture on the African continent by withdrawing forces to "prepare for great power competition" further reinforced the misconception of Africa as the periphery. 
297
While this research is applicable for U.S. SOF practitioners concerned with the Russian threat (specifically in the EUCOM, CENTCOM, and AFRICOM AORs), a similar assessment of Chinese CIW capabilities would provide additional depth to the understanding of the potential threats U.S. SOF may encounter when executing IW in a near-peer environment. This research could use a similar approach-define the influences of strategic culture on the Chinese approach to irregular warfare, trace the most important themes through applicable case studies-and would have the added benefit of comparing the Russian and Chinese approach.
Finally, the fact remains that Russia has proven undeniably successful at defeating irregular foes. The cases of the Afghanistan and the First Chechen War serve as exceptions which prove the rule. As the U.S. military looks back on the failure of Operation Enduring
Freedom and the limited success of the Operation Iraqi Freedom, it is beneficial to address the potential for approaches to countering irregular threats from outside the Western doctrinal canon. Much will likely be unsuitable for a free democratic state, but-like Russia for the last two decades-there are potentially techniques and approaches that could be adopted.
6 James Sherr, Hard Diplomacy and Soft Coercion: Russia's Influence Abroad (London: Brookings Institution Press, 2013). 7 Anna Antczak, "Russia's Strategic Culture: Prisoner of Imperial History?," Athenaeum Polskie Studia Politologiczne 60, no. 4 (December 31, 2018): 223-42, https://doi.org/10.15804/athena.2018.60.13.
Bugai and A. M. Gonov, "
Bugai and A. M. Gonov, "
65 Dima Adamsky. "Continuity in Russian Strategic Culture." George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies: Security Insights 48, no. February 2020: 8. https://www.marshallcenter.org/en/ publications/security-insights/continuity-russian-strategic-culture-case-study-moscows-syrian-campaign-0.
82 Paul B. Rich and Isabelle Duyvesteyn, eds., "Counterinsurgency in a Non-Democratic State: The Russian Example," in The Routledge Handbook of Insurgency and Counterinsurgency, (Routledge, 2012), 293-307, https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203132609-32.
90  
90  
102 Galeotti, Russia's Wars in Chechnya 1994-2009, 31.  
129  
129  
Yuri Zhukov, "Counterinsurgency in a Non-Democratic State: The Russian Example," in The Routledge Handbook of Insurgency and Counterinsurgency, ed. Paul B. Rich and Isabelle Duyvesteyn (Routledge,
2012), 293-307, https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203132609-32.
Olga Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994-2000:  Lessons from Urban Combat (Santa Monica, Calif: RAND Corporation,
2001), 5, https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7249/mr1289a.
Halford Mackinder. "The Geographical Pivot of History (1904)." The Geographical Journal 170, no. 4 (December 2004): 298-321. https://www.iwp.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/ 20131016_MackinderTheGeographicalJournal.pdf
George Kennan, "The Long Telegram," Wilson Center Digital Archive, 1946, https://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/116178.
Mackinder, 303.    
Tim Marshall, "Russia and the Curse of Geography," The Atlantic, October 31, 2015, https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2015/10/russia-geography-ukraine-syria/413248/.
The concept of the Near Abroad is discussed at length in Gerard Toal's Near Abroad. He describes this term as "first emerging in 1992 as a consensus [English] translation of blizhneye zarubezhye, (lit. near beyond border)." The term implies a paternalistic sense of responsibility for and authority over many regions that gained statehood in the aftermath of the end of the Cold War. In Toal's words, the expression "named a new arrangement of sovereignty, and an old familiarity, a long standing spatial entanglement and a range of geopolitical emotions."(Toal, Gerard. Near Abroad, 3.)   
Russell Weigley. "Annihilation of a People: The Indian Fighters." In The American Way of War: A History of United States Military Strategy and Policy. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1973
Terrence McCoy, "What Does Russia Tell the Mothers of Soldiers Killed in Ukraine? Not Much.," Washington Post, accessed October 20, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/ 2014/08/29/what-does-russia-tell-the-mothers-of-soldiers-killed-in-ukraine-not-much/; CIA, "USSR: Domestic Fallout From the Afghan War."
Stasys Knezys and Romanas Sedlickas, The War in Chechnya (College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press, 1999), 46.
Olga Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994-2000:  Lessons from Urban Combat (Santa Monica, Calif: RAND Corporation, 2001), 5, https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7249/mr1289a.
In several ways, the Russian maneuver concept resembles the antithesis Stephen Biddle's "Modern System" as explained in 2004 book Military Power: Explaining Victory and Defeat in Modern Battle. Rather than maneuvering decentralized elements to close with and destroy the enemy, Russian forces relied on extreme centralization of both force and decision making.
Timothy Thomas, "Air Operation in Low Intensity Conflict: The Case of Chechnya," Airpower Journal, 1997, 3. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA515085.pdf
Schaefer, The Insurgency in Chechnya and the North Causasus: From Gazavat to Jihad, 128.   
Zhukov, "Counterinsurgency in a Non-Democratic State," 5.
Glenn E.Robinson, "The Four Waves of Global Jihad, 1979-2017," Middle East Policy 24, no. 3  (2017): 70-88, https://doi.org/10.1111/mepo.12287.
Grau, "Technology and the Second Chechen Campaign: Not All New and Not That Much," 1-2.
Grau, "Technology and the Second Chechen Campaign: Not All New and Not That Much," 4.
Hodgson, "Is  The Russian Bear Learning? An Operational and Tactical Analysis of the Second ChechenWar, 1999War,  -2002," 75.  ," 75.   
Oliker, Russia's Chechen Wars 1994-2000:  Lessons from Urban Combat, 52.
Cohen and Hamilton, The Russian Military and the Georgia War.   
"Paper divisions" in this case refers to the manning of units below the threshold required for them to engage in combat operations. In theory, these units would be made ready for combat by filling their ranks with conscripts during mobilization. In practice, the Russian General Staff learned that it often could not afford to wait for mobilization and resorted to cannibalizing these units to form the elements required for operations.
Cohen and Hamilton, The Russian Military and the Georgia War.72   
Cohen and Hamilton, The Russian Military and the Georgia War. 80   
British Broadcasting Company, "Why Has the Syrian War Lasted 10 Years?," BBC News, March 12, 2021, sec. Middle East, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-35806229.
Jean-François Ratelle and Emil Aslan Souleimanov, "A Perfect Counterinsurgency? Making Sense of Moscow's Policy of Chechenisation," Europe-Asia Studies 68, no. 8 (September 13, 2016): 1287-1314, https://doi.org/10.1080/09668136.2016.1230842. It should be noted that Russian integration with Syrian forces benefited from a host nation partner with an existing standing army-regardless of its relative decay at this point in the conflict.
Charles Bartles and Lester Grau, "The Russian Ground Based Contingent in Syria," Foreign Policy  Research Institute, Russia's War in Syria, 2020, 20.   
Mordechai Haas et al., "Russia's Military  Action in Syria Driven by Military Reforms," The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 33:2 (July 3, 2020): 292-99.
Fedor Danilchenko. "Стали известны детали операции «российского спецназа» в Сирии" [Details of a "Russian Spetnaz" operation in Syria become known]." Moskovskoi Kosmolets, January 13, 2021. https://www.mk.ru/politics/2021/01/13/stali-izvestny-detali-operacii-rossiyskogo-specnaza-v-sirii.html. Recondo here refers to the Vietnam-era training school for select U.S. personnel in Vietnam-the culminating exercise of which was often an actual operation. For additional information on the Military Assistance Command-Vietnam (MACV) recondo school, reference www.sogsite.com/recondo-school/
Al-Masdar News. "Russian Special Forces Take Part in Northwestern Hama Offensive." Al-Masdar News (blog), May 10, 2019. https://www.almasdarnews.com/article/russian-special-forces-take-part-innorthwestern-hama-offensive-photos/.
231 Mark Galeotti, "Not-So-Soft Power: Russia's Military Police in Syria," War on the Rocks, October 2, 2017, https://warontherocks.com/2017/10/not-so-soft-power-russias-military-police-in-syria/.; Sarah Fainberg, "Russian Spetsnaz, Contractors and Volunteers in the Syrian Conflict," n.d., 30.; Emmanuel Dreyfus, "The Russian Military Police, from Syria to Karabakh," News, https://www.ponarseurasia.org/, 2021, https://www.ponarseurasia.org/the-russian-military-police-from-syria-to-karabakh/.
Vladimir Karnozov, "Russia Advances UAV Forces, Sheds Light on Syrian Experiences," Aviation International News, accessed May 12, 2021, https://www.ainonline.com/aviation-news/defense/ 2019-10-06/russia-advances-uav-forces-sheds-light-syrian-experiences.
The Tiger Force refers to the Russian-backed element of the Syrian military. Somewhat counterintuitively, this ground force was founded, financed, trained, and commanded by the Syrian Air Intelligence Directorate. Although sometimes referred to as "elite," the Tiger Force is conventionally structured (roughly two infantry brigades with armor and artillery support). Their combat effectiveness is a
Dynamic Software Solutions, "Android Tactical Assault Kit," ATAK, accessed May 12, 2021, http://www.ds2.com/solutions/atak.
Strategy Page, "Information Warfare: Doing 2003 In Russian," 2019, https://www.strategypage.com/htmw/htiw/articles/20190712.aspx.
John Matthews, Explosion: The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 (New York, NY.: Hippocrene  Books, 2007); Ron Soodalter, "Over Where? Cuban Fighters in Angola's Civil War," HistoryNet, October 20, 2016, https://www.historynet.com/cuban-fighters-angolas-civil-war.htm.
Gil Barndollar, "The Best or Worst of Both Worlds?," Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), 2020, https://www.csis.org/blogs/post-soviet-post/best-or-worst-both-worlds.
Direct Action is defined in Joint Publication (JP) 3-05 II-5 as "short duration strikes and other small scale offensive actions conducted as a special operation in hostile, denied, or diplomatically sensitive
Austin Carson explores the trade offs between a state's decision to intervene in a conflict either overtly or covertly and advances a "limited war theory of secrecy" which sheds additional light on risks and opportunities Moscow faces as it increasingly employs it's evolved CIW capabilities.Carson, Austin.  Secret Wars: Covert Conflict in International Politics (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press,  2018).
Aaron Mehta, "Here's What Esper's AFRICOM Review Has Decided So Far," Small Wars Journal, 2020, https://smallwarsjournal.com/blog/heres-what-espers-africom-review-has-decided-so-far.
the 
U.S. Government
We was rotten 'fore we started-we was never disciplined;
We made it out a favour if an order was obeyed.
Yes, every little drummer 'ad 'is rights an' wrongs to mind, So we had to pay for teachin'-an' we paid! -Rudyard 
Kipling 175
impacts of these reforms to the key trends in Russian CIW: The transition to a more flexible expeditionary force composition, the increased integration of precision fires, and the steady drive to replace outdated Soviet-legacy systems with modern technology at the tactical and operational levels. Changes in the reform period directly contributed to the capabilities on display during Russia's CIW campaign in Syria circa 2015.
The Georgian War of 2008 was a frozen conflict that flared hot after 15 years of relative peace. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, in 1991, the Republic of Georgia declared its independence. In 1992, pro-Russian minorities in north Georgian provinces-Abkhazia and South Ossetia-declared their independence. 
177
"The declaration and recognition of Kosovar independence will make Russia adjust its line toward Abkhazia and South Ossetia." 
178
On 7 August 2008, after several days of sporadic armed exchanges between Ossetian separatists and Georgian forces, Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili authorized Georgian troops to cross into South Ossetia. Russian forces, which had quietly infiltrated the area over the preceding weeks, responded immediately, and conventional combined arms combat erupted (see Figure 
5
Failures in Russian fire support during the Georgian War also laid the groundwork for increased CIW capability following the post-war reforms. The realization that the Russian military still could not accurately employ fires in direct support of maneuvering ground forces proved one of the most damning realizations of the campaign. A lack of precision guided munitions (PGMs) significantly hampered Russian fires in Georgia.
When laser-guided surface to surface munitions were available, the broken terrain and foliage prevented line of sight acquisition and designation. 
203
206 Kofman.
When a nation re-awakens, its finest sons are prepared to give their lives for its liberation. When empires are threatened with collapse, they are prepared to sacrifice their non-commissioned officers.
-Menachem Begin, 1951 221
A.
A.
In sub-Saharan Africa, Russian CIW efforts have taken a noticeably lighter approach than in Syria. 
258
Within CAR, somewhere between 600 and 2000 Russian PMCs have embedded themselves into the country's security apparatus (see Figure 
11
259
260
The limited information available on the Russian CIW operation in CAR indicates that the 258 The recent Russian CIW experience in Africa is ironic in that it is an inversion of their role on the continent during the Cold War. Soviet inroads into Africa during the Cold War often manifested in long-term support to Communist insurgent movements such as the Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO) in the 1970s and 1980s, and the Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA)   
What happened in the past can be very complicated, as is life. One way to learn from the past is to simplify the record of what happened: distill and distill until, at last, the final essence offers a usable generalization, a parable.
While it is indeed important to learn the appropriate lessons from history to best predict the future, one must carefully select the cases for analysis to avoid flawed lessons and interpretations. If one wants to predict the essence of future successful resistance, then contemporary examples must be studied in detail.
Dr. Sandor Fabian, Modern Warfare Institute at West Point, 2021 
280
281
For its part, the Russian military has observed these developments and emerged from its own evolution, learning many lessons in blood along the way. It remains likely that this rapid change will continue as Russia increasingly involves itself in irregular conflicts beyond its traditional sphere of influence. While many of the lessons learned by Russian leadership have resulted in changes comparable to those experienced by the U.S. and European militaries over the past two decades, today's Russian military retains a distinct approach. This Russian "flavor" of defeating irregular threats warrants deliberate consideration as the United States engages with the resurgent power on the global stage 280 Sandor Fabian, "Not Your Grandfather's Resistance: The Unavoidable Truths about Small States' Best Defense Against Aggression," Modern War Institute, September 29, 2021, https://mwi.usma.edu/notyour-grandfathers-resistance-the-unavoidable-truths-about-small-states-best-defense-against-aggression/.
281 "Revolution in Military Affairs" refers to the hotly debated notion that the U.S. victory in the 1991 Gulf War and subsequent invasion of Iraq in 2003 demonstrate such a departure from previous approaches to warfare that rather than simply constituting the next evolution of military technology, they are harbingers of a fundamental shift in how nations will need to organize to wage war, requiring drastic change among both societies and militaries throughout the world to prevent obsolescence.
(SR). 
284
The transformation of Russian fires in CIW operations has focused primarily on a pivot towards joint fires and the incorporation of precision weapons. Joint Fires are defined in U.S. doctrine as "Fires delivered during the employment of forces from two or more components in coordinated action to produce desired effects in support of a common objective." 286 Often, the difficulty in executing joint fires is coordination and communications-as evidenced by the fratricide, lack of effective CAS, and delayed artillery support during the Russo-Georgian War. Russia's expeditionary fire support in Syria, however, displayed an ability to coordinate and apply fires assets in a joint environment. Naval gunfire, ground artillery, rotary wing attack aircraft, CAS, and maneuver force-synchronizing strikes using a Strelets-enabled command post. The Russian kill chain is getting shorter and more precise due to the synching of digital command-and-control and drones, an important improvement for future CIW campaigns.
Likewise, Russian experiences in Syria, Libya, Ukraine, and Nagorno Karabakh, have kept the Russian military at the forefront of C-UAS advances. As a result of these 
The most important takeaway for U.S. IW practitioners remains to be wary of (1) Calls for an urban-centric approach to UW come with a distinct risk when facing an adversary such as Russia or Russian proxies. As highlighted in each of the primary case studies, Russia has historically chosen to destroy urbans areas rather than fight for them. While urban areas may provide useful hubs for command or support nodes, bringing the fight to an urban area will likely result in the mass application of firepower rather than risk continued armed resistance or fighting block by block.
(2) Unmanned Aerial Systems are a major pillar of Russian warfare and are only gaining importance and proficiency. The layered effect of strike capability from drones combined with digital command-and-control structures means the kill chain will be shorter today than it was even in Syria. Combined with the historic trend of accepting high levels of collateral damage in targeting operations, it appears likely that Russia's irregular foes will increasingly find drones to be one of the most lethal tools deployed against them. Similarly, Russia's emphasis on CUAS with their ongoing experimentation in conflicts such as Libya and Ukraine will mean that