# ID: a0e9d6d4db0e4e68bb45fb222902bd27
# Title: Modern Warfare: Nato's War Amongst the People in Kosovo
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph explores the application of Rupert Smith's theory regarding the utility of force and the six characteristics thereof, using NATO's 1999 Operation ALLIED FORCE (the Kosovo campaign) as a case study. Smith's theory and conclusions provide insight for both political and military leaders interested in the profession of arms. The monograph investigates the events leading up to the conflict highlighting tensions within NATO and the intricacy of conducting alliance warfare as well as the need to determine NATO's role in a post-Cold War world. Focusing mainly on the U.S., the campaign reveals tensions in civil-military relations and tensions within the U.S.
Kosovo…illuminates in many ways how America and our allies and adversaries are going to approach the art of war well into the next century.
-William S. Cohen, United States Secretary of Defense 1
On 24 March 1999, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) began its first war, a seventy-eight day military campaign against Serbia. 2 NATO conducted military action solely under alliance auspices, without a United Nations Security Council Resolution. Although the political and military end states for the campaign were not finalized until well into the campaign, NATO fought to compel Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic back to the bargaining table on the issue of Kosovo. NATO also aimed to put an end to the ethnic cleansing of Albanian Kosovars by Serbian forces in Kosovo, while simultaneously setting the conditions for Internally Displaced Personnel and refugees to return safely to their homes. To a lesser extent, NATO also fought to diminish the military capability of Serbian forces.
The 1999 war over Kosovo was part of the larger story of the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia. Throughout the 1990s, ethno-religious identity proved more powerful than the fragile political unity of the Yugoslav state. Ties to outside powers exacerbated tensions within the country. It also brought to the forefront, NATO's struggle for viability and purpose in the twenty first century. For NATO, continued conflict in Kosovo threatened to destabilize the entire Balkans with not only a surge of refugees but also the potential for violent confrontation along religious and ethnic lines. 
3
4
5
Century as it was in the 20th; how to make this Alliance, which has stood us so well for so long, an effective partnership to meet the challenges of today and tomorrow." 
6
Additionally, like many conflicts following the end of World War II, Kosovo quickly turned into an incremental, coercive war, which was substantially less than total warfare. The war also of the crisis. Steve Bowman, Kosovo: U.S. and Allied Military Operations, CRS Report 1B10027 (Washington, DC: Office of Congressional Information and Publishing, 24 July 2000).
claimed the career of the victorious senior US military officer due to its divisive elements among U.S. political leadership and senior military officials.
In his 2003 book, The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World, General Sir Rupert Smith provocatively suggested, "war no longer exists…war as cognitively known to most non-combatants, war as battle in a field between men and machinery, war as a massive deciding event in a dispute in international affairs: such war no longer exists." 
7
Arab-Israeli war, making large armored tank formations and accompanying operations and tactics, no longer applicable in the current state of warfare. 8
This monograph uses Smith's six characteristics of war to analyze the 1999 military campaign against Serbia. 9 It also explores the consequences resulting from the Allies' initial 
7
War, from 1992
-1994
. General Smith retired in 2002. 8
9
10
11
12
13
11 See Appendix 1 for a list of Key Personnel.
12 See Appendix 2 for a map of Kosovo and Appendix 3 for NATO Command Structure and Key U.S. Military Leadership at Appendix 2. 
13
16
Several authors have recognized this new type of warfare that emerged after World War II and have put forward different models and approaches to explain the change. 
17
The six characteristics, found in varying degrees in each of the post-World War II conflicts, are strongly evident in the Kosovo campaign. The six characteristics suggest the character of war has changed. War among the people is the new paradigm of modern warfare. War is no longer about a single massive decisive battle where both the military and political objectives line up precisely.
Instead, the six characteristics prevalent in war among the people, dominate the conflict, a conflict fought by the military to set the condition for political and diplomatic negotiations. War among the people is so different from industrial war, a true paradigm change has occurred. In Thomas Kuhn's explanation, the paradigm shift occurred because of the old paradigm's (industrial age warfare) inability to address military conflict and confrontation following the end of World War II. 
18
19
According to Smith, war among the people "reflects the hard fact there is no secluded battlefield upon which armies engage, nor are there necessarily armies, definitely not on all sides." 21 War among the people is in fact fought where people live, where they work, and in their social settings. Civilians serve as targets in the sense that they must be won as one of the conditions for victory at the strategic level. 
22
23
For industrial war, the sequence of confrontation is peace-crisis-war-resolution-peace. In other words, wars up to and including World War II, were fought and resolved, resulting in a new peace. 
24
21
22 Ibid., 6.
23 Ibid., 18.
24 Ibid., 19.
War: A History of United States Military Strategy and Policy, with the following insight: "In this view, the Civil War, World War I, and World War II were not won by tactical or strategic brilliance but by the sheer weight of numbers-the awesome destructive power that only a fully mobilized and highly industrialized democracy can bring to bear…U.S. armies composed of citizen-soldiers suffered and inflicted massive casualties."
25
26
27
The theory on the utility of force hinges on the two immediate effects of military force (composed of men, material, and logistics support) which is defined as killing people and destroying things. The measure of how killing people and destroying things achieves the overarching political purpose it was intended to achieve, measures the utility of military force. In order to maximize the utility of force, General Smith stated, "to apply force with utility implies an understanding of the context in which one is acting, a clear definition of the result to be achieved…and, as important as all others, an understanding of the nature of the force being applied." 28 For initial operations in Kosovo, lack of a coherent political purpose wreaked havoc with NATO's military utility for the first half of the military campaign. A campaign that was expected to last only a few days by senior American and NATO officials dragged on for seventyeight days.
The following context for war in Kosovo illustrates General Smith's third characteristic of war among the people, namely, "conflicts tend to be timeless.  (1159-1196). Under self-proclaimed emperor Stefan Dusan (1331-1355), the Serbs extended their reach from now modern day Belgrade to Greece. The Byzantine Empire sent the Turks to fight Serb forces in 1345 and 1345, with Serbs suffering defeat in 1352. Serbian Prince Lazar Hrebeljanovic fought the Turks again in the Battle of Kosovo Polje in 1389. Although he and the sultan were killed in battle, heroism, honor and the pride of Serbian people were celebrated an a national holiday on St. Vitus Day, June 28. In the 15th century, Turks conquered the last Serbian forces at Smederjevo in 1459, causing Serbs to flee to nearby countries of Hungary, Montenegro, Croatia, Dalmatia and Bosnia. For fifteen years beginning in 1684, Christian forces fought to expel Turks from the Balkans but failed. In 1718, Austrian forces took book Serb regions south of Sava from the Turks but the Jesuits who followed came to make the Serbs "hate the Austrians" as much as the Turks following their intense conversion efforts. Russia gained influence in the region in the 18th century when they were granted the "diplomatic right to protect Christian subjects of the Turks." Both Russia and Austria fought war against the Turks in 1787 and 1788 that was joined by Serbian forces who used guerilla tactics against the Turks. The Turks attached rebel Serb strongholds in 1813 alongside Bosnian and Albanian soldiers who ransacked Serbian villages, leading to a Serb uprising in 1815. The sultan recognized Serbia as a Turkish principality in 1830 and also reiterated Russia's right to protect Serbia. The treaties of San Stefano and Berlin in 1878 transformed Serbia into an independent state. Much to the frustration of the Serbs Austria-Hungary annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1908. During the Balkan wars, the Serbs helped rid the Balkans of the Turks and won back land lost in the 13th and 14th century. Following the end of World War I, Serbian, Croatian and Slovenian leaders, "formed the federation known as Yugoslavia…later renamed as the Kingdom of Yugoslavia." Following the establishment of the kingdom, border disputes with Italy, Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria and Albania intensified disagreements with the Kingdom's neighbors, most notably Italy who did not receive all the land they thought they were entitled to in the 1915 Treaty of London. The creation of Yugoslavia combined together Serbs, Croats and Slovenes all of whom had their own separate convictions regarding government, culture and religion. Following German occupation in World War II, the socialist federation of Yugoslavia formed with Josip Broz Tito serving as the leader until 1980, when he passed away. Tito put in force a new constitution that recognized the "autonomous nature" of Kosovo with similar rights granted to the six republics of Yugoslavia (Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Slovenia. In 1991-1992, several countries (Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina) left Yugoslavia via violent cause of conflict in the Balkans in the 1990s was closely wrapped up in the personalities and process of Yugoslavia's disintegration.
Under the rule of wartime resistance leader Marshal Josip Broz Tito, Yugoslavia maintained a relatively stable existence through much of the Cold War. After Tito's death, longstanding internal tensions in Yugoslav society began to manifest themselves. In 1989, Milosevic stripped away Kosovo's autonomy granted by Tito in 1974. 
33
34
35
36
Gradivo -Treaties & Documents, 52 (2007): 277. 38
39
40 Kosovo Country Review, Country Watch, Inc., http://connection.ebscohost.com 2012, (accessed 27 January 2013). 
41
billion pledged from the international community to rebuild Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
42
43
The North Atlantic Council (NAC) issued a statement of "profound concern," condemning both
Albanian violent repression at the hands of Serb forces and terrorist acts committed by the KLA against the Serb population and its police forces. 
45
42
Powers, 1804
Powers, -1999, 653. 43 , 653. 43
44 Tim Judah, Kosovo: War and Revenge (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000), 130-131. 
45
Nardulli, et al., eds., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999
(Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2002), 13. 48
In the United States, President William Clinton was halfway through the second term of his presidency. 
49
51
49
50
51
in Kosovo for fear of what might follow, should a bombing campaign fail to coerce Milosevic. 52
In addition, a month prior to NATO military action in Kosovo, the President of the United States had narrowly survived an impeachment attempt following an affair with White House intern Monica Lewinsky. Clinton had avoided impeachment but at the expense of attention in other matters, most notably the Balkans and foreign affairs in general. 
53
54
By opposing Slobodan Milosevic's murderous rampage, NATO is playing its rightful role as a defender of freedom and security within the Euro-Atlantic region. Because our cause is just, we are united. And because we are united, we are confident that in this confrontation between barbaric killing and necessary force; between vicious intolerance and respect for human rights; between tyranny and democracy; we will prevail. 
55
56
Secretary of Defense by 
Clinton in 1997. 61
62
63
61
62 Michael A. Cohen, "The Powell Doctrine's Enduring Relevance," World Politics Review (22 July 2009), http://www.worldpoliticsreview.com/articles/4100/the-powell-doctrinesenduring-relevance (accessed 29 January 2013); Interview with William Cohen, PBS Frontline, n.d., http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/ frontline/shows/kosovo/interviews/cohen.html (accessed 29 January 2013). The Powell-Weinberger Doctrine states the following conditions should be considered by policy makers prior to committing U.S. forces: "1) The United States should not commit forces to combat overseas unless the particular engagement or occasion is deemed vital to our national interest or that of our allies.; 2) If we decide it is necessary to put combat troops into a given situation, we should do so wholeheartedly, and with the clear intention of winning; 3) If we do decide to commit forces to combat overseas, we should have clearly defined political and military objectives; 4) The relationship between our objectives and the forces we have committed -their size, composition and disposition-must be continually reassessed and adjusted if necessary; 5) Before the U.S. commits combat forces abroad, there must be some reasonable assurance we will have the support of the American people and their elected representatives in Congress; 6) The commitment of U.S. forces to combat should be a last resort." 
63
65
Bradley Graham, a Washington Post writer, quoted a senior military officer familiar with deliberations in the "tank" leading up to the campaign in Kosovo, "I don't think anybody felt like there had been a compelling argument made that all of this was in our national interest." 67 However, both Clark and Albright, having been involved in direct diplomacy with Milosevic to 
64
71
72
68
69 David Stout, "U.S. General Who Led NATO to Retire Ahead of Schedule," New York Times, 28 July 1999, http://connection.ebscohost.com 2012 (accessed 27 September 12). 
70
71 Linda D. Kozaryn, "NATO Orders Air Strikes to End Humanitarian Catastrophe" Armed Forces Press Service, 24 March 1999, http://www.defense.gov/News/NewsArticle.aspx?ID=42000 (accessed 28 January 2013. 
72
75
76
European war as those living in the region." 77
Among other key Allied governments, the French government was a strong supporter for campaign objectives. The military campaign made French President Jacques Chirac re-think 73 James Kitfield, "Not so Sacred Borders," PBS Frontline, 2000, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/kosovo/procon/kitfield.html, (accessed 28 January 2013. 
74
75 Tony Blair, A Journey, My Political Life (New York: Borzoi Book, 2010). Former British Prime Minister Tony Blair devotes an entire chapter of his autobiography to Kosovo. On the atrocities going on in Kosovo, Blair notes, "This was ethnic cleansing. What's more, it was happening right on Europe's border…from the onset, I was extraordinarily forward in advocating a military solution," which, "put a colossal strain on my personal relationship with Bill Clinton"  (226-227). Blair saw a need to do something in Kosovo as a moral issue and a great disappointment that Milosevic carried out the atrocities on Europe's doorstep in the 1990s (228). In early 1999, he worked on the American and European leadership and gained their concurrence to condemn Milosevic's action but he was unsuccessful in gaining their support for ground troops. For Blair, he saw the lack of willingness to commit ground troops in January 1999 as an "utterly hopeless negotiating tactic with Milosevic. It signaled from the outset that there was a limit to our seriousness of intent, and that provided he could withstand the air campaign, he could survive" (230).
76 Paul E. Gallis, Kosovo: Lessons Learned from Operation Allied Force, RL30374 (Washington, DC: Office of the Congressional Information and Publishing, 19 November 1999). 
77
France's relationship with NATO and the prerequisite of having a U. on Serbia to cease ethnic cleansing in Kosovo. 
80
81
82
83
84
85
81
82
83 Nardulli,
et al.,
Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo,
14. 84
85 Ibid., 14.
did not plan for any type of ground operations. This early decision essentially ceded the initiative to Milosevic. It also sent a strong signal to him regarding NATO's weak resolve to push Serb forces out of Kosovo. 
86
The decision to settle on airpower was not a simple decision but a result of "having to do something in Kosovo," coupled with the distaste for the use of ground forces. Remarkably, aside from NATO officials, few observers actually believed air power would force Milosevic back to negotiations. Some military experts view airpower as the ultimate instrument of military coercion. 
87
88
89
87 Michael Clarke, "Airpower, Force and Coercion," The Dynamics of Airpower (1996). In his article, Michael Clarke does not specify which NATO officials believed bombing would coerce Milosevic back to negotiations. 
88 Nardulli,
et al.,
Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo,
27. 89
to "do nothing" or use air power. 
90
In October 1988, Holbrooke and Short met with Milosevic and reached concessions regarding a three pronged Kosovo Verification Mission (KVM) aimed to ease tensions. 
91
On 6 February 1999, the Rambouillet Conference began as a last ditch diplomatic effort to avoid military conflict. After the conference, Sandy Berger stated if Milosevic "was playing a game with us at Rambouillet by building up his force while pretending to negotiate, so were we.
We needed to demonstrate a real commitment to get a peaceful resolution in order to get the allies to go along with the use of significant force." 92 One of Albright's close aides put the purpose of the conference in clearer terms, stating it was held to "get the war started with the Europeans locked in." 
93
94
95
96 Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 17-18. 97
Crisis 1998
Crisis -1999, 152. 98 , 152. 98
It was a strategy designed to somehow convince somebody that we were committed to something we were not committed to do. 
107
Additionally, the Serbs knew they risked losing their military capability if they chose to challenge NATO military power might head-on. Instead, the Allies fought to achieve a condition whereby negotiations would resume. Regardless, peace would be something solved in diplomatic channels, as no NATO nation desired an outright military defeat of Serbia. The characteristic of fighting "so as not lose the force," greatly shaped every aspect and detail of the Allied plan from overall strategic objectives to the tactical level rules of engagement for NATO pilots.
The overall lack of a long-term plan to address Kosovo's struggle for independence is one of the most noted shortcomings among authors. Daalder and O'Hanlon wrote that NATO "had hope but not a plan. NATO stumbled into war, unready either for countering Serbia's massive campaign to forcefully expel much of the ethnic Albanian population from Kosovo or to do militarily what it would take to achieve its stated objectives." 108 General Clark's observations reflect the same perception and prove even more alarming given his position as SACEUR for the duration of the conflict as he notes, "there simply was no detailed planning. There was no strategic consensus in Washington. Even if there had been, U.S.-only planning would have been unrealistic since we never had any intention of fighting alone." 109 A British Defense Committee report places the blame squarely on the shoulders of the North Atlantic Council for failure "to reach an early consensus on its policy on recourse to military means, and the inhibitions within NATO on military contingency planning." 
110
111
112
108
109 
Clark,
Waging Modern War,
[439]
[440]
111
Crisis 1998
-1999, 6. 112 Clark, Waging Modern War, 6-7, 188
Kosovo were closely scrutinized by the press, a battle truly "fought among the people." General Smith's second characteristic for war among the people states the role of the media plays a central role in shaping military action as, "we fight in every living room in the world as well as on the streets and field of a conflict zone." 113 Early on, General Clark acknowledged the significance of the media's role in the campaign when we stated, "The media and press were going to be vitally important." Clearly, Clark understood he had to provide the jus ad bellum for war in Kosovo and maintain support from the international community through the media. 114
For the duration of the campaign, alliance cohesion was an overarching objective for the NATO Secretary General and his organization. However, military action in Kosovo and the Balkans challenged NATO's resolve from day one of the campaign. General Clark stated alliance cohesion as one of his "measures of merit" for the campaign. The measure aimed to, "retain alliance solidarity and the full support of our regional partners." 
115
Another top priority for senior NATO officials was to minimize NATO casualties or any catastrophic civilian casualties. Senior alliance officials feared such an event could immediately 
113
114 
Clark,
Waging Modern War,
188. 115
halt military operations prior to the condition being set for a political agreement.
116
The consequences for valuing alliance cohesion as the top priority trickled down to every level of planning and subsequent execution. For fear of failure, politicians in NATO nations became involved with the most detailed planning, to include the selection of individual air targets.
Even with target selection however, NATO's lack of an overall plan negatively affected the process and diminished the utility of targets selected to achieve the end states. A British report stated this fact more somberly: "Despite the involvement of politicians, the selection of some strategic targets was politically ill-considered."
117
Air Force's experience in the Rolling Thunder campaign in Viet Nam, where President Lyndon Johnson and his administration, "dictated the size of the striking force, its weapons, and the precise time of the attack." 
118
120
were not allowed to operate below 120 Eliot A. Cohen, Soldiers, Statesmen, and Leadership in Wartime: Supreme Command  (New York: Anchor Books, 2003), 203. 
121 Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 34.
123
124
125
"considerable mistake," while senior military officials "thought it was, in fact, a catastrophic mistake because it sent the wrong signal to all kinds of people, most notably Slobodan Milosevic."
126
Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, continued the rhetoric of America's efforts to fight so as not to lose the force: "The United States has no intention of sending ground troops to fight in Kosovo, and the Department of Defense is not doing any planning that would enable such a deployment." 127 Several days later on 31 March, the President spoke about his rationale behind the "no troops on the ground" policy. In an interview with Dan Rather, he said, "the thing that bothers me about introducing ground troops into a hostile situation-into Kosovo and the Balkans-is the prospect of never being able to get them out." 128 A few months later, Sandy Berger, believed Congress would not approve funds for the operations unless the administration acknowledged there was no intention of sending ground troops. 
129
Authors Daalder and O'Hanlon remarked, "Operation ALLIED FORCE was in its early weeks a textbook case of how not to wage a war. The blindness of NATO's major members to the possibility that the war might not end quickly was astounding." 130 Instead of a quick end to the military campaign, Belgrade dug in and met the alliance's air campaign by adapting tactics, preventing NATO from destroying Serbia's integrated air defense system. In fact, Milosevic accelerated the ethnic cleansing of Albanians in Kosovo when the campaign began. 
131
132
129
Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 23. 130
131 Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 21.
number of aircraft and sustainment elements, or lack thereof, deployed in the region. 
133
134
Apache gunships to fight in coordination with the Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS) and fixed wing assets. 
135
March 2009, the Army, Air Force and Marines non-concurred on Gen Clark's request to deploy the Apaches to Macedonia. 136 Although the U.S. deployed the Apaches and supporting equipment to the AOR although they were never employed for fear of losing them in combat. 
137
133
134
135 Ibid., 464 
;
Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 57. 136
President Clinton never authorized the employment order because Service Chiefs predicted a high loss rate for the gunship. In a Washington Post article, writer Dana Priest provided a stark condemnation of the U.S.'s efforts to "fight so as not to lose the force:" "the vaunted helicopters came to symbolize everything wrong with the army as it enters into the 21st century…its obsession with casualties; its post-Cold War identity crisis." 
138
139
Had NATO destroyed all targets during the first few days of the conflict without Milosevic surrendering, the results would have been disastrous for the alliance. General Clark also 138 Dana Priest, "Army's Apache Helicopter Rendered Impotent in Kosovo" Washington Post (29 December 1999). 
139 Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 34
140
understood maintaining the alliance was critical and he worried heavy bombing at the beginning of the campaign would have shattered alliance resolve and cohesion. Additionally, he was concerned with the international community perceiving him as the "butcher of Belgrade. 142 
Clark, Waging Modern War and
Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 33. 143 Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, xvi.
145
In the United States, President Clinton announced NATO strikes had three objectives, which were not fully consistent with statements by Solana just a day prior. In his television address to the American people on 24 March, the President stated the goals of the campaign were to, "demonstrate the seriousness of NATO's opposition to aggression and its support for peace.
Second, to deter President Milosevic from continuing and escalating his attack on helpless civilians by imposing a price for the attacks. Third, if necessary, to damage Yugoslavia's capacity to wage war against Kosovo."
146
147
On 23 March 1999, SACEUR identified what he called his measures of merit for the campaign over Kosovo: "the first…is not to lose aircraft, minimize loss of aircraft…second…is to impact the Yugoslavia military and police activities on the ground as rapidly and effectively as possible…third…is to protect our ground forces-and in this case SFOR, the elements of the international community." 148 The stated military strategy from the NATO Secretary General, POTUS and SACEUR consistently illustrated the emphasis on fighting so as not to lose the force.
General Clark also asked critical questions of his 4-star Generals regarding the effectiveness of the campaign in regards to his measures of merit. 
149
When could we reach it?"
150
With respect to the three NATO objectives, the alliance achieved limited results although Milosevic eventually capitulated after a seventy-eight day campaign. In fact, when Operation ALLIED FORCE began, the Serbs stepped up their efforts to cleanse ethnic Albanians. Given the limited amount of air assets initially deployed and the restrictive rules of engagement, NATO had neither the mass nor procedures in place to neutralize Serb military units operating on the ground. 
151
153
Clinton and the Generals, 451. 154 Ibid., 452;
Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 4-5.
Clark increased military pressure on Milosevic beginning on 28 March, with a broader target set. 
156
157
The turning point for the Allies came about as they realized the concept of "fighting so as not to lose the force" by limiting the campaign to an air only option was failing to achieve the desired political solution in a timely manner. An air campaign, expected to last only a few days, was dragging on into weeks with no foreseeable end in sight. In addition, without the option or at least a threat of ground troops against Milosevic, the military strategy demonstrated a lack of understanding for the context of the campaign. Milosevic feared NATO ground units operating in Kosovo and especially in the FRY as evidenced by the rejection of the Rambouillet Peace Accord, which included such a clause. Consistent with Smith's theory, the determination to use both an air campaign coupled with ground forces had the potential to exponentially increase the utility of force and push Milosevic to peace talks.
The Allied bombing campaign continued into April with very little sign of Milosevic settling for peace and returning to negotiations. This realization finally strengthened and focused Allied resolve to prevail against Milosevic. As early as 9 April, Secretary General Javier Solana 
156 Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 32. 157 Ibid., 32.
Kosovo. 158
Shelton. 159
160
161
158 Clark,
Waging Modern War,
252. 159
160 Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 40-41;
161 NATO held the 50th Anniversary Summit 23-24 April 1999, in Washington, DC; Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 36-37.  campaign of terror to succeed. NATO is determined to prevail." 162 Author Benjamin Lambeth noted the summit was "pivotal in solidifying NATO's collective determination not to lose." 
163
165
166
Economic losses suffered in Serbia and Kosovo ranged from $7-10 billion. Reconstruction in both countries cost another $10 billion, spent over a three-to-five year period. Other countries in the Balkans experienced a short-term drop in their Gross Domestic Product (GDP) as well. The worst hit, Macedonia and Bosnia-Herzegovina have lost an estimated 5 percent of GDP while Romania and Hungary may have lost as little as 0.5 percent. Additionally, following the end of hostilities, the Vienna Institute of Economics estimated "stability" in the Balkans would cost $100 billion. 
182
180 Glenny, The Balkans: Nationalism, War and
the Great Powers, 1804-1999, 661. 181 Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 199, 109.
183
In the author's opinion, Smith's "war among the people" theory is by definition an incremental military approach, allowing time for diplomatic maneuvering while simultaneously intensifying military operations. The difference with Kosovo and the proper application of Smith's theory however, was NATO's inability to set clear political goals prior to commencing military operations, something Smith specifically warns against as one of his fundamental beliefs. 
185
In the context of the campaign's strategic goals, the destruction of Serbian equipment and forces is unknown. Although no count of equipment coming out of Kosovo was made, the Serb redeploying units appeared both combat effective and with high morale. 
186
183
184 Papacosma, Kay, and Rubin, NATO After Fifty Years, 21. 
185
186 Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 4.
Estimates from Ambassador Daalder and O'Hanlon claim that up to 10,000 people, mainly civilians, were killed by Serb ground units and approximately 800,000 people were forced to leave Kosovo and another 100,000 were relocated somewhere in Kosovo away from their homes. 
188
Additionally, an international administration was setup to run the Kosovar government, successfully excluding Serbia from governance in Kosovo and involvement in their political affairs. 
189
190
Cohen's comment in the wake of the Allied air campaign over Kosovo reflects the essence of General Smith's war among the people. This new paradigm of war among the people clearly fits the Kosovo military campaign and offers useful incites regarding future 21 st century warfare for those who are interested in advancing their understanding of the profession of arms. NATO's combat operations against the FRY were the third conflict since the end of the Cold War (first Gulf War and conflict in Bosnia). Following the end of hostilities, leaders in both Iraq and the FRY remained in power as the Allies had achieved their limited objective for each campaign without their removal.
Since maintaining alliance cohesion was one of them main NATO objectives, the alliance created restrictive ROE for NATO targeteers and pilots. The ROE aimed to prevent civilian collateral damage and in general, NATO succeeded at this goal. Additionally, NATO feared the loss of aircraft and NATO pilots would constitute significant challenges for on-going military operations. Although an American F-117 Stealth Fighter was shot down, American combat rescue forces quickly rescued the downed pilot. In fact, the campaign did not begin until search and rescue capabilities were in theater and fully operational. All of these restraints were developed out of NATO's fear that a catastrophic event would unravel the alliance. Given the action of key NATO nations throughout the campaign, the concern was legitimate and subsequent actions to mitigate the risk are consistent with fighting "war among the people."
At the very onset of the international community's recognition of trouble in the Balkans, that describe this new paradigm of war. General Smith also warns against the catastrophic mistake of failing to establish a clear link between the political end state and the military strategy used to achieve it. At the beginning of military operations in Kosovo, a strategy had not been clearly articulated and military action was taken out of the need "to do something," using the air campaign over Bosnia as the template for action. As witnessed by Milosevic's failure to capitulate after three days of bombing as originally anticipated, the initial campaign proved military action lacked utility as Belgrade merely dug in and weathered NATO bombings. Finally,
59
60
65  
65  
79  
79  
96    
96    
Bowman, Kosovo: U.S. and Allied Military Operations, 2.  
Bowman, Kosovo: U.S. and Allied Military Operations, 2.  
American senior political leaders committed the gravest of errors regarding the development of a realistic military strategy for Kosovo. As early as October 1998, Sandy Berger confessed, "I don't think that the American people will support ground troops, U.S. ground troops in Kosovo." 122 Although the U.S. National Security Advisor made the statement to placate the U.S. public and Congress, Berger should have understood this statement would do more damage
American senior political leaders committed the gravest of errors regarding the development of a realistic military strategy for Kosovo. As early as October 1998, Sandy Berger confessed, "I don't think that the American people will support ground troops, U.S. ground troops in Kosovo." 122 Although the U.S. National Security Advisor made the statement to placate the U.S. public and Congress, Berger should have understood this statement would do more damage
166  
166  
The Contact Group, made up of four NATO nations (France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and the United States) and Russia, provided the diplomatic interface with Serbia throughout much
Misha Glenny, The Balkans: Nationalism, War and the Great Powers, 1804-1999 (New  York: Penguin Books), 656.
Paul E. Gallis, Kosovo: Lessons Learned from Operation Allied Force, CRS Report RL30374 (Washington, DC: Office of Congressional Information and Publishing, 19 November 1999).
Ivo Daalder, statement  to U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 22 April 2009, http://nato.usmission.gov/mission/ambassador.html (accessed 17 November 2012).
Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 3rd ed. (London and Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1996), 84.19  Smith, The Utility of Force, 5.
Max Boot, "The New American Way of War," Foreign Affairs 82, no. 4 (July/August 2003): 41-58; Russell F. Weigley, The American Way of War: A History of United States Strategy and Policy (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1973).
Smith, The Utility of Force, 18.
Carl Von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. by Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976), 89.
Richard Cavendish, "Tito Elected President of the Former Republic of Yugoslavia," History Today 53, no. 1 (June 2003): 56.
R.Craig Nation, War in the Balkans, 1991-2002 (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies  Institute, 2003), x.   
Ivo H. Daalder and Michael E., O'Hanlon, Winning Ugly, NATO's War to Save Kosovo  (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2000), 78.
Joseph Fitchett, "Main Winner: U.S. Support for EU," International Herald Tribune (11 June 1999): 1.
Dag Henriksen, NATO's Gamble: Combining Diplomacy and Airpower in the Kosovo  Crisis 1998-1999 (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2007), x.   
Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 18.    
Ivo Daalder, interview by PBS Frontline (n.d.).
Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, xiv, 46.    
The Defence Committee, Fourteenth Report. Report to Parliament, Point 301. http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/ cm199900/cmselect/cmdfence /347/34702.htm (accessed 21 June 2012).
Dennis Drew, "Rolling Thunder 1965: Anatomy of a Failure," Air University, School of Advanced Airpower Studies, Air University Press, October 1986. http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/readings/drew2.htm (accessed 9 March 2013).
Jeffrey R. Smith, "Accord on Kosovo Remains Elusive," Washington Post (12 October 1998).
Cohen, Soldiers, Statesmen, and Leadership in Wartime: Supreme Command, 203.    
It is the author's opinion, when a nation commits to military operations, it should do so fully prepared to consider all possible military capabilities or at the very least, not to rule them out. For Kosovo, President Clinton, to the detriment of the campaign, ruled out ground options even before the military campaign began.
Halberstam, War in a Time of Peace: Bush, Clinton and the Generals, 423.
Ibid., 423.9    
Department of Defense, "News Briefing," statement by Kenneth Bacon, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, (Washington, DC: 27 March 1999).
For more information regarding Task Force HAWK, see Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999 by Bruce R.Nardulli, et al, 
NATO, "Political and Military Objectives of NATO Action with Regard to the Crisis in Kosovo," NATO Information, 23 March 1999, http://www.nato.inf/docu.pr.1999/p99-043e.htm (accessed 21 June 2012); Department of Defense, "News Briefing," statement by Kenneth Bacon, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, Washington DC, 23 March 1999.
Javier Solana, Secretary General of NATO, "Press Release (1999) 040," NATO Information, 23 March 1999, http://www.nato.inf/docu.pr.1999/p99-040e.htm (accessed 21 June 2012).
William Jefferson Clinton, President, "Address to the Nation on Airstrikes Against Serbian Targets in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)," Washington, DC, 24 March 1999, http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=57305.
Department of Defense, "Kosovo/Operation Allied Force Report After-Action Report to Congress," (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 31 January 2000), xvii.
In Clark's book, Waging Modern War, he does not specifically mention which 4-star generals he discussed the measures of merit with in regards to the air campaign over Kosovo.
Ibid., 233.    
Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 1999, 49.   
Daalder and O'Hanlon, Winning Ugly, NATO's War to Save Kosovo,[158][159][160] 
William Jefferson Clinton, President, "Remarks Prior to Discussions With King Abdullah II of Jordan and an Exchange With Reporters." Washington, DC, May 18, 1999, http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=57589&st =kosovo&st1=.
Ibid., 495.    
Ibid., 472.    
Ibid.,[472][473] 
Nardulli, et al., Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo, 44,[99][100][101] 
Clark, Waging Modern War, 233.   
The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/docs/refmaps.html (Accessed 9 April 2013.
Several authors have put forward different rationale explaining why Milosevic did surrender in early June 1999. Although it is an over simplification to cite one particular aspect as the sole reason for capitulation, the increasing intensity of the air war played a major role.
Additionally, the new planning for the use of ground forces probably shaped Milosevic's decision to surrender. The U.S. Army had already established a foothold on the continent with Task Force HAWK. 
172
Another critical factor in Milosevic's capitulation was the loss of support from Russia. 
173
174
172 Nardulli,
et al.,
Disjointed War: Military Operations in Kosovo,
41,
[44]
[45]
174
In order to resolve this lack of coherence between political and military objective, creators of U.S. doctrine need to change the framework from which military and political leaders interact and instead use a four-tiered level of war model, similar to the model proposed by General 
Smith. 192
193
Both politicians and military leaders at all levels need to understand and appreciate this new paradigm of 21st century warfare and more importantly, plan for it. Unlike in Kosovo, nations and alliances must develop clear political end states directly linked to the military means prior to beginning military action. When possible, leaders should act and speak so as not to rule out any particular military option as the use or even threat of a particular military capability may 
192
193 Clausewitz,
On War,
128;