# ID: a0e9d6d4db0e4e68bb45fb222902bd27
# Title: Modern Warfare: Nato's War Amongst the People in Kosovo
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
The following context for war in Kosovo illustrates General Smith's third characteristic of war among the people, namely, "conflicts tend to be timeless.
 (1159-1196).
Under self-proclaimed emperor Stefan Dusan (1331-1355), the Serbs extended their reach from now modern day Belgrade to Greece.
The Byzantine Empire sent the Turks to fight Serb forces in 1345 and 1345, with Serbs suffering defeat in 1352.
Serbian Prince Lazar Hrebeljanovic fought the Turks again in the Battle of Kosovo Polje in 1389.
Although he and the sultan were killed in battle, heroism, honor and the pride of Serbian people were celebrated an a national holiday on St. Vitus Day, June 28.
In the 15th century, Turks conquered the last Serbian forces at Smederjevo in 1459, causing Serbs to flee to nearby countries of Hungary, Montenegro, Croatia, Dalmatia and Bosnia.
For fifteen years beginning in 1684, Christian forces fought to expel Turks from the Balkans but failed.
In 1718, Austrian forces took book Serb regions south of Sava from the Turks but the Jesuits who followed came to make the Serbs "hate the Austrians" as much as the Turks following their intense conversion efforts.
Russia gained influence in the region in the 18th century when they were granted the "diplomatic right to protect Christian subjects of the Turks."
Both Russia and Austria fought war against the Turks in 1787 and 1788 that was joined by Serbian forces who used guerilla tactics against the Turks.
The Turks attached rebel Serb strongholds in 1813 alongside Bosnian and Albanian soldiers who ransacked Serbian villages, leading to a Serb uprising in 1815.
The sultan recognized Serbia as a Turkish principality in 1830 and also reiterated Russia's right to protect Serbia.
The treaties of San Stefano and Berlin in 1878 transformed Serbia into an independent state.
Much to the frustration of the Serbs Austria-Hungary annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1908.
During the Balkan wars, the Serbs helped rid the Balkans of the Turks and won back land lost in the 13th and 14th century.
Following the end of World War I, Serbian, Croatian and Slovenian leaders, "formed the federation known as Yugoslavia…later renamed as the Kingdom of Yugoslavia."
Following the establishment of the kingdom, border disputes with Italy, Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria and Albania intensified disagreements with the Kingdom's neighbors, most notably Italy who did not receive all the land they thought they were entitled to in the 1915 Treaty of London.
The creation of Yugoslavia combined together Serbs, Croats and Slovenes all of whom had their own separate convictions regarding government, culture and religion.
Following German occupation in World War II, the socialist federation of Yugoslavia formed with Josip Broz Tito serving as the leader until 1980, when he passed away.
Tito put in force a new constitution that recognized the "autonomous nature" of Kosovo with similar rights granted to the six republics of Yugoslavia (Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Slovenia.
In 1991-1992, several countries (Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina) left Yugoslavia via violent cause of conflict in the Balkans in the 1990s was closely wrapped up in the personalities and process of Yugoslavia's disintegration.