# ID: a109300bef594f64b0605240a0a14a59
# Title: US Army Conventional Forces in Gray Zone Conflict
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Gray zone conflict is a nascent term in the US Military lexicon. Some experts and analysts believe this concept is a new phenomenon of warfare which will shape the operational environment in the future; others view it as ageless and argue that it constitutes a rule of warfare, rather than an exception. As the patterns of modern conflict reshape societies' conceptions of warfare, the US Army must be prepared to meet every challenge. US Army leaders and planners must understand whether the operational environment has changed significantly and, if so, how might they employ the force they have to achieve a position of relative advantage in an operational environment that exhibits the characteristics of the gray zone.
This monograph addresses the ability of US Army conventional forces to successfully conduct operations in gray zone conflict. This study is divided into four sections. The introductory section defines the gray zone and describes its context and complexity in the modern operational environment. The second section addresses the applicability of the gray zone theory of warfare to existing US doctrine and compares this to the assigned missions of US Army conventional and Special Operations Forces. The third section explores the Dominican Republic Intervention of 1965 as an example of US Army conventional forces operating successfully in a gray zone conflict. The final section draws upon lessons learned and offers conventional force solutions to modern gray zone problems.
Gray zone conflict is a nascent term in the US Military lexicon. Some experts and analysts believe this concept is a new phenomenon of warfare that will shape the operational environment in the future; others view it as ageless and argue that it constitutes a rule of warfare, rather than an exception. As the patterns of modern warfare reshape societies' conceptions of warfare, the US Army must be prepared to meet every challenge. US Army leaders and planners must understand whether the operational environment has changed significantly and, if so, how might they employ the force they have to achieve a position of relative advantage in an operational environment that exhibits the characteristics of the gray zone?
This monograph addresses the ability of US Army conventional forces to successfully conduct operations in gray zone conflict. This study is divided into four sections. The introductory section defines the gray zone and describes its context and complexity in the modern operational environment. The second section addresses the applicability of the gray zone theory of warfare to existing US doctrine and compares this to the assigned missions of US Army conventional and Special Operations Forces. The third section explores the Dominican Republic Intervention of 1965 as an example of US Army conventional forces operating successfully in a gray zone conflict. The final section draws upon lessons learned and offers conventional force solutions to modern gray zone problems. 
This is another type of war, new in its intensity, ancient in its origin-war by guerrillas, subversives, insurgents, assassins, war by ambush instead of by combat; by infiltration, instead of aggression, seeking victory by eroding and exhausting the enemy instead of engaging him . . . . It requires in those situations where we must counter it, and these are the kinds of challenges that will be before us in the next decade if freedom is to be saved, a whole new kind of strategy, a wholly different kind of force, and therefore a new and wholly different kind of military training.
-President John F. Kennedy, Remarks at West Point, 1962   After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991, the United States of America emerged as the sole world superpower. 
1
2
3
The United States' competitors and adversaries continually seek relative advantage over US forces to advance their agendas, but lack the conventional parity to realize their disparate goals. For many nations, the use of conventional military force is not a viable method of challenging American interests; consequently, these competitors employ their resources asymmetrically to combat US interests in a manner for which the United States is least prepared. 
4
The United States possesses considerable advantages in conventional war: national resources, national performance, and military capability. 
6
7
8
9
Some analysts and military experts believe the gray zone concept is a new phenomenon of warfare that will shape the operational environment in the future; others view it as ageless and argue that it constitutes a rule of warfare rather than an exception. 
10
Though the term "gray zone conflict" is new, it bears similarity to other relevant concepts of war and warfare. These concepts include asymmetric warfare, political warfare, ambiguous warfare, irregular warfare, hybrid warfare, and military operations other than war. 
12
10
11
12 Christopher Paul, "Confessions of a Hybrid Warfare Skeptic: What Might Really Be Interesting but Hidden Within the Various Conceptions of Gray Zone Conflict, Ambiguous Warfare, Political Warfare, and Their Ilk" Small Wars Journal (March, 2016): 1, accessed September 18, 2016, http://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/confessions-of-a-hybrid-warfare-skeptic; Kapusta, "The Gray Zone," 20.  expresses elements of several theories of war and warfare. Due to the complex, ambiguous, and emergent nature of this phenomenon, gray zone conflict should be described by its underlying characteristics and context-not defined as the sum of its parts. 
13
14
US government policy holds that the United States has participated in five conventional conflicts since 1915: World War I, World War II, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and Operation Desert Storm. 
15
16
14
18
19
20
21
17
22
23
Conversely, America's current and potential competitors, adversaries, and enemies have closed the gap considerably in other instruments of national power, particularly in the information domain. The availability of cheap and effective methods of communication through off-the-shelf information technologies allows state and non-state actors to promulgate their messages effectively and at little cost. 
24
To combat the growing complexity of armed conflict and gray zone competition, the US Army must explore new ways to utilize the force it has. US Army leaders may employ conventional forces to effect positive change across the entire spectrum of conflict, from the gray zone to theaterlevel wars. While the solution to any conflict is a whole-of-government approach, conventional forces may have opportunities for an expanded role in gray zone conflicts given the appropriate 
22
25
26
In 1993, R. James Woolsey was nominated for Director of the Central Intelligence Agency. 
27
The 2015 National Security Strategy asserts that the modern operational environment is complex and situations of national concern may not lend themselves to "quick and easy fixes." 
29
30
26 "Traditional warfare is characterized as a violent struggle for domination between nation-states or coalitions and alliances of nation-states," JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States, x; for the three characteristics of gray zone conflict, see Freier, "Outplayed: Regaining Strategic Initiative in the Gray Zone," ix, 3-4.
27 
25. Cong. Rec., 103rd Cong., 1st sess., 1993. vol. 139, pt. 23: 423. 28
30 JP 3-05, Special Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), II-1; Barack H. Obama, National Security Strategy (Washington, DC: The White House, 2015), ii; Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Unified Land Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2016), 1-1 -contemporary example best illustrates the context of gray zone conflict: the Russian Federation's annexation of Crimea in 2014. This example challenges the paradigms of war and peace and possesses the three elements of gray zone conflict.
On March 22, 2014, the Russian Federation formally annexed Crimea from Ukraine. This action proved a complex problem for Ukraine and other world powers that favored the pre-conflict status quo. The annexation resulted from the 2014 Ukrainian Revolution and subsequent military intervention by the Russian Federation. 
31
32
33
34
35
36
The US Army Operating Concept: Win in a Complex World addresses this action directly:
Russian annexation of the Crimean Peninsula and use of conventional and unconventional land forces in Ukraine suggest that Russia is determined to expand its territory and assert its power on the Eurasian landmass. Russia deployed and integrated a range of diplomatic, information, military, and economic means to conduct what some analysts have described as "non-linear" operations. Russia conducted operations to pursue its war aims below the threshold that would elicit a concerted North Atlantic Treaty Organization response. 
37
34 Agence France-Presse, "Thousands of Russian Soldiers Sent to Ukraine, Say Rights Groups," The Guardian, September 1, 2014, accessed October 02, 2016, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/ sep/01/ russian-soldiers-ukraine-rights-groups. 
35
36 Keir Giles, "Russia's 'New' Tools for Confronting the West: Continuity and Innovation in Moscow's Exercise of Power," Russia and Eurasia Programme (March, 2016): 2, 5, accessed October 02, 2016, https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/publications/research/2016-03-21-russiasnew-tools-giles-embargoed2.pdf?dm_t=0,0,0,0,0. 
Complementing the three characteristics of gray zone conflict published in the 2016 report from the US Army War College's Strategic Studies Institute described above, one often sees hybridity referred to with the term "hybrid threat." 
38
39
The gray zone's "menace to defense and military convention," highlights the ability of gray zone actors to frustrate the capabilities of their object. Actors employing gray zone strategies do not solely rely on traditional models of military operations. Instead, adversaries reduce the role of the military instrument or use it in concert with other instruments of national power. Gray zone actors will not provide their adversary with a decisive battle nor will they operate along the traditional lines of operation. This complexity presents an adversary with multiple, ambiguous problems that are difficult to classify, conceptualize, and counter. 
40
38
39 ADP 3-0, Unified Land Operations, 4. 
40
for the interdependent problems associated with gray zone challenges. 
41
The presence of these factors in interstate relations presents a challenge to the status quo and the classical concept of war and warfare. These three characteristics serve as the criteria for classifying a phenomenon as gray zone conflict. This monograph examines the potential expanded role of conventional US Army forces in gray zone conflict through historical case study of the US Army involvement in the 1965 Dominican Republic Intervention (Operation Power Pack.)
The research design of this monograph explores current Army and Joint doctrine and compares it to the nascent terminology of the gray zone theory of warfare to determine its applicability to the problem. These doctrinal definitions serve to describe the three characteristics of gray zone conflict within the established US Department of Defense lexicon and determine their relevancy to US Army special operations and conventional forces.
The subsequent section compares the core competencies of US Army special operations and conventional forces to the doctrinal definitions supporting gray zone conflict. This will verify which force is better suited to combat this threat and highlight areas of potential overlap in effort and/or capability. This leads to evaluation and comparison of the capabilities of conventional and special operations forces in the US Army. The XVIII Airborne Corps and Army Special Operations Forces (ARSOF) serve as examples for critical capability analysis. This comparison assists in determining shared mission sets, capabilities, or other commonalities that conventional forces may adopt or perform in gray zone conflict.
The case study of the Dominican Republic Intervention of 1965 serves as a historical example of conventional forces operating successfully in a gray zone conflict. Analysis of this 
41
This study provides analytical support for the thesis that US Army conventional force capabilities can be applied to the complex situations that arise from gray zone conflict. The conclusion offers recommendations with applicability to the modern environment and the joint capability solutions under the doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership policy and education, personnel, facility, and policy (DOTMLPF-P) construct the US Army may employ for the accomplishment of this goal. 
42
Current US doctrine describes warfare as a dichotomy between traditional and irregular qualities. This model represents the full spectrum of conflict that necessarily includes the gray zone. As described in JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States, Traditional warfare is characterized as a violent struggle for domination between nationstates or coalitions and alliances of nation-states. With the increasingly rare case of formally declared war, traditional warfare typically involves force-on-force military operations in which adversaries employ a variety of conventional forces and special operations forces (SOF) against each other in all physical domains as well as the information environment (which includes cyberspace). 
43
44
Irregular warfare represents the opposite pole of this dichotomous model. As defined in JP-1, IW [irregular warfare] is characterized as a violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population(s). In IW, a less powerful adversary seeks to disrupt or negate the military capabilities and advantages of a more powerful military force, which usually serves that nation's established government. 
45
46
Under this paradigm of war, conventional forces undertake the preponderance of responsibility for traditional warfare and special operations forces bear the greatest responsibility in irregular warfare; however, the joint publication states that a "synergistic combination" of both 44 Philip S. Meilinger, "Busting the Icon: Restoring Balance to the Influence of Clausewitz," Strategic Studies Quarterly 1 (Fall 2007): 118, 122-24, accessed December 01, 2016, http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/GetTRDoc?Location=U2&doc=GetTRDoc.pdf&AD=ADA509169. 
45
46 JP 3-05, Special Operations, II-1. types of forces in each environment produces the greatest result. 
47
The core competencies of ARSOF exist in two categories: special warfare and surgical strike. 
48
49
51
47
48 ADRP 3-05, Special Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), v. 
49
50
51 JP 3-05, Special Operations, II-1.
Similarly, the core competencies of US Army conventional forces (CF) are combined arms maneuver (CAM) and wide area security (WAS). 
52
53
54
According to ADP 3-0, Unified Land Operations, Stability operations are military missions, tasks, and activities conducted outside the United States to maintain or reestablish a safe and secure environment and to provide essential governmental services, emergency infrastructure reconstruction, and humanitarian relief. They include five tasks: establish civil security, establish civil control, restore essential services, support to governance, and support to economic and infrastructure development. 
55
As described in ADRP 3-07, Stability, Foreign internal defense involves civilian and military agencies of a government participating in action programs taken by another government or other designated organization. This program aims to free and protect its society from subversion, lawlessness, insurgency, terrorism, and other threats to its security. U.S. foreign internal 52 "Combined arms maneuver is the application of the elements of combat power in unified action to defeat enemy ground forces; to seize, occupy, and defend land areas; and to achieve physical, temporal, and psychological advantages over the enemy to seize and exploit the initiative. It exposes enemies to friendly combat power from unexpected directions and prevents an effective enemy response. Wide area security is the application of the elements of combat power in unified action to protect populations, forces, infrastructure, and activities; to deny the enemy positions of advantage; and to consolidate gains in order to retain the initiative. Offensive, defensive, and stability operations each requires a combination of combined arms maneuver and wide area security; neither core competency is adequate in isolation." ADP 3-0, Unified Land Operations, 5-6.
53 ADP 3-0, Unified Land Operations, 5. 
54
55
defense efforts involve all instruments of national power to support host-nation internal defense and development (IDAD) programs. 
56
57
-Rafael Tavera, 14th of June Movement, 1965   The Dominican Republic Intervention of 1965 serves as a useful case study to assess the performance of a conventional US Army unit deployed in a conflict exhibiting the three characteristics of the gray zone. The case study evaluates the US Army's role in the international effort to restore peace and stability to the Dominican Republic (DOMREP) during a communist take-over of the democratically elected government. 
58
The Dominican Crisis and subsequent American intervention in 1965 occurred during the Cold War-a global competition between first and second world powers characterized by the propagation of ideologies. 
59
70
71
72
66
67
68
69
70
71
disputes, yet the US government recognized a need for further measures to ensure peace and stability in the region. 
73
75
76
77
78
May 31, 1922. 79
80
81
82
83
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
90
91
92
93
103
65. 104
105
106
108
While a relatively small force, the Constitutionalist rebels and their supporters boasted resources 
103
104
105
106 Charles, K. Welliver, "Strategic Analysis of Two Joint Contingency Operations: Lebanon 1958  and Dominican Republic 1965," Monograph (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Command and General Staff College,  1989), 91-92, accessed February 13, 2017, http://www.dtic.mil/get-tr-doc/pdf?AD= ADA211904. 
107
108
rivaling the Loyalist government forces and proved frustrating to conventional US capabilities. 
109
110
111
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
At the small unit level, many US soldiers thought they deployed to "kill commies" and exhibited strong support for the Loyalist forces. 
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
128
129
On April 26, 1965, the Joint Chiefs of Staff ordered two battalions of the 3rd Brigade/82nd Airborne Division to defense readiness condition (DEFCON) 3 in response to the growing concerns of US Ambassador Bennett in Santo Domingo. 
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
On April 28, the JCS elevated the 3rd Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division to DEFCON 2 in anticipation of an execution order. 
138
139
133
134
135
136 Ibid., 59. 
137 Yates,
"Power Pack,
" 61,
65.
140
141
142
143
At approximately 1930 hours on April 29, 1965, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) ordered the 82nd DRF to action in DOMREP. 
144
145
Infantry Regiments, but Johnson denied permission for York to commence the drop once the planes were airborne, remarking that the San Isidro Airport was assumed to be in Loyalist hands (see Figure 
1
146
141
Unilateral and Coalition Operations in the 1965 Dominican Republic Intervention, 37;
Yates, "Power Pack," 59-62. 142
143
Yates,
"Power Pack,
" 61. 146 Ibid.,
[68]
[69]
147
Ambassador Bennett wanted the 82nd to assist the 3rd Battalion, 6th Marines to establish an International Security Zone (ISZ) around the capital city of Santo Domingo and decrease 
147 Ibid.,
69.
150
2
153
154
151
152 US Army Center of Military History, U.S. Army Counterinsurgency and Contingency Operations  Doctrine 1942-1976, by Andrew J. Birtle, CMH Pub 70-98-1, (Washington, DC, 2006), 214, accessed  February 20, 2017, http://history.army.mil/html/books/us_army_counterinsurgency/CMH_70-98-1_US%20Army_Counterinsurgency_WQ.pdf.  Dominican Republic, 1965-1966," Leavenworth Papers, no.15 (Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute, 1988), 80.
The 1-505th Regiment established security for the San Isidro Airport located twenty-five kilometers east of the Ozama River and provided security for the ground lines of communication leading out of the city. 
155
156
155
Barry, Power Pack, Dominican Republic, 1965
-1966, Part II, 24, 34. 156 Ibid., 34.
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
3
157
158
Barry, Power Pack, Dominican Republic, 1965
-1966, Part I, 24. 159
160
161
164
168
169
170
171
172
Where the US interest requires it, that is where the Army belongs, and so far as I am concerned, that's where I am going to recommend that it go. That's our job.
-Harold K. Johnson, CJCS, 1965   Operation Power Pack was a qualified success. Despite setbacks and shortcomings in planning, preparation, and execution, the 1965 Dominican Intervention serves as proof of concept for the successful deployment of US Army conventional forces in a gray zone conflict. In a period of one month, US forces rapidly deployed, developed an understanding of a complex situation, and formed a solution that achieved the desired strategic endstate. Although the ambiguous and rapidly developing nature of the conflict caused confusion, US Army conventional forces exercised their core competencies and applied their conventional capabilities to maintain relevance in this type of warfare.
In present doctrinal terms, the 1965 Dominican Republic Intervention is an example of irregular warfare and neatly fits the definition in JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States as a "violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population. . . [in which] a less powerful adversary seeks to disrupt or negate the military capabilities and advantages of a more powerful military force, which usually serves that nation's established government." 
173
174
In the six-phase model of joint operations, SOF is most effective when they have "had enough time (months to years) to conduct pre-crisis activities, build relationships, and build HN [host nation]/PN [partnered nation] SOF capacity as part of shaping operations (Phase 0) of theater campaign and contingency plans." 
175 In April, 1965
174 Unified Combatant Command for Special Operations Forces, Public Law 114-328, US Code 10 (2016), ยง167.
175 "Although the commander will determine the number and actual phases used during a campaign or operation, use of the phases [shape, deter, seize the initiative, dominate, stability, and enable civil authority] provides a flexible model to arrange combat and stability operations." JP 5-0, Joint Operation Planning (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2011), xxiii-xxiv, III-39; JP 3-05, Special Operations, I-4. forces were uniquely capable of rapid deployment and achieving the mass required to seize the initiative (phase 2), dominate the enemy (phase 3), and stabilize the situation (phase 4).
The expeditionary capability of the US Army, particularly the 82nd Airborne Division, combined with extensive basing in the Caribbean allowed the CJCS to deploy forces rapidly and preserve the sustainment principle of endurance. 
176
177
While operational plans provide a framework for contingency operations, they do not accurately reflect the complexity of emergent situations. OPLAN 310/2-65 provided deployment timetables and force allocations that allowed the 82nd to deploy rapidly, but did not account for the 176 ADRP 4-0, Sustainment (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), 1-2.
177 Birtle, U.S. Army Counterinsurgency and Contingency Operations Doctrine 1942-1976, 213.  intricacies of the developing situation. Intelligence reports and subject matter expertise are essential to the planning process and must be developed and maintained prior to execution of an operation.
While SOF may not have been the best choice for action in the Dominican Intervention, their critical capabilities complement those of conventional forces-forming a synergistic effect with the potential to reduce shortfalls in planning. As described in Joint Publication (JP) 3-05, Special Operations, Longer term preparations for SO [Special Operations] provide options for decision makers in times of crisis that would otherwise not be available. Also, pre-crisis SO preparations may provide situational awareness that permits identification of a potential crisis prior to requiring a US military response, thus allowing a whole-of-government solution be applied to de-escalate the situation by dissuading, deterring, or disrupting the parties involved or through mediation. 
178
179
Additionally, persistent presence and tacit knowledge of a region helps RAF units develop leaders and planners who are more informed and able to exercise mission command more effectively.
178 JP 3-05, Special Operations, I-4. While the RAF concept is not a solution in itself, it provides a framework that facilitates the incorporation of these lessons. Should the United States commit conventional forces to a gray zone conflict under the RAF concept, these forces will be apt to have greater contextual understanding of the environment and a better appreciation for the requirements of the operation. These factors, combined with the current size and expeditionary capabilities of the force provide a viable model for the application of US Army conventional forces in gray zone conflict.
Anuarbek Alimzhanov, Declaration on the Establishment of the Commonwealth of Independent States. no. 142-N, December
26, 199126,  , accessed September 18, 2016, https, https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/ Declaration_no._142-N_of_the_Soviet_of_the_Republics_of_the_Supreme_Soviet_of_the_USSR. 2 Gilberto Villahermosa, "Desert Storm: The Soviet View" (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office Publications, 2005), 1, accessed October 1, 2016, http://fmso.leavenworth.army.mil/ documents/rs-storm.htm. 3 Ibid., 4.
Jennifer K. Elsea and Matthew C. Weed, "Declarations of War and Authorizations for the Use of Military Force: Historical Background and Legal Implications," Congressional Research Service (April 2014): 1-3, accessed October 01, 2016. https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/RL31133.pdf.
Ibid.,[88]
[89]
Michael J. Mazarr, "Mastering the Gray Zone" (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute and US Army War College Press, 2004), 4.
The opinion among scholars varies regarding the proper balance of conventional and irregular war-fighting capabilities in the US Army. Despite this disagreement, most agree that the Modular Force concept offers a step in the right direction toward balancing the two concepts. For some examples, see
Joint Staff, "Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS)," Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instructions, CJCSI 3170.01I, January 23, 2015, accessed November 30, 2016, https://dap.dau.mil/policy/Documents/2015/CJCSI_3170_01I.pdf.
JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States, x.
G. Pope Atkins and Larman C. Wilson, The Dominican Republic and the United States: From Imperialism to Transnationalism (Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 1998), 45-47.
Bruce Palmer, Jr., Intervention in the Caribbean: The Dominican Crisis of 1965 (Lexington, KY: University Press ofKentucky, 1989), 19.    
Johnson, "Radio and Television  Report to the American People on the Situation in the Dominican Republic."
Immediately prior to their deployment in DOMREP, 3rd Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division completed Quick Kick VII, a joint training exercise focused on airborne insertion and amphibious operations. This exercise validated the unit as "combat ready" and helped the unit identify shortfalls in equipment and training in conventional warfare.Yates, "Power Pack," 56.   
Greenberg, US Army Unilateral and Coalition Operations in the 1965 Dominican Republic  Intervention, 32, 36, 47.   
Welliver, "Strategic Analysis of Two Joint Contingency Operations," 88; Yates, "Power Pack,
" 61.
Yates, "Power Pack,
" 61.
Greenberg, US Army Unilateral and Coalition Operations in the 1965 Dominican Republic  Intervention, 38-39.    
Welliver, "Strategic Analysis of Two Joint Contingency Operations," 88; Yates, "Power Pack,[70][71] 
Welliver, "Strategic Analysis of Two Joint Contingency Operations,
" 89;
" 76.
Yates, "Power Pack,
" 76.
Greenberg, US Army Unilateral and Coalition Operations in the 1965 Dominican Republic Intervention, 53.
Greenberg, US Army Unilateral and Coalition Operations in the 1965 Dominican Republic Intervention, 51.
Greenberg, US Army Unilateral and Coalition Operations in the 1965 Dominican Republic Intervention, 50.
Palmer, Intervention in the Caribbean,[51][52] 
Greenberg, US Army Unilateral and Coalition Operations in the 1965 Dominican Republic  Intervention, 50-51.   
Yates, "Power Pack, 
Welliver, "Strategic Analysis of Two Joint Contingency Operations," 90; Yates, "Power Pack,"  176.   
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
war. 
60
61
62
The United States has a long and complicated history of involvement in the Dominican Republic that dates to the early 1900s. 
63
64