# ID: a16f7ccbb1744804a6f4e40b0b1b2373
# Title: Moving into the Future: Allied Mobility in a Modern Hybrid Warfare Operational Environment
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph investigates the implication of modern hybrid warfare or Russian fourth generation warfare on mobility. Hezbollah in the Second Lebanon War in 2006 and separatists in the crisis in Ukraine in 2014 provide examples of irregular forces applying a wide range of strategies and sophisticated modern weapons and technology. Allied doctrine is analyzed to compare current and past doctrines to the two case studies and the multi-domain battle concept. Using the US Army Warfighting functions as an analysis tool doctrine, equipment and organizational recommendations are made. The recommendations to improve mobility in the modern hybrid threat environment include a doctrinal focus on wider dispersion, less reliance on communications, more mobile and self-supporting units. This requires lighter, multi-role, swimmable high mobility fighting vehicles. Units require a higher ratio of logistics vehicles. These combined arms units must be self-sufficient, well-rehearsed and capable of independent maneuver.
me to a foreign country only to subject her to endless proofreading of terrible spelling and grammar. Logan and Erik, my sons, now believe me to be a hermit that lives in the basement endlessly reading, I will emerge soon boys. I need to acknowledge the Canadian Army that has invested two years in my education and LCol Kyle Solomon who encouraged me to take this opportunity. I was reluctant at the start but I have learned more than I immediately realize.
The staff and faculty in Fort Leavenworth also were an immense resource that contributed a great deal to my monograph. My  
In Book Eight of On War, Clausewitz "wanted to show how every age had its own kind of war, its own limiting conditions, and its own particular preconceptions. Each period, therefore, would have held to its own theory of war."
1
2
In the twentieth century, there have been a series of changes in the theories of war. The trench warfare of the First World War gave way to the maneuver warfare of World War II, which resulted from the rise of mechanization and new technologies such as aircraft, and radios. This latter conflict culminated with the atomic bomb, further changing the concept of warfare and ushering in a period of more limited conflicts. The Cold War that emerged with the post-war proliferation of nuclear weapons saw the rise of Soviet military power and an escalation in the number of weapons and their sophistication. With nuclear weapons preventing conventional war, guerrilla warfare reemerged in the wake of anti-colonialism and social revolutions that swept across the globe after WWII. However, the sophistication and firepower of large conventional forces did not help them in wars against enemies with nebulous and elusive targets of passionate and motivated partisans. 
3
4
In July of 2016, Iraqi Engineers built an Improved River Bridge to cross a 200-meter gap on the Tigris River. This bridge replaced the Qayyarah Bridge that had been the only span across the Tigris between Mosul and Baghdad. The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) had been using the Qayyarah Bridge, so coalition aircraft had to destroy it. Iraqi Forces built the military bridge to provide their troops mobility, allowing reinforcements and materials to cross easily. It also helped to isolate ISIL fighters and was a key factor in the campaign to retake Mosul from ISIL. Prior to the construction of the bridge, the Iraqi Forces had a division on both the east and west banks of the Tigris River. Still ISIL targeted the bridge with a mix of improvised explosive devices and sporadic mortar fire, but could not sustain this effort because of coalition air power. 
5
The years of counter-insurgency conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan resulted in modifications of doctrine and development of capabilities specifically for that operational environment. There is now a growing focus on conventional operations in NATO and the US military. Unfortunately, wars in the future will have elements of both conventional and irregular elements that require a hybrid strategy to combat the hybrid threat.
The term hybrid warfare is widely used and has a variety of definitions and interpretations. For the purposes of this monograph, hybrid warfare is defined "as conflict involving a combination of conventional military forces and irregulars (guerrillas, insurgents, and terrorists), which could include both state and non-state actors, aimed at achieving a common political purpose."
6
7
Current NATO and allied doctrine and capabilities do not match the requirements needed to allow mobility in modern hybrid warfare now and into the future. Changes are required to allow Allied forces to move to positions of advantage to be successful in future land conflicts. This monograph will not discuss the holistic implication of hybrid warfare. Instead, the paper will investigate the effects of hybrid warfare on mobility.
NATO defines mobility as "a quality or capability of military forces which permits them to move from place to place while retaining the ability to fulfill their primary mission."
8
According to NATO doctrine, "Military engineering provides commanders with the means to use terrain in a manner that best meets campaign and operations' objectives by applying a range of skills such as field, construction, environmental and geospatial engineering."
9
10
The ability of militaries to move and achieve assigned missions is not strictly a task for military engineers. Mobility is also a result of several organizational decisions, including doctrine, force structure, and equipment. As threats change with time so must the equipment. To ensure mobility is possible in contemporary and future conflicts the equipment must adapt to the threats. With new equipment, new force structures are required to man, equip, and train new or modified capabilities. All of these changes must be informed by a doctrine that demonstrates flexible understanding of the current and future operating environment.
Mobility of Army organizations is a product of a series if interrelated factors and functions. The factors effecting mobility include the physical characteristics of equipment, logistical requirements, geography, intelligence, planning, communication, and the capabilities of adversaries. Mobility, being the ability to move to achieve the primary mission, is an operational requirement to be able to execute tactics and conduct military operations. A military that cannot move cannot achieve positions of advantage and cannot be tactically successful. Further, because mobility is based on a system of interrelated capabilities it provides a useful concept to analyze doctrine, force structure, and equipment without specific tactical considerations.
In order to analyze mobility as an operational requirement in modern hybrid warfare, the concept of hybrid warfare and the current Allied understanding of the future operating environment must be defined. There are multiple definitions of hybrid warfare and various nations conceptualize the future operating environment differently. The US military uses the term Multi-Domain Battle while the Russians use New Generation Warfare. Their concepts are different in scope and focus but both indicate a change in the way forces will fight in the future.
Next, current doctrine must be analyzed to determine if current concepts and procedures will be effective in the changing operational environment. Current doctrine demonstrates a bifurcated view of military operations between counter insurgency operations and conventional operations. In order to determine the requirement for doctrinal change engineer mobility operations such as conducting combined arms breaching, conducting area and route clearance, and conducting gap crossing will be analyzed in terms of a hybrid threat that uses both irregular and conventional military capabilities. Hybrid conflicts require dispersed forces that are highly mobile and capable of independent maneuver. The significant logistics and communications requirement of current force structure and doctrine does not align with the lessons learned from recent conflicts or the current conceptual understanding of future conflict. Importantly, however, improved mobility for a hybrid warfare environment is not an engineer responsibility but instead requires systematic changes to armies. There is a requirement for lighter, highly mobile vehicles to support combined arms maneuver with more lethal weapon systems. The current trend toward more armor and less mobility is not the answer. Organizational changes require combined arms teams to increase interoperability and self-reliance thus reducing network communication requirements. Further, the ratio of logistic to combat forces must increase. This allows for increased operational reach, wider dispersion, and independence of land maneuver forces.
In order to understand the effects of hybrid warfare on mobility and the required changes for future Army doctrine, organizations and equipment, the concept of hybrid warfare must be understood and defined. Further, understanding of how the contemporary military powers have changed their conceptual understanding of the operational environment is required.
US Joint doctrine defines mobility as "a quality or capability of military forces which permits them to move from place to place while retaining the ability to fulfill their primary mission." 
12
13
Unfortunately, the term "hybrid warfare" has a multitude of different interpretations as it relates to modern conflict. In actuality, "hybrid warfare" is not a modern phenomenon and there are several historical examples. Throughout history, several forces employed hybrid threats and strategies in order to become difficult and powerful opponents. The German Army on the Eastern Front in World War II had continual disruption to its lines of communication due to the thousands of Soviet partisans conducting irregular operations behind the conventional front. In the Second Sino-Japanese War from 1937 to 1945, Mao Tse Tung and his forces perfected the use of both 
12
13
Hybrid threats blend the lethality of state conflict with the fanatical and protracted fervor of irregular warfare. Modern hybrid warfare has proven to be even more dangerous because advanced conventional weapons and capabilities are being supplied to irregular forces. In modern hybrid war, states, state-sponsored groups, or self-funded actors exploit access to modern military capabilities to proliferate capabilities previously only available to state actors in novel ways. This practice has happened in Iraq and Lebanon with devastating effects on US Forces and the Israel Defense Force. 
15
Therefore, the greatest military challenge in the future will come not from a state that selects one approach, but from states or groups that select from a wide variety of tactics and technologies and blend them in innovative ways to meet their own strategic culture, geography, and aims. They will blend traditional and irregular tactics with decentralized planning and execution, employ non-state actors, and use both simple and sophisticated technologies in innovative ways. 
16
14
15 Ibid., 14-15. 
16
17
18
Combined Arms for the 21st Century. This document highlights some of the past doctrinal frameworks such as AirLand Battle in the 1980s followed by a transition to counterinsurgency.
The White Paper highlights the fact that full spectrum dominance and a reliance on precision deep fires is no longer a solution. The AirLand battle doctrine that focused on two domains now requires expansion to five domains. These domains include the physical domains of air, land, sea, and space; the 'abstract' domain of cyberspace; as well as the electromagnetic spectrum (EMS); the information environment; and the cognitive dimension of warfare. Allied forces no longer can assume dominance in all domains as adversaries have been studying Allied capabilities and are developing strategies and systems to contest within the various domains. Specifically, adversaries have studied the manner in which the United States coordinates technical reconnaissance, satellite-based communications, and air and maritime power to enable ground freedom of maneuver and overmatch. Specifically, air superiority is unlikely to be assured in the future operating environment due to integrated air defense systems, missile systems, fourth and fifth generation aircraft, and electronic warfare capabilities. Missile systems and precision deep fires allow adversaries, with ever-increasing precision and speed, to threaten command and control nodes, maneuver and support forces, and infrastructure. Systems designed to contest allied forces use of the EMS hinder command and control, and reconnaissance capabilities required to coordinate operations including fires, maintain situational awareness, and conduct logistical and deployment activities. 
19
Russia has developed a new approach to operations that has been called Russian New Generation Warfare, 4 th Generation Warfare, or hybrid war. The Russian 2010 Military Doctrine describes modern warfare as the integrated utilization of military and other forces and resources of a nonmilitary character. In this approach, information warfare is used to achieve political objectives without the utilization of military force, with the goal of shaping a favorable response from the world community to the utilization of military force. In 2014, the Russian doctrine added that participation of irregular armed force elements and private military companies in military operations and use of indirect and asymmetric methods of operations are a part of modern warfare. 
20
19 US Army-Marine Corps, White Paper Multi-Domain Battle: Combined Arms for the 21 st Century (Washington, US Government Printing Office,18 Jan 2017), 1-5. 
20
For the purposes of this monograph, modern hybrid warfare includes the use of conventional, irregular, criminal, terrorist, or partisan forces to conduct conventional and asymmetric activities to directly or indirectly achieve their military objectives. This definition highlights the complexity of the modern operational environment with adversaries conducting operations in various domains by a variety of groups not limited to the military operations and potentially without a chain of command. Although Russian New Generation Warfare represents a highly sophisticated hybrid threat with capabilities to rival allied forces in several domains, it is not the sole focus of the monograph.
The hybrid threat in a multi-domain battle will have significant impact on the ability of forces to freely move on the battlefield and conduct operations such as logistical or offensive operations. The current and past doctrine provides insights to the current capabilities and lessons from the past.
As demonstrated, modern hybrid warfare is changing the operational environment and redefining the way we understand warfare. Mobility doctrine provides guidance on how to conduct military operations based on our capabilities and threats. Mobility as a key requirement to success in land warfare provides a useful tool to compare current doctrine to our current operational environment. Additionally, looking at older mobility doctrine provides parallels to operational concepts from the past that have modern utility.
There is a wide variety of engineer capabilities in NATO. Each nation has doctrine that reflects its national capabilities, strategic and political goals. American, British, Canadian, Australian, and New Zealand Army engineering capabilities are well known, and data about them is readily available. Further, there are several standardization agreements (STANAG) that facilitate engineer interoperability and cooperation. 
21
Mobility doctrine and, specifically, how freedom of movement is assured is an all-arms task. However, engineer units have specific tactical tasks that have operational effects. Some of the key tasks are combined arms breaching, gap crossing, and the maintenance of roads and routes. These tasks are predicated on specific organizations, equipment, and procedures. Doctrine provides the foundation for these tasks and it is based on a specific understanding of the operational environment. New capstone doctrine reflects a changing understanding of the operational environment; however, mobility doctrine itself has remained largely unchanged.
Mobility doctrine is not based on the current modern hybrid warfare environment in which NATO militaries may operate.
The newest US Army Field Manual 3-0 Operations provides emphasis on the importance of the combined arms nature of mobility operations. It states, "Freedom to move and maneuver within an operational area is essential to the application of combat power and achieving results across the range of military operations. An operational environment will present numerous challenges to movement and maneuver. These are typically overcome through the integration of combined arms mobility and counter-mobility in support of mission requirements." 22 US mobility doctrine is conceptually captured in Field Manual 3-34, Engineer Operations. Mobility support operations are combined arms activities that mitigate the effects of natural and manmade obstacles to enable freedom of movement and maneuver. Engineers support these operations with a series of tasks at the tactical level. 
23
• conducting combined arms breaching,
• conducting area and route clearance, 
22
23 FM 3-34, Engineer Operations, 2-2.
• conducting gap crossing,
• constructing and maintaining combat roads and trails,
• constructing and maintaining forward airfields and landing zones, and
• conducting traffic management and enforcement.
Engineer contributions to the planning of mobility operations occur at all levels of war. The execution of engineer tasks in support of mobility usually occurs at the operational and tactical levels, but will often have strategic level implications. At the tactical level of war, combat engineer units are frequently required, especially in offensive and defensive tasks. At the operational level, general engineer units typically perform engineer tasks. 
24
When planning this operation the mnemonic, SOSRA (Suppress, Obscure, Secure, Reduce, Assault) is used to consider the fundamentals. 
25
26
25 FM 3-0, Operations, 5-16. 
26
The procedures to conduct a gap-crossing have similar complexities to combined arms breaching. Gap crossing operations are defined as projecting combat power across a linear obstacle (wet or dry gap). 
27
28
When selecting a crossing site specific requirements include: cover from observation, routes to and from crossing sites, cover for forces moving to cross, sufficient space for the bridgehead force, and locations for indirect and direct fire assets. There are also technical engineer considerations as to where the gap crossings are possible and how many sites are required to cross the force, including accounting for crossings lost to enemy action. 
29
The complexity of this operation and the number of available targets for enemy indirect fires is clear from the figure below that depicts the various control measures required to ensure the efficient crossing of the gap. All of the staging areas, holding areas, call forward areas, routes and crossing sites are based on the terrain and existing infrastructure that the enemy could determine by a detailed map study. Therefore, the combined arms fight is to provide direct fire, obscuration, air defense, and deep fire to protect the crossing sites in order to complete a gap crossing. The basis of our doctrine is an understanding of the enemy's capabilities and an assessment of western abilities to counter them. 30 • conducting area and route clearance,
• constructing and maintaining combat roads and trails,
• constructing and maintaining forward airfields and landing zones, and
• conducting traffic management and enforcement.
General engineer units are not organized, manned, equipped, and trained to conduct their tasks while in close support. General engineer units are not designed to perform as combat engineers without significant augmentation and training. 
31
31 FM 3-34, Engineer Operations, 2-2. but cannot engage in close combat. The ability to conduct general engineer tasks and operations is predicated on a doctrinal assumption that general engineer units will be conducting mobility operations in the "rear area" subject only to small arms fire.
The relationship between general engineering mobility tasks and sustainment is critical to elements of the operational art to include operational reach, culmination, basing and risk.
Sustainment is the provision of logistics, personnel services, and health service support necessary to maintain operations until successful mission completion. 
32
33
34
33 FM 3-34, Engineer Operations, V.  (1986). The newest doctrine provides updated terminology, concepts, and tenets of US Army operations and planning. Yet, these changing doctrines and philosophies have had minimal changes on mobility planning, procedures, or equipment. The operational environment in this current generation of doctrine highlights important trends such as globalization, urbanization, technological advances, and failed or failing states that can affect land operations. Specifically related to mobility, enemies are developing the capability to mass effects from multiple domains at a speed that will affect ongoing operations. Land-based threats will attempt to impede joint force freedom of movement and action across all domains and disrupt the electromagnetic spectrum. The enemy will attempt to present multiple dilemmas to land forces from the other domains. 
36
35
This will require additional mobility support assets and additional security. Clearly, the conceptual view of the operational environment is changing, as demonstrated in US Army Field Manual 3-0 Operations, but mobility operations and tasks do not reflect today's understanding of the current and future operational environment.
Engineer and mobility doctrine have evolved over time with changing threats and technology. Clausewitz wrote extensively about mobility, dedicating chapters to River Crossings, Maneuver, and Attacks on Swamps, Flooded Areas, and Forests. In the Maneuver section, Clausewitz addresses five factors for actions that in his time needed to be considered for success.
They are enemy food sources, combination with other units, threats to communication with home country and other units, threat of retreat, and an attack on individual points with superior forces.
These factors become the objectives around which everything revolves. Bridges, highways and entrenchments gain their importance in relation to these things. 
37
The mobility doctrines of the 1950s and 1960s were developed with lessons learned from the Second World War and a focus on a conventional Soviet near peer. The post-Vietnam crisis in the US Military led to a re-write of doctrine and the development of AirLand Battle doctrine in the early 1980s for the continuing Cold War. Then there was a revision of mobility doctrine during the Iraq and Afghanistan wars to adjust to increasingly lethal counter insurgency mobility 
37 Clausewitz,
On War,
541.
The most current US Army engineer publication is FM 3-34, Engineer Operations, which was first published in 2004. It updated the previous FM 5-100, Engineer Operations, to align with the current US Army doctrine framework. FM 5-100 has a series of subsequent engineer doctrine manuals that provide additional detail on the procedures, equipment, organization, and threats from several periods. These manuals demonstrate the evolution of military mobility doctrine.
Most recently in 2014 FM 3-34 was updated and acknowledges the shift to modern hybrid warfare conceptually. This admission was an important initial step, however, the DOTMLPF-P framework that the US military uses to develop new capabilities is a necessarily slow and bureaucratic process designed to procure, man, train, equip, and field military capabilities based on requirements. Although FM 3-34 is the first step in identifying the required capabilities there is little direction on how this is to be accomplished in a modern hybrid or multi-domain operational environment. Unfortunately, engineer procedures have always played catch-up after a crisis.
As demonstrated earlier, the concept of hybrid warfare is not new. The use of partisans and the mix of irregular and conventional tactics, for instance, is not a new phenomenon.
However, the sophistication of modern hybrid war adds lethality, range, and higher levels of situational awareness with the distribution of significant technological capabilities to very low levels. The complexity of the post Second War World operating environment provides some parallels and insights to current mobility issues.
In the late 1950's, the US Army had finished fighting in Korea and experienced typical post war budget and manpower cuts. The continuing spread of communist ideology was accompanied by the proliferation of and improvements in nuclear weapons. Tactical nuclear weapons such as the M31 "Honest John" nuclear rocket systems provided a new devastating firepower capability. The rise of these types of weapons by the Soviets and the US military necessitated a change in doctrine to demonstrate atomic mindedness. Those changes included increasing the ratio between combat and support units, achieving greater flexibility and mobility in combat units, and improving the force's capability to sustain itself for extended periods in combat. 
38
39
FM 5-135, Engineer Battalion: Armored, Mechanized and Infantry Divisions from 1961 was the doctrinal solution to the problems encountered in the late 1950s and reflects atomic mindedness. This doctrine stipulated that when a division attacks through an area with an unfordable river, plans must be made to cross without the loss of momentum or significant concentration on either bank. The river is approached at maximum speed on a broad front and all existing bridges should be seized intact. If intact bridges cannot be seized, then hasty crossings are attempted on a wide front capitalizing on organic resources such as assault bridging, amphibious armored carriers, airlift capability, nuclear fires, chemical munitions, and improvised means. Such a hasty crossing was considered to provide the best chance for success on a nuclear battlefield because it minimized the risk of presenting a massed target that could be defeated by a tactical nuclear strike. 
40
Another area from the 1961 doctrine that is of interest to today's Army is the section on security against guerrilla forces. This concept is the precursor to the insurgencies that are prevalent on the modern battlefield and likely to remain in the future. Guerrilla forces conduct irregular warfare tasks to contribute to a hybrid warfare environment. Doctrine indicates that they are likely to use surprise, mobility and decentralized operations to conduct ambushes and emplace booby traps. The doctrine provides simple security tasks to protect engineer forces and equipment such as briefing units on fighting techniques, not allowing local inhabitants near the assembly areas, and security precautions on work sites. Clearly, these tactical actions are not foreign to the modern battlefield. Modern hybrid warfare expands the capabilities of these guerrilla forces with sophisticated IEDs and modern weapons systems controlled with networked communications capabilities. 
41
Two modern conflicts provide insights into the application of modern hybrid warfare concepts and mobility doctrine. The Second Lebanon War in 2006 and the Ukraine Crisis in 2014 are modern hybrid warfare case studies. These conflicts are different from the insurgent conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, primarily because of the mix of state sponsored irregular forces and the application of a wide variety of threats including conventional weapons and forces.
The Second Lebanon War in 2006 demonstrates a non-state actor, in this case Hezbollah, acting as a guerrilla force with support from a state. The support provided to Hezbollah in the form of weapons, sophisticated equipment, and training from Lebanon, Syria, and Iran allowed Hezbollah to prevent the Israel Defense Force (IDF) from achieving its political and military objectives. The Israeli government applied the conventional wisdom that advanced conventional warfare technology, combined with precision firepower and the superiority of the IDF, would defeat Hezbollah forces. Hezbollah's state-sponsored guerrilla tactics rapidly transitioned the nature of the conflict from one of conventional warfare to a modern hybrid war that negated the IDF's technological advantage. Hezbollah's actions departed from historical asymmetric, irregular operations and shifted toward conventional tactics, which included defending terrain from fortified defensive positions and maneuvering in formations with conventional warfare weapons and equipment. 
42
43
44
45
After an IED destroyed the Merkava tank, additional forces were sent to recover the soldiers' bodies but those reinforcements soon came under mortar fire, killing another IDF soldier. The IDF responded with preplanned air strikes against seventeen Hezbollah locations in Lebanon and against three bridges that spanned the Litani River, all in an effort to prevent the movement of the captured soldiers out of south 
Lebanon. 46
47
48
49
Hezbollah had been preparing southern Lebanon for a war with Israel since May of 2000. Hezbollah used the complex natural terrain in southern Lebanon to great advantage. The mix of highlands and lowlands results in significant canalized terrain that limits mobility. The steep valleys make wheeled vehicles and armored forces targetable, as they are restricted to predictable routes. This terrain is well suited to ambushes, mines and Improvised Explosive Devices. Not only did Hezbollah prepare the terrain but they also used modern hybrid tactics to counter IDF strengths. Hezbollah possessed some capabilities associated with conventional military forces, 
47 Johnson,
Hard Fighting: Israel in Lebanon and Gaza,
56. 48 Ibid.,
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
32.
50
51
Hezbollah possessed both offensive and defensive signals intelligence (SIGINT) capabilities and demonstrated the ability to intercept IDF radio communications. They also had sophisticated modern communication devices and used radio procedure and encryption defensively to avoid the IDF intercepting their communications. Hezbollah also employed fiberoptic communications systems, which are not subject to jamming. 
52
Israel sought three objectives during the war: the release of the kidnapped soldiers, a stop to rocket fire into Israel, and the disarming of armed militia in Lebanon. As mentioned earlier, the Israelis believed that Hezbollah would sue for peace after a few days of the air campaign and that Lebanon would be forced to act against Hezbollah. After two days of bombing, 14 July, the bombing campaign escalated to the destruction of Hezbollah targets near Beirut and throughout 
50 Johnson,
Hard Fighting: Israel in Lebanon and Gaza,
46. 51 Ibid.,
48. 52 Ibid.,
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
53
54
Overall, the plan envisioned the 91 st Division pressing north and the 162 nd Division crossing the Saluki River from the east and pushing north where it would link up with the 98 th Division along the Litani River. The 98 th Division would conduct a helicopter assault and move to the Litani River in the direction of Tyre. The 366 th Division would attack Hezbollah forces north of Metula. 
55
53
54 David Johnson, Hard Fighting: Israel in Lebanon and Gaza,72. Quotation from testimony at the Winograd Commission, 370. 
55 Johnson,
Hard Fighting: Israel in Lebanon and Gaza,
73.
56
The lead battalion of the 401 st Brigade halted and failed to open the route across the Saluki. On 13 August, the 401 st Brigade again forced a crossing of the Wadi that was successful but was forced to stop due to the pending ceasefire. They had failed to achieve their objective. 
57
58
57 Johnson,
Hard Fighting: Israel in Lebanon and Gaza,
[74]
[75]
[76]
[86]
[87]
[88]
[89]
Hezbollah's modern hybrid tactics allowed them to hide from the Israeli Air Force's fires.
Hezbollah were able to demonstrate both conventional and guerrilla tactics that benefitted from the IDF's doctrinal confusion and lack of jointness. Hezbollah forces fought in their local area blurring the line between combatant and non-combatant and disguising lines of communication.
Traditional guerrilla tactics coupled with sophisticated weapons and equipment allowed Hezbollah to limit the IDF's mobility. The man portable Anti-Tank Guided Missiles (ATGM) supplied to Hezbollah defeated the protection that armored vehicles were to provide. The Battle of Wadi Saluki demonstrated Hezbollah's ability to recognize key terrain and limit the IDF's mobility. By contesting this piece of key terrain and limiting the IDF's ability to maneuver, they prevented Israel from achieving its political and military objectives. Hezbollah was able to use conventional military equipment in conventional and irregular ways to be successful against a technological and numerically superior force.
The Second Lebanon War exemplified a state sponsored non-state actor conducting a modern hybrid war. By contrast, Russia, through a series of conflicts in Chechnya, Georgia, and Ukraine, has developed a modern hybrid war strategy being employed by a state under the auspices of non-state actors. This development demonstrates a dangerous and powerful evolution of the concept of modern hybrid warfare as the full technological, diplomatic, informational, military, and economic powers of a state can be applied in a variety of ways to meet Russia's political and military objectives. By concurrently fighting with conventional forces, irregular forces, and guerrilla forces, modern hybrid warfare provides a wide range of dilemmas to opponents of Russia. The varied tempo, threats and tactics in operations allows them to overwhelm their opponents and achieve their objectives. General Valery Gerasimov, Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces, stated in 2013, "Wars are no longer declared and, having begun, proceed according to an unfamiliar template."
59
60
61
In February 2014, anti-government protesters toppled the Ukrainian government of Viktor Yanukovych. Shortly thereafter, pro-Russian separatists began seizing infrastructure in Crimea while systematically occupying territory in the eastern part of Ukraine. Many of the supposed separatists were actually highly trained Russian Special Forces personnel wearing no insignia. The precision of these operations surprised many western analysts. The most surprising aspect was the ability of the Russians to swiftly and efficiently coordinate numerous and wideranging operations. Remarkably, during the annexation of Crimea and subsequent fighting in Eastern Ukraine, Russian conventional military forces played only a supporting role. Russian Special Forces, which organized much of the resistance, secured key infrastructure, and established many of the checkpoints that sprang up throughout the peninsula were advantageous elements in this conflict. The extensive and well-coordinated use of intelligence, psychological warfare, intimidation, bribery, and internet/media propaganda that undermined and eventually collapsed Ukrainian resistance was decisive. 
62
Beginning in February 2014, Russia conducted two distinct phases of operations in Ukraine. First, the occupation and annexation of Crimea, which began as a covert military operation that combined ambiguity, disinformation, and the element of surprise at the operational level with more traditional aids such as electronic warfare. The annexation was completed by a traditional military invasion and occupation of the peninsula using Russia's airborne, naval infantry, and motor rifle brigades. 
63
64
65
The Russian supplied anti-aircraft systems neutralized the Ukrainian air power. The massed rocket artillery, directed by tactical UAVs and electronic warfare, destroyed and demoralized Ukrainian ground forces and crippled their command and control capability. In the end, Russia destabilized Ukraine, annexed Crimea and demonstrated to the world their new generation warfare, a modern hybrid warfare.
As demonstrated in doctrine and in the historical examples, the ability to move is a combined arms task that requires coordination to be successful. In order to structure the discussion about mobility requirements in a modern hybrid threat environment, the warfighting functions used by the US Army will be used. The Warfighting Functions are Mission Command, Movement and Maneuver, Intelligence, Fires, Sustainment, and Protection. 
71
The mission command warfighting function allows militaries to plan, communicate, and control military forces in multiple domains. 
72
The movement and maneuver warfighting function deals with the ability of forces to move to positions of relative advantage over the enemy. 
73
74
74
Another consideration for movement and maneuver and mobility is the employment of combat power in a hybrid threat environment. In a modern hybrid threat environment, the enemy will transition between conventional, irregular and guerrilla tactics to counter allied technological advantages. These tasks will require soldiers to dismount and conduct a variety of tasks from police actions and engagement with unarmed civilians to combat. This requires vehicles and soldiers to be mutually supporting. The US Bradley Fighting Vehicle has only six infantry dismounts to protect the vehicle. In irregular fighting, infantry dismounts are needed to do the fighting protected by the vehicle. 
75
In order to be successful in the movement and maneuver warfighting functions, a highly mobile, medium weight force is required. Future forces must be dispersed, more mobile, and more lethal. Armored fighting vehicles need to be light enough to cross the small secondary bridges common in the developing world to avoid massing at large high-capacity highway bridges. Additionally, the ability to swim combat vehicles allows for dispersion and hasty river crossings on a wide front to avoid massed fires. This concept was part of an atomic-minded past and needs to considered again for the future. Vehicles need to be smaller and contain sufficient infantry to allow operations in urban and complex terrain. Smaller vehicles will need to use modern missiles and weapons systems to defeat armor while using speed and mobility as a defense. To breach and reduce obstacles, combined arms organizations must be organized with integral infantry, armor, engineers, breaching assets, fires, and logistics. This will ensure that breaches are conducted rapidly on a broad front to rapidly overwhelm opposition capabilities.
The intelligence warfighting function facilitates understanding of the enemy, terrain, weather, civil considerations, and other significant aspects of the operational environment. 
76
This technology has grown significantly more accessible on the open market and is now used effectively by our adversaries. In 2014, Russia added 200 UAVs of various sizes to its inventory. These UAVs can be used for communication, intelligence, and electronic attack but have predominantly been used to identify targets for artillery and adjust fire. 
77
78
77
78
Further increasing the capability of adversary intelligence is their use of irregular forces and low cost commercial communications to provide reporting on activities throughout the depth of allied forces. This human intelligence will increasingly allow adversaries to identify units and capabilities that are moving on the battlefield in order to predict, reinforce, or interdict allied actions. This rear area intelligence will limit allied mobility by indicating to adversaries where key mobility assets are moving and potentially interdicting them. If there are rivers to cross and a finite number of bridges, irregular forces would likely interdict the bridging assets prior to a crossing attempt, thereby limiting allied mobility. Again, smaller vehicles with more mobility and a capability to swim will allow hasty river crossings to occur lowering the priority to bridging assets.
The fires warfighting function allows for the application of indirect, air, and missile defense and joint fires through a targeting process. 
79
80
On a river crossing operation, the concentration of forces in waiting areas, cushion areas and design load in all but a very few main roads. The logistics to support such heavy forces has made allied force logistics tied to these select roads and the 50-100 kilometers on either side of the roads. This sustainment limitation significantly limits mobility and operational reach. This limited mobility makes for predictable supply routes and creates concentrations of critical supplies. If a convoy of fuel is destroyed, tanks cannot move until they get more. The long lines of communication are difficult to defend and an easy target for irregular tactics in a modern hybrid warfare environment.
Protection is the warfighting function that relates tasks and systems that preserve the force, so the commander can apply maximum combat power to accomplish the mission. This warfighting function includes several tasks that effect mobility and survivability operations. They include explosive ordnance disposal support, antiterrorism measures, populace and resource control, coordination of air and missile defense, and chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear operations. 
83
Current doctrine is starting to understand the complexities of modern hybrid warfare with the US Military concept of multi-domain battle. The concept highlights the complexity of the contemporary operating environment, however, mobility doctrine and military equipment have not changed to respond to this conceptual change. Current, mobility doctrine still is focused on engineers crossing rivers, gaps and obstacles based on templates that have changed little since the Cold War while western adversaries have developed new technology make these operations more dangerous and less feasible. The limited lines of communications available to heavy forces are vulnerable and engineers are required to provide assured mobility and enable force protection and logistics. As a limited resource in a hybrid environment, the engineers will be rapidly exhausted.
Future mobility doctrine can benefit from lessons of the past. In the 1950's, the US military moved towards "atomic mindedness" to avoid the catastrophic effects of tactical nuclear devices. These measures included increasing the ratio between combat and support units to achieve greater flexibility and mobility to increase a units internal self-sufficiency in extended periods of combat. In order to achieve this, dispersion was a key to survivability. The crossing of obstacles and gaps was to be done on the widest front possible.
To achieve this dispersion, future forces need to be lighter. To use all of the existing bridges in the developing world, 60 ton vehicles are unacceptable and as seen in Ukraine and Lebanon, additional armor does not provide the anticipated protection because ATGM and MLRS warheads continue to become more lethal. Heavy armored forces, MG Scales argues, also do not have the flexibility or dismounted infantry required to be successful in a modern hybrid threat operational environment. Therefore, highly mobile, medium weight forces are required. Combat vehicles need to swim, be light enough to cross bridges, have ATGM to defeat adversary armor, and have sufficient infantry dismounts to provide protection. Lighter vehicles require less maintenance, fuel, and can travel more places, increasing mobility. Engineers will still be
There are contemporary examples of modern hybrid warfare that provide lessons on mobility. In Lebanon in 2006, the Israel Defense Force (IDF) was determined to use conventional combat power against Hezbollah to prevent rocket attacks into Israel and recover an Israeli soldier captured in a border incident. Hezbollah demonstrated an ability to use state sponsored conventional weapons in a hybrid manner to successfully force negotiation with a much larger and technologically advanced IDF. protection, and fires to analyze the case studies of modern hybrid warfare and provide recommendations. 11
Carl Von Clausewitz, On War, edited and translated by Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989), 593.
MacGregor Knox and Williamson Murray, The Dynamics of Military Revolutions 1300-2050  (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 179-180.    
Lawrence Freedman, Strategy: A History (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013), 179.
Amos C. Fox and Andrew J. Rossow, "Making Sense of Russian Hybrid Warfare: A Brief Assessment of the Russo-Ukrainian War," The Land Warfare Papers, No.112 (Arlington, VA: The Institute of Land Warfare, 2017), 1.
Jim Garamone, "Iraqi Military Demonstrates New Skills in Mosul Campaign", DoD News, Defense Media Activity, accessed 12 Oct 2017, https://www.defense.gov/News/Article/Article/885558/iraqi-military-demonstrates-new-skills-in-mosulcampaign/.
Williamson Murray and Peter R. Mansoor, Hybrid Warfare: Fighting Complex Opponents from the Ancient World to the Present (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 2.
Ibid.   
Allied Joint Publication (AJP) 3.2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations (NATO: October 2009), Lexicon 16.
Allied Joint Publication (AJP) 3.12, Allied Joint Doctrine for Military Engineering: Edition B Version 1 June 2014 (NATO: June 2014), 1-2.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-34, Engineer Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014).
US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012),
12-13.   
National Defence Canada, Strong Secure Engaged: Canada's Defence Policy (Ottawa, ONT: Minister of National Defence, 2017), 53.
Ibid., 57.   
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-34, Engineer Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), 1-19.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-90.12, Combined Arms Gap Crossing Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2008), 1-1.
Ibid., 2-1 to 2-8.
Director of Army Doctrine Canada, B-GL-300-001, Land Operations (Kingston, ONT: Army Publishing Office, 2008), 7-144 to 7-146.
FM 5-135, Engineer Battalion: Armored, Mechanized and Infantry Divisions, 1961), 112.   
John R. Davis Jr, "Defeating Future Hybrid Threats: The Greatest Challenge to the Army Profession of 2020 and Beyond," Military Review: September-October 2013 (September 2013): 22.
"The Second Lebanon War (2006)," Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs, accessed October 19, 2017, http://mfa.gov.il/MFA/AboutIsrael/History/Pages/Hizbullah%20attack%20in%20northern%20Israel %20and%20Israels%20response%2012-Jul-2006.aspx.
"The Second Lebanon War (2006)," Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs, accessed October 19, 2017, http://mfa.gov.il/MFA/AboutIsrael/History/Pages/Hizbullah%20attack%20in%20northern%20Israel%20an d%20Israels%20response%2012-Jul-2006.aspx.
David Johnson, Hard Fighting: Israel in Lebanon and Gaza (Santa Monica, CA: RAND  Corporation, 2011), 54-56.   
Valery Gerasimov, "The Value of Science is in the Foresight: New Challenges Demand rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying out Combat Operations," Robert Coalson (ed.), in Military Review (January-February 2016), 24.
Aleksandr Andreevich Svechin, Strategy, ed. Kent D. Lee (Minneapolis, MN: East View Publications, 1992), 239-256.
Andrew J. Duncan, "New 'Hybrid War' or Old 'Dirty Tricks'? The Gerasimov Debate and Russia's Response to the Contemporary Operating Environment" in Canadian Military Journal Vol. 17, No. 3 (Summer 2017): 9-14.
Tony Balasevicius, "Looking for Little Green Men: Understanding Russia's Employment of Hybrid Warfare" in Canadian Military Journal Vol. 17, No. 3 (Summer 2017): 17.
Michael Kofman and Matthew Rojansky, "A Closer look at Russia's "Hybrid War"," Kennan Cable No. 7 (April 2015): 3, accessed October 3, 2016, https://www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/7-KENNAN%20CABLE-OJANSKY%20KOFMAN.pdf.
US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012),12-13.    
ADRP 3-0, Operations, 5-3.
Scales, Scales on War:  The Future of America's Military atRisk, 146.   
US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2016), 5-5.
Grau and Bartles, The Russian Way of War: Force Structure, Tactics, and Modernization of  Russian Ground Forces, 234.   
ADRP 3-0, Operations,12-13.   
Firstly, I need to acknowledge my wife, Amanda, for sacrificing her career to come with
Some of the Russian technology that allowed them to be successful against a larger conventional Ukrainian force included massed rocket artillery, anti-aircraft systems, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and electronic attack. Outside the town of Zelenopillya, near the Russian border, the Russians fired a three-minute artillery "fire strike" with MLRS. This attack used bomblet munitions that combine an anti-armor weapon with a thermobaric weapon that "virtually wiped out two Ukrainian tank battalions." 67 With these thermobaric bomblets, a volley delivered by a single heavy-rocket-launcher battalion can annihilate anything within an area of about 350 acres. 
68
69
68 Robert H. Scales, "Russia's superior new weapons," in The Washington Post, accessed November 1, 2017, https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-opinions/russias-superior-newweapons/2016/08/05/e86334ec-08c5-11e6-bdcb-0133da18418d_story.html?utm_term=.be0b687fd3cd. 
69
70
Conventional western wisdom relies on joint fires to suppress adversary artillery and provide direct fires to suppress enemy to allow a crossing. As demonstrated by separatist forces in Ukraine with sophisticated SAMS systems, facing such an adversary makes this difficult. Russia continues to improve and modernize its air defense systems so that modern hybrid conflicts will not be able to rely on total air supremacy, or even sustained air superiority, to enable ground maneuver and mobility. Instead indirect fires will mass on fixed priority targets to block river crossing and breaches. 
81
82
81
82 ADRP 3-0, Operations, 12-13.  required for larger crossings or specific operations but will be less likely to be overwhelmed. The units of the future will need to have logistics vehicles with matching capabilities to the fighting vehicles in order to increase operational reach and flexibility. These units will need to be combined arms organizations less reliant on current networks and have a capacity to use physical control measures or less emissive communication to operate in a sensor rich environment.
The western focus since the end of the Cold War has been on technology in networks and sophisticated aircraft. These strategic capabilities created dominance for the United States and its NATO allies, which they demonstrated in various conflicts. The adversaries of the western allies took note and have developed both techniques and strategies to contest most domains. This multidomain battle concept addresses this very point. As demonstrated, the mobility of NATO countries is limited by engineer doctrine, equipment, and organization. The engineer limitations are a product of larger army systems that require too much bandwidth, fuel, maintenance, and road infrastructure owing to the incredible weights of vehicles in the western inventories. The problem is further exacerbated by not developing the required logistical systems for widely dispersed operations. In order for NATO armies to live, move, and fight, a full DOTMLPF-P analysis of mobility is required within the conceptual framework of hybrid warfare and multidomain battle. The wars of the future will still require the Army to be able to move to positions of advantage to win our nations' wars. Currently, there are significant challenges to achieving that.