# ID: a28cd889ef184475a7651ab88eaf722b
# Title: Operational Understanding of Positioning, Navigation, and Timing
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph pursues a determination of how the US Army can create a shared operational understanding of positioning navigation and timing. Planners, analysts, and strategists must understand how to implement space enablers and capabilities to address challenges in a contested operational environment. Most importantly this monograph seeks to answer the question of how the US Army will mitigate the adverse effects of positioning navigation and timing (PNT) during future multi-domain operations. Space enablers are paramount to successfully bridging the space operations gap at the BCT level in order to address near-pear threats during PNT warfare. Understanding how the US Army will conduct operations during MDO against near peer adversaries is vital to future mission planning that will allow the US Army to address operational challenges and maintain operational dominance during multi-domain operations. The monograph will provide background information that identifies the current problem the US Army faces with GPS in a denied, degraded, and disrupted space operational environment (D3SOE), current literature that is applicable to PNT, and analyzes current PNT capabilities and limitations. Finally, it concludes with recommendations on how the US Army must recognize the future implications of MDO and identify vulnerabilities that will impede any execution of future US Army operations.
In the current age of information and technology, the world's population has become increasingly reliant on real-time data. Whether it be cell phones, television, or even electricity, technology has become a staple to provide real-time information in everyday lives across the planet. As this globalization of technology increases, so do challenges to US national security and the complexity of protecting US interests at home and abroad. The United States continues to project power into contested operational environments. The ability of America to project power enabled by space capabilities in a denied, degraded, and disrupted operational environment must not remain solely in the strategic realm, but must also extend to the operational and tactical levels.
Today, near pear adversary threats, specifically China and Russia, are in an everincreasing complex technological race with the United States. The Defense Space Strategy (DSS)   summarizes that China and Russia present the greatest strategic threat due to their development, testing, and deployment of counterspace capabilities and their associated military doctrine for employment in conflict extending to space.0 F
1
Understanding the strategic benefits of these space-enabled operations, foreign governments are developing capabilities that threaten others' ability to use space. China and Russia each have weaponized space as a means to reduce United States and allied military effectiveness and challenge US freedom of operation in space.1 F 2
This technology race to deny adversary capabilities may cause a paradigm shift in both "the what" and "the how" for the delivery of information. Denying the delivery of information is at the forefront of information operations (IO) and multi-domain operations (MDO). The current problem facing the US Army at the operational level is the absence of a shared understanding in how positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) and space capabilities enable mission planning and execution in a degraded, disrupted, or denied operational environment. The US Army must understand how PNT warfare may occur in an operational environment and also how to mitigate adversarial use of PNT warfare across all echelons during future MDO.
A combination of three distinct and essential capabilities defines PNT. Positioning is the ability to determine one's location and orientation accurately and precisely in two-dimensions, or three-dimensionally when required, in a standard geodetic system, such as the World Geodetic System 1984, or WGS84). Navigation is the ability to determine current and desired position (relative or absolute) and apply corrections to course, orientation, and speed to attain a desired position anywhere around the world, from sub-surface to surface and from surface to space.
Timing is the ability to acquire and maintain an accurate and precise time from a standard (Coordinated Universal Time or UTC) anywhere in the world and within user-defined timeliness parameters. Timing also includes time transfer.2 F
3
Timing is the key to PNT. It is the foundation for both positioning and navigation. GPS derives its positioning and navigation data from timing signals by receiver devices. Users globally depend on a US Air Force maintained constellation of satellites solely for timing information.3 F 
4
5
From an infantryman conducting a foot patrol at the tactical level to a naval ship conducting a joint exercise, and even a B-52 Stratofortress dropping a precision guided bomb at the strategic level; the calculation of exact locations required for successful execution for each of these operations uses PNT. The disruption of PNT may have the ability to halt US Army operations.
There is an increasing concern about the ways and means adversaries can disrupt GPS signals and thereby deny US forces the positioning and navigation information that enables the "American Way of War."5 F 
6
Operating effectively in D3SOE relies on several space-based systems that maintain a network of connectivity. Space-based systems and unhindered access to space are increasingly critical to the nation's economic well-being and linked to America's national security.7 F 8 The US Army depends upon space capabilities to enable and enhance land warfare; virtually every Army and joint operation benefits from these capabilities.8 F
9
Space-based capabilities are an integral component of the military, commercial, and civilian sectors. Current US space policy articulates foundational activities to improve space system development and procurement by strengthening interagency and commercial  partnerships.9 F 10 Longstanding technological and cost barriers to space are falling, which enable more countries and commercial firms to participate in satellite construction, space launch, space exploration, and human space flight. Space X, a private commercial company, recently publicized its space program. This may facilitate new market opportunities for United States commercial space capabilities and services, including commercial applications that rely on US governmentprovided space systems.1 0F 
11
How will the US Army mitigate the effects of PNT warfare during future multi-domain operations (MDO)?
The US Army requires a focus on supporting assured PNT and mitigation techniques that may allow the US Army to address operational challenges and maintain operational dominance during MDO. To counter near-peer challenges to assured PNT, the US Army must find new and comprehensive ways to reduce threats to timing systems, by simultaneous use of other warfighting domains, such as cyber and electronic warfare. It also means crafting a defensive time infrastructure and network to maintain, and improve friendly timing sources and timing distribution, with a focus on the wide-range of uses for precision timing.1 1 F 
12
The US Army must recognize the future implications of MDO and identify vulnerabilities that will impede any execution of future US Army operations. Understanding how the US Army will conduct operations during MDO against near peer adversaries is vital to future mission planning. MDO approaches will be tantamount to how the US Army will reduce its current overreliance on PNT while continuing to conduct and achieve mission success.
Through the lenses of doctrine, history, and theory, research will focus on open-source unclassified archival material, current and historical military doctrine, and theoretical frameworks to generate a prescriptive recommendation to answer the research question. Access to personnel resources at Joint Navigation Warfare Center (JNWC), US Army Space and Missile Defense Command (USASMDC), US Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM), and US Space Command (USSPACECOM) at Peterson Air Force Base (AFB), Colorado will provide historical and current context along with information relevant to the research question. This will assist in guiding research, any findings, and provide additional context that pertains to this topic. The monograph will identify current MDO doctrine, including current space operations doctrine, to understand identified PNT vulnerabilities, mitigated where possible, and unmitigated where space enablers can bridge any operational gaps. Space enablers are paramount to successfully bridging the space operations gap at the BCT level in order to address near-pear threats during PNT warfare. This monograph will focus specifically on addressing the process through which the US Army should implement a centralized system approach to understanding PNT. This process will increase the operational understanding of PNT warfare by implementing space enablers and space capabilities across Brigade Combat Teams (BCT). Space capabilities are critical enablers to projecting land power and winning in close combat.1 3F 14 This monograph is divided into four major sections: the first section provides the introduction which consists of background information that identifies the current problem the US Army faces with GPS in a D3SOE; the second section provides current doctrine that is applicable to PNT warfare, and understanding of current PNT warfare capabilities and limitations; the third section provides an analysis on how the US Army currently plans and executes MDO; the fourth section concludes with implications, recommendations, and what additional research must be conducted.
Section 2: Literature Review The Army's warfighting functions, weapons, and battle systems are vitally dependent on space. We must fully leverage allied, national, and joint space capabilities to enable our warfighting functions and provide space support to all ground component forces.
-2013 Army Strategic Planning Guidance, Field Manual 3-14, Army Space Operations
The United States is currently the world leader in space-based military capabilities. As competition drives innovation while simultaneously driving down operational costs, how will the United States maintain its status as the world leader in Space and provide the US Army with adequate space enablers at all echelons? With more nations, primarily China, Russia, Japan, and India, looking to develop their own innovative capabilities, the United States must also foster 14 US Department of the Army, Army Regulation (AR) 900-1, Department of the Army Space Policy (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2017), 1-1, b. multilateral cooperation when using these capabilities.1 4F 15 Understanding what compels these other nations to develop their own capabilities will ensure the United States remains two steps ahead to avoid the historical Thucydides's trap.1 5F 
16
Few technologies have as broad an impact on national security and military operations as PNT. Timing threats to technology and Americans' daily lives must receive the appropriate priority. Yet, even as the Department of Defense (DoD) currently works on innovative systems to spread the risk, it must also think more broadly about timing's future place in warfare.1 6F 17 A centralized system approach must be employed to ensure the US Army can be cross-functional to provide interoperability. Without deliberate, comprehensive, coherent, and comprehensive guidance and policy now, the DoD risks replacing one well-functioning but vulnerable timing component-GPS-with dozens of disparate, non-interoperable, and possibly still vulnerable timing systems.1 7 F
18
16
connectivity and the asymmetric advantage provided. Space operations are integral to successfully conducting large scale combat operations as part of unified land operations.1 8F 
19
20
Maintaining dominance has several challenges in the space domain. Space is the only physical domain capable of achieving a globally persistent and legal overflight military perspective of any location on the earth.2 1F 
22
23
19
20
21
22 US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication: Space Power, Doctrine for Space Forces (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, June 10, 2020), 21, accessed March 31, 2021, https://www.spaceforce.mil/Portals/1/Space%20Capstone%20Publication_10%20Aug%202020.pdf.
23 US Army, FM 3-14, 1-50. warfighting domains.2 3F 24 Maintaining freedom of maneuver in space requires the ability of soldiers to adapt or adjust operating parameters such as frequency, power, or modulation to gain a relative advantage over the enemy.2 4F 25 Maneuver in the space domain puts the US Army and joint force in a position of relative advantage over the enemy and may help counter the effects of a D3SOE.2 5F 26
Seizing this perspective presents opportunities to implement space capabilities during PNT warfare that will enable physical operational and tactical maneuver. By controlling this ultimate perspective, military forces can monitor and rapidly respond to any contingency around the world before establishing a large in-theater footprint.2 6F 
27
FM 3-14 defines PNT as the space-based Global Positioning System (GPS) that is a satellite-based radio navigation system operated by the Department of Defense to provide all military, civil, and commercial users with precise PNT.2 7F 28 GPS provides essential, precise, and 24 US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication, 22.
25 US Army, FM 3-14, 1-51. 
26
27
28 US Army, FM 3-14, 1-52. reliable timing information which enables forces to effectively execute unified land operations.
GPS enables precision attack from stand-off distances, reducing collateral damage and allowing friendly forces to avoid threat areas.2 8F 29 Assured PNT information is a mission essential element in nearly every modern weapon system.2 9F 30 Assured PNT through GPS allows ground units to maneuver expeditiously and efficiently. Based on Colonel John Boyd's concept of maneuver warfare, this formulation recognizes speed as the rapidity of action while focus represents the convergence of effects on an objective.3 0F 31 Real-time GPS information is tantamount to a unit's ability to fire and maneuver.
GPS also enables friendly force tracking (FFT) to avoid specific areas and aid in rescue operations; it increases tactical operating ranges by providing specific location coordinates, fosters precision movement and maneuver, enables unmanned aerial systems which provide situational understanding, and many other functions.3 1F 32 Precision timing provides the US Army the ability to synchronize tactical digital networks and communications capabilities. Ensuring GPS connectivity and assured PNT is tantamount to mission success.
The loss of GPS may yield a decrease in the efficiency to conduct mission operations in a D3SOE. All Soldiers must understand the extent their forces and equipment rely on PNT information and how degraded or denied GPS information may impact US Army operations.3 2F 
33
Neutralizing C2 capabilities will create proverbial fog of war distorting and limiting the commander's visualization of the operational environment. 
29
30
31 US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication, 53.
32 US Army, FM 3-14, 1-20. 
33
The Space professionals (Functional Area -FA 40A) are career space specialists, who plan, develop, resource, acquire, integrate, or operate space forces, concepts, application, or capabilities.3 3F 
34
Joint Publication 3-14 defines space operations as those operations impacting or directly utilizing space-based assets to enhance the potential of the US and multinational partners. Army space operations and its personnel are separate from the newly founded US Space Force (USSF). US Army space operations utilize the fundamental principles of mission command to create a shared understanding of space enablers and space capabilities. Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 6-0 articulates the US Army doctrine of mission command and accurately states that "a defining challenge for commanders and staffs is creating shared understanding of their operational environment, their operation's purpose, its problems, and approaches to solving them."3 8F 
39
40
42
US Army activities conducted in the space domain support freedom of action throughout the operational environment (OE), and operations in other domains may create effects in the 39 US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 6-0, Mission Command: Command and Control of Army Forces (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2019), 1-8. 
40
41
42
Commanders want to hold the high ground for the greatest visualization in any operational environment. Holding the high ground offers an elevated and unobscured field of view over the battlefield, providing early warning of enemy activity and protecting fielded forces from a surprise attack.4 3F 
44
Within MDO, there is often conflation between space and cyberspace operations. Space operations and cyberspace operations (CO) are distinct, operations in space that enable many CO 
43
44
45 US Army, FM 3-14, 1-55. 
46
47
48
Cyberspace provides a means for satellite control and spacecraft data transport.4 9F 50 A unity of effort between space systems and cyberspace requires streamline processes to relay information in a timely manner. Without this unity of effort, it could delay operations, ultimately preventing mission success.
This streamlined connectivity ensures that the DoD maintains a relative advantage with constant space superiority or even space supremacy. Space superiority is the degree of control in space of one force over any others that permits the conduct of its operations at a given time and place without prohibitive interference from terrestrial and space-based threats.5 0F 51 Space superiority is imperative to support strategic, operational, and tactical mission success. Space supremacy implies that one side could conduct operations with relative impunity while denying space domain freedom of action to an adversary.5 1F 
52
SSA is the requisite foundational, current, and predictive knowledge and characterization of space objects and the OE upon which space operations depend (JP 3-14).5 3F 
54
50
51
52 US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication, 30. 
53
54 US Army, FM 3-14, 1-19.
Three emerging patterns drive the current and future strategic environment. Space is becoming increasingly congested, contested, and competitive. Growing global space activity and testing of China's destructive anti-satellite (ASAT) system have increased congestion in important areas in space.6 0F 61 Commercial entities are also adding to the congestion with frequent satellite launches into orbit. There are well over one hundred thousand pieces of man-made debris orbiting the Earth, some of which are too small to track with current sensor technology. These smaller pieces of debris can damage satellites in orbit.6 1F 
62
63
65
67
68
69
The National Security Space Strategy (NSSS) draws upon all elements of national power and requires active presence of US leadership in space. The NSSS states that the United States will pursue a set of interrelated strategic approaches to meet national security space objectives to promote responsible, peaceful, and safe use of space; provide improved US space capabilities; partner with responsible nations, international organizations, and commercial firms; prevent and deter aggression against space infrastructure that supports US national security; and prepare to defeat attacks and operate in a degraded environment.7 0F 71 67 DOD and ODNI, National Security Space Strategy, 3. 
The Defense Space Strategy (DSS) nests within the NSSS and seeks to achieve desired conditions of which the space domain is secure, stable, and accessible. The United States and its allies and partners underpin the use of space by sustained comprehensive US military strength.
The United States is able to leverage its use of space to generate, project, and employ power across all domains throughout the spectrum of conflict.7 1F 
72
The DSS also articulates its prioritized lines of effort (LOE) to achieve these desired conditions, specifically to build a comprehensive military advantage in space.7 2F 
73
74
75
73
74
75 Theresa Hitchens, "SASC Wants Alternative GPS by 2023," Breaking Defense, June 29, 2020, accessed September 16, 2020, https://breakingdefense.com/2020/06/sasc-wants-alternative-gps-by-2023/.
that will generate resilient and survivable alternative positioning, navigation, and timing signals;
process resilient, survivable data provided by signals of opportunity and on-board sensor systems; and integrate and deploy such equipment into the prioritized operational systems, platforms, and weapons systems.7 5F 
76
77
The Department of the Army space policy defines how the US Army accomplishes its service-level responsibilities and integrates space capabilities into Joint Combined Arms Operations.7 8F 
79
The US Army will integrate space capabilities across the force, provide needed space capabilities and support, and develop capabilities needed to provide space effects in support of US Army requirements.7 9F 
80
77 DOD and ODNI, National Security Space Strategy, 6. 
78
79
80
The distinct space capabilities, effects, and products used by the Army, joint, allied forces, and partner nations are planned, developed, prepared, and made available to the force by Soldiers conducting Army space operations and space-enabled operations.8 4F 
85
86
88
89
86
87 US Army, FM 3-14, 1-15-17. 
88
89
90
Preserving freedom of action becomes an operational imperative in peace and war, and space security becomes a critical mission across the conflict continuum.9 0F 91 Space Control is the operations to ensure freedom of action in space for the US and its allies and deny an adversary freedom of action in space (JP 3-14). The Army conducts space control by using globally deployable units to conduct surveillance and assessment of space systems in support of US Army operations.9 1F 92 Space control supports freedom of action in the space domain for friendly forces, and when necessary, defeats adversary efforts to interfere with United States or allied space systems and negates adversary space capabilities. The current US Army task organization of space support nests within the force structure required to support national strategic and policy objectives.
Soldiers and civilians make up the Army's strategic level space cadre at the ASCC. Army operational echelons, primarily division and corps, also have documented training and experience in the space domain and conduct daily missions of the US Army Space Force.9 2F 93 91 US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication, 28.
92 US Army, FM 3-14, 1-15-17. 
93
94
95
of
95
100
Army Service Component Command (ASCC) Section 3: Analysis This section analyzes current and proposed US Army space capabilities, which provide maneuverability during PNT warfare. This section also identifies how the US Army currently integrates space capabilities and its impact across the force due to any operational limitations created by PNT warfare. Identifying when and how integrating space domain capabilities into mission planning is extremely salient. This analysis will also cover the adequacy of current requirements for space enablers and capabilities, their understanding, application at the operational and tactical levels, and alternatives that may provide additional breadth and depth to assist the US Army in defeating D3SOE.
The US Army must develop and sustain a cadre of skilled military and civilian space personnel through effective space-related training and education.1 09F
110
111
Therefore, recruiting and retention of FA40 space enablers must become a priority for US Army
Integrating space enablers within a BCT will provide planners at the operational level with an increased space situational awareness of the battlefield. Sound space doctrine and superior space capabilities are of little use without personnel who have the expertise and empowerment required to wield them.1 11F 
112
Current US Army battalion and brigade planners receive their professional military education while attending Command and General Staff College (CGSC). The CGSC curriculum only provides 1 hour of education related to US Army space operations during the 12-month curriculum. A one-hour block of space education at CGSC is simply inadequate as effective education to cover the vast amount of relevant information that pertains to space, space enablers, space capabilities, and their incorporation into MDO and the planning process. CGSC offers two elective courses that provide an orientation to space, but classes are limited due to schedules and the qualified faculty available to instruct. CGSC students that successfully complete the two elective space courses become space enabler qualified and receive the 3Y additional skill identifier.
112 US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication, 46.
113 US Army, AR 900-1, 1-1, b.
The modern American military also depends on GPS to navigate, to track the position of friendly units, and even to provide the microsecond timing required to link up its radio communications networks.1 13F 114 Tracking the position of friendly units occurs at the lowest levels while also pushing the information up through the organization. This real-time awareness is vital for operational units to provide C2 during MDO. It is imperative that operational units receive the training and support necessary to utilize space capabilities to maintain tempo on the battlefield.
Space enablers embedded at the BCT level will require dispersion throughout the sections within the S3 Operations. Both Current Plans (CUOPS) and Future Plans (FUOPS) staff sections will require space enablers that provide SSA training to the BCT staff. Understanding SSA for current space operations and available space capabilities will assist in planning for future operational requirements and space capability requests. BCT commanders must ensure their staffs understand how to access and plan for space capabilities to determine whether the capabilities are continuously available or require special authorization and coordination.1 14F 
115
116
115 US Army, AR 900-1, 1-1, b.
116 US Joint Staff, JP 3-14 (2018), I-3. prepare and enable US Army forces to successfully fight and win future conflicts in a D3SOE while protecting the US homeland, warfighters, and way of life.1 16F 
117
118 US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication, 26. 
119 Shepard,
"eLORAN.
The US Army and sister services currently utilize INS in some scenarios. As INS uses accelerometers and gyroscopes to dead reckon positioning rather than rely on external signals such as GPS. These components work together to calculate position, orientation, and velocity to deliver critical navigation information in GNSS-denied areas like urban canyons, bridges, tunnels, mountains, parking garages and dense forests.1 20F 121 INS is a readily available and successful alternative to GPS. 120 US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication.
121 Jon Thorland, "What is An Inertial Navigation System?" Honeywell Aerospace, accessed February 5, 2021, https://aerospace.honeywell.com/en/learn/about-us/blogs/2020/04/what-is-an-inertialnavigation-system.
Mariners have used various celestial navigation techniques for hundreds of years. Two stars, the local altitude, and a clock are all that one needs to determine a position using a sextant.1 21F 122 Celestial navigation is surprisingly accurate. Today's advanced optics and high-speed microelectronics can enable celestial navigation with an accuracy of 15 meters, without the need to know the altitude, even in a moving aircraft or missile.1 22F 
123
A quantum compass, is somewhat similar to INS. It is an instrument that measures relative position using the technique of atom interferometry. And includes an ensemble of accelerometers and gyroscopes based on quantum technology to form an inertial navigation unit.
A quantum compass contains clouds of atoms frozen using lasers, and by measuring the 122 Jeff Shepard, "Quantum Compasses and Optical Imaging for Global Positioning and Navigation," Microcontroller Tips, October 27, 2020, accessed February 5, 2021, https://www.microcontrollertips.com/quantum-compasses-and-optical-imaging-for-global-positioning-andnavigation/. 
123
124
125
126 Jaspreet Gill, "Army Approves First Assured PNT Requirement," Inside Defense, September 16, 2020, accessed November 24, 2020, https://insidedefense.com/insider/army-approves-first-assured-pntrequirement.
127 Nathan Strout, "Collins Aerospace to Build GPS-Jamming Solution for the Army," Battlefield Tech, C4ISRNET, Sightline Media Group, October 7, 2020, accessed December 2, 2020, https://www. c4isrnet.com/battlefield-tech/2020/10/07/collins-aerospace-to-build-gps-jamming-solution-for-the-army.
incorporates into the C4ISR/EW Modular Open Suite of Standards, or CMOSS. CMOSS is a common chassis the Army is building as part of their new plug-and-play approach to capabilities. Instead of having to install MAPS onto vehicles with each upgrade, CMOSS will allow MAPS to install by simply plugging a chip into the chassis.1 27F 128 Dismounted Assured-Positioning, Navigation and Timing (A-PNT) will provide a single source of A-PNT to support communications, command and control, logistics, targeting and effects as a stand-alone capability. It will also optimize power to leverage shared Conformal Wearable Battery when employed with Nett Warrior.1 28F 
129
128
129 US Army Acquisition Support Center (USAASC), "Assured-Positioning, Navigation and Timing (A-PNT) -Dismounted," accessed February 5, 2021, https://asc.army.mil/web/portfolio-item/apnt-dismounted/.
130 US Army Acquisition Support Center (USAASC), "Nett Warrior (NW)," accessed February 5, 2021, https://asc.army.mil/web/portfolio-item/soldier-nw/.
131 Ibid.
132 USAASC, "Assured-Positioning." gaps by its ability to create a real-time shared understanding with adjacent units on the battlefield.
Below is a graphic that illustrates how to acquire alternative sources of APNT during D3SOE. Lastly, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) has several PNTrelated projects under way, intended to improve accuracy, allow fast integration of PNT sensors across multiple platforms, and even go beyond GPS. These programs are developing PNT capabilities that do not use the satellite system, but instead use arrays of sensors and new types of signal processing that can function in difficult environments, ad hoc networks of separate nodes, and new architectures that would allow integrate other domains such as communications, electronic warfare or ISR systems into PNT.1 32F 133 PNT capabilities that do not use satellite would provide additional alternatives for the US Army to operate when in a D3SOE.
Execution of a synchronized, robust science and technology program can lead to procurement and fielding of space capabilities, to include technologies designed to operate in and through permissive D3SOE.1 33F 134 US Army implementation of these alternative capabilities will ensure BCT commanders can conduct operations during D3SOE. US Army space operations must remain flexible to commanders' needs and stay agile in response to threat actor exploitation efforts to place US Army and joint forces into a D3SOE, which is the results of a threat actor implementation of A2 and AD strategies.1 34F 135 Flexibility provides commanders the ability to orchestrate and exercise operational art. D3SOE is the most recognizable impact to space capabilities from threat actors such as China and Russia.
These alternative capabilities provide additional breadth and depth that assure PNT while operating in D3SOE. Breadth helps understand the enduring nature of PNT while providing insight on how PNT warfare's character will evolve in the future.1 35F 136 Depth provides the ability to better forecast the pressures high-intensity conflict will place on PNT.1 36F 137 Additional breadth and depth are necessary to ensure uninterrupted situational awareness during operations in D3SOE.
This uninterrupted real-time situational awareness provides the operational understanding necessary for the US Army to mitigate the effects of PNT warfare during future MDO.  Expanding organizational space warfighting expertise and culture recognizes the importance of US Army space enablers and space capabilities. Space enablers with PNT expertise must integrate into the BCT in order to inform and educate BCT forces. PNT education will provide the BCT staff with the understanding required to plan with available space capabilities and inform future planning considerations. Creating a shared understanding of operational PNT will improve intelligence and C2 capabilities that enable military advantage in space. A brigade must also incorporate a space support cell and a STO cell which will provide the necessary space support at the operational to reinforce improved intelligence and C2 capabilities. BDE space support cell and STO cells, in the respective S3 and S5 staff sections, parallel the current DIV space cell structure. Mirroring the Division cell will create a streamlined connection between the DIV and BDE that will improve the dissemination of information and also create the necessary understanding of space enabler capabilities at the BDE level by including the BDE in space battle drills, space running estimates, space annex development, space RFIs, space products and assessments, and create a predictive space analysis which can all be disseminated to subordinate battalions to further the space knowledge at the tactical level within the organizations. Recommend the BDE MTOE approval to authorize 1 x Major (O-4), 1 x Captain (O-3), and 1 x Staff Sergeant (E-6) and also create the S3 Space Support Element (SSE), and 1 x Captain (O-3) to create the S5 (STO) Cell.
Presently, there are a limited number of space enabler billets currently in combat arms corps and divisions. As identified during the analysis, Active-duty Compo 1 combat arms divisions only have three space enabler billets authorized per division. These billets must remain in place, and also be expanded, to provide continuity between echelons. Recommend that current BCT billets be recoded for space cadre and enabler personnel instead of authorizing ADCON, OPCON, or TACON to BCTs. This will eliminate the "red tape" that is often associated with ADCON, OPCON, and TACON personnel. Expanding the AFAT program will increase the number of available space enablers and recruit the appropriate talent to adequately support the need for space enabler billets at the BCT level. With ASPDO's assistance to expand the scope and scale of space enablers across BCTs will fundamentally increase the incorporation of space assets in planning, training, and execution of missions under a denied, degraded, and/or disrupted operational environment.
Recommend senior leaders push to foster additional leader development for junior leaders to acquire an understanding of space enablers and space capabilities. Exposure to US Army space operations while attending PME will increase this understanding. By incorporating space operations into the military education, US Army personnel can apply their new understanding of space enablers and capabilities the planning process within scheduled operational exercises. A specific example of this is allocating time for additional space blocks of instruction throughout CGSC held at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. The field grade officers attending CGSC can receive a foundational understanding of US Army space operations and implement their newfound knowledge during the planning process of the Advanced Operations Course (AOC). Providing qualified space cadre to participate in US Army space-related training, education, and exercises can also familiarize field grade officers with space enablers and capabilities and give them the tools necessary to increase space knowledge and understanding at their future assignments, which are typically at the operational level in brigades and battalions. This can also increase recruitment for soldiers who want to transition to the US Army space professional functional area.
What space capabilities and emerging technology will be required to support the Multi-Domain Army of 2035?
The US Army must recognize the future implications of PNT and continue to identify vulnerabilities that will impede execution of future military operations, supported by space power, during D3SOE. Space power cannot unilaterally win wars, but like land power, sea power, air power, or cyber power, its success, absence, or failure could prove catastrophically decisive in war.1 38F 
139
With regards to space, as new technology continues to develop, the primary challenge in the foreseeable future for the US Army is assuring PNT and the space-based capabilities that are essential to conducting MDO. The near-universal reliance on PNT information has led militaries to explore "deliberate defensive and offensive action to assure friendly use and prevent adversary use of PNT information through coordinated space, cyberspace, and electronic warfare (EW) capabilities"1 39F 
140
US Army space enablers are paramount to successfully bridge the space operations gap, mitigate PNT vulnerabilities, and address near-pear threats during PNT warfare. Anticipating the future operational environment that the US Army will operate in requires additional US Army space enablers implemented at the BCT level. US Army echelons must significantly enhance the number of space enabler personnel in order to bridge the space operations gap. Educating, 139 US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication, 26. 
Hawkes and McMahon, "Time Warfare." 7 Center for Army Lessons Learned (CALL), CALL Handbook 18-28, Operating in a Denied, 8
US Department of Defense (DOD), Defense Space Strategy (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, June
2020), 1, accessed March 15, 2021 https://media.defense.gov/2020/Jun/17/2002 317391/-1/-1/1/2020_defense_space_strategy_summary.pdf. 2 DOD, Defense Space Strategy, 1.
US Department of Transportation, "What is Positioning, Navigation and Timing (PNT)?" last modified June 13, 2017, accessed July 15, 2019, https://www.transportation.gov/pnt/what-positioningnavigation-and-timing-pnt.
4
.5  Resilient Navigation and Timing Foundation, "The Facts …," accessed July 15, 2019., https://rntfnd.org/wp-content/uploads/RNT_FactSheet_Mar_16.pdf.
CALL, iii.   
Donald J. Trump, National Space Policy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: The White House, 2020),
11, accessed March 15, 2021, https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2020/12/National-Space-Policy.pdf.11 Ibid., 13.12  Hawkes and McMahon, "Time Warfare."
Curtis Wright, "A-PNT: Assured Positioning, Navigation and Timing," accessed August 10, 2020, https://www.curtisswrightds.com/technologies/open-architecture/assured-position-navigationtiming.html.
Hawkes and McMahon, "Time Warfare."   
Cecil Longino, "Growing tomorrow's Army space operations officers," US Army, May 19, 2020, accessed March 31, 2021, https://www.army.mil/article/235757/growing_tomorrows_army_ space_operations_officers.
US Army,[2][3] c,
4.
US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication, 49.   
US Army,[2][3] c, 7.   
US Space Force, Space Capstone Publication, 54.   
To 
Mr. Thomas Gray
Dr. James K. Greer
LtCol Jacob Q. Robinson
/JKG// , USMC //signed/11 May 21/BAP// , Director, 
School of Advanced Military Studies Brian A. Payne, COL __, Assistant Dean of Academic
Degree Programs Dale F. Spurlin, PhD
Research, CGSC
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
A2AD adversary use of space capabilities and their potential to threaten friendly space capabilities.5 4F 55 This insight is extremely useful during the reverse intelligence preparation of the battlefield (IPB) in the) step of the military decision-making process (MDMP). SSA contributes to a commander's ability to understand adversary intent.5 5F 
56
To assure PNT, the JNWC provides subject matter experts in deployable teams to support geographic combatant commanders.5 7F 58 These teams provide expertise in planning and executing Navigation Warfare (NAVWAR). The JNWC defines NAVWAR as the deliberate defensive and offensive action to assure PNT information through coordinated employment of space, cyberspace, and electronic warfare operations.5 8F 59
The National Space Policy of the United States of America (NSPUSA) recently created space guidelines that address current US national security interests in space. The United States seeks a secure, stable, and accessible space domain, which has become a warfighting domain as a result of competitors seeking to challenge United States and allied interests in space.5 9F 
60
55
56
57
58 "Joint Navigation Warfare Center," Kirtland Air Force Base, accessed March 1, 2021, https://www.kirtland.af.mil/Units/Joint-Navigation-Warfare-Center. 
59
60 Trump,
National Space Policy,
11.
81
82
83
Space enablers are an important piece of this complex system. Understanding the imperatives of interdependency, the necessity of reducing complexities, and the need to produce manageable simplicities require a workable systems methodology.8 3 F 
84
82
83
Additional research considerations may need to focus on how PNT warfare may push future warfare out of the physical dimension and into the virtual dimension and how the US Army can achieve and maintain an advantage in preparedness within the next decade. Identifying and forecasting future technological shortfalls, how to improve/correct these future problems, and research to address additional US Army doctrine shortfalls. Additional questions to consider are will the US Army require partnerships with private industry to maintain its competitive advantage in space? How does the US Army prepare to meet the future challenges of evolving adversaries in space? What capability development, doctrine improvement, force structure changes, and training will be required to support MDO at the ever-increasing speed of innovation? How will AI and machine learning innovation change the operational environment for the US Army by 2035?