# ID: a2d697d4c88c497c83b7de454c381f9b
# Title: US Forces Korea: The Key to Cooperative Stability and Security in Northeast Asia
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2002.0
# Fulltext:
As long as the United States maintains its current national security objectives and vital strategic interests in the Northeast Asia region, US forces must remain deployed in South Korea in order to deter North Korean aggression and to ensure
FORM APPROVED ---OMB NO. 0704-0188 public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington headquarters services, directorate for information operations and reports, 1215 Jefferson davis highway, suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the office of management and budget, paperwork reduction project (0704-0188) Washington, dc  The Korean Peninsula is significant to United States national security because of its geographical location and the strategic landscape in the Northeast Asia region which includes the presence of five traditionally warring nations: North and South Korea, Japan, Russia and China. Current US national security objectives for the region are to enhance security, promote democracy and promote economic prosperity. A US military presence on South Korean soil allows the US to stay engaged in the region, influence political, diplomatic and economic arenas and prove our commitment and determination to defend our allies.
Due to the continuing buildup of military forces and weapons of mass destruction by the North Korean Government, North Korea is viewed by the US Government as a hostile regime that threatens regional peace. With the world's fifth largest military, highly regimented social system, and desperate economic situation the potential for the implosion of the government or explosion by the people is possible. Also, the potential emergence of China as a viable military competitor in the region is likely to cause regional instability. Rapid growth both economically and militarily, gives China the instruments of power to threaten peace in the region.
US Forces Korea is the key to cooperative stability and security in the Northeast Asia region. The continued forward presence of US forces on the Korean Peninsula allows the US to stay engaged in the region, cements our commitments to our allies, and allows for a peaceful coexistence.
As the United States enters the 21st century and recovers from the devastating attacks on its homeland on September 11, 2001, it must reevaluate and determine what its true strategic interests are in the world and where best to focus its military capabilities. Throughout history the United States and its allies have built mutually supporting relationships that have offered stability and security throughout several regions in the world. US forces stationed abroad play a large role in securing US vital interests in historical zones of conflict. In particular, the nexus of US vital interests in Asia is Northeast Asia because of the presence of five traditionally warring powers there: North and South Korea, Japan, Russia and China.
1
As changes in the strategic environment take effect, the forward presence of US forces on the Korean Peninsula play a key role in the strategic landscape in this region. Renewed conflict on the Korean Peninsula has been prevented since the Armistice Agreement was signed in 1953. Two factors contributed largely to this: The United Nations Command (UNC) which has represented the United Nations Security Council's will to secure the peace and the presence of US and Republic of Korea (ROK) troops in the Combined Forces Command (CFC).
Since the Armistice Agreement was signed by the military commanders of the United Nations Command, North Korean People's Army and the Chinese People's Volunteers, the US has stationed soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines on South Korean soil as evidence of our commitment to preserve the peace, provide security and ensure stability not only on the peninsula but in the entire Northeast Asia region. Historically most Asian governments welcome a US presence in the region to preserve stability and security, even if it means an occupying force. The US has also displayed its willingness to withdraw its forces when requested by the leadership of that country. The nations of Thailand and the Philippines are evidence of this. 
3
The purpose of this paper will focus on answering the following question: Is the presence of forward deployed US forces on the Korean Peninsula the key to cooperative stability and security in the Northeast Asia region? Should the US continue to station forces on the Korean Peninsula? The US is determined to continue to stabilize the Northeast Asia region by trying to shape a peaceful and economically sound Korean Peninsula. This paper will further analyze the role US forces play on the Korean Peninsula and assess their military importance and effect their presence has. By shaping the future the US can impact its vital interests in the region.
Northeast Asia Region The Northeast Asia region consists of the following countries and the littoral waters that surround them: North Korea, South Korea, China, Russia, Japan, Philippines, Taiwan and Vietnam. Historically this region has been engulfed in conflict and instability. The Korean Peninsula is referred to by many historians as both a bridge and a dagger among its neighbors;
A bridge across into Manchuria China and the Russian Far East for Japan and a dagger at the heart of Japan if used by China, Russia or Korea. Korea has been the bridge to and from the Asia mainland. 
4
Since the 3 rd Century BC, the region has been immersed in armed conflict as international borders and governments changed and clashed. Korea has been invaded numerous times and The Northeast Asia region is significant to United States national security because of its geographical location and strategic landscape. As outlined in the US National Security Strategy, current US national security objectives for this region are to:
• Enhance security
• Promote democracy
The US utilizes the armed forces as an instrument of national power to implement these objectives. A continued US military presence stationed abroad allows the US to stay engaged in the region, influence the political, diplomatic and economic arenas, and prove our commitment and determination to defend our allies. President Franklin D. Roosevelt summed it up best when he said, " We have learned that we cannot live alone at peace. We have learned that our well being is dependent on the well being of our nations far away. We have learned to be citizens of the world, members of the human community."
5
Furthermore, the US vital strategic interests in the Northeast Asia region are:
• Developing regional and bilateral security and economic relationships
• Assisting in conflict prevention and resolution
• Expanding US participation in regional economies
6
These strategic interests link US security interests with economic growth and commitment to democracy and human rights. By staying engaged in the Northeast Asia as a stability force the US is cementing its commitment to future stability in the region. The strategic interests support our enduring national interests that contribute to the development of the US defense posture.
As outlined in the latest Quadrennial Defense Review, the purpose of the US Armed Forces is to protect and advance these enduring national interests:
• Ensure US security and freedom of action, including:
-US sovereignty, territorial integrity and freedom -Safety of US citizens at home and abroad -Protection of critical US infrastructure
• Honoring international commitments, including:
-Security and well-being of allies and friends -Precluding hostile domination of critical areas particularly Europe, Northeast Asia, the East Asian littoral, and the Middle East and Southwest Asia. -Peace and stability in the Western hemisphere • Contributing to the economic well-being, including:
-Vitality and productivity of the global economy -Security of international sea, air, space and information lines of communication -Access to key markets and strategic resources
7
Japan ruled Korea from 1910 to 1945. Following the defeat of the Japanese at the end of World War II, the Allied forces agreed that the Soviet Union and the United States would accept the surrender of Japanese troops and jointly occupy the country. At midnight on 10 August 1945, Colonel Charles H. Bonesteel and Major Dean Rusk drafted the portion of the order that delineated the Soviet and American zones of occupation. Both men wanted to follow provincial boundary lines that did not violate political divisions and place the capital city of Seoul in the American zone. They used the only map available, which was a small-scale map of the Far East. They were given thirty minutes to complete the draft for the US State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee. Colonel Bonesteel and Major Rusk noted that the 38 th parallel passed north of Seoul and almost divided the Korean Peninsula in equal halves. Thus, the 38 th parallel became the proposed zonal boundary. 
8
On June 25, 1950, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) communist forces invaded the Republic of Korea (South Korea) by crossing the international border at the 38 th parallel. The Republic of Korea Army (ROK Army) defended against the coordinated attack but the element of surprise and the shock of enemy armor overcame their defenses. The North Korean People's Army (NKPA) crushed the ROK Army and within three days captured the capital city of Seoul and continued their advance south.
In response to this aggression, President Truman, with the support and mandate of the United Nations, ordered US forces into South Korea to stop the aggression and halt the expansion of communism. The UN Security Council established a united command in Korea and requested that the US designate a commander of forces, Commander in Chief United Nations Command (CINCUNC). This is a position that the US still holds today.
Initially the UNC conducted delaying actions against the NKPA until US and ROK forces withdrew and took up defensive positions within the Pusan Perimeter. The UNC was outnumbered and outgunned and it was not until the arrival of reinforcements from the US and other UN countries could the UNC conduct a counterattack. Once the two pronged counterattack was begun which consisted of an amphibious assault at Inchon and a breakout of the Pusan perimeter followed by a pursuit across the 38 th parallel, the war turned into a series of "seesaw battles for Korea's freedom."
9
From 1950-1953 military forces from twenty-one countries under the United Nations Command (UNC) fought and died for the freedom of the South Korean people and to demonstrate the UN's resolve to stop unprovoked aggression by a communist country. The countries of Australia, Belgium, Canada, Columbia, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, Great Britain, Greece, India, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, South Africa, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey and the United States provided troops from all echelons of combat, support, logistical, and medical fields. 
10
27 July 1953. 11
The Soviet Union provided arms and equipment and the Chinese provided troops that were "volunteers". 12
Since the end of the war the US and the UN focused their efforts on the tremendous task of literally rebuilding a nation, its economy, its military and all of its infrastructure and support mechanisms. On August 8, 1953, the US and South Korea signed the Mutual Defense Treaty.
The Mutual Defense Treaty provided the basis for the continued presence of US forces in Korea, (US Forces Korea -USFK), military aid for the rebuilding and strengthening of the ROK Armed Forces, security of South Korea and support by US air, ground, and sea forces should another attack occur.
Hostilities between North and South Korea are deterred today by a binational defense team that evolved from the multinational UNC during the Korean War. The Combined Forces Command (CFC) is the warfighting headquarters whose mission it is to deter, or defeat if necessary, outside aggression against the ROK. In support of that, USFK is deployed in South Korea to support the UNC and CFC by coordinating planning among US component commands in South Korea and exercises operational control (OPCON) of assigned US forces as directed by the Commander in Chief, Pacific (USCINCPAC). USFK also coordinates US military assistance to the ROK and functions as the US Defense Representative in Korea. 
13
• Army -26,987
• Air Force -8,322
• Navy -293
They are augmented by 19,153 Korean National civilian employees and 4,185 Korean Augmentation to the United States Army (KATUSA), a program continued from the Korean War. 14 At present the Army service component command is Eighth US Army and the Air Force Service Component is 7 th Air Force. These two components make up the majority of the forces currently stationed on the peninsula.
12 Ent, Fighting on the Brink: Defense of the Pusan Perimeter, 26. 13 U.S. Forces Korea Homepage, online edition under "USFK Mission," Accessed on 2 January 2002. 14 U.S. Forces Korea Homepage, online edition under "USFK Manpower Strength," Accessed on "Tensions on the Korean Peninsula remain the leading threat to peace and stability in East Asia." 15 North Korea has publicly stated that it remains committed to a peaceful reunification.
However, it continues to dedicate a large portion of its dwindling budget to its huge military force. Currently, the NKPA has approximately 1 million active duty personnel and 5 million in the reserves dedicated to the army. More than half of the North Korean ground forces are prepositioned within 65 km of the DMZ prepared to launch an offensive. Long-range artillery guns are directed at cities and critical targets in northern South Korea. Particularly important are the emplacement of anti-tank barriers in the forward area and dug-in combat fighting positions along the major routes to and from the DMZ to Pyongyan. 16 " This deployment of troops poses a severe security threat to South Korea." 
17
Military improvements over the past year clearly illustrate North Korea's emphasis on being prepared for war no "matter what the cost". 
18
The North Korean Air Force has 103,000 personnel and an inventory of 1,600  In 1994, Kim Jong Il replaced Kim Il Sun as the President of North Korea. The transition in power was not exactly smooth, but he has maintained power by placing loyal members of his party, the Korean Workers Party, in top level government, military, security service, and party headquarters positions. He maintains that loyalty by further allocating national resources to key industries, programs and military units. Despite years of worsening economic, social and quality of life conditions he and his party have remained in power. However, since 1999, Kim Jong Il has directed major policy changes in order to rehabilitate the North Korean domestic economy by emphasizing science and technology while still maintaining a large and robust military machine. Figures show that in 1999, due to an increase in food production resulting from key agrarian changes and international aid, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose 6.2%. 
20
21
22
23
In order to answer the question, "Is the presence of forward deployed US forces on the Korean Peninsula the key to cooperative stability and security in the Northeast Asia region?" an examination and justification of why the US forces were sent to the peninsula to intervene at the advent of the Korean War in the first place is required. After North Korea invaded South Korea in 1950, the President of the United States armed with a United Nations resolution, deployed air, land and sea forces to the Korean Peninsula. By getting this diplomatic approval and mandate from the United Nations, the United States had the multi-lateral backing of nations from across the globe to intervene. Together, the US and UN forces under the auspices of the United Nations Command (UNC) implemented the grand strategy of containment. The main objectives of the containment strategy were to:
• Halt the aggression and restore the border at 38 th parallel • Not conquer, but contain the North Koreans on the north side of the 38 th parallel • Restore the peace through a cease fire at the 38 th parallel • Stop the war from spreading Although the grand strategy changed during the course of the war to liberation and the rollback of communist forces, it reverted back to a containment strategy due to the intervention and subsequent loss of territory to the Chinese communist forces.
Once the Armistice Agreement was signed in 1953, these objectives were reached.
However, in order to safeguard against any efforts of renewal, the United States and South Korea entered into the Mutual Defense Agreement that validates the requirement for defensive forces in South Korea to ensure that the North Koreans do not renew their offensive efforts. This is in keeping with America's role in the world as outlined in the 2001 Quadrennial Defense Review. "America's goals are to promote peace, sustain freedom and encourage prosperity….
US military strength is essential to achieving these goals, as it assures friends and allies of an unwavering US commitment to common interests." 
24
Since the Armistice Agreement was signed in 1953, the primary purpose of the US military presence in South Korea has been to deter any further acts of aggression by North Korea and to contain the North Korean People's Army (NKPA) at the 38 th parallel. To this day, the US has been successful in accomplishing this mission. Although there have been several with a large combined air force and naval forces in the region not only guarantees to the people of South Korea that the US is committed to the defense of South Korea, but also demonstrates to North Korea that any act of aggression will be met with an immediate and lethal response.
Besides the psychological impact of a massive army on the southern side of the 38 th parallel, the presence of US troops demonstrates our commitment to the Northeast Asia region in the event of a crisis or contingency where forces would be needed. The 37,000 troops coupled with the US forces stationed in Okinawa, Japan, represent a significant amount of military capability and presence that can be rapidly deployed throughout the region if needed.
Also, an established military presence in the region allows for the continued forward rapid deployment of additional troops and equipment to the region in the event of a major regional conflict. Access to land in the region and the ability to preposition large numbers of troops, equipment and supplies there as part of an intermediate staging base gives the US an immense strategic capability which would be invaluable during a crisis situation.
Although there has been peace on the peninsula since 1953, the presence of US forces is still required due to the continuing build up of military forces and weapons of mass destruction by the North Korean Government. The perceived threat that North Korea poses not only to South Korea but also to the region was categorically emphasized by President George W. Bush in his State of the Union Address on 29 January 2002. In his address President Bush said, "North Korea is a regime arming with missiles and weapons of mass destruction, while starving its citizens." He further stated that the hostile regimes of North Korea, Iraq and Iran constituted an "axis of evil" and along with their terrorist allies "were actively seeking weapons of mass destruction, threatening the peace of the world." 
25
North Korea has the world's fifth largest military, with over half of its ground forces prepositioned along the border at the 38 th parallel postured to launch offensive operations.
Although these conventional forces pose a major threat to the region, an even greater and more dangerous threat is its ability to make and use weapons of mass destruction. An unclassified CIA Report to Congress for the period of 1 January through 30 June 2001 stated that, During this timeframe North Korea continued procurement of raw materials and components for its ballistics missile programs from various foreign sources, especially through North Korean firms in China. We assess that North Korea is capable of producing and delivering via missile warhead or other munitions a wide variety of chemical agents and possible some biological agents." The report went on to say that the North Korean Government is continuing its attempts to procure technology that could help its nuclear program. The report further states that, "We assess that North Korea has produced enough plutonium for one, possibly two, nuclear weapons. 
26
The US has had four planned withdrawals from South Korea. Three of them were completely executed. All of the withdrawal plans have met with staunch resistance by the South Korean Government. The South Korean Government vehemently opposed troop The third withdrawal occurred in 1971 under President Richard M. Nixon. One Army division, 7 th Infantry Division, was withdrawn from the peninsula leaving only the 2 nd Infantry Division. The US continued to provide economic and military assistance for the defense of South Korea, however, the majority of the manpower would have to be provided by South Army divisions had increased from 29 in 1977 to 37 in 1979; and the number of tanks and armored personnel carriers had increased by 35 and 20 percent, respectively. In the end the withdrawal program under President Carter resulted in the withdrawal of only one infantry battalion. 
31
Previously, the DPRK was dedicated to a forward defense deployment in which forces were deployed along the 38 th parallel and reinforced from the rear. Reinforcements would require time and could be detected through our intelligence capabilities. North Korea had changed to a defense in depth whereby they could launch an attack without reinforcements required by forward defense planning. 32 Thus, the US and South Korea's reaction time was severely reduced.
The second, third and fourth withdrawal plans illustrate that history can repeat itself on the Korean Peninsula. As the presence of US forces diminished, the North Korean military machine gained power and momentum through increased buildup and forward posturing of offensive forces. The intentions of North Korea are transparent -reunification of the Korean Peninsula under a communist regime. Why else would the government spend so much of its GDP on its military and so little on feeding its own people? The former North Korean President, Kim Il Sung, had vowed to reunite Korea and envisioned a united Korea under his leadership. 
33
31
32
33
The presence of US forces in South Korea remains a clear statement of a shared commitment not only to the people and democratic government of South Korea but also to the continuance of peace in the region. The US forces in South Korea are strategically prepositioned and designed for employment not only as a deterrent to North Korea but for contingency operations and crisis in the Asia-Pacific region. The physical presence deters aggression and encourages conflict resolution at the lowest level vice another war on the peninsula.
The current socio-economic conditions in North Korea give rise to the potential for the implosion of the current government -collapse of the regime of Kim Jung Il. Due to North Korea's preoccupation with conventional and nuclear military buildup, it has fiscally drained the resources of the country. In their attempt to continue their military buildup, the impact is continued economic depression for the people of North Korea. According to the latest CIA economic overview report, North Korea is one of the world's most centrally planned and isolated economies facing desperate economic conditions. Industrial capital stock is nearly beyond repair as a result of years of under investment and spare parts shortages. The nation faces its seventh year of food shortages because of weather-related problems, including a major drought in 2000, and chronic shortages of fertilizer and fuel. Massive international food aid deliveries have allowed the regime to escape the major consequence of spreading economic failure, such as mass starvation, but the population remains vulnerable to prolonged malnutrition and deteriorating living conditions. 
34
35
If the North Korean Government did implode, this could give the Chinese the opportunity to intervene in the peninsula once again. The presence of US forces on the peninsula could deter the Chinese from invading North Korea or at least remain above the 38 th parallel. The possible collapse of the North Korean government is a real threat to the border of China. As during the Korean War, the Chinese view North Korea as a buffer zone on its flank from the United States.
Another facet of the North Korean instability is the potential for explosion of the government -an eruption by the will of the North Korean people against the ideals of communism that could lead to a national revolution. The North Korean Government continues to preach a line of self-reliance, self-sufficiency and isolationism among its people from the rest of the world. However, self-reliance will only permeate so far when the populace is cold and starving from lack of food and energy. The Ministry of Unification in South Korea estimated that despite all the humanitarian aid received from the international community in 2000 ($178.88 million), North Korea had a shortage of 2.4 million tons of food grains. 
36
37
North Korea's military first vice people first policy could cause a major humanitarian disaster that has the potential to topple the regime of Kim Jung Il. Regardless, if the regime implodes or explodes, the region would see a major influx of refugees flowing out of North Korea towards the borders of China, South Korea, or out to sea.
National reunification on the peninsula has long been a goal of both North and South Korea.
Reunification meaning that North and South Korea become one united country under one form of government. In contrast, reconciliation is centered on both sides remaining separate countries but eliminating political and military confrontation and the acceptance of mutual recognition of and respect for the other side's form of government. 
38
Through the engagement policy, both South Korea and the United States are dealing with the fact that the previous containment policy has produced aggressive and uncooperative behavior from the North Korean Government. Through economic and humanitarian aid, increased diplomatic and political ties, the policy attempts to draw the North Korean Government out of isolation and engage in economic cooperation and improved diplomatic relations. Thus, by actively participating in conflict prevention and expanding US participation between the two governments the policy supports the increased US role in strategic and enduring national interests.
Whether the outcome is either reunification or reconciliation, the US will still need to stay engaged on the peninsula to ensure that peace and stability endure. The US must continue to discourage aggression by the remaining communist hard-liners in the North Korean Government.
Although the US Government views the North Korean military buildup as a severe security threat to South Korea, South Koreans' fear of military invasion has declined in the past decade particularly among the younger generation. According to recent polls, South Koreans do not register the same level of concern as many Americans over a potential North Korean invasion, nuclear weapons development, ballistic missile testing and missile sales abroad. 
39
Due to the increased dialogue and engagement opportunities between North and South Korea created by the Sunshine Policy, fears of invasion have decreased and South Korean debate about the continued US military presence has increased. Several well-publicized crossborder family reunifications have replaced fear with hopeful expectations of a full reunification of the peninsula. Young radical groups have united with several citizen groups demanding a full US withdrawal of forces. 
40
Several contentious issues also generate debate on the continued need for US military presence in South Korea. Most recently the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) was updated and signed in December 2000 after six years of negotiations. It now requires that US military personnel accused of certain crimes will be turned over to South Korean law enforcement personnel prior to their trial and that they will receive certain legal guarantees from the South Korean Government. Another heated issue deals with the South Korean monetary contribution to the stationing of US forces in South Korea. Currently it costs over $2 billion annually to 40.
station US forces in South Korea. South Korea pays $350 million annually to the US to help offset this cost. The Bush administration is seeking a 30% increase in host nation support.
However, the South Korean Government and population are very hesitant to increase their financial support. 
41
The presence of US forces in South Korea has an enormous impact on both the society and the economy which impacts pubic opinion. Currently, the US footprint in South Korea consists of 100 Army installations, 18 Air Force sites, and 2 Navy facilities. Over 19,153 Korean national civilian personnel are employed by the US military on these military bases. 
42
The Japanese Government has traditionally regarded the presence of US forces in South Korea as essential to the security of Japan. In 1969, Premier Eisaku Sato stated that the security of South Korea was "essential to Japan's own security." 
43
The Japanese view the US troop presence in South Korea as the first line of defense from their previous enemies: The Republic of China and Russia. Since World War II, the Japanese Government has relied on the United States Government to ensure a relatively friendly and democratic government in South Korea. "The US commitment to South Korea and the presence of US forces there prevent the domination of the peninsula by a major power unfriendly to Japan." 44 American bases in Japan also play a major role in the defense of South Korea. In particular, bases on the island of Okinawa provide a substantial amount of forces and equipment that would deploy to the peninsula in the event of a North Korean invasion.
From an economic standpoint, stability on the peninsula is essential to the Japanese economy. South Korea and Japan are major trading partners and throughout the years South Korea has been a major recipient of investment by Japanese industries. Japan is South Korea's second largest trading partner while South Korea is Japan's third largest trading partner. Total trade between the two countries in 1999 exceeded $40 billion. Total Japanese direct investment in South Korea total $8 billion. 
45
43
44
45
46
Due to the geographical location of the Korean Peninsula, at the strategic crossroads between China, Russia and Japan, the stationing of US forces in South Korea is viewed as essential by the Japanese as a clear sign of commitment to their security and defense. The Government of Japan realizes that their economic prosperity and future growth in the global economy are directly linked to stability and cooperation in the Northeast Asia region. The Japanese Defense Forces (JDF) were established in 1954 to defend Japan from conventional attack from outside Japan for a brief period of time until US forces intervene in support of the Mutual Defense Treaty. Under the existing treaty, Japanese Defense Forces cannot be utilized in an Asian regional conflict unless there is a direct attack against Japan. Therefore, Japanese military contribution to regional peace and stability is limited and thus linked to alliance cooperation with the United States.
In light of the end of the Cold War and the breakup of the Soviet Union, the emergence of a new world order developed whereby there is only one global superpower -the United States.
However, due to constant changes in the evolving political and military situation in the Northeast Asia region, a major military competitor could emerge in the region. One could argue that 
46
Russia is on the periphery of the Northeast Asia region power struggle and does not play a leading role like it used to. As Russia moves to a more global market economy and focuses inward towards domestic social and economic reforms, it is not viewed by the US as a threat or military competitor in the region.
However, stability and cooperation in the region is the focus of Russia's new foreign policy under President Vladamir Putin, particularly to promote economic development in Siberia and the Far Eastern region of Russia. President Putin visited North Korea and China in July 2000 with these ideals in mind. Putin's diplomatic efforts are aimed at coaxing the North Korean Government to be less isolated from the global economy.
Putin characterizes the situation on the Korean Peninsula as a serious security concern to Russia. The new Russian foreign policy concentrates on "its equal participation in the solution of the Korean problem and balanced relations with the two Korean states." 47 If successful in this endeavor Russia could become more influential in international political affairs and could be viewed by the US as an important intermediary in dealing with the North Koreans. However, given Russia's current economic situation, their influence as a major military competitor in the Northeast Asia region is limited and minimal. The People's Republic of China, on the other hand, continues to build momentum as it emerges as a viable military competitor in the Northeast Asia region. The Chinese Government embarked on a transformational journey as it tries to maintain a communist regime yet focuses its economic development on a global market economy. Rapid growth and internationalism of its economy have led Chinese leaders to seek membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO). However, socially and politically the communist way of life is clashing with capitalism.
Chinese communist hard-liners try to remain in control of all facets of Chinese society, restricting the spread of capitalism.
China's foreign policy in the Northeast Asia region can be characterized as oscillating between cooperation and confrontation. 
48
(Group politics referring to US led military alliances such as the Japanese -US security arrangement and NATO.) 
49
50
51
52
The forward stationing of troops in South Korea not only demonstrates US commitment to its allies but also is consistent with and contributes to the achievement of its national security interests and vital strategic interests for the Northeast Asia Region. As stated previously, current US national security objectives for the Northeast Asia region are to enhance security, promote democracy and promote economic prosperity. The physical presence or "boots on the ground" of 37,000 US troops on South Korean soil not only demonstrates US commitment to a lasting peace on the Korean Peninsula but support for multilateral economic and security cooperation and stability for regional peace and progress.
Since the end of the Cold War, the US has emerged as the sole superpower in the world today with the "world's largest economy and supremacy in every field -from its technology to 
51
In summary, the United States maintains several multi-faceted relationships with all five major players in the Northeast Asia region at different places on the diplomatic spectrum. Relationships with South Korea and Japan have developed into strong, decades old bilateral alliances built on political, security and economic concerns. Relationships with Russia and China are continuing to evolve as their socio-economic domestic issues take center stage in the redevelopment of their governments in light of the international community. The US relationship with North Korea, however, has remained tense, cautious and suspicious.
Since the Armistice Agreement was signed in 1953, the North Korean government has remained a horrific repressive regime that has focused its efforts on military buildup, both conventional and weapons of mass destruction, and isolating its people and economy from the rest of the world. Unfortunately, this isolationism has led to massive degradation of basic human rights and starvation of the North Korean people.
In trying to answer the questions: "Is the presence of forward deployed troops on the Korean Peninsula the key to cooperative security and stability in the Northeast Asia region?
And should the US continue to station forces on the Korean Peninsula?" this paper examined and analyzed the key roles US forces play on the Korean Peninsula and the effect their presence has not only in Korea but also throughout the region. In analyzing the different aspects of these questions, reviewing and comprehending US security objectives and vital strategic interests for the region are essential. Active and transparent engagement in the region allows the US to protect and advance their enduring national interest of:
• Ensuring US freedom of action
• Contributes to the global economic well-being
The background of the Northeast Asia region provides the historical perspective needed to understand the complexities of issues facing the region today. Analyzing the North Korean regime under Kim Jung Il and the current military capability puts the threat to stability on the peninsula into perspective and provides an appreciation for continued regional peace. The future implication of the peninsula reunification or reconciliation not only impacts the Korean people but all of the regional neighbors. The impact of public opinion between generations of South Koreans plays a major role in the continued presence of US forces on the peninsula and their role in preserving stability. Continued peaceful relations between Japan, Russia and China towards both North and South Korea will continue to provide a vital link to sustained stability.
The presence of US forces under the UNC in cooperation with the ROK forces is built upon the premises to defend freedom and deter aggression. Since 1953, US Forces Korea have accomplished this mission.
After examining and analyzing the different aspects of the questions, "Is the presence of forward deployed troops on the Korean Peninsula the key to cooperative security and stability in the Northeast Asia region? And should the US continue to station forces on the Korean Peninsula?" the evidence suggests the following conclusions:
The forward deployed presence of US forces in South Korea for the last fifty years has reinforced and assisted the Republic of Korea in the defense of their country, deterred not only North Korean aggression but other regional neighbors, and maintained a peaceful coexistence.
All of which have provided for a lasting peace not only on the Korean Peninsula but also throughout Northeast Asia.
Although it can be argued that North Korea's conventional military capabilities may have eroded since 1990 due to antiquated weaponry, the amount of conventional weapons, the large physical military personnel presence prepositioned in an offensive posture and the ability to employ weapons of mass destruction far outweigh that argument. US intelligence estimates concluded that existing facilities in North Korea give them the capability to produce over 30 atomic weapons annually. 
56
It is hard to argue with success.
Besides defending South Korea from North Korea aggression, US forces in South Korea provide critical prepositioned forces and access to the Asian theater. In an era where access is key in order to execute full spectrum military operations, the utility of US forces on the peninsula provides a dual capability: protection for South Korea from North Korea and being a deterrent for conflict in the entire region. Access to land based prepositioned supplies, equipment and infrastructure is a combat multiplier. Even more, it provides the capability to provide large-scale reinforcements by sea and air from the continental United States.
Since the American way of war is heavily dependent on air power to do a majority of the fighting or shape the battlefield prior to a ground campaign, access to air bases is essential.
Without access, employment of land based air assets is severely limited. 
57
Security on the peninsula also provides Japan the reassurance that the US is committed to Japanese security, the Mutual Defense Agreement and the stability of their economy. The hegemony of US military power helps balance other regional powers and keeps belligerents in check at a very low security cost to them. This allows our allies to focus their resources on economic development and not high defense budgets. 
58
As long as the US maintains its national security objectives and vital strategic interests in the Northeast Asia region, US forces must remain on the peninsula in order to shape the environment. Even if the peninsula reunifies or reconciles, US Forces Korea provide a stabilizing force that can and have for five decades provided cooperative security and stability among neighboring countries in the Northeast Asia region.
abstract (maximum 200 words) As long as the United States maintains its current national security objectives and vital strategic interests in the Northeast Asia region, US forces must remain deployed in South Korea in order to deter North Korean aggression and to ensure cooperative stability and security throughout the entire region.
53  
53  
Robert H. Scales and Larry M. Wortzel, The Future US Military Presence in Asia: Landpower and the Geostrategy of American Commitment (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War College, 999)
Richard G. Stillwell, "The Need for US Ground Forces in Korea," AEI Defense Review, No.2 (1977) p. 25.
The White House, National Security Strategy for a New Century, 1.
The White House, National Security Strategy for a New Century, 37.
Department of Defense, Report of the Quadrennial Defense Review, (Washington, DC: GPO, 2001) p. 2.
Lee Suk Bok, The Impact of US Forces in Korea, (Washington, DC: National Defense University Press, 1987), p. 4.
U.S. Forces Korea Homepage, online edition under "Combined Forces Command," Accessed on 2 January 2002.
Uzal A. Ent, Fighting on the Brink: Defense of the Pusan Perimeter (Puducah, KY: Turner Publishing Co, 1996) p. 26.
U.S. Forces Homepage, online edition under "Casualties and Participants in the Korean War," Accessed on 16 March 2002.
The National Institute for Defense Studies Japan, East Asian Strategic Review
2001, 143.   
The National Institute for Defense Studies Japan, East Asian Strategic Review 2001, 122.
The National Institute for Defense Studies Japan, East Asian StrategicReview 2001, 124-125.   
Kozaryn, "Korea Commander  Tackles Readiness Challenges," Armed Forces Press Service, Accessed on 2 January 2002.
Larry A. Niksch, "Korea: US-South Korean Relations -Issues for Congress," CRS Report for Congress,B98045, (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, 22 January 2002), p. 10.
"CIA Outlines North Korean Weapons Plan," CNN, Accessed on 1 February 2002.
Central Intelligence Agency, Unclassified Report to Congress on the Acquisition of Technology Relating to Weapons of Mass Destruction and Advanced Conventional Munitions, Accessed on 9 February 2002.
Henry Kissinger, Diplomacy, (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994), p. 475.   
Ent, Fighting on the Brink: Defense of the Pusan Perimeter, 26.
Central Intelligence Agency, "North Korea," The World Fact Book, Accessed on 12 January 2002.
Niksch, "Korea: US-South Korean Relations -Issues for Congress," CRS Report for Congress, 2.
The National Institute for Defense Studies Japan, East Asian Strategic Review 2001, 125.
The National Institute for Defense Studies Japan, East Asian Strategic Review 2001, 125.
Gennady Chufrin, "Russian Interests in Korean Security in Post-Cold War World," in Asian Flashpoint-Security and the Korean Peninsula, ed. Andrew Mack (Australia: Allen & Unwin Australia Pty Ltd, 1993), p.
Niksch, "Korea: US-South Korean Relations -Issues for Congress, CRS Report for Congress, 10.
Niksch, "Korea: US-South Korean Relations -Issues for Congress, CRS Report for Congress, 12.
Niksch, "Korea: US-South Korean Relations -Issues for Congress, CRS Report for Congress, 11.
U.S. Forces Korea Homepage, online edition, under "USFK Manpower Strength," Accessed on 2 January 2002.
The National Institute for Defense Studies Japan, East Asian StrategicReview 2001, 238-239.   
The National Institute for Defense Studies Japan, East Asian Strategic Review 2001, 172.
The National Institute for Defense Studies Japan, East Asian StrategicReview 2001, 176-177.   
David Shambaugh, "From the White House, All Zigzags Lead to China," The Washington Post, February 17, 2002, p. B3.
Niksch, "Korea: US-South Korean Relations -Issues for Congress," CRS Report for Congress, 2.
Devitt, "The QDR and East Asia," Proceedings, 88.   
Tan, "East Asia & US Need Each Other," Proceedings, 63.
February 2002.
OMB No. 
0704-0188
SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME AND ADDRESS USMC Command and Staff College Marine Corps University 2076 South Street, MCCDC Quantico
VA22134-5068 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11
SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S)