# ID: a44aad3de1c047028b125248d84aada2
# Title: Resurrecting NSC-68 for the Global War on Terror
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2007.0
# Fulltext:
The attacks on the World Trade Center on 9-11 provided a tremendous potential catalyst for our national leadership to demonstrate the capacity of the American Government.
Our president declared a "Global War on Terror" (GWOT) and with those words began the "Long War" that is still being waged after five plus years.
Today, campaigns subordinate to the GWOT are being executed in Iraq, Afghanistan, Horn of Africa and within the borders of the United States of America.
The conduct of these campaigns is and will continue to be instrumental in the overall success of the U.S. government in the "Long War."
Although each campaign plays an important role in the overall War on Terror, they will not be the focus of this monograph.
Rather, the national strategy directing their objectives will be the focus.
The GWOT is not the nation's first long war.
World War II arguably began for America as early as 1939 as we were involved diplomatically and economically with the U.K and Russia with the famous "Lend Lease Program."
The end of United States involvement in both Europe and Japan did not occur with the signing of an instrument of surrender, but included lengthy occupation duty by U.S. military forces in both countries.
Post conflict reconstruction and posturing military forces for a potential threat from communist Russia kept the U.S. government engaged overseas for many more years.