# ID: a5d7411486fb489087ad4b9981e2eec9
# Title: Hidden in Plain Sight: Signs of Great Power War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
This thesis is the product of an intellectual journey
Is Great Power War Approaching?
One crucial question for US strategists today is whether or not the United States is approaching a great power war-especially an immense, costly war that could change the international system as we know it.
Since Thucydides, possibilities and probabilities of great power war have inspired contemplation about international relations. Across time, there have been strategically important war signals leading up to the deliberate infliction of violence. Looking at the twentieth century's first great power conflict, World War I (WWI), this paper explores certain variables that made conflict more likely, and then uses those variables to clarify strategic contours in the complex international relationship between the United States and China today.
This paper springs from a basic assumption: intelligent and purposeful application of historical lessons has a use for today's decision-makers. This thesis holds two strategic cautions: first, existing parallels between the origins of World War I and the modern Asia-Pacific region have strategic implications; and two, contextual differences between 1914 and today should be understood and identified to avoid misapplying historical analogies. The paper concludes that the risk of major war exists, but its eventuality is not inevitable, particularly if leaders take to heart a few strategic cautions.
Great power war has three primary attributes. 1 During a great power war, all of the great powers in the region are involved, the wars are high-intensity fighting that requires full military mobilization, and states could be eliminated as sovereign nations. 2 Thus, great power wars can change the international order and involve a large degree of military 
1
2
Everyone is a historian, and history can provide many insights for leaders. Every person relies on memories and experiences to problemsolve. People want to make sense of complicated environments, and the past can help with this endeavor. National leaders should utilize history not only to comprehend current circumstances but also to understand potential adversaries and possible futures. People may ignore information that does not confirm their existing beliefs, which can lead to a self-defeating blindness. 
5
4
5
There are parallels between the factors that led to WWI in Europe and the Asian-Pacific region today. There are also contextual differences between the two. Strategists can compare these two periods to gain insights. While this paper acknowledges the pitfalls of historical analogies, decision-makers can and should still look to history for understanding.
Leaders must understand why great powers move from relatively peaceful interactions to military action for political interests. The period before the outbreak of war is immensely important because decisionmakers may be able to take proactive steps in order to avert war. This assumes that states face choices, and if these leaders knew what factors increase the likelihood of great power war, they could act in a more informed manner.
The prewar juncture shares important characteristics that have the unique opportunity advance peace. The most important feature of prewar relations is that the states are at peace. Political leaders make choices that initiate war. There are factors presented in this thesis that can aid political leaders in realizing the power disparities that can manifest incentives to go to war. Major prewar junctures are rare strategic moments when leading states, or great powers, face a choice on whether to keep peaceful relations or initiate military action. 
6
and three, great geographical differences are present. Despite these differences, however, the similarities provide a useful comparison for leaders to navigate today's world without sparking a prolonged, deadly war. This paper will now explain how these variables originated.
The variables for this paper originated from multiple strands of realism and international relations theory. The first variable, a hegemonic challenger, comes from Robert Gilpin's hegemonic stability theory. 
7
when the status quo is threatened, the risk of war increases. This leads to the second variable, a power imbalance.
States are more likely to initiate war when they believe they can win. John Mearsheimer discussed the concept of power asymmetries in his book The Tragedy of Great Power Politics. 
8
7
9
10
A history of repeated crises is the third variable, and at its core, this factor deals with how decision-makers may be predisposed to fear another state. Great powers anticipate danger and fear rivals, and these repeated crises could compound these emotions. 
11
12
Politics that people see what they expect to see. 
13
14
The fourth variable, entangling alliances, stems from realism as well. In international anarchy, states may have to pursue alliances to enhance their prospect for survival. 
15
16
The variables' origins fit soundly in a realist perspective, and each factor represents a symptom of Thucydides' origins of great power conflict: fear, honor, and interest. States will accept an increased risk of war to drive certain political aims. Each of these variables has importance as a risk indicator for great power war, and the following sections describe each in detail.
A hegemonic challenger is a revisionist state wishing to shift the balance of power in its favor. A current status quo power seeks to keep the status quo that supports its honored place at the top. In War and Change in World Politics, Robert Gilpin argued a hegemonic challenger can be destabilizing because as states rise in power, their cost-benefit analysis to go to war can become more favorable. 
17
Thucydides described the fear of a hegemonic challenger when he described what caused the Peloponnesian War. "What made the war inevitable," he wrote, "was the growth of Athenian power and the fear which this caused in Sparta." 
18
20
21
22
A power imbalance can create a dangerous condition whereby a state calculates the cost-benefit analysis of going to war and believes there are more benefits than costs associated with war. Generally, there must be a power imbalance between great powers, coupled with a sense conflict cannot be resolved absent violence, for great power war to occur. 
23
24
In particular, a state whose relative power has declined and does not have enough power to win a great power war will not risk major war-though a still powerful state may initiate war-provoking actions to preserve the status quo. 
25
26
Other great powers may form alliances against a declining power in order to avoid being a victim of a preventative war, and declining states must be cautious about the possibility of a long, drawn-out war that will not only be deadly but also economically costly.
When states begin to have consistently bad interactions, expectations for future tensions start to rise.
27
28
For example, fifth century B.C. Greece was under a continual war cycle with only a few peaceful breaks, which created animosity between the Athenians and Spartans. While the cost-benefit analysis supported the logic of nearly continuous war because there were immense profits (colonies, land, natural resources, tribute) and huge costs not fighting (risks of enslavement, death, and loss of property), enmity from repeated conflict created the feeling that Athens and Sparta were enemies and war between them was inevitable. 
29
Most importantly, if states begin to view another state as hostile after disputes, then the state will be less likely to compromise. As Robert Jervis explained, "When one state sees another as extremely hostile, it is apt to find most compromises on specific issues unattractive. Since the other's demands are considered illegitimate, having to give in even slightly will be seen as unreasonable." 30 Thus, as states have repeated negative interactions, perceptions of worthless negotiations and animosity begin to linger, and the use of force can seem to be a more attractive option. Over time, prophecies stemming from animosity and fear of conflict can self-fulfilling.
Negotiations can often seem impractical between two states with a history of poor compromises over security or prestige issues. Even if one side modifies its demands, the other side may still refrain from reciprocating the concession. 
31
Alliances can appear threatening to other countries, and even  President George Washington warned the United States about the danger of permanent alliances in his 1796 Farewell Address. 
37
32
33
38
While there could be benefits to alliances, going to war was for him clearly a possible consequence of alliance, a possibility that has not disappeared in all the years since Washington spoke.
While four similarities between 1914 and today form the bedrock of this thesis, three contextual differences-nuclear weapons, a different international order, and geography-will be addressed by this study.
Nuclear weapons were not around in 1914, and this is a crucial contextual variance. The possibility of relatively few weapons blowing up the world has changed the ways states calculate decisions to go to war.
Additionally, a shift in the international order occurred between WWI and today.
The classic example of a multipolar system stemming from the Treaty of Westphalia-where multiple states balanced each other through diplomatic means, changing alliances, and conflict-existed on the eve of the First World War. 
39
40
These differences constituted discrepant information for this analogy and are addressed in this paper. As Khong pointed out, it is imperative not to slight or discount discrepant information, and analogies should be challenged by critical thinkers in order to avoid 
38
39
41
This paper covers two periods of history: one that led to a major war and one that carries the risk of a major war. The focus is on an analysis of the First World War and the conditions that are present today in US-Chinese relations. While there are clear differences between the two periods, both situations stem from one commonality: fear from a rising state.
The evidence of this paper's main argument is found in chapters one through three. From this evidence, an analysis provides decisionmakers implications to aid in strategic understanding in regards to US-Sino relations. The implications build upon current international relations theories, and the thesis synthesizes multiple international relations viewpoints into an integrative argument.
Chapter 1
There is no such thing as an inevitable war. If war comes it will be from failure of human wisdom. Andrew Bonar Law, Former British Prime Minister
The First World War (WWI) was devastating. The war killed millions, drained economies, and tore societies apart. In hindsight, the enthusiasm surrounding the great powers' military mobilizations seem difficult to imagine given the despair that was to follow from a bloody struggle. 1 WWI was much longer and more costly than most people imagined at its outset. 
2
This section shows how Germany grew as a power and threatened its European neighbors, most notably Britain, France, and Russia. A look at Germany's industrial and military rise shows Germany's growth as a nation. In addition, Germany's Weltpolitik-its quest to expand to foreign markets, have more colonial possessions, and operate on a 1 Barbara W. 4 "Wealth here is a straightforward composite indicator that assigns equal weight to iron/steel production and energy consumption." The percentage shows the "total amount of iron/steel that all the great powers produced for a given year, and then [Mearsheimer] calculated the percentage of that total accounted for by each great power. [Mearsheimer] performed a similar calculation for energy consumption." The "wealth" percentage is the average of iron/steel production and energy consumption. surpassed the United Kingdom's wealth. 5 Thus, Germany challenged Britain's share of European wealth in the years before WWI.
Germany challenged Britain in military growth as well (see Table 
2
The French and German armies leading up to the First World War were comparable in size, though there was one key difference that goes beyond the numbers. Unlike the Germans, the French did not train their reserve forces to fight alongside the regular standing army, giving the German army a competitive advantage. 8 Moreover, the German army's superior general staff and better heavy artillery gave Germany a moderate qualitative edge over the French army. 
9
5
1
Mearsheimer,
The Tragedy of Great Power Politics,
301,
517. 6
2
" Mearsheimer,
The Tragedy of Great Power Politics,
187,
303. 7
8
9
it is evident why a rising Germany posed such a threat to its European neighbors. the need for ships to the point where he began to see virtually every international crisis as a lesson in the primacy of naval power." 
12
13
14
In their exchange concerning German interests in Africa, Bertie threatened Germany if they intervened: "Should the Germans lay so much as a finger on the Transvaal," Bertie stated, "the British government would not stop at any step, 'even the ultimate' (an unmistakable reference to war), to 'repel any German intervention.'" 
15
16
17
18
There was, for instance, an increasing theme that Germany was destined to be a global power as illustrated in Prince von Bulow's first speech in the Reichstag. The German foreign minister began his 1897 oration with the words: "The days when Germans granted one neighbor the earth, the other the sea, and reserved for themselves the sky, where pure doctrine reigns-those days are over. We see it as our foremost task to foster and cultivate [German] interests." 
19
20
The Rise of the Anglo-German Antagonism:
1860-1914, the issue of Germany's "proper" place in the world was troubling because German industrial growth brought about a quasipolitical influence in the region. 
21
Germany to be a challenge to the balance of power that existed in the region. Even with economic interconnectivity, the international community saw Germany as a threat to the international order. "So far as the British and German governments were concerned, the 1914-18 conflict was essentially entered into because the former power wished to preserve the existing status quo whereas the latter, for a mixture of offensive and defensive motives, was taking steps to alter it." 
22
This section shows that German decision-makers calculated a power imbalance in which they believed they could win a great power war. German statesmen believed the benefits of going to war outweighed the costs of peace when they crossed the Belgium border in 1914.
Germany saw that Britain would not remain neutral, feared Russia's growth, and began to believe that a general war was looming. With the possibility of a general war, German leaders began a cost-benefit analysis of the consequences of war, and for them, the issue became not whether, but rather when, to engage in war. Hollweg used this offer to determine whether Britain needed to be included in Germany's cost-benefit calculations of war. The Anglo-German détente ultimately failed.
24
25
35
30
This section examines the last three major European crises along with two minor crises (the First and Second Balkans Crises). The benefit of the major crises is that most, if not all, the Great Powers were involved in the conflicts. The minor crises in this analysis help show the importance of building animosity between regional rivals, which can spark great power war.
France against each other. 39 For background, most European countries recognized the "status quo" of Morocco-the "Pearl of North Africa." 40 
36
41
France have Morocco if England could have Egypt. 
42
43
44
45
46
41
42
43
44
47
48
49
50
The Agadir Crisis of 1911 once again pitted Germany against
France and featured talks of war. 
51
52
47
48
War of 1914, vol. 1, 198, 202, 206-207. 49
50
51
52
53
54
France put military forces inside of Morocco. In response, a German military ship parked off the Moroccan coast. 
55
56
57
Ferdinand's chauffeur turned down a wrong street and met an armed terrorist. 
63
64
In retrospect, Germany gave its ally a significant amount of latitude, supporting Austria-Hungary's declaration of war against a country that was openly under the protection of Russia. 
65
In sum, the history of repeated crises contextualizes the tension built up over time between great powers. These tensions created a climate of expectation that future conflicts were inevitable, but that the conflicts would not last long. None of the previous conflicts had lasted long, and, in fact, some German leaders, such as Staff Chief Helmuth von Moltke, foresaw a short, decisive war. 
66
63 Luigi Albertini, The Origins of the War of 1914, vol. 2, The Crisis of July 1914: From the Sarajevo Outrage to the Austro-Hungarian General Mobilization, ed. and trans. Isabella M. Massey (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1952), 37. 
64
65
Analyzing the European alliance system helps illuminate why European states abandoned their coexistence for violent hostilities. The alliance systems-the Entente Cordiale, the Anglo-Russian Convention, the Franco-Russian Alliance, and the Triple Alliance-that snared the European states was another foundational cause to WWI.
Germany had a bilateral security agreement with Austria. German  These entangling alliances were brought about by a classic example of a security dilemma, which included concerns over sea control. Germany's increased investments in its naval expansion alarmed the British military. 
69
70
The security dilemma also existed on land. By German calculations, Russia had huge potential to field over a million soldiers, and this sheer size "haunted the Germans." 71 Germany felt encircled, so
German politicians countered by strengthening their alliance with Austria-Hungary. The European great powers divided most of the continent into a bipolar region, the Triple Alliance, or the Triple Entente, with a few exceptions, such as Belgium. Again, the alliance system created by the elites was not the sole cause of the war, but it was a foundational cause that led to WWI's magnitude. Following the July 1914 crisis, politicians were unable to resolve the crisis diplomatically, 
69
70
71
and Germany saw more benefits than costs associated with executing the Schlieffen Plan.
Ultimately, support of an ally can lead a great power into conflict over interests that would otherwise not be an existential security interest. As this paper argues, alliances can lead to miscalculations. While maintaining alliances was essential, the German decision to support Austria's ultimatum to Serbia could have been different.
German decision-makers clearly did not choose an alternative that could maintain an ally and simultaneously de-escalate a crisis. The First World War is an example of how alliance commitments inclusive of great powers drove states to great power war.
War is too serious of a venture to be considered inevitable. Human decision-making in an extremely complex and uncertain environment led to World War I. People must comprehend the contextual environment of a crisis and realize they merge biases into their understanding. All wars seem to have triggering events and underlying causes. During a crisis, decision-makers must anticipate the consequences of their actions and the tensions that may be present from well before they were in leadership positions. Most importantly, decision-makers should not discount the signposts of great power war.
To summarize, there were four interlinked causes to WWI: a hegemonic challenger, a power imbalance, a history of repeated crises, and entangling alliances. No variable pinpoints the most important cause. However, each factor was apparent, even in the complex environment prior to the 1914 July Crisis. The systemic pressures of having a hegemonic challenger-Germany-drove its neighbors into decisions that made war more likely. Just as Britain was concerned about Germany's growth, Germany had a reasonable fear about Russia's latent military strength, with its huge population and landmass. The for great power war loom need to be acknowledged and handled appropriately. This chapter does not seek to predict the future, but rather elicit a greater understanding of the highly dynamic nature of today's US-China relationship to guide American policy-makers.
This section shows how China has grown as a world power and has the capacity to threaten its neighbors. A look at China's economic and military rise will show its growth. This section will also examine how China's revisionist ambitions challenge the international balance of power.
The world has yet to see if China's economic rise can continue, but its recent material growth has been spectacular and indisputable. As         China views current laws and the post-World War II international legal architecture as unfairly biased toward Western interests and sees the present international order as sustaining Western hegemony. 
17
18
Warfares" doctrine. Its authors introduced this strategy in 2003 and the CCP Central Committee and the Central Military Commission subsequently endorsed it. 
19
20
China dubbed its island-building activities as benign projects in reclamation and ocean management.
Nonetheless, Chinese leaders are pushing international norms and international law toward a more Chinese-centric version of legitimacy.
Presently, this territorial dispute issue is under deliberations at the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea (ITLOS)-and China is not participating in the proceedings (see Figure 
4
Chinese leaders are expecting an event that would have China face the United States on its way to achieving PRC goals. PLA Senior Colonel Liu Mingfu's 2010 China Dream defined a national "grand goal" as "when China takes over as world leader," reestablishing the PRC to its believed rightful place. 
22
22 Mingfu,
The China Dream,
[69]
[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]
[103]
[104]
[105]
[106]
[107]
[108]
[109]
[110]
[111]
[112]
[113]
[114]
[115]
[116]
[117]
and Kissinger,
On China,
506.
23
Hard power is still a currency that great powers understand, and  Disputes, 1962-1988," (SAASS Thesis, Maxwell AFB, AL: School of Advanced Air and Space Studies), 1. 
37
missiles into the Taiwan Strait, apparently to undercut the campaign of a pro-independent Taiwan presidential candidate. 
38
39
40
41
42
43
54
55
5
54
55
has flown US military planes near the construction as well. All this creates on-going tensions between the United States and China with no abatement in sight. The potential for miscalculation in the ongoing dispute is fertile ground for great power war.
China views these animosity-building incidents as a continuation of its "Century of Humiliation." Historians typically view China's "Century of Humiliation" as lasting from approximately 1839 to 1945, when foreign countries extracted significant concessions and territory from the Chinese government. 
56
States and its allies vis-à-vis China to levels that increase the likelihood 
56
57
64
65
66
China's increasingly assertive stance on territorial disputes in the East and South China Sea and the US insistence upon normative rules of engagement between nations erodes regional stability and generates US-Sino tension (see Figure 
6
China advances its claims with a form of legal warfare that is called legal  crises between the two Koreas, a miscalculation or escalatory move is not out of the realm of possible, which could also lead to US-China entanglement.
These regional states and their prominent allies be they US, or Chinese, could instigate the environment for great power war, much like that of the July 1914 crisis. Regional actors, not unlike great powers in some cases, have a tendency to draw on prestige and national identity to promote their side of a dispute. 
72
The PRC has the advantage of watching from the sidelines as the United States continues to wage war across the globe. The PRC has studied the American way of war, and while they have contempt for American arrogance, Chinese leaders fear facing US conventional forces.
With a strong US presence in the Pacific theater, China had little choice but to modernize its military. The PRC contends that it must contest intolerable foreign policies by the United States, and the only way to challenge is with a strong military and the ability to slowly revise 
70
71
Like 1914, the capacity to wage great power war and the reasons to do so appear to be moving away from peace. Germany believed it could No country wants to begin a war that it does not think could advance its political aims.
The uncertainty surrounding a definitive cost-benefit analysis could be the most important factor that is stopping a current great power war between the United States and China. Because of the sheer complexity of a modern-day war between two nuclear-armed superpowers, the cost-benefit analysis for both sides appears incalculable. There are too many unknown unknowns in the war that make the highest echelon political leaders on both sides unlikely to initiate any action that would warrant a significant combative response. Therefore, Germany initiated its Schlieffen Plan because German military leaders believed they may not have a chance to do so in the future.
Today, with China's trend towards military parity, PRC leaders may believe they have regional comparative advantage in military power-an advantage that would most likely be for a finite period due to US presence. Given China's history of surprise attack, Chinese rivals should use caution concerning a future surprise attack.
Paradoxically, the ambiguity in who would win a great power war using kinetic means between the United States and China makes it more likely that China will seek non-kinetic forms of warfare for PRC interests.
Whether the PRC continues its claims for territory, cyber espionage against US companies, or "Three Warfares," China will attempt avert a conventional military response by the United States. As long as China can advance its interest without using military force, then the initiation of military violence will not take place. The paradox for the United States is that it does not want a great power war because war could destabilize the international order. However, US decision-makers must determine how they would allow a potential hegemon to subvert international norms without initiating military force for US national interests.
Historical crises in the years leading up to WWI created an environment of tension, which is also evident in today's US-China There is a large gap in how people perceive the US-China relationship. Some see the economic benefits from trade and foresee peace in the future. However, the history of repeated disputes between the two states has created mistrust and friction. With distrust comes pessimism over the future. PRC leadership may see diplomacy as a lost cause if continual disputes over territory do not cease. Looking back at the First World War, German leaders felt pessimistic about their ability to advance national interests after it was as demonstrated repeatedly in disputes that diplomacy would not work. As disputes further aggravate actors without providing resolution, the risk for great power war increases.
In 1914 and today, alliance commitments increase the risk of great power war. Strategic partnerships make countries take on commitments that increase the probability of great power war. There are many benefits to security agreements, but war is a definite drawback to such security commitments.
In While security partnerships are not necessarily a strategic weakness, they do increase the risk of great power war. Admittedly, great power war is far more complicated than any single factor. However, the combined four variables deliver a compelling evidentiary basis for increased great power war risk.
The commonalities between WWI and US-China today do not make the analogy between the two periods necessarily sufficient evidence for the duplication of WWI today. This paper argues that the risk of great power war is currently increased, but this does not mean that a repeat of WWI will happen. In fact, fundamental differences regarding nuclear weapons, the international order, and geography between the two periods make an exact replication of the past highly unlikely.
While Nuclear powers cannot ignore the possibility of escalating warfare from limited to unlimited warfare. Indeed, the very existence of nuclear weapons makes their use inescapable in "go to war" calculations. If nuclear weapons were ever to be employed by a state, hopefully, it would use its nuclear weapons in a limited capacity.
As Schelling wrote as recently as 2014, the world must hope that if nuclear weapons were ever to be employed by any country in future wars, the state employing these destructive weapons would restrain its employment.
4
7
8
Over the centuries, states have risen and fallen and will continue to do so. With the ebb and flow of power, sequential hegemons emerge.
Hegemons establish order in various ways, and the 1914 hierarchy was different from the one existing today. 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Today's system relies more on Lockean logic. In a Lockean environment, states treat each other as rivals instead of enemies. 17 This logic does not preclude violence in disputes, but it does espouse the notion that states have the right to sovereignty. 
18
16
17
18
the PLA or the United States could attempt cyber attacks. While cyber attacks could be detrimental to power grids or financial markets, cyber weapons tend to fall into three distinct categories-sabotage, espionage, or subversion. 
19
In sum, these differences make it less likely that the July Crisis will replay itself in the same manner, but the US-Chinese relationship exhibits warning signs for great power war. The four-variable model does allow insight on what increases and decreases the risk of great power war. The following section provides some of these insights.
First, revisionist actions are the most important element necessary to label a hegemonic challenger, albeit, the most difficult. In this light, a state should not rely on the rhetoric of its rivals to determine if revisionist tendencies exist. A state needs to determine if a state is currently attempting to change the international order-a task easier said than done. Some scholars have gone so far as to measure leadership travel to calculate whether China is a revisionist state or not. 
20
If we could first know where we are, and whither we are tending, we could then better judge what to do, and how to do it.
There is a current tension on whether great power war is approaching. This thesis started with this very question: is great power war approaching? This issue is similar to the pre-WWI debates stating that economic interdependence and the destructive costs of military violence are too high to have a great power war in modern times. Using this discussion as a springboard, this thesis sought to explore the concept of great power war using a four-factor framework comprised of a hegemonic challenger, a power imbalance, a history of repeated crises, and entangling alliances.
The four factors tie multiple strands of realism together to help determine if China is likely to rise peacefully or violently and uses a comparative analogy to the First World War to gain insight into this complex issue. The potential rising Chinese threat has some contextual differences-nuclear weapons, a different international order, and geography-that make the WWI analogy imperfect. However, to dismiss the analogy altogether would be throwing out key strategic insights that could help decision-makers potentially avert war.
The four factors used in this analogy are all manifestations of Thucydides' origins of great power war: fear, honor, and interest. The reason for framing the variables in Thucydidean terms is not to argue that war between the United States and China is inevitable. Rather, it is to recognize that if the United States continues on its current strategic vector, then a conflict may approach. Because there is an increased risk of great power war, decision-makers on both sides should deliberately plan and execute measures that prevent war. Before going into actions that could avoid war, one must comprehend the four-factor framework used in this thesis.
Thucydides put forth three items that relate to the origins of war: fear, honor, and interest. The four variables put forth in this thesis are symptoms and consequences of Thucydides' concerns. Realist international relations scholars such as Gilpin, Mearsheimer, and Waltz elaborated upon these concerns in their analyses.
Different realist theories provide a unique approach to conceptualizing international relations. A commonality in realism is that states go to war over one aspect-power. When a state has dominant power, it can ensure its survival. While there are many subsets of the realist perspective, this paper takes the strengths of multiple realist theories to create a unique worldview. The worldview purported in this paper argues that four quantifiable factors help lend perspective to what "power" means to a hegemon and its challengers. The four-factor framework helps distill clarity from today's complex environment to provide insight to decision-makers.
This paper concludes that there is a high risk of great power war between the United States and China; however, it does not conclude that great power war is inevitable. Even with interdependent economies, the 1914 great powers could not prevent World War I. Today, China and the United States rely on each other as trading partners, but there are enough signposts for conflict that a great power war is not hard to imagine. China's challenge to US hegemony beckons, dynamic change in the balance of power looms, a history of repeated disputes is evident, and entangling alliances are abundant. As a result, there are plenty of warning signs that the twenty-first century has a reasonable likelihood of great power war. However, there are contextual differences, such as nuclear weapons, a different international order, and geography.
Admittedly, these differences make a direct analogy to 1914 imperfect.
Still, there is a common narrative between the two periods.
Imperial Germany sought to "take its place in the sun," and China is The major danger of strong alliances is great power war. 
The four-variable framework synthesizes multiple strands of realism into one perspective, but one element-power imbalance-stands out as the most important factor preventing a great power war.
Calculating if one great power can advance its national interests through military force against a near peer is extremely ambiguous. Moreover, nuclear weapons increase the complexity of power imbalance considerations.
5
The four variables offer policy makers another perspective on how states may act in the future without necessarily considering all of the micro-level characteristics, such as domestic governance. This vantage point looks more at the systemic level of international relations to foretell when conflict or war is a more likely outcome. This point of view does not necessary seek to explain why great power war occurs; rather, it offers insight into conditions when war is more likely to occur between great powers.
This paper looked at shifts in power (the rise and decline of great powers in relation to each other) and how it affects international order.
These shifts in power relate to economic, military, and national objectives. When all three of these combine, a hegemonic challenger can be easier to identify, particularly if revisionist actions are apparent. A hegemonic challenger will most likely begin to make significant calculations on the costs and benefits of working within the established international order before attempting to revise the system. Currently, it appears that China is attempting to subvert, at a minimum, the current international order.
When one combines all four variables, a strategist can provide a perspective to a leader on why states maintain hardline diplomatic stances. This logic can also work in reverse as well. If a state actor observes hardline stances, then analysts may test these variables against current evidence to provide another perspective for a decision-maker.
Even in the today's nuclear age, the symptoms of Thucydides' origins of great power conflict -fear, honor, and interest -still hold true.
States will accept an increased risk of war to drive certain political aims.
This perspective, while unashamedly realist, can help indicate why a great power war could occur in this century. When the four variables exist, crisis initiation seems to provide an answer to political problems.
Knowing this can provide political leaders a valuable perspective on the risk of war and prepare appropriately.
The United States is not in a historically unique strategic position when it comes to the decline and rise of great powers. Significant shifts in power have been the norm throughout history. By understanding the origins of WWI, current US leaders today can better gauge and anticipate conflict and crisis in US-Sino relations, and perhaps avert World War III.
For future study, analysts should test more case studies against this comparative worldview, which has the potential to grow into a theory. In particular, World War II and the Cold War have the potential to show why another great power war started in the former example, and why states averted great power violence in the latter. Significant shifts in power have been the trend throughout history and will continue to happen in the future. Understanding the factors that increase the risk of major war is an important key to any strategist. This perspective could
Source: This table is from John J. Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, 71. Mearsheimer's source data comes from Singer and Small, National Material Capabilities Data.
Source: This table is from John J. Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, 71. Mearsheimer's source data comes from Singer and Small, National Material Capabilities Data.
Sources: This table is from John J.
Sources: This table is from John J.
4 Data are in current international dollars. For most economies PPP figures are extrapolated from the 2011 International Comparison Program (ICP) benchmark estimates or imputed using a statistical model based on the 2011 ICP." CIA, The World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/vm.html.
This concept of strategic junctures that are important timeframe to for leaders to make decisions comes from G. John Ikenberry's After Victory. G. John Ikenberry, After Victory: Institutions, Strategic Restraint, and the Rebuilding of Order After Major Wars (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001), 3-4.
Gilpin, War and Change in World Politics, 50.   
Gilpin, War and Change in World Politics, 144.   
Ikenberry, Power, Order, and Change in World Politics, 6.   
Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, 363.   
Khong, Analogies at War, 221, 227.   
Clark, The Sleepwalkers, 147.   
Clark, The Sleepwalkers,  
147-148.
14
16
Kennedy,  The Rise of the Anglo-German Antagonism, 470.
Ferguson, The Pity of War, 71.   
Kennedy,  The Rise of the Anglo-German Antagonism, 450-451.
Quoted in Kennedy, The Rise of the Anglo-German Antagonism, 451.
Clark, The Sleepwalkers, 329.   
Tuchman,  The Guns of August, 143.28 Herrmann, 179, and John C. G. Rohl, The Kaiser and His Court: Wilhelm II and the  Government of Germany, trans. Terence F. Cole (1987; repr., Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 165, and Clark, The Sleepwalkers, 329.29 Rohl, The Kaiser and His Court, 166, and Clark, The Sleepwalkers, 329.   
CIA, "China," The World Factbook, 25 February 2016, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ch.html and The World Bank, World DataBank, http://databank.worldbank.org/data.
".." denotes data is unavailable. Money is converted for each year based upon that year's exchange rate.
Saunders, The Chinese Navy, 207.   
Saunders, The Chinese Navy,[207][208] 
Mingfu, The China Dream, 73.   
Aaron L. Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy: China, America, and the Struggle for Mastery in Asia (New York, NY: W.W. Norton and Company, 2011), 215.
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy, 217.
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy, 218.
Erik Seedhouse, The New Space Race: China vs. the United States (Chichester, UK: Praxis Publishing, 2010), 1-10.
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy, 219.
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy, 219, and "China's progress in acquiring over-thehorizon radars, satellites, and unmanned aerial vehicles is described in Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic ofChina, 2010, 2, 7, 33,  
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy, 97.
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy, 97.
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy, 218.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, accompanied by the Deputy Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, went to the Chinese Embassy in Washington to apologize as soon as she heard the news. President Clinton also publicly apologized for the tragic
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy, 81.
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy,[83][84][85][86] 
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy, 104.
This map does not show all of the Chinese disputes, but it provides a spatial perspective on the three major ongoing territorial disputes. The disputes stem from shared borders with India and Bhutan, the South China Sea, and with Japan in the East China Sea. The University of Texas Libraries, "China Disputed Territories," http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/middle_east_and_asia/china_disputed_territories_20 09.jpg
Luttwak, The Rise of China, 169.
Friedberg, A Contest for Supremacy, 209.
Eric Heginbotham et al., The U.S.-China Military Scorecard: Forces, Geography, and the  Evolving Balance of Power, 1996-2017 (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2015), 68, 93, 131,  151, 199, 224, 241, 257, 282,  
Thomas C. Schelling, Arms and Influence (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008), 1-34.
Thomas C. Schelling, "Foreword," in On Limited Nuclear War in the 21st Century, ed. Jeffrey A. Larsen et al. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2014), xi-xiii.
Schelling, "Foreword," xii.   
Benjamin S. Lambeth, Airpower at 18,000: The Indian Air Force in the Kargil War (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment, 2012), 1-2.
Bernard Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1959), viii.
T.V. Paul, Complex Deterrence: Strategy in the Global Age (Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 2009), 5-6.
Thomas Rid, Cyber War Will Not Take Place (New York, NY: Oxford University Press,
2013), xiv, 113, 128-131.  20  Scott L. Kastner and Phillip C. Saunders, "Is China a Status Quo or Revisionist State? Leadership Travel as an Empirical Indicator of Foreign Policy Priorities," International Studies Quarterly 56, March 2012, 165.
President Xi describes a "Thucydidean Trap" as military conflict between China, a rising power, and the United States, an established power, so instability does not disrupt economic prosperity. President Xi Jinping, President of China (address, Berggruen Institute on Governance, Beijing, PRC, 3 November
2015), http://berggruen.org/activities/79.
John J. Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics (New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company, 2014),
US leaders should publicly denounce measures it sees as supporting the subversive Three Warfares Doctrine.
Ja Ian Chong and Todd H. Hall, "The Lessons of 1914 for East Asia Today: Missing the Trees for the Forest," International Security 39, no. 1 (Summer 2014): 24.
Two nuclear-powered countries have been to war before. During the Kargil War Indian and Pakistan fought a conventional war, but it was a relatively short, limited war.
Major Patrick Kennedy
US Air Force Academy. He graduated from Euro-NATO Joint Jet Pilot Training, NATO's Tactical Leadership Programme
US Air Force Weapons School
Maj Kennedy
USAF Air Command and Staff College
School of Advanced Air and Space Studies
than anything else, reminds us that the United States is an enemy." 
44
45
46
47
48
49
While there are beneficial interactions between the United States and China, there is no denying the possible outcomes regarding ongoing disputes.
Fifth, while several aspects point towards the increased risk of great power war, entangling alliances seem are the most likely spark for great power war in today's strategic reality. Alliances increase a state's interests beyond its own. For example, there are no US-only reasons why the Senkaku Islands are a national interest. However, Japanese Admittedly, any effort of future speculation requires a degree of guesswork. However, a look at the past can assuredly provide insight for decision-makers concerning future great power conflict.