# ID: a6f99bc2f37348c6bb9dce097e67a84d
# Title: Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Operational Art
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
Since the discovery of Artificial Intelligence (AI), the aim has been the development of an intelligent agent that is capable of achieving human-level intelligence to improve human performance and increase human productivity. John McCarthy first coined the term artificial intelligence in 1955 when he proposed the first AI conference in 1956. The expressed goal was to explore ways to create machines capable of reasoning on a human level to engage in abstract thought, solve problems, and learn on their own. 
1
2
3
4
Smartphones and wireless technology allow its users to stay connected all day. The speed of the internet gives users access to information, pictures, movies, music, and even video conferences from anywhere in the world at any time.
The same holds true for the military, whether its twenty-four-hour access to the internet, through our smartphones, tablets, smartwatches, or computers. Social media has proven a powerful tool to spread IO themes and messages. This new information environment has contributed to the creation of a gray zone that is reminiscent of the cold war. A zone in which adversarial forces conduct subversive operations across the range of military operations. This new gray zone allows adversaries to operate just below the threshold for open armed conflict. 
5
6
7
The power of computing is rapidly expanding all around us, fundamentally changing the way we work, play and communicate. Moore's Law foreshadowed these breakthroughs in many facets of daily human life. 
8
9
10
11
12
The pace of technological advancement during the second offset during the Cold War, which sought an asymmetrical advantage against the Soviet Union, pales in comparison to the pace of technological development in the third offset. Leading up to and throughout the second offset, DoD-funded research developed the majority of advanced technology. The development of robotic technology and AI (third offset strategy), will require DoD collaboration with the private sector companies in the Silicon Valley. 
13
Another major problem that the United States currently faces is other major states and non-state actors. They are investing heavily in the development of artificial intelligence and autonomous robots for their militaries to employ. Russia and China are investing heavily to develop autonomous weapons, artificially intelligent systems and robots. 14 They are also notorious for committing intellectual property theft. In addition to the direct threat posed by the two major powers, both have ties to other states that are known enemies of the United States; namely Iran and North Korea.
In the case of Iran, eleven Arab countries have accused it of being to be the largest state sponsor of terrorism in the Middle East. 
15
The intent of this paper is to evaluate the ways in which artificial intelligence can facilitate the operations process using prevailing AI technology. Additionally, this paper will examine how the US Army can employ AI to enhance a commander's ability to exercise mission command. The Mission Command Battle Lab (MCBL) in the Capability Development Integration Directorate (CDID) is taking the lead in this area. They are currently focused on developing tools that the US Army can use to enhance human capacity and capability through AI. 
16
With the increasing availability of AI, it is no longer a matter of if militaries will employ it in the future wars but when. The US Army has made it clear that the human dimension is the most important aspect of the future. 
18
Operational art together with mission command and the modern system provide a theoretical framework that serves as the blueprint for this study. This theory provides basic concepts that are valuable in pursuit of increased understanding. The central concepts within operational art that are invaluable to this study include the cognitive aspect, inherent collaboration between a commander and his staff, the need for synchronization across both space and time, and the art of command. Lastly, incorporating the modern system provides an understanding of the space within which leaders must conduct operational art. 
19
20
19 Biddle, 33. 
20
21
to serve as an enabler in many aspects of mission command and operations. The theoretical framework consisting of operational art, mission command, and the modern system provides the requisite context within which this study can explore the potential role of AI in future wars.
Given the breadth of information available on the topic of artificial intelligence, this paper will be limited to the evaluation of narrow artificial intelligence that is currently in existence. Additionally, the study will be limited to the concepts that the MCBL within CDID is developing.
Given the historical nature of technologically induced evolutions in war there is little doubt that militaries will weaponize AI. In fact, China and Russia have already begun conducting extensive research and development in AI. They have begun experimenting with autonomous weapons, electromagnetic spectrum warfare and cyberspace. 
22
23
Since the late eighteenth century, war has undergone many evolutions. The technological advent of AI has spurred changes in how the western world lives, from the ways we communicate, interact, shop, and learn. It is now just a matter of time before the proliferation of this new technology will spur the next evolution in the way militaries prosecute wars. How will AI contribute to the next evolution in warfare? To answer this question, this literature review looks at the impacts of cultural and technological discoveries of the nineteenth and twentieth century that spurred previous evolutions.
The American and French Revolutions changed the way nations manned, trained, and equipped their militaries, shaping the western way of warfare. Advances in technology were another major contributor to the evolution in the western way of war. This study will focus on three specific phenomena that occurred as a result of the cultural and technological evolutions that occurred throughout the last two centuries. The theoretical framework will be the operational art, the modern system, mission command. This paper will study the potential role of AI within this theoretical framework.
The conditions that existed throughout the world at the turn of the twentieth century share a striking resemblance to many of the conditions present today. At the turn of the twentieth century, the west found itself in a period of rapid technological change. It is as difficult today as it was then to determine the impact technology would have on warfare. 
24
The specialization of labor within the agencies designed to address these problems reinforces these conditions. 
25
The three major theories that serve as the framework for this study are the theory of operational art, the modern system, and mission command. It is important to evaluate each theory for the individual contributions they provide. This review will then assess how the individual aspects of each theory respond in relation to one another in order to provide the context within which militaries conduct modern warfare. The intent is to provide a comprehensive understanding as to the future role of artificial intelligence in warfare using the theoretical framework.
Victory in the modern system is never the result of a single factor. Modern weapons and a professional military are not enough when confronting a near-peer threat. Operational art is the key to a decisive victory. To comprehend operational art, it is essential to understand the area to apply this concept as well as the attributes common to the officers and the operational artists responsible for executing operational art.
The Prussian General Helmuth von Moltke the elder first discovered this new dimension. 
26
Robert Cotino said, "The elder Helmuth von Moltke emphasized an intermediate level of warfare known as the operational level. It exists in a conceptual space between tactics and strategy. It involves the movement of large units: armies, corps and divisions. Prussian and later German commanders sought to maneuver their operational units in a rapid and daring fashion." 27 Moltke made the requisite changes to Prussian doctrine long before they became conventional military wisdom. 
28
29
26
30
It was clear that the size and scale of future wars meant that militaries could no longer defeat an enemy force with a single blow, massing a force at a single point at the enemy line. "As a result, the decision was made in the summer of 1931 to create an 'operational department.' The new department was tasked with preparing commanders and staff officers at the Corps, Army, front (military district) level, and for the RKKA staff. As this list makes clear, the department's mission was to prepare students for the operational level of war." 
31
32
33
33 Harrison,
66.
The operational dimension also requires a great deal of critical and creative cognition from army commanders tasked with organizing operational victories. 
34
35
To succeed in the operational dimension, a commander and his staff must synchronize available resources across time and space leveraging experience, judgment, and creativity to convert tactical victories into operational victories. This cognitive exercise is operational art. The term operational art was first introduced into US Army doctrine in 1986, recognizing the creativity required by an operational commander. Connecting the tactical dimension of warfare with the strategic aims established in policy requires a cognitive process. 
36
In addition to the domains familiar to twentieth-century warfare, an operational artist must now also consider the space domain and information environment. 
37
38
39
37 US Army, FM 3-0 (2017), 1-6.
38 "The Growing Danger of Great-Power Conflict," The Economist, January 25, 2018, accessed January 28, 2018, https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21735586-how-shifts-technology-andgeopolitics-are-renewing-threat-growing-danger.
intangible qualities that make an operational artist successful. According to Clausewitz, it is military genius, which consists of intellect and courage. 
40
The Roots of Mission Command Once military execution begins, it is very difficult for an army level commander to direct all of his subordinate units. Decentralized execution and dispersion of the higher headquarters are critical to survival in the modern system. 
42
43
He did this by providing guidance through verbal directives. Moltke also implemented a system of issuing orders that emphasized the "why" instead of the "how" to encourage freedom of action in the absence of orders. 
45
He provided his subordinate commanders with maximum leeway and, despite several mistakes throughout the campaign, when the time came Moltke managed to direct the crucial maneuvers needed to defeat the French Army in a kurtz and vives (short and lively) war." 
46
47
Mission Command serves two distinct functions; it is a leadership philosophy as well as a WfF. Much like the Germans, the US Army sees the mission command philosophy as a way to increase the tempo of a ground force commander by allowing leaders to exercise a degree of control tailored to the specific mission requirements. 
48
49
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
The staff works through mission command to facilitate the commander's ability to lead and assess. The staff is responsible for conducting the operations process, knowledge management, synchronizing information-related activities, and conducting cyber electromagnetic operations. 
53
During the Austro-Prussian War, the Austrians possessed new rifled muskets with increased accuracy and lethality. Moltke witnessed firsthand the devastating effects this weapon had on the closed formations employed by the armies of the time. He realized immediately that 50 Ibid.
51 Biddle, 31. 
52
53
this technology would increase the lethality of future battlefields. 
54
As a result, the Prussian army revised its doctrine and began moving in open formations to increase survivability in the face of the deadly new weapons. The Prussian's began to have their second line disperse just as the first line did. 
55
56
57
58
60
The modern system is, "a tightly interrelated complex of cover and concealment, dispersion, suppression, small unit independent maneuver and combined arms at the tactical level 
54
55
56
57 Biddle, 30. 
58
59
60
There are those in the US Department of Defense who offer an alternative, one centered on technology. They argue that technology is causing a revolution in military affairs. This technology would make it possible to achieve victory from standoff distances without having to put Soldiers in harm's way. If true, the Modern System would be obsolete. Proponents of this thinking are advocating for increases in the purchase of new technology and equipment in lieu of a larger military force. 
62
63
AI is synonymous with computers and the increased ability to process information and provide answers to questions ranging from math problems to playing the game "Go." 
64
In 1950, Alan Turing asked, "can machines think?" 
65
66
In Watson's case, a machine used information stored in a CPU, applied reasoning and constructed an answer to questions. 
67
In order to provide the level of shared understanding that this study warrants it is crucial to understand machine learning. Arthur Samuel first defined Machine Learning in 1959 as a "Field of study that gives computers the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed." It is an automation of analytics that allows its application at scale." 68 Machine learning now operates within the parameters of an algorithm that defines its purpose.
In most instances, once the algorithm is written, developers upload large volumes of human data that enables machine learning. This is a process known as deep reinforced learning and it is a similar process to that of the human brain. The algorithm can then conduct iterations of the task for which scientist designed it. 
69
Is AI Dumb? 68 Rob Thomas, "A Practical Guide to Machine Learning: Understand, Differentiate, and Apply," Medium, May 15, 2017, accessed January 28, 2018, https://medium.com/inside-machine-learning/apractical-guide-to-machine-learning-understand-differentiate-and-apply-b800bb4c4942. 
69
70
71
Throughout military history, developments in technology have required an evolution in warfare. These evolutions progress and occur over time. For this reason, it is critical that a counterfactual be identified. The literature points to the Austro-Prussian war as the moment when an evolution in warfare became evident to its participants.
The rifles that the Austrians possessed were the antecedent to the modern system that has defined warfare since WWI. 
72
The western world is in the midst of a similar evolution in the way it conducts warfare. This is a result of the proliferation of artificial intelligence. Like the modern system, it did not occur overnight. It is a modern phenomenon that began to evolve with the creation of the first computer. Today the average person in the United States owns a smartphone with built-in artificial intelligence that can assist in addressing a wide range of challenges by simply asking the device a question. There is no question that an evolution is occurring. The question is how will it change the way militaries conduct modern warfare.
This study conducts a structured, focused case study comparison because of its increased rigor and reliability. This will prove to be invaluable to the study given the somewhat unquantifiable and fluid nature associated with emergent technologies. The comparative case study method is, therefore, better suited to capture the effects of AI on the conduct of military operations. This structured approach will also allow others to easily replicate the study in the future thereby enhancing the validity of the findings.
The case studies will consist of four sections with the intent of answering the research questions. The opening section will provide a description of what the technology is and the stated goals of the parent company. The next section will provide a brief history that describes the creation of the technology and a chronological summary of its major milestones. The third section will evaluate recent developments in the technology and the ways in which the company is marketing the technology in both the public and private sectors. The fourth and final section will use the empirical data collected in the case studies to answer the research questions.
The theories of operational art, mission command, and the modern system will guide the case studies. The characteristics of each theory will serve as a framework to evaluate if and how narrow AI can benefit a commander and his or her staff throughout the operations process. The study will assess this through the empirical data provided in the case studies.
The following case studies represent comprehensive, cutting-edge, machine learning capable AI platforms. These platforms have demonstrated the ability to outperform their human counterparts in complex game scenarios, exceeding all expectations well in advance of anything previously thought possible. Alpha Go and Watson are widely considered the leaders in the field of narrow AI and machine learning.
These two cases represent the best examples from which this study can gain the necessary empirical data to shed light on possible military applications. Although they shared similar visions, the companies adopted unique approaches in pursuit of their objectives. The goal of this study is to assess the benefits and challenges presented by their respective approaches.
Watson is IBM's AI platform, capable of machine learning, guided by a unique algorithm. Watson's introduction to the world happened in 2011 on Jeopardy. The private sector has employed Watson's AI capability ever since. Much like Watson, Alpha Go employs machine learning guided by an algorithm to perform its function. Alpha Go's major accomplishment was its four games to one victory over a world champion Go player in 2016. The most recent version, Alpha Go Zero, defeated previous versions of the program within days. Unlike IBM, Deep minds is only now developing an application for use by the private sector. The preponderance of its focus is still in research and development.
The intent is to determine the extent to which narrow AI, in its current capacity, can enhance, enable, or facilitate operational art by streamlining the operations process and mission command. The study will analyze the information the case studies provided through a series of focused questions. The following questions seek to confirm or deny the thesis: Watson is IBM's supercomputer that fuses the latest AI technology with software capable of analyzing large volumes of information to provide its users with solutions. Watson's capability is defined by a unique algorithm that was specifically written for it. This algorithm enables IBM's supercomputer to decipher between the information pertinent to its assigned task and information that is irrelevant. Developers then feed Watson large volumes of relevant historical data that it uses to learn through a process called deep reinforcement learning. To accomplish this task, Watson has eighty teraflops at its disposal enabling it to operate at the rate of a highly functioning human. 
73
74
77
In here lies the disparity between the reality of existent narrow AI and the promise of general AI often captured in science fiction novels. Although Watson cannot cure cancer, it is an excellent tool that many fields use, ranging from fiscal efficiency to insurance companies reducing risk and increasing savings. 
78
77
The company introduced the first concept of reinforced learning known as deep reinforcement learning or DeepRL. It was the first of its kind in 2015. The program's major accomplishment was the superhuman level of play achieved in Atari 2600 games. 
80
81 Alex Graves, et al. "Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic external memory," Nature News, Nature Publishing Group, October 12, 2016, accessed September 26, 2018, www.nature.com/articles/nature20101.
In 2016, Deep Minds accomplished its greatest achievement to date with a program called Alpha Go. Alpha Go used a form of machine learning, known as supervised learning to evolve into an expert at what many consider the world's most difficult game, Go. Alpha Go shocked the world when it defeated, top ranked Go player, Lee Sedol in four out of five games. 
82
83
85
86
87
The creation of the internet amplified the information age that started with the introduction of the home computer. Today the internet provides instant access to volumes of information. It is important to harness this information environment in ways that will make commanders and staffs more informed and cognitively agile. AI, such as Watson or Deep Minds, provides the tools that will help humans leverage this information and use it to their advantage.
Watson or Deep Mind's Alpha Go to increase efficiency, reduce risk, and promote shared understanding. Programs like Watson consist of a large repository of information combined with machine learning algorithms that provide answers. It evaluates several sources of information through reason and presents potential solutions to complex problems. AI will place large volumes of information at the fingertips of commanders and their staffs, provide access to the experience of others, and make it useful to enhance cognition. The AI helps to do this by organizing large volumes of information and presenting only what pertains to the situation. In short, this technology will enhance the commanders' and the staffs' expertise and 86 Murphy, Mike, "This is how much Google is spending on cutting edge AI research." Quartz. October 05, 2017, accessed February 13, 2018, https://qz.com/1095833/how-much-googles-deepmind-airesearch-costs-goog/.
87 "AlphaGo," DeepMind, accessed February 13, 2018, https://deepmind.com/research/alphago/.
in so doing, it will increase their ability to conduct operational art and facilitate the operations process.
What can narrow AI, contribute to the military?
If employed correctly, AI provides the military an asymmetrical advantage by gaining greater access to the information environment. Access to this emergent domain presents the commander with a menu of options not previously available. It is in the information environment that commanders could employ AI, to shape the operational environment. Because this shaping effort does not require the deployment of forces, operations can begin long before troop movements begin. This also allows our military commanders to conduct operations deep behind enemy lines with little to no political risk.
The information environment is a part of the greater multi-domain extended battlefield concept. It is a domain within which militaries conduct grey zone warfare. The grey zone refers to a form of conflict that remains below the threshold that would insight a retaliation from another state. 
88
How does human-AI teaming enhance the cognitive process?
Commanders and members of a staff all go through a cognitive process when presented with new information. This cognitive process can be broken down into four basic steps: observe, interpret, evaluate, and decide. 
89
89
93
94
The results of the study support the hypothesis that human-AI teaming will enhance the cognitive process and situational understanding of commanders and their staffs. Due to the cognitive nature that serves as the core of the operational art and the artist. Human-AI collaboration will give militaries an asymmetrical advantage in speed, tempo and lethality. The evolution of artificial intelligence is such that commanders and staffs can employ it to streamline the analysis of large volumes of available data at an accelerated rate.
The advent of cognitive computing and machine learning makes this possible. An evolution in technology will lead to an evolution of the human mind and the cognitive process. Human intelligence will evolve and humans will develop new habits that will increase the speed 
93
94 Ibid, 102. and efficiency of cognition processes, creative thinking, and critical thinking. 95 AI will serve as a force multiplier for the commander and his staff as they work to conduct operational art and exercise mission command across all domains.
As the armies of the nineteenth century expanded beyond a million men, they spanned enormous distances and increasing lethality brought on by the weapons of the industrial revolution created the modern system. 
96
The operational art is a cognitive process that is dependent on a commander and his staffs' experience, judgment, and critical and creative thinking. This is where human-AI pairing will provide an asymmetrical advantage. It will enhance the OODA loop process for the commander and his staff by leveraging large volumes of data on databases. Databases loaded with doctrine; theory; history; current tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP); and relevant after-action reviews (AARs). 
97
95 Carr,
222. 96
History has demonstrated that the first army to successfully incorporate emergent technology, is rewarded with an asymmetrical advantage over its adversary. This race, like all others, is a zero-sum game and the country that fails to seize the technological advantage will face a tremendous disadvantage. An evolution in the prevailing military theory and doctrine often joins technology. For example, the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) now considers warfare a confrontation between various adversarial operational systems. 
98
99
The MCBL located in the US Army's Capability Development Integration Directorate CDID is leading this effort. Their mission is to "mitigate risk to current and future Army forces by examining and evaluating emerging concepts and technologies through experimentation, studies, prototyping, and network integration, while simultaneously informing the combat development and acquisition processes." 
102
103
103
Since the dawn of the industrial revolution, warfare has become exceedingly lethal. To compensate for the increased lethality, formations have dispersed in order to survive long enough to accomplish their missions. 
104
Today's military analysts already find themselves overwhelmed by the volumes of information currently available in the information environment. 
105
Armed with this information, the commander and his or her staff can leverage AI to facilitate the operations process. AI will serve as a force multiplier through the planning, preparation, and execution.
106
105 "Getting to grips with military robotics," The Economist, January 25, 2018, accessed February 01, 2018, https://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21735478-autonomous-robots-and-swarms-willchange-nature-warfare-getting-grips. formation will reduce risk, and increase speed, tempo, and lethality providing an asymmetrical advantage for the United States. This asymmetrical advantage will prove instrumental in prosecuting the wars of the future that range from large-scale ground combat to gray zone conflict designed to operate just below the threshold of armed conflict. It is in this gray zone, the enemy is constantly maneuvering to create a position of relative advantage against the United States. The gray zone uses misinformation, coercion, and blackmail during all operations, making it difficult for the western nations to match. The Ukraine is an example of Russia combing force, misinformation, cyberwar, and economic coercion in ways that democratic societies would not approve of and find difficult to counter effectively without risking escalation.
107
The results of this study support the assertion that human-machine collaboration will enhance the Army's ability to conduct operational art. Human-AI teaming is a force multiplier for commanders to use against an adversary in the information environment. Human-AI collaboration will also enhance the commanders' and their staffs' ability to conduct operational art and exercise mission command. The increased agility will allow commanders and to establish cognitive dominance across the multi-domain extended battlefield. The resulting battlefield effect will be an increase in tempo and lethality that will overwhelm the enemy's ability to generate combat power. Narrow AI will be the weapon that gives the United States and its allies an asymmetrical advantage in future wars.
43 Citino, 311.   44  
43 Citino, 311.   44  
63 Ibid, 33.
63 Ibid, 33.
John McCarthy, "Computing Science," January 1, 1970, accessed September
26, 2018, jmc.stanford.edu/computing-science/index.html. 2 World-Information.Org, accessed November 02, 2017, http://worldinformation.org/wio/infostructure/100437611663/100438659360. 3 Max Tegmark, LIFE 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence (VINTAGE, 2018), 69. 4 Ray Kurzweil, "Kurzweil AI | Accelerating Intelligence," 26 January 2016, accessed September 26, 2018, www.kurzweilai.net/ray-kurzweil-biography.
Nora Bensahel, "Darker Shades of Gray: Why Gray Zone Conflicts Will Become More Frequent and Complex," Foreign Policy Research Institute, February 13, 2017, accessed February 19, 2018, https://www.fpri.org/article/2017/02/darker-shades-gray-gray-zone-conflicts-will-become-frequentcomplex/.
6 "Microchips implanted in humans: Practical or perilous," CBS News, CBS Interactive, April 12, 2017, accessed September 26, 2018, www.cbsnews.com/news/microchips-privacy-implants-biohacking/.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations. (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017). 1-5.
"50 Years of Moore's Law," Intel, accessed January 18, 2018, https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/silicon-innovations/moores-law-technology.html.
Stephen Biddle, Military Power: Explaining Victory and Defeat in Modern Battle (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010), 3.
Andrew Ilachinski, AI, Robots, and Swarms Issues, Questions, and Recommended Studies.  (Technical paper, January 26, 2017)  27.
Jessica Purkiss and Jack Serle, "Obama's Covert Drone War in Numbers: Ten Times More Strikes Than Bush," The Bureau of Investigative Journalism, March 28, 2017, accessed January 18, 2018, https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/stories/2017-01-17/obamas-covert-drone-war-in-numbers-tentimes-more-strikes-than-bush.
12 "Getting to Grips with Military Robotics." The Economist, January 25, 2018, accessed February 01, 2018, https://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21735478-autonomous-robots-and-swarms-willchange-nature-warfare-getting-
grips.13  
Ilachinski, 31.    14 Patrick Tucker, "Welcome -Defense One," November 8, 2017, accessed January 18, 2018, https://cdn.defenseone.com/a/defenseone/interstitial.html.
"Iran is 'state sponsor of terrorism,' 11 Arab countries tell UN," UN Watch, November 14, 2016, accessed January 18, 2018, https://www.unwatch.org/iran-state-sponsor-terrorism-11-arab-countriestell-un/.
16 "Mission Command Battle Lab (MCBL) | US Army Combined Arms Center," accessed September 26, 2018, usacac.army.mil/organizations/mccoe/cdid/mcbl.; US Department of the Army, Training and Doctrine Pamphlet (TRADOC Pam) 525-3-7, The US Army Human Dimension Concept. (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014
). 17 Detlef F. Sprinz, and Yael Wolinsky-Nahmias. Models, Numbers & Cases Methods for Studying International Relations. (Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press, 2011), 32.
"Getting to Grips with Military Robotics," The Economist (January 25, 2018).
US Army, FM 3-0 (2017), 1-35.
V.K.Kool, and Rita Agrawal. Psychology of Technology (Cham, Switzerland: Springer  International Publishing, 2017), 4.    
Arden Bucholz. Moltke, Schlieffen and Prussian War Planning (Providence R.I.: Berg, 1993), 1.
US Army, FM 3-0 (2017), 1-7.
Christopher Mims, "Without Humans, Artificial Intelligence Is Still Pretty Stupid." The Wall  Street Journal, November 12, 2017, accessed January 28, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/withouthumans-artificial-intelligence-is-still-pretty-stupid-1510488000.
Gordon, 516.   
"What is IBM Watson supercomputer? -Definition from WhatIs.com," WhatIs.com, accessed December 22, 2017, http://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/IBM-Watson-supercomputer.
US Department of the Army, Army Doctrinal Reference Publication (ADRP) 5-0, The Operations Process (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2015), 1-2.
"The Growing Danger of Great-Power Conflict," The Economist, January 25, 2018, accessed January 28, 2018, https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21735586-how-shifts-technology-andgeopolitics-are-renewing-threat-growing-danger.
Artificial Intelligence (AI)-"General" AI that is one that is capable of learning, reasoning, and interacting within a given environment without the need for human assistance. This form of AI would surpass human intelligence and could function as an unbounded system. 108 General AI has not been realized as of the writing of this paper.
"Narrow" AI, on the other hand, is capable of learning within a set of parameters defined by a series of rules that the system then uses as a guide. 
109
110
Modern Battlefield-Toward the end of the nineteenth century, Jan Bloch published La Guerre Future. In it he described the modern battlefield as an impassible zone of increasing lethality that will be impossible for a human to survive long enough to accomplish any meaningful mission. 
112
108 Kate Baggaley, "There Are Two Kinds Of AI, And The Difference Is Important," Popular Science, February 23, 2017, accessed November 08, 2017. https://www.popsci.com/narrow-and-generalai#page-2. 
109
110
111 "AlphaGo," DeepMind, accessed November 08, 2017, https://deepmind.com/research/alphago/. 
112