# ID: a7007a2c385c41babfb87aa6fbfbfafb
# Title: Army Operational Doctrine: Too Much LSCO and Not Enough Bellum Ligula
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
For much of history war was straight forward: armies clashed on the battlefield, a victor emerged, and a settlement, albeit fleeting, meant an end to hostilities. True, doctrine, tactics, and weaponry evolved, and overtime armies grew larger and war more destructive, but for the most part war was easily distinguishable within a continuum that moved from peace to war.
The nuclear age undermined this binary peace-war construct. The reality of nuclear deterrence and mutually assured destruction soon emerged, limiting the ability of states to achieve political objectives using conventional force. But states adapted, harnessing other aspects of national power and updating unconventional methods of warfare for the modern age.
When the Soviet Union dissolved soon after America demonstrated its military prowess in the deserts of Iraq, an interwar period similar to that following World War I began. The Army concluded that a revolution in military affairs had occurred, with its status in a unipolar world dependent on maintaining technological overmatch in conventional arms. Her adversaries reached a different conclusion.
Over the past thirty years terms such as hybrid, gray zone, and unrestricted, warfare, or what the author calls "bellum ligula," the Latin term for unconventional war, rose to prominence. These age-old concepts were developed and tested in response to US power in the post-Cold War era. When the US emerged from eighteen-plus years of conflict in Afghanistan and Iraq, the threat environment had changed significantly, marking the "return" of great power competition. The Army's response was the publication of FM 3-0, Operations. Although it filled a gap in Army doctrine, FM 3-0 emphasized large scale combat operations in a high intensity conflict at the expense of operations that take place during the competition phase of war. However, the threat environment continues to evolve. Peer competitors, though modernizing their armies, had largely moved beyond conventional war as a means to achieve political objectives. Instead, they seek to exploit seams in the American Way of War using all military and non-military aspects of national power. The result is that Army operational doctrine is unbalanced, preparing the force for a war that is as unlikely in the future as it was during the Cold War.
The September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks marked the end of an era. Since the end of the Cold War the US had enjoyed a "unipolar moment."0 F 1 For more than a decade, the US dominated diplomatically, culturally, militarily, and economically, all while seeking a solution for a problem unique to the US: how to balance the Wilsonian ideals of "consultation, cooperation, and collective action" with the realpolitik required to enforce them.1 F 
2
3
4
With the most to gain, the Chinese recognized the paradigm shift. Two Chinese Colonels, Qiao Lian and Wang Xiangsui, captured the shift in a document titled Unrestricted Warfare, published in 1999. Lian and Xiangsui believed warfare had broken out of its traditional domain, defined largely by interstate conflict with large armies engaging each other on the battlefield, to encompass all means, "military and non-military, lethal and non-lethal to compel the enemy to accept one's interests."4 F
5
6
Chief of the Russian General Staff Valery Gerasimov added to these concepts with what has since become known as the Gerasimov Doctrine. The Gerasimov Doctrine rose to prominence soon after Russia seized the Crimea and Eastern Donbas regions from Ukraine in 2014. Like the Chinese, Gerasimov believed the lines between war and peace had blurred. As a result, "wars are no longer declared and having begun, proceed according to an unfamiliar template."6 F 7 This template includes harnessing social media to spread propaganda and the merger of state and terrorist, or in the case of Ukraine, proxy forces. Further, the Gerasimov doctrine shrinks the distance between the strategic and tactical levels of war as capabilities and authorities are pushed to lower tactical formations.7 F 8 Given the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's (NATO) uneven response, Gerasimov might have added the cloak of deniability, for Russian's actions in Crimea were executed in such a way that the status quo changed before Russia was officially linked to the conflict. Although international relations scholar Bettina Renz believes the hype surrounding "hybrid warfare" is an oversimplification of Russia's strategic approach, the Gerasimov Doctrine highlights a major theme in the changing character of war.8 F 9
This theme is the slow demise of industrial age warfare, which started with the explosion of the first nuclear weapons at Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945. According to Gen. (Ret.) Rupert Smith, industrial age warfare is defined as "conflict between states, the maneuver of forces en masse, and the total support of the state's manpower and industrial base, at the expense of all other interests, for the purpose of an absolute victory."9 F 10 However, absolute victory in the nuclear age, using conventional force, is a chimera, as the Cold War bore out. Instead, Smith described a paradigm shift to a "war amongst the people" that is characterized by the "continuous crisscrossing between confrontation and conflict" with little differentiation between war and peace, and "no predefined sequence" to describe its start point or its end point.1 0F 11 Smith's analysis of modern conflict describes the Gerasimov doctrine (hybrid war), China's model for conflict (unrestricted war), and other unconventional methods. Together, the Gerasimov doctrine and Chinese unrestricted war illustrate a non-linear, whole-of-government approach to war, defined by its ambiguity and the ability to package information operations, diplomacy, economic coercion, and on occasion military force in unique ways to achieve affects at all levels of war.
Given events over the past thirty-years, it appears adversaries incorporated many of these concepts into their doctrine.
Contemporary Army operational doctrine, represented by Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations, is designed to prepare the force for large-scale combat operations (LSCO) in a high intensity conflict. As Lt. Gen. (Ret.) Michael Lundy pointed out, "large-scale combat operations are more lethal, and more likely, than they have been in a generation."1 1F 
12
On the one side are those who view the threat environment through an unconventional war lens, believing the era of industrial age war reached its zenith during World War II. This camp includes Rupert Smith and Frank Hoffman, both leading scholars on unconventional methods of war. Although acknowledging the destructiveness of industrial age warfare and its impact on world history, Smith and Hoffman point to the numerous challenges that emerged in the post-Cold War era to highlight the unlikelihood of a twenty-first century Battle of Kursk.
Overall, they believe "Western military thinkers have been reluctant and thus slow to address the 
11
14
15
16
17
Only in hindsight did the period between World War I and World War II become known as the interwar years. During that time the French concluded that firepower and the defense was superior to maneuver and the offense. Their solution, drawing on the defensive nature of World War I, was the Maginot Line.1 7F 
18
19
The central argument of this paper is that current Army operational doctrine underestimates those types of conflict that take place during the competition phase. These are hybrid, gray zone, and unrestricted methods of war, among others, hereafter referred to as "bellum ligula," the Latin term for unconventional war. The result is doctrinal imbalance, with LSCO weighted more heavily than bellum ligula. This does not imply that conventional war is obsolete. Indeed, as a global power with global interests, the Army must support US interests across the full spectrum of operations, but doing so requires an honest assessment of the threat environment and a broader lens through which warfare is viewed. This paper is divided into two parts. The first examines how the threat environment evolved over the past seventy-five years. It is anchored by the military historian's Williamson Murray and Allan Millet's study of the interwar period, arguing that the political and ideological struggle between the US and Soviet Union, combined with the advent of nuclear weapons, disrupted a similar assessment to the one the British, French, and Germans conducted after World War I. In sum, although doctrine evolved and technology advanced, conventional war remained the lens in which states viewed conflict. When the Cold War ended states regained the autonomy to evaluate the threat environment and adjust accordingly. For the United States, the adjustments were minimal, with LSCO remaining the lens through which warfare was framed. Adversaries adopted a different approach---bellum ligula.
The second section of this paper examines the contemporary threat environment through the lens of the Russo-Ukrainian War. First, it uses the Russo-Ukrainian War as an example of how states adapted to America power in the post-Cold War era. Second, it examines how bellum ligula challenges the Army's current operational framework. As Frank Hoffman points out, the tendency for the military to ignore certain types of conflict "has impeded US strategic performance in the past, and will continue to do so until we grasp the full range of conflict types."1 9F
20
Definitions of hybrid, gray zone, and unrestricted methods of war are a major point of contention within military academia. This paper will not add clarity to the debate. For instance, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Operations, recently defined a hybrid threat as a "diverse and dynamic combination of regular forces, irregular forces, terrorists, or criminal elements acting in concert to achieve mutually benefitting effects."2 0F 
21
22
23
1
21 US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), 1-19. 
22
This monograph is mainly empirical and inductive, though it will include a brief examination of Russian actions in the Ukraine to guide the narrative of the threat environment in Section 2. With access to the Combined Arms Research Library at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, the author examined numerous publications, including journal articles, books, white papers, and policy documents. Of special note, Army doctrine, the writings of Frank Hoffman, and   Williamson Murray and Allan Millet's study of the interwar period were indispensable to the author's understanding of this topic. FM 3-0, Operations, provided the inspiration for this paper due to its emphasis on LSCO at the expense of operations that take place during the competition phase of war. As the Army's operational doctrine, it provides the organizing principle for all doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, facilities, and policy (DOTMLPF-P) solutions. This is evident in the "materiel" acquisitions represented by the Army's Cross Functional Teams (CFT), all of which are focused on ensuring over match in a LSCO environment.2 3F
24
Frank Hoffman is a Distinguished Research Fellow at the National Defense University.
His articles on gray zone, hybrid, and unrestricted methods of war date to the early 2000s, when he retired from the Marine Corps Reserves as a Lieutenant Colonel. Through Hoffman's numerous writings, the author learned the intricacies of the hybrid and gray zone debate and the difficulty the Joint Force and Army have in describing and maneuvering within those environments.
The interwar period is fascinating. How did Germany recover from World War I, the Treaty of Versailles, and the ensuing economic depression, when the value of money was measured by the size of the wheel barrel that carried it, rebuild its military, and then conquer more of Europe than Napoleon?2 4F 
25
On October 4, 2019, Daryl Morey, General Manager of the National Basketball Association's (NBA) Houston Rockets, posted a message on Twitter in support of protestors in Hong Kong. Although just one of five-hundred million daily tweets, Morey's drew an immediate response from the Chinese government that led to the cancellation of NBA pre-season games in China and put the NBA's multi-billion-dollar contract to televise games at risk.2 6F 
27
28
For much of human history that was not the case. States declared war, armies clashed on the battlefield, a victor emerged, and a settlement, albeit fleeting, meant an end to hostilities.
True, doctrine, tactics, and weaponry evolved, and overtime armies grew larger and war more destructive, but for the most part war was easily distinguishable within a conflict continuum that moved from peace to war. Nuclear weapons undermined this simple and binary peace-war construct because they eliminated the number of counterpoises, to borrow from Clausewitz, that an adversary could take before reciprocal actions became meaningless.2 8F 
29
The paradox Brodie discovered was that before August 6, 1945, "the chief purpose of our military establishment has been to win wars." In the nuclear age "its chief purpose must be to avert" war between nuclear powers.2 9F 30 Unfortunately, both policymakers and military leaders were slow to grasp the change. Whether one can attribute this to historical anchoring, wherein the past becomes prologue, or recency bias, wherein both World War I and World War II serve as examples of the utility of conventional force, is beyond the scope of this paper. However, it is clear that policy makers and military leaders believed conventional force would be as decisive in the future as it was in the past. National Security Council Paper-68, approved by President Harry Truman in 1950, supports this assessment. According to international relations scholar Walter LaFeber, it argued that the Soviet Union was not only an existential threat but also that its power and influence could only be stopped with military power, hence the necessity of a large conventional force through increased military spending.3 0F 31 Although the debate over the strategic approach was much more nuanced during the formative years of the Cold War, as evidenced by George F. Kennan's "Long Telegram" and the subsequent embrace of containment theory, the end result was an emphasis on both nuclear and conventional capabilities, with the expectation that victory would come on the battlefield. The Army's Pentomic Division during the 1950s serves as a prominent example. As a result, a thorough assessment of the threat environment was disrupted.
In hindsight, the surrender of the Axis Powers at the end of World War II should have brought about another interwar era, whereby the winners and losers conducted an assessment of their wartime performance and made adjustments that would determine their fate in the next war. This happened in nearly every war in history, most recently following World War I. Then, the British, French, and Germans accessed that four years of war had brought about immense technological change, but each reached different conclusions on how such change would impact the future battlefield. The horrors of trench warfare taught the British that another land war on the 30 Bernard Brodie, The Absolute Weapon (New York: Harcourt Press, 1946), 52. 
31
European continent was to be avoided at all costs. Consequently, British defense strategy focused on protecting the empire at the expense of modernizing the army or adopting new doctrinal concepts then under development by B.H. Liddell Hart and J.F.C. Fuller.3 1F 32 Like the British, the French feared another war, but their geographical position in Europe made a strategy that ignored one untenable. Disagreements within the military on the best path forward coupled and a breakdown in civilian-military (CIV-MIL) relations led to a stalemate in defense strategy and inadequate military funding.3 2F 
33
Germany reached a far different conclusion. Both political and military leaders believed another war was inevitable given the harsh punishment handed down in the Treaty of Versailles and the inability to accept defeat. After a thorough assessment of its wartime performance, Germany determined that emergent technologies had the potential to restore maneuver to the battlefield. By World War II, the character of war had changed so much than an officer from 1918 "could have understood the underlying concepts governing warfare in 1940" more so than an officer who marched off to war in 1914.3 4F 
35
32
33
34 "The French Army Between the Wars," Global Security Organization, accessed November 20, 2018, https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/europe/fr-armee-inter-war.html. "Methodical battle is a carefully orchestrated form of the offense that insists on the primacy of the infantry, careful organization of artillery, and the methodical advance of all elements in accordance with a highly detailed plan." It was firepower centric and allowed for little control to subordinate commanders, the polar opposite of the German conception of Auftragstaktik, similar to the US Army's concept of Mission Command. 
35
As the Cold War never turned hot, one will never know if the Pentomic Division, Active Defense, or Air Land Battle could have defeated Soviet forces and avoided nuclear escalation.
However, with the collapse of the Soviet Union coming so soon after a quick and stunning victory over Iraqi forces during the First Gulf War, the US learned different lessons during this interwar era.
At the national level many policy makers believed that great power conflict ended. As President Bill Clinton's first National Security Strategy (NSS) noted, "the threat of a war among great powers and the specter of nuclear annihilation" receded dramatically and the United States stood as the "world's preeminent power."3 5F 
36
37 David R. Henderson, US Federal Budget Restraint in the 1990s: A Success Story (Arlington, VA: Mercatus Center, 2015), accessed December 5, 2019, https://www.mercatus.org/system/files/Henderson-Federal-Budget-Restraint-Research.pdf. According to the Mercatus Center, the "peace dividend" refers to cuts in military spending following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. From 1990 until 2000, military spending fell in nominal terms, from $299.3 billion to $294.5 billion. Overall, it decreased from 5.2 percent of GDP to 3.0 percent of GDP and accounted for 61.2 percent of the overall reduction in federal spending during the 1990s. Yoshihiro Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man, (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1992). The "end of history" throughout the world. Again, as the NSS points out, America will "exercise global leadership" to resolve conflicts, spread democracy, expand markets, and deter traditional threats, among other priorities.3 7F 
38
39
40
41
doctrinal holy grail was discovered and that to retain its military edge the Army had only to make minor refinements to doctrine while maintaining technological overmatch.
At the same time many leaders understood that the lack of a unifying threat described by Kennan meant the Army was likely to take on a broader mission set. For example, as early as 1990 the Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Carl Vuono, believed the force must prepare to operate across the conflict continuum.4 1F 42 This pitted those who believed that doctrine had reached its apogee with ALB against those who believed the post-Cold War operational environment required the Army to prepare for a broader range of conflicts.4 2F 
43
42
43
44
45
46
focus is on peer competition that culminates in high intensity conflict.4 6F 47 For instance, a simple search of the terms "hybrid" and "gray zone" return one response, and that is in reference to the difficulty of collecting intelligence in both a LSCO and hybrid environment (though the term "hybrid" is not defined). The term "competition" fares little better, returning one search inquiry.
That said, ADP 3-0, Operations, with a publication date of July 2019, defines hybrid warfare and mentions the difficulty of operating across the competition continuum.4 7 F 48 However, hybrid warfare is defined in terms of the range of threats Army forces might encounter, while offering little beyond the Army's operational concept of Unified Land Operations as a counterpoise.4 8F 49
To be fair, an argument can be made that the Army's Multi-Domain Operations (MDO) concept fills this gap. For instance, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028 (MDO-2028), emphasizes the importance of deterring conflict and if deterrence fails, fighting and winning. Further, it argues that adversaries of the US seek to "achieve their strategic aims short of conflict by the use of layered stand-off in the political, military, and economic realms." Its central idea is the "rapid and continuous integration of all domains of warfare to deter and prevail as we compete short of armed conflict."4 9F 
50
48
49
53
Another example of this imbalance is found in the Army's strategic role within the Joint Force, also known as its phasing construct: Shape, Prevent, Conduct LSCO, and Consolidate Gains. According to FM 3-0, Operations, shaping operations include security cooperation activities and forward positioning of Army units and pre-positioned stocks, whereas prevent operations are meant to deter adversarial actions. They include Flexible Deterrence Operations, force tailoring, and other pre-deployment activities. The purpose of LSCO is straightforward, while consolidating gains is meant to take place during and/or after high intensity conflict to "set the conditions for a sustainable environment" and enable the transition to civil control.5 3F 
54
52
53
54 US Army, FM 3-0, Operations, 1-63 to 1-66. bellum ligula activities. For instance, security cooperation and the forward positioning of forces send a message; however, given Russian actions in the Ukraine and China's island building campaign in the South China Sea, it appears their effectiveness is waning.
Overall, FM 3-0, Operations, is narrowly focused on LSCO. Although it mentions the need to respond to "worldwide challenges against a full range of threats," it fails to clearly describe what these threats are and then assumes that the ability to execute LSCO against a peer threat also enables the Army to "win" during the competition phase. In a recent article in Task and Purpose, Col. Rich Creed argued that the Army is not ignoring these types of conflict, pointing to the continued relevance of counter insurgency doctrine. He also emphasizes the gap which the current version of FM 3-0 fills: doctrine for Army forces in a LSCO environment.
Creed then pointed to guidance from the Secretary of Defense and Army Chief of Staff highlighting the "possibility (not probability)" of LSCO against a peer threat.5 4F 
55
While the US focused on perfecting advanced technologies in preparation for LSCO, with a detour toward counter insurgency operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, competitors embraced the paradigm shift. The lessons they learned were much different than those embraced by Headquarters, Department of the Army. These lessons were not universal, and some were born of necessity rather than foresight, such as improvised explosive devices, but they all share a 55 Rich Creed, "What's Wrong with FM 3-0? Well, Most People Haven't Actually Read it," Task and Purpose, May 17, 2018, accessed May 17, 2018, https://taskandpurpose.com/thelongmarch/whatswrong-withfm-3-0.
56 Ibid.
Section II: Threat Environment Russia's actions in the Ukraine provide a contemporary example of how states adapted to American power in the post-Cold War world. In Ukraine, Russia used a mix of conventional and unconventional forces, cyber and electronic warfare, information operations, diplomacy, and economic coercion to quickly seize and maintain the initiative before either the Ukrainian government or the international community could mount an effective response. What follows is a description of Russia's actions in the Ukraine, a brief summary of their characteristics, the challenges they pose for the Army, and finally the theoretical underpinnings of the Army's (and America's) resistance to change.
After Ukraine gained its independence following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, a political struggle began over whether to draw closer to the West or maintain historical ties with Russia. This debate dominated Ukrainian politics until February 2014, when protestors who favored closer relations with the West marched on Kiev's main square, the Maidan, forcing the pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych, to abdicate.6 5F 66 What became known as the Euromaidan movement was the culmination of this struggle. The Ukrainian Parliament then voted to remove Yanukovych from power. Although it appeared the West had won, Russia had different objectives.
Russia's political objectives in Ukraine were straight forward: protect its near-abroad by preventing Ukraine from formalizing closer ties with the West.6 6F 67 Russian operations formally began soon after Yanukovych abdicated. In the Crimea, Russia executed an information campaign to solidify the large ethnic Russian population against the "hostile" Western leaning  
69
70
71
72
79
80
81
82
Bellum ligula, as mentioned earlier, is less about definitions than a menu of options.
These range from information warfare (or propaganda), economic coercion, cyber and electronic warfare to the exploitation of historical and ethnic grievances, religion, and the political process itself. This list is not all inclusive. In fact, the hallmark of bellum ligula is that its only limiting http://www.unian.info/war/1099656-ukrainian-troops-near-zelenopillya-burnt-to-the-ground-by-russiangrads-year-ago.html. factor is imagination. That said, it has broad characteristics that differentiate it from industrial age warfare.
First, it unfolds gradually, sometimes over many years, like the Ukraine case above, where Russia used bribes and below market gas contracts to secure fealty from pro-Russia political actors. Second, bellum ligula is characterized by a lack of attribution. Actions here might include cyberattacks, disinformation campaigns, or the use of proxy forces. With a lack of attribution comes ambiguity. It is here where gaps in an alliance, the law, and ethnic and political loyalties are exploited. Together, the lack of attribution and the importance of ambiguity highlight another characteristic: the importance of avoiding outright conflict. In the Ukraine, this meant avoiding actions that might draw a military response from the US or its NATO allies. Either way, the goal is to achieve political objectives without triggering conventional war. Lastly, bellum ligula is non-linear and those who practice it operate under the assumption that conflict is ongoing. It is non-linear because there is no construct that determines when conflict begins or ends. For instance, FM 3-0 Operations, provides a phasing model to help leaders conceptualize the battlefield. It starts with operations to shape and prevent and ends with operations to conduct large scale combat operations and ultimately consolidate gains. It presumes a progression across time and space. Bellum ligula, in contrast, is an "unending process that can never lead to conclusion" because "continuation is the goal, not culmination."8 2F 83 Needless to say, bellum ligula challenges the Army across all levels of war.
Bellum ligula challenges the Army across all levels of war. At the strategic level, it undermines the dominant culture that guides decision making. Put differently, Army strategic leaders, like a company commander at the tactical level, set the tone of the formation, or in this case the strategic culture of the force. This culture is dominated by a "big war" mindset that 
83
overemphasizes preferred mission sets (conventional war) and often times obscures the complexity of warfare.8 3F 
84
For instance, the 2017 NSS points to the return of great power competition. At the same time, it highlights how adversaries are "operating below the threshold of open military conflict and at the edges of international law…to achieve maximum effect without provoking a direct military response."8 4F 
85
Within the operational and tactical levels, bellum ligula shrinks the distance between the strategic and tactical levels of war. In Ukraine, Russian BTGs had access to cyber and electronic warfare capabilities typically held at much higher echelons, allowing the BTG to place strategic affects quickly. As Maj. Amos Fox noted, Russia's multi-domain approach combines conventional and unconventional, cyber, information, and electronic warfare in a "synergistic effort to overwhelm an opponent's capacity to handle the quantity of presented dilemmas."8 5F 
86
87
94
95
According to Berger and Luckmann, a person is "not born a member of society" but becomes one through primary socialization.9 5F 96 This begins early in childhood, when children learn norms and rules from their parents (the shame in nudity) and extends into elementary, middle, and high school, where the foundations of civic duty are first laid.9 6F 
97
How the American Revolution is taught in elementary, middle, and high school paints a picture of how American's are socialized to view warfare. From an early age, the American Revolution is portrayed in terms of George Washington leading the Continental Army to Yorktown, where he defeats Charles Cornwallis and ends the war. In middle school more nuance 
94
95
Knowledge,
80. 96 Ibid.,
149. 97 Ibid.,
167.
98
First, there is a precise point in time where peace ends and war begins. In this case, April 18, 1775, with Paul Revere's warning about the approach of British soldiers. Second, war is portrayed in conventional terms. For example, little is mentioned about the guerilla war campaign in New Jersey prior to Washington's audacious attacks at Trenton and Princeton, or about the unconventional methods used during the Carolina Campaign later in the war, at least outside of the Carolinas. Lessons about the Civil War, World War I, and World War II are similar.9 8F 99 In context, bellum ligula is largely reserved for the college level, if taught at all to the general public at lower grade levels. As a result, from an early age American's are socialized to believe that there is an exact day when peace ends and war beings (Pearl Harbor) and that once war begins soldiers on the battlefield are the sole determinant of victory. These ideas are reinforced when soldiers raise their right hand to take the oath of service.
Primary socialization comes first whereas secondary socialization is typically associated with a career field.9 9F
100
101
98
99 Kansas Department of Education, Kansas History, Government, and Social Studies Standards.  expected to arrive familiar with offensive and defensive tasks, forms of maneuver, and the fundamentals of reconnaissance and security operations, among other LSCO dominant topics.1 02F 103 Again, the overwhelming majority of topics emphasize LSCO; bellum ligula is not a prerequisite.
Instead, and similar to IBOLC, war is assumed to take place within a simple binary construct, while LSCO guides the mental model in which officers are trained. Overall, primary and secondary socialization helps explain why the Army is hesitant to embrace bellum ligula.
According to Clausewitz, "the first, the supreme, the most far-reaching act of judgment that the statesman and commander have to make is to establish by that test the kind of war on  compete short of war. Lastly, the Army's professional education system (PME) must increase the learning objectives and content dedicated to bellum ligula. IBOLC and MCCC narrowly focus on LSCO, as examined above, while the Command and General Staff Officer Course does little better.1 06F 107 A solution is to mandate at least fifteen percent of course instruction and content, with specific learning objectives, focus on bellum ligula.1 07F 108 Overall, the end state is not to make soldiers experts on bellum ligula but to broaden the lens through which they view warfare.
The second recommendation is to revise the current phasing construct. As Antulio Echevarria argues, phasing "models should be based on actual practice, not ideals, that is on approximations rather than aspirations. Otherwise, they lead to cognitive dissonance between expectations and realities."1 08F 
109
107
108
6
7
The interwar and post-Cold War eras are similar. Politically, the collapse of the Soviet Union was every bit as earth shattering as Germany's surrender in late 1918. Technologically, continued advances in computing will likely be as life changing as airplanes, tanks, and radio communications were less than one-hundred years ago. Economically, the depression-laden 1930s serve as a stark reminder of how the economy is not only important to military readiness and innovation but also to global stability. Today, in contrast, a debt crisis over the next ten to twenty years is more likely than a depression, especially as the US Congress (and other nations) borrow trillions of dollars in response to the Coronavirus pandemic.1 11F 112 Doctrinally, the Army's focus on LSCO resembles the British and French during the Interwar Period more so than the Germans. Together, as Williamson Murray succinctly points out, "we appear to be entering a time of political, strategic, and technological uncertainty; yet a period where the threats seem more 112 Erica Werner, Mike DeBonis, Paul Kane, and Jeff Stein, "Congress, White House clse in on $2 trillion stimulus deal to blunt coronavirus fallout," Washington Post, March 24, 2020, accessed March 24, 2020, https://www.washingtonpost.com/us-policy/2020/03/24/trump-coronavirus-congress-economicstimulus/. Anticipating the future is difficult. Nostradamus got it right only because he got it wrong so many times. The Army does not have that luxury. As much as the author would like to speculate on the "spirit of our age" and how it might "predict" the future, it was not the purpose of this paper. Nor were idle prognostications on how advances in computing technology will upend the world---Ray Kurzweil's "singularity" might happen or it might not.1 14F 
115
116
117
113
114 Clausewitz,
On War,
594.
The second section examined the contemporary threat environment, using the Russo-Ukrainian War as a framework for how states adapted to American power in the post-Cold War era. It went on to suggest how bellum ligula challenges the Army's current operational framework at all levels of war. Lastly, it used Berger and Luckmann to explain why change is so difficult. In short, primary socialization early in life and secondary socialization as one transitions to the military make it difficult to broaden the lens through which warfare is framed.
Recommendations included revisions, if not removal altogether, of the strategic phasing construct and greater focus on bellum ligula throughout the Army PME system. Neither will solve the problem outright, but they are modest steps in the right direction. For further study, one might examine how to operationalize a whole-of-government approach. Peter Wilcox at the Modern War Institute offers a template in a recent article, though it was focused on the addition of an "information warfare directorate" to the National Security Council.1 17F 118 Perhaps a similar directorate with accompanying authorities is needed to synchronize the Combatant Commands with the other aspects of national power. Ultimately, the Army (and America) must adapt to the changing character of war if it wants to continue its dominance over the international system.
67
110 Ibid.,[12]
[13]
Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare, ed. and trans. Ian Straus (Brattleboro,  VT: Echo Point Books, 1999),  
6 Ibid., 118.
Mark Galeotti, "The 'Gerasimov Doctrine' and Russian Non-Linear War," In Moscow's Shadows, July 6, 2014, accessed August
8, 2019, https://inmoscowsshadows.wordpress.com/2014/07/06/the-gerasimov-doctrine-and-russian-non-linearwar/. Galeotti provides a translation, with comments, of a speech given by General Valery Gerasimov, then Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Federation, to the Russian War College. 8 Ibid. 9 Bettina Renz, "Russia and Hybrid Warfare," Journal of Contemporary Politics 22, no. 3 (Fall 2016): 283-300, accessed September 3, 2019, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13569775.2016.1201316. 10 Rupert Smith, The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World (New York, NY: Random House, 2008), 19.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), i.
Elinor Sloan, Hegemony, Power, and Hybrid War (Berlin, Germany: DOC Research Institute,   
2018), accessed September 10, 2019, https://doc-research.org/2018/11/hegemony-power-hybrid-war/.
Frank G. Hoffman, "Examining Complex Forms of Conflict: Gray Zone and Hybrid  Challenges," PRISM 7, no. 4, November 8, 2018, accessed April 23, 2020, https://cco.ndu.edu/News/Article/1680696/examining-complex-forms-of-conflict-gray-zone-and-hybridchallenges/.
Daniel Roper and Jessica Grassetti, "Seizing the High Ground: United States Army Futures Command," Institute of Land Warfare, October 2018, accessed February 19, 2020, https://www.ausa.org/sites/default/files/publications/SL-18-4-Seizing-the-High-Ground-United-States-Army-Futures-Command.pdf. There are six CFTs: Long Range Precision Fires, Next Generation Combat Vehicle, Future Vertical Lift, the Army Network, Air and Missile Defense, and Soldier Lethality. With the exception of the Army Network, this modernization effort is focused on replacing conventional warfighting technologies developed during the 1970s-1980s (PATRIOT air defense system, the Abrams main battle tank, Black Hawk helicopter, Apache attack helicopter, and the Bradley fighting vehicle).
Julia Horowitz, "Mike Pence blasts the NBA and Nike," CNN, accessed October 30, 2019, https://www.cnn.com/2019/10/25/business/pence-nike-nba/index.html.
Clausewitz, On War,
[75]
[76]
[77]
Atalia Zinets and Maria Tsvetkova, "Ukraine says Rebels will Pay as Missiles Kill 23 Soldiers," Reuters, July 11, 2014, accessed February 27, 2020, http://www.reuters.com/article/us-ukraine-crisis-idUSKBN0FG1A920140711.
 80  Phillip Karber and Joshua Thibeault, "Russia's New-Generation Warfare," Association of the United States Army, May 20, 2016, accessed September 14, 2019, https://www.ausa.org/articles/russia'snew-generation-
warfare.81  Karber, "The Russia Military Forum, Russia's Hybrid Warfare Campaign: Implications for Ukraine
and Beyond." 82 Ibid.
Berger and Luckmann,  The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology ofKnowledge,[150][151][152][153][154][155][156][157][158] 
Ibid., 158.   
Clausewitz, On War, 594.    
Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, s.v. "balance," accessed April 23, 2020, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/balance. Merriam-Webster defines "balance" as stability produced by even distribution of weight on each side of a vertical axis.
Kretchik, US Army Doctrine: From the American Revolution to the War on Terror, 248-251.
Ray Kurzweil, The Singularity is Near(London, England: Penguin Books: 2005). Kurzweil argues that the "singularity," what he describes as the fusion of humans and machines, will take place around 2045.
"Dow Jones Industrial Average: 1896-2020," Trading Economics, accessed March 22, 2020, https://tradingeconomics.com/united-states/stock-market. The Dow Jones Industrial Average reached an all-time high of 29,068 on February 12, 2020. Over the next month it dropped 10,000 points, erasing all of the gains since the beginning of the Trump Administration.
Michael Howard, "Military Science in the Age of Peace," Royal United Services Institute no. 3 (March 1974): 64.
Caroline, Lucas, 
Maja
Colonel Shane Murphy
ADP unifying theme: a move away from industrial age warfare. The major causes of this shift were twofold.
First, nuclear weapons and the risk of escalation meant states were "best served by pursuing their objectives without triggering a major conflict or waging conventional war."5 6F 
57
Second, as Colonel (Ret.) Thomas Hammes posited, the US has too great a lead and modern weapons systems cost too much for peer states to compete.5 7F 
58
59
60
61
The cliché is somewhat antiquated, but the first step in the recovery process is to acknowledge the problem. As mentioned earlier, the Army's operational doctrine and emerging concepts, major acquisition programs, as represented by the CFTs, and military education system are all weighted toward LSCO. Thus, the first recommendation is to achieve balance. That said, the author does not mean balance as defined by Merriam-Webster's Dictionary.1 04F 105 Rather, balance is defined in terms of meeting the full range of threats listed in the NSS. For example, the addition of the term OOTW to Army doctrine in the early 1990s was a step in the right direction.1 05F 
106
Further, the CFTs are narrowly focused on achieving overmatch in a high intensity conflict; however, what if Army senior leaders created a CFT to solve equally troublesome problems that take place during the competition phase of war? Outputs might not lead to materiel acquisitions, though a universal translator would certainly help in any conflict, but they would at least provide an official forum in which these discussions could take place. In terms of the authorities, or lack thereof, mentioned in MDO-2028, it might also lead to unity of action in both the Army and throughout the Joint Force to acquire those capabilities that are necessary to