# ID: a757fd364c1144c68507780eafb127f7
# Title: People, Passion, and Armies: Historical Recruitment Methods and Their Application
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
Throughout history, states have used different recruitment methods to raise armies. Some of those methods have been successful-and some have failed disastrously. This study examines four historical cases to explore underlying patterns that help explain what makes different means of recruitment effective, focusing on the key social factors that are pertinent to raising an army. Using the backdrop of RAND researcher Brian Nichiporuk's "competitively multipolar" world, this study offers analysis on what mix of volunteer recruiting, contractor use, and conscription, is right for America against the RAND study's near-future threats.
The 2014 United States Army Operating Concept describes our world as deeply uncertain and complex. * Its interactions are fast-paced, competitive, and dangerous. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Several key terms within this study have particular meanings. The "all volunteer force" refers to the American non-compulsory military service model used since 
1973. 17
†
This study identified no limitations to its research but the author did impose several delimitations on it. First, the intrinsic morality of the three recruitment methods is not examined (this study does not discuss whether a volunteer system is more ethically right than hiring contractors or conscription). Second, the author confines the subject † For example, imagine that the cost of recruiting a soldier goes up on the margin. This would mean that the cost of recruiting the last soldier an army acquired was $50,000, but the cost of the next soldier (the one on the margin) is $51,000. This is what the author means by costs increasing on the margin. matter of this study to personnel recruiting only. This study examines no other aspect of force generation. Lastly, this study does not discuss the accession of Department of the Army civilians.
The significance of this topic relates to understanding possible ways the United States Army can increase troop strength and how those ways are more likely to succeed or fail under different social circumstances. Exploring how the US Army can grow its forces attempts to provide insight into US Army recruiting policy and force management. 2 Ibid.
3 Brian Nichiporuk, Alternative Futures and Army Force Planning: Implications for the Future Era (Santa Monica: RAND Corporation, 2005). 
4
37, 45, 51, 58, 64, 69. 5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12 Ibid. 
13
14
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
13
While many people avowedly respect the military (82 percent of respondents in one recent poll said they considered being a military officer prestigious), 
14
15
16
17
18
However, the current military recruitment debate is not confined to volunteer recruiting and conscription. In his 2015 book Return of the Hired Gun: How Private Armies Will Remake Modern Warfare, author Sean McFate details how mercenary armies have boomed around the world in the last 25 years. For instance, in 1995 South African private mercenary company Executive Outcomes fought a predominantly conventional war in Sierra Leone against Charles Taylor's Revolutionary United Front. This same company went on to find work in Kenya, Angola, and elsewhere after the end of the war. 
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
29
Others, like J. Ronnie Davis, Neil Palomba, James Miller, and Robert D. Tollison described in detail the implicit taxation that is inherent within the draft. In these authors' cases, the premise is that impressing a citizen into military service, something that under free market conditions would bear a price tag, imposes a tax on the individual equal to the value of their service, minus whatever compensation they receive. As such, while this saves money for the government in the short term, it transfers that cost to society in the form of lost civilian production and to the soldier in the form of lost wages, both of which ultimately cost the nation. This general argument was one of the key factors in the Gates Commission's report in favor of volunteer recruitment. 
30
31
Ross predicates his findings on the belief that people are unequally suited to being soldiers. Some individuals will make good soldiers but poor civilian workers and vice versa. In light of this, Ross notes that the bigger the disparity between "good" and "bad" potential soldiers, the more attractive volunteer recruiting, with its ability to pick the "right" people, is. 
32
34
Ross concludes by saying that the most important factor in whether a country uses conscription or volunteer recruiting is the size of army it needs: if it needs a large force, conscription is preferable; if it only requires a small force, volunteer recruiting is the better choice. 
35
Revolutionary France was the first to use conscription on a large scale after Europe's emergence from the Middle Ages. 
36
37
38
The initial periods of this military expansion were fraught with problems.
Contrary to the somewhat romanticized view of revolutionary France's military recruiting, in 1792 the idea of compulsory military service was widely regarded as a moral injustice. 
39
40
41
42
The hitherto unknown tyranny of conscription had to be enforced by ferocious penalties. Those failing to report when called were treated like deserters who had voluntarily enlisted and then broken their contract. They were punished by ten years in chains, their property was confiscated and their parents punished with them. 
44
45
46
47
The vehicle by which the government accomplished this somewhat radical shift in values was its effective argument that patriotism and republicanism were supreme moral values, trumping even the people's cherished notion of personal liberty. The primacy of these beliefs made the anti-liberalism of conscription less obvious, if perhaps not actually accepted. 
48
49
50
51
Through the dual lines of obligation and desirability, the French government masked the unpleasantness of conscription under the veil of a volunteer army. As researchers Daniel Moran and Arthur Waldron put it, "honor . . . [came] to be represented, and to some extent subjectively felt by those concerned, as authentic expressions of individual personality." 52 This unique, powerfully motivating factor enabled the public's acceptance of military service as an endeavor as respectable as any civilian trade-and one that was certainly more patriotic. 
53
54
55
56
57
59
60
61
Jeon-Henri Dombrowski, for one, raised his Polish Legion quite voluntarily to assist Bonaparte in securing Lombardy. 
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
In parallel development with Frederick's kingdom, the nearby Netherlands followed a similar mercenary model. 
76
77
78
79
80
Criminals, the extremely poor, and the socially outcast often found employ as mercenaries, in Prussia or somewhere else. 
81
82
83
85
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
Mercenaries had no stake in society, other than their wish to be paid, and as such were tools that a monarch could control with relative ease. 98
Frederick the Great died firmly convinced that using foreign mercenaries, rather than one's productive citizens, was the only sensible way to wage war. 
99
101
102
Recruiting and Conscription
The earliest American form of military recruitment was a mixed system of volunteerism and conscription. 
103
104
105
116
118
119
Amid the conscription process, many states had established exemptions for a number of protected classes like the clergy, students, slaves, and free blacks. 
120
121
[the government bought] recruits from entrepreneurs.
[Businessmen] could pay a willing recruit the official bounty [which varied by state] and then offer him to draftees as a substitute. The high bidder among the draftees sent the recruit to the [Army], and the entrepreneur pocketed the difference between the private payment for a substitute and the public bounty for a recruit. 
122
123
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
The draft was successful at raising troops to sustain the United States Army during Vietnam, just as it had been in the Korean and previous two world wars. The American conscription process, a method that had been in place since 1948, was designed to augment the country's professional military and replace "combat casualties." 141 It had raised the number of troops necessary for the conflict in Korea and, in the opinion of President Lyndon B. Johnson, had done so equitably. 
142
143
The Vietnam era draft supported five separate theaters: the continental United States, the greater Americas, Europe, the Middle East, and East Asia. 
144
145
146
150
151
152
153
Nixon would describe it on November 3, 1969, was in favor of the American government's limited war of containment in Vietnam. 
154
155
156
157
that the bloody experience of Vietnam is to end in a stalemate . . . to say that we are closer to victory today is to believe in the face of the evidence, the optimists who have been wrong in the past." 158 White House confidants reported that the President's response to this broadcast was "if I've lost Cronkite, I've lost middle America." 
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
During the end of his first term, *** Nixon established The President's Commission on an All-Volunteer Armed Force, colloquially known as the Gates Commission, to "[eliminate] conscription and [move] toward an all-volunteer armed force." 
175
According to academic Andrew J. Bacevich, Sr., the Vietnam era Selective Service draft was so poorly managed that it was a key reason for the political failure of the war at home and America's move to an all-volunteer force. 
178
179
180
The author conducted this study in four basic steps that guide the reader from the initial problem statement to the research's ultimate recommendation. These four steps are: one, framing the current state of affairs; two, framing the desired state; three, framing the problem that separates the current state from the desired one; and four, framing the solution to the research problem. 
1
Step two is to frame the desired state: the United States wants a stable, democratic, and pro-western Iraq. The US has key economic and political interests in this Middle Eastern country and is not willing to see them fail. According to Nichiporuk's scenario, the United States government's primary instrument to protect Iraq is the United States Army. As such, the US will have to field a force that is capable not only of countering the immediate threat posed to Iraq, but also of continuing to support its other worldwide commitments. 
3
4
5
6
Finally, this study presents the solution to the research problem.
The word how, which is recurrent in each of the critical aspects of the problem, led the author to use case study methodology. The case study method provides a detailed exploration of what factors will make the three stated recruitment means-volunteer recruiting, the use of contractors, and conscription-viable. This methodology is also § § § The United States Army had roughly 493,000 Soldiers on its rolls in 2005. appropriate because two out of the three criteria that academic Robert Yin defines in his book Case Study Research: Design and Methods (fourth edition) as characterizing a case study apply to this situation (namely that it answers the question of "how [or] why" and does not require control of behavioral events). 
7
8
9
10
11
While exploring the cases, this study sought commonalities that would point to underlying patterns in order to explain why some recruitment methods were successful while others were not, and then extrapolate those insights forward into a possible future scenario. In line with Yin's definition of case study methodology, this portion of the research explored "what" the key factors were that made different recruitment methods successful. 
12
13
Interestingly, the study revealed that any method was capable of raising a force, in the short term, but using a method unsuited to the circumstances failed to "raise a . . . reliable instrument of state policy." 
14
15
Additionally, the analysis of the data revealed one secondary factor that had an effect on the success of each recruitment method, albeit to a lesser degree. This factor was time, which the author hypothesizes has the progressive effect of lowering popular CHAPTER 4 ANALYSIS Chapter four will include several layers of analysis. First, it will describe the factors derived from the case studies that are pertinent to military recruitment. Second, it will analyze the four historical cases-Revolutionary France, Prussia, Revolutionary America, and Vietnam Era America-in terms of these factors as an explanation of why volunteer recruiting, contractor (mercenary) use or conscription was or was not successful. Finally, this chapter will return to Brian Nichiporuk's world of competitive multipolarity, apply the lessons from this chapter to his scenario, and set the stage for the study's conclusions in chapter five.
In this subsection, this study will define the two primary factors, popular passion and the number of people available, and the secondary factor of time, all of which affect the viability of volunteer recruiting, the use of contractors, and conscription.
The level of enthusiasm that people have for a conflict is the primary factor that determines which method of recruitment is optimal and when. High popular passion, like what France and America experienced during their revolutions, has the effect of lowering the monetary cost of acquisition (because people can be persuaded to join and support with less effort and less monetary incentive) and reducing the expenditure of effort required from the government. High popular passion contributes to higher retention and to soldiers being willing to endure greater hardship. 
1
High popular passion also contributes to increased retention. During the American Revolution, soldiers were relatively expensive, due to the country's small population, but those who served were comparatively easy to keep. Desertion was not the overriding problem that it was for Europe's lingering mercenary armies. Colonists serving in Washington's Army generally believed in the conflict and felt that fulfilling their commitments, despite the poverty of their situation, was worthwhile.
A final benefit of high popular passion is the increased ability of soldiers to deal with hardship. During both the Continental Army's winter at Valley Forge and Napoleon's Italian campaign, pay, provisions, equipment, and other forms of soldierly necessities were lacking. However, those soldiers' high level of personal commitment to their cause sustained them through their enlistment terms, which, consequently enabled those two governments to field forces at significantly lower costs than would have been necessary with less committed troops.
Low popular passion has the opposite effect. In general, lower levels of commitment or passion for a conflict increase the cost of acquisition, increase the costs of retention, and generally coincide with less willingness to endure hardship.
Like in the Vietnam War, as the Gates Commission Report argued in its chapter "Conscription is a Tax," 2 while soldiers were certainly paid less than they would have been under a volunteer model, the cost to the government of raising an impressed force was higher than the volunteer alternative because of the unaccounted for costs of conscription. 
3
4
5
6
7
Since enthusiasm for the cause was not sufficient to keep them in formation, only the alternative of poverty and the threat of their non-commissioned officers' bayonets kept them from dispersing rapidly.
In effect, high popular passion enables a government to raise and keep an army more cheaply and with less difficulty. It allows for more forceful means of recruitment, such as conscription. Low popular passion does the opposite, prompting the government to raise a force based on some extrinsic motivation, most commonly money, although prestige, social standing, and other elements may also play a role.
The number of people available to a government has an effect, too. The more people there are, the easier it is to raise an army. A nation of any size can raise an army, but the larger a nation's population is to begin with, the greater the percentage that can be devoted to prosecuting a conflict for a given cost. The populations of Frederick the Great's Prussia and Napoleon I's **** France provide good contrasts of this phenomenon.
Prussia had roughly one fifth the population of its often hostile neighbors. This encouraged Frederick the Great to obtain soldiers from outside his borders, embrace clearly defined strategic ends (such as the annexation of Silesia), and to seek a qualitative **** Napoleon Bonaparte.
Another salient factor is overall employment of a nation's population. In accordance with the economic law of supply and demand, a country that has more people available for military service, i.e., not productively employed in the work force, will have to pay less for them. 
11
13
14
15
As unemployment drops and the number of people available to serve become scarcer, the cost of enticing that next soldier, both in money and in effort, increases. 
16
18
19
20
Just such was the case during the Vietnam War when the American Selective Service drafted conscripts for two-year terms. 
21
22
Finally, time has different but related effects on which recruitment method is preferred. In general, people dislike being forced to do things against their will, preferring choice to coercion. 
23
24
25
26
27
28
It is very arguable that governments that do not value personal liberty as highly would not behave in similar ways. However, that it is outside of the scope of this study.
Further research may prove interesting regarding whether governments and cultures that have a stronger group than individual identity, such as the Soviet Union or the Republic of Korea, favor volunteerism over conscription, ceteris paribus. For the case studies examined, though, greater time available tends to encourage governments to embrace contractor use and volunteerism while less time encourages conscription.
In this section, the three factors-popular passion, the number of people available, and time-are applied to the four case studies of Revolutionary France, Prussia, Revolutionary America, and Vietnam Era America. It concludes with analysis of why each conflict's method of recruitment was successful or not.
The passion of the revolutionary French was high. The fervor of anti-royalism and the empowerment of the commoner inflamed the French nation with a deep enthusiasm for change. This passion had several key effects: it made the French more willing to say yes when asked to enlist and it increased the level of hardships that they were willing to bear. French enthusiasm also lowered society's barriers to recruitment. The levée en masse would not have been successful, no matter how universal or thorough it was, had the French people not been intrinsically motivated to achieve their own nationhood.
Additionally, France's high popular passion increased its soldiers' willingness to accept hardships. Poor food, shortages of equipment, and even a lack of pay were all things that the revolutionary French army was more willing to accept because they were motivated for their cause. Lowered mental barriers to entry into the military and a higher acceptance of deprivation, functions of high popular passion, made French mass conscription a viable and successful option.
France had two numerical advantages during its revolutionary phase. One, it was the most populous country in Europe and two, its ravaged economy left many people eager to find work. France's population during the revolutionary period was between 25 and 30,000,000 people, compared with approximately 12,000,000 in Italy, 7,000,000 in Spain, and perhaps as many as 15,000,000 in Germany. 
29
30
31
32
The popular passion of the Prussians during the reign of Frederick the Great was low. The lack of interest in service on the part of average Prussians made them a poor choice as soldiers; moreover, Prussia needed productive subjects much more at home than in the army. As a result, contracted foreign mercenaries, who needed no motivation other than remuneration, were an ideal choice.
The number of people available to Prussia was low. Prussia had one fifth the population of its most likely enemies, and within that 20 percent Prussian society deemed only its least employable members expendable enough for military service. This dearth of people caused the opportunity cost of losing civilian labor to outweigh the cost of hiring mercenaries. By contracting out his army, even at the exorbitant prices that mercenaries demanded, Frederick the Great was able to raise an effective army at a lower overall cost than by mobilizing his civilian population. Time, with its effect of lowering popular passion and increasing the need for troops, was never on Frederick's side. The escalating cost of replacing soldiers in a protracted war, compounded with all of his other resource constraints, encouraged Prussia to limit its military aims to only its core interests. Upon taking Silesia in 1742, Frederick the Great pointedly stopped his expansion. 
33
Additionally, Prussia had so few subjects that were not already productively employed that it was loath to spare any of them for military service. Hiring mercenaries was the right course of action because it allowed the civilian base to produce taxes that paid for the mercenaries, which in turn won Prussia's wars. This organization allowed Frederick the Great to raise an army with few people and little public interest.
Popular passion during the American Revolutionary War was high. Historians estimate four fifths of the population was in favor of rebellion. 
34
However, America had a much smaller population than its former parent country.
All 13 colonies only equaled 2,500,000 individuals (not counting Indians), half a million of whom were slaves, while Great Britain had 8,000,000 residents in its home islands alone. At any given time, the Americans were only able to field a force of 48,000, augmented by 12,000 French. By contrast, Great Britain fielded an expeditionary army of 22,000 regulars, 25,000 American loyalists, and 30,000 Hessian (German) auxiliaries, equating to a ratio of .78:1 in Britain's favor at any one time. 
35
The degrading effects of time took its toll on revolutionary America. The year 1782 saw the collapse of the centrally funded Continental Army as money, will, and people began to wear out. The length of the conflict eventually necessitated approximately 217,000 Americans to serve, though only 48,000 of which were ever in uniform at one time. 
36
37
43
44
45
The number of people available fluctuated throughout the conflict and contributed both to the effort's early success and to its later troubles. Almost trending along the same timelines, American Vietnam era conscription was aided by relatively high unemployment, defined here as five percent or more, from 1958-1964. 
46
47
48
Additionally, what started in 1962 as a small, advisor-led group under General Westmoreland's Military Assistance Command-Vietnam expanded with the passage of time into a war that in total involved 9,087,000 American service members. 
49
50
1963-1973. 51
1958-1964. 52
Recruitment methods are predominantly successful at raising a reliable instrument of national power if they correctly play to two key factors: popular passion and the number of people available. In large part, Revolutionary French conscription was successful because the populace was highly enthused and there were many people available. Likewise, Prussian mercenary contracting was successful because it effectively sidestepped the low passion and numbers of the Prussians to recruit foreigners with monetary enticement. American Revolutionary mixed volunteer recruitment and conscription was successful because it played to the different willingness levels of the people, allowing the government the ability to take only those who wanted to go for regular Army service and leaving those who were most resistant to less strenuous militia service. Finally, American Vietnam era conscription was ultimately counterproductive because it imposed conscription on an unwilling populace over a protracted period. High unemployment only somewhat ameliorated this, making military service more palatable to the poor, though not enough to offset the people's resistance to the war and its draft after 1968.
The secondary factor of time influenced recruitment in all of these case, albeit to a lesser extent that popular passion or the number of people available. Some examples of this include France's army suffering the need for droves of replacements over time as casualties and completed enlistments built up over its decade plus of war. An additional example was the revolutionary America's need to field 217,000 total Soldiers over the course of its war for independence (despite only fielding 48,000 at any one time). 
54
At this point, this study transitions back to RAND researcher Brian Nichiporuk's world of competitive multipolority. In chapter five, this paper applies what it has learned from its analysis of the case studies to his future world. To that end, the following two subsections of chapter four, the situation and the assessment, explain Nichiporuk's scenario in detail and offer pertinent analysis of it in order to support chapter five's conclusions.
Brian Nichiporuk envisions a future where two separate global blocs, the Central Powers and the New Solidarity Alliance, have become capable of challenging US hegemony. However, the heads of these two international orders are as much in competition with each other as they are with America. All three of these blocs have built an alliance of follower states, whose members encompass most of the nations of the world. By 2025, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization has dissolved and America instead leads the Rimland Alliance, a partnership with Japan, Great Britain, and many of its traditional European partners. Russia leads the Central Powers, which is largely comprised of India, Libya, Sub-Saharan African states, and large parts of Eastern Europe.
China leads the New Solidarity Alliance, whose sphere of influence includes the majority of the Islamic world and Northern Africa. 
55
56
57
58
60
The Assessment This assessment will follow the same order as the conclusion of chapter four. It will consider the people's popular passion for the conflict, how many people are available, and how time will shape the US Army's raising of the 247,000 additional troops. Since the culture of 2025 is unknown, of course, this study will substitute elements of 2016 America and the current Iraqi crisis (with the Islamic State) as necessary.
The first step in this analysis is estimating the enthusiasm the American people have for this conflict. One point of insight into how much people care comes from a December 2015 Washington Post article that followed on the heels of the 2015 Paris terrorist attacks. According to the article, interest among 60 percent of 18 to 26-year-old American respondents "strongly" or "somewhat" supported the committal of ground troops against the Islamic State. 
62
53
Conglomerating a number of open-source reports, The Huffington Post stated that an estimated 108 Americans are fighting within the ranks of the "YPG," a Syrian Kurdish military, and in the Peshmerga, which is the military arm of the semi-autonomous Kurdish sub-government within Iraq. 
64
Reporting on the same source data, National Public Radio (NPR) reported that 62 percent of "millennial" 65 Americans "wouldn't . . . personally join the fight, even if the U.S. needed additional troops." 66 Along the same lines, a July 2015 USA Today article stated that the Army was nearly 14 percent short on its annual requirements that year. The article referenced Major General Jeffrey Snow, a ranking US Army recruiting officer, as saying that attracting young men and women to the Army becomes more difficult when the US economy improves. This fear was confirmed in an August 4, 2015 Department of Defense announcement that stated the Army achieved 89.2 percent of its active duty 2015 goal of 43,614, though all other branches of service met or exceeded their goals. Army
Reserve and National Guard rates were 100.6 percent of 20,773 and 90.3 percent of 36,181, respectively. The report went on to state that the Army "exhibited strong retention number for the nine month [sic] of fiscal year 2015." 
67
71
For the purposes of this study, the social conditions that affect this recruitment effort are low popular passion and few people from which to draw. Under these circumstances, voluntary recruitment is the most preferable means of levying a sustainable Army. Volunteerism is more politically acceptable because it shifts the burden of service from the reluctant to the willing, reducing the liability of the government for individual Soldiers' satisfaction with the conflict. Ultimately, this allows a force to be raised, retained, and employed with markedly less public emotion and interaction. The choice to serve is individual, made with full knowledge of the situation, and no other member of society has to bear any burden other than taxes. Additionally, astute recruiting policy can target potential Soldiers by selling the social benefits of military service: a generally merit-based system of advancement, relatively high pay versus civilians in their twenties, and the social advantage of belonging to a generally well-respected profession. In summation, people should be enticed to serve by extrinsic benefits instead of their excitement for the conflict, which is crucial in this case because the populace's passion is low.
The liberal use of contractors in this scenario would be both efficient and beneficial. The 2025 Iraqi crisis is not yet a highly lethal war (and may never become one, if deterrence is successful). As such, a wide variety of positions are legally available to civilians. A contracted force may be cheaper than recruiting and keeping 247,000 Soldiers. However, the best utility of contractors in this situation would be from the perspective that society generally feels less ire at the loss of them and that such loss would be only indirectly attributed to the government. While this may appear to be a callous perspective perhaps bordering upon immoral, it is a reality. By the use of volunteer recruiting and contractors, the US Army can bypass the discussion of enthusiasm for the conflict, of which there is little, and raise its force by economic and social enticement alone. Under these circumstances, conscription would be a viable but ultimately selfdefeating option. The popularity of the conflict is low and the people's passion is not aroused. While enacting conscription would be effective in the sense that it would generate the troops necessary to meet the need, it would not be effective at raising an "effective army, capable of serving as a reliable instrument of state policy." 72 Low unemployment, combined with the fact that the fraction of Americans who meet qualifications for military service are also among the most employable, means conscription will necessarily dip into a population that has both money to lose and employers to upset. Eventually, the loss of economic productivity and the resentment of the people, particularly if the conflict were unsuccessful, would outweigh the efficiency benefits that conscription offers. However, this is not to say that conscription has no role to play at all. During the Vietnam War, the Gates Commission Report stated that the fear of conscription induced many people to volunteer. 
73
Like in the American Revolutionary War, time will have an important impact on the prosecution of this conflict. The longer the Iraqi crisis continues to take American troops, ceteris paribus, the lower the enthusiasm of the people will be and the greater the Army's need for replacements. As interest in the war is already low, the American government cannot allow it to turn into a protracted affair without negative political and 
This study concludes that any of the three recruitment methods, or any combination thereof, is capable of producing the raw number of people required to meet Nichiporuk's scenario. If America were to activate its standby draft, it could quickly generate the 247,000 additional Soldiers. Alternatively, it could hire an entirely contracted force for use in the Army's logistics and support base to free existing Soldiers for combat. Lastly, with proper incentives the Army could recruit the 247,000 people using its current volunteer system. As such, the direct answer to this study's research question, "how can the US Army recruit and retain a force able to win against the threats described in a 'competitively multipolar' world," is any of the three.
However, this study now addresses how best to raise these 247,000 additional troops. The reader will recall from chapter four that two social factors, popular passion and the number of people available, determine what the best method is. Additionally, the market forces and personal choice to select who will serve instead of an indiscriminate draft, which would have undue impact on civil production. Conscription, while very capable of producing the people needed, is the least preferable option under these conditions. Drafting from a society whose popular passion for a conflict is low is least preferable because it: one, increases recruitment costs, obliging the government to expend additional resources activating the draft system, prosecuting draft dodgers, and forcing a relatively small number of people (relative to the total US population) into service. Two, it increases the Army's operating costs; conscription would necessitate additional time and money to account for its incumbent increase in indiscipline and Soldiers' lower intrinsic motivation. Three, it increases political resistance. The impressment of unwilling civilians into service for Iraq in 2025 would cycle back to the government in the form of protests and pressure on elected officials. This would result in the political losses of unpopular conscription eventually outweighing its operational benefits. Lastly, conscription is a poor choice in light of the number of people available. As there are few people, the chances that a random draft would draw from productively employed civilians is very high. Should a draft impartially glean society for recruits, it would impart a disproportionately high cost to civil production.
Time will have the effect of lowering popular passion and increasing the Army's needs for troops. As the conflict continues, passion for the conflict will lessen, particularly if military progress is difficult to see, necessitating an increase in the incentives necessary to entice people to join and stay in the Army. Additionally, casualties and completed service terms will increase the need for troops over time, further increasing the scarcity of an already small pool of civilians. This will simultaneously increase the costs of the acquisition and retention costs of both the Army and civilian employers.
Furthermore, it is fair to consider other factors that might impact which recruitment method the Army should use. Implicit in the rationale for Nichiporuk's 50 percent increase in the size of the Army (instead of more) is that it enjoys a qualitative advantage over its anticipated foes, Syria and Iran. Should this assumption prove false, the Army might require more people. Additionally, the lethality of the war can have an effect. If the 2025 Iraqi conflict improves into a tranquil, peacekeeping mission, a relatively greater percentage of the required force could be contracted (as there is less need for people to directly engage the enemy); conversely, if it becomes a more conventional conflict, a relatively larger percentage of the force logically should be Soldiers, who are capable both of support and combat roles. Lastly, should America confront competitive multipolority as a coalition or alliance, it may be able to adjust its total manpower need or makeup by sharing its burden with partner nations.
The outcomes of this study pose several questions worthy of further research. For one, how quickly is the US Army's training base capable of expanding to accommodate 247,000 additional Soldiers and what resources would such an expansion require? Additionally, how many total people would the Army have to recruit, accounting for training and other losses, to end up with a net increase of 247,000? Lastly, a more expansive series of case studies from multiple times and cultures could be useful to further test the theory that social conditions determine which recruitment method is most advantageous to a society. Exhaustive research on the subject in order to develop an indepth explanatory model could be beneficial to the US Army.
113    
113    
Campaign 1776, "
Washington Journal, hosted by George Hager interviewing Richard Flahavan (Cable-Satellite Public Affairs Network, November 24, 2001), accessed May 24, 2016, www.c-span.org/video/?167441-4/selective-service.
† † † † It is fair to mention, that Great Britain's counterinsurgency in the Americas was a limited war, whereas American involvement was total. The popular passion lowering effects of time affected both belligerents, but at differing rates by virtue of their different stakes in the outcome of the war.
Gates.   
Rothenberg, 33; Nichiporuk, 58.   
Sandra Sanchez United States Army Command and General Staff Officer
Force Management
Thomas W. Ross
Raising an Army: A Positive Theory of Military Recruitment
109-31
Ross. Pierce
Daniel Moran
Arthur Waldron
French Revolution (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press
Waldron. Ibid
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other
passion and increasing a government's need for troops. The longer a conflict persists over time, the less support can be sustained.
Finally, the fourth frame of this study is the application these three factors to Nichiporuk's scenario. Using the hypothesized factors of popular passion, number of people available, and time, supplemented by 2016 American social data substituted for 2025 America as needed, this research proposes an answer to its research question of how the United States Army can "recruit and retain a force able to win against the threats described in a 'competitively multipolar world.'" 16 1 Headquarters, Department of the Army, Army Design Methodology (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, July 2015). 
2
3 Ibid. 
4
5
6 
David Coleman, "US Military Personnel 1954
-2014
," History in Pieces, accessed May 20, 2016
, http://historyinpieces.com/research/us-military-personnel-1954
-2014.adf. 7
9
10
11
13 Ibid. edge for his army over its opponents by superior training. 8 However, none of this made any difference for Prussia when it faced a much larger country, like France, with an overwhelmingly superior number of combatants. Indeed, just such was the case at the Battles of Jena and Auerstedt 120 years after Frederick the Great's death. 
9
10
Additionally, population size has a direct effect on which method of recruitment-volunteerism, contractor use, and conscription-is favorable. Referring back to Ross' article (referenced in chapter two), conscription becomes a more attractive option the larger an army becomes because conscription is capable of lower recruitment costs per capita. Since, as Ross contends, the cost of each additional soldier goes up on the margin (because more soldiers mean less civil workers), the selectiveness offered by volunteerism and contractor use progressively loses its cost utility as a recruitment effort gets larger.
Similarly, larger countries incur less opportunity cost compared to smaller countries for raising the same number of people. To use an example from the competitive multipolarity scenario, a 10 percent mobilization of the United States, a relatively more populous country, and Syria, a less populous one, would both have dramatic costs associated with them. However, America could field that force more easily: Syria's small population makes a 100,000-man army more costly than the same size force for America.
In short, a larger population generally makes it easier and less expensive to raise an army.
American volunteer recruitment was a viable and correct choice because the newborn country enjoyed high popular passion, but had few available people. High popular passion enabled voluntary recruitment by reducing the cost of acquiring each soldier-the greater the popular support or passion, the more the population is willing to do for less money. Another consideration was that to have used conscription would have quickly and indiscriminately eaten into the civilian workforce, which America desperately needed at home. 
38
Despite the populist narrative of Vietnam always having been an ill-favored conflict, popular passion for the war started relatively high. Gallup poll data from 1965 through December 1967 showed that more Americans thought "the United States [had not] made a mistake sending troops to fight in Vietnam" than the reverse, often by double-digit margins. 
39
40
41
42
The second step in the assessment is to estimate the number of people available for service. Again, the only economic information available from Nichiporuk's scenario is that American productivity is somewhat less than other comparable western countries.
As such, the author will draw the remainder of the assessment of the situation from 2014, 2015, and 2016 data.
The number of people available for military service is primarily a function of population and economics. In 2016, the US population was nearly 324,000,000, as compared to the scenario's aggressors Syria, with 18,000,000, and Iran, with 8,000,000. 
68
The more gainfully employed a society is, the greater the opportunity cost individuals and society incur for inducting each subsequent person into military service.
As such, perhaps the most telling statistic available to address how many people are available is the unemployment rate. Though an imperfect tool, because it does not describe underemployment nor discouraged workers, it provides useful insight into the availability of people. The January 2016 unemployment rate in the United States was 4.9 percent (seasonally adjusted) for individuals 16 years of age and older. 69 This is a reduction from the mid 2015 rate of 5.3 percent and the continuation of a generally positive trend from 2011's nine percent. To lend some recent historical perspective to passage of time affects both of these factors. To briefly recap, popular passion for Nichiporuk's Iraqi crisis is low, as is the number of people available, and the length of the conflict is, of course, unknown. Based on this study's analysis from chapter four, these circumstances lend themselves to less forceful, more voluntary methods of recruitment.
The most advantageous method of recruitment for the world of competitive multipolarity is a combination of contracting and volunteer recruiting. The US Army should first fill and retain as many positions as possible with contractors for the following reasons: one, popular passion is low, so enticing civilians with high pay (and easy entry into the force, as contracting involves little if any military style training), sidesteps any need to make the conflict itself an inspiring affair to potential employees. Two, for the same reason, the use of military contractors, versus Soldiers, carries much less political liability. Three, as the number of people available is low, contracting allows for selective recruitment from society of only those individuals who would benefit from the job, which avoids the issue of taking highly productive laborers out of the civilian workforce.
In concert with liberal contractor use, the Army should fill and maintain the remainder of its troop strength requirements by volunteer recruiting. Similar to the rationale for using contractors, the US Army should favor volunteerism because it: one, avoids the political ramifications of conscripting a force for an unpopular conflict. Two, restricts those in service to only those who have chosen to be there, reducing political liability for the conflict. Three, as there are few people available, it is preferable to allow