# ID: a7696e9826a04ff4975d6e36315323b4
# Title: Mission Command: The Historical Roots of Mission Command in the US Army
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
Mission orders as described in ADP 6-0, are the foundation of mission command, because it sets the tone of a command climate. Mission orders tell a subordinate what to do and why he is doing it, but does not tell him how. By not telling a subordinate how to do something they can better account for and deal with the friction and fog of war to accomplish the commander's intent. ADP 6-0 Mission Command published in September 2012 lays out principles and tasks for commanders and staffs to prepare orders, and to execute command and control operations. ADP 6-0 states that army mission command comes from the German concept of Auftragstaktik.
This study analyzes the U.S. Army's historical examples of mission command in using three distinctly different American general officers from three separate periods of American military history. Mission command existed in the American army prior to the Prussian army of the mid to late nineteenth century and the US Army's formal adoption of mission command in the 1980. Analysis of the military careers of Generals Zachary Taylor, Ulysses S. Grant, and John J. Pershing shows these military commanders successfully displayed a mission command style of command.
To conduct this analysis a short biography that shapes the traits, personality, and education of the general is important along with a description of the military environment of their respective period. These two important aspects place in context the detailed analysis of how they applied mission command to achieve operational and strategic success through military means.
"Never tell people how to do things, tell them what to do, and they will surprise you with their ingenuity." 1 -General George S. Patton Jr.
Mission command in essence is the way commanders and leaders guide their organizations to accomplish the operational end state through allowing subordinate leaders to account for the inherent friction in war through their individual initiative. 
2
3
4
2 Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 6-0, Mission Command (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), 1. Mission Command is the exercise of authority and direction by the commander using mission orders to enable disciplined initiative within the commander's intent to empower agile and adaptive leaders in the conduct of unified land operations. leaders to understand and develop a useful framework with which to apply the art of mission command. The lack of practical synthesis and the credit given to German Field Marshal Helmuth Von Moltke for creating mission command in American army doctrine leaves leaders looking to the Prussian army for a framework to apply mission command.
There are American generals that exhibited the principles of mission command prior to Moltke's adoption of Auftragstaktik in the 1860s. The cultural and historical differences between Prussia and America are significant enough that American military leaders should also look to their own past to gather lessons learned to develop frameworks to practice mission command.
Moltke may have coined the term Auftragstakik, which means mission orders or decentralized tactics, but he is not the founder of mission command. 
5
The modern context of mission command or decentralized command started with Napoleonic warfare. Carl Von Clausewitz described that the fog and friction of war is a state in warfare where the easy tasks become hard to accomplish. This making the easy seem hard 5 Geoffrey Wawro, The Franco Prussian War: The German Conquest of France in 1870-1871 (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 54.
prevents leaders from effectively controlling every detail of an operation. 
6
7
8
There is a gap and lack of adequate research and analysis on early examples of American mission command. Due to the military infatuation with WWII German combined arms mobile warfare doctrine, and extensive military writings from Prussian military theorists, the US Army studies the Prussian and German examples of mission command from the nineteenth and twentieth century instead of their own. The lack of coverage on American examples of mission command is in part because the military theorists that wrote and influenced the thoughts on mission command came from Europe during the nineteenth century. The writings of theorists Henri Jomini, Carl Von Clausewitz, and Helmuth Von Moltke articulated their experiences in war with the modern division and corps systems and general staff gave military historians a lot of material to work with in the analysis of mission command. 9 Orders and correspondence from the time mostly represent field commanders' dialogue back to Washington D.C. or from commanders to their individual corps and division commanders. This leaves quick written orders between leaders that do not provide the context of the why they issued the order. The lack of communications technology and the fear of written messages falling into enemy hands likely created this condition. Writings on American conflicts of the nineteenth century fall into three categories, either biographies, memoirs, or historical books. These tend to be descriptive of the events versus analysis of how generals approached their style of command to achieve success on the battlefield.
Recent American military theorists cover the art of mission command, but fail to use early American examples that display how the command style of the American army developed over time beginning in the nineteenth century. Instead, recent military theorists on mission command use German and Israeli examples. American writers and theorists of the twentieth and twenty-first century include Robert R. Leonhard, William S. Lind, Michael D Mathews, and Don   Vandergriff. These writers cover American examples and developments in mission command, but focus on World War II to present. They give little representation to the American military leaders of World War I and earlier. The one exception they reference is Ulysses S. Grant, but they fail to put his actions in context of the current understanding of mission command. They also fail to 
9
This study analyzes the US Army's historical examples of mission command in using three American general officers from three separate periods of American military history.
Analysis of the military careers of Generals Zachary Taylor, Ulysses S. Grant, and John J.
Pershing shows these military commanders successfully used the art of mission command. The analysis of each general begins with a short biography that shaped the traits, personality, and education of each general, followed by a campaign analysis through the lens of the principles of mission command. The six principles of mission command are to build cohesive teams through mutual trust, create shared understanding, provide a clear commander's intent, exercise disciplined initiative, use mission orders, and accept prudent risk. 
11
"No Soldier could either face danger or responsibility more calmly than he. These are qualities more rarely found than genius or physical courage." 12 --General Ulysses S. Grant in describing General Zachary Taylor in his memoirs
General Zachary Taylor was a soldiers' commander. He felt that doing the right thing and success was more important than the process. The beginnings of General Taylor's life provide an understanding of how he grew into the leader that led the US Army into Mexico in 1846. General Taylor was born in Virginia to a farmer and citizen soldier. 
13
12
President Thomas Jefferson. 
14
15
16
18
19
14
15
16 Ibid; 
Bauer,
Zachary Taylor: Soldier,
Planter,
Statesman,
of the Old Southwest,
[14]
[15]
[16]
18 Henry Montgomery, The Life of Major General Zachary Taylor (Bedford, MA: Applewood Books, 1847), 15.
19 Ibid, 16.
General Taylor built a cohesive team during the Mexican American war that trusted in each other to accomplish the mission. During the buildup of the Army of Observation prior to the starting of the war, General Taylor remembered his earlier failures with volunteers during the Seminole Wars. This failure with volunteers resulted in of a lack of trust between him and the volunteers. 
20
21
When soldiers trust their leaders, they follow them through the rigors of the crucible of combat. General Taylor over his career built a reputation where his men respected and trusted him. He shared their hardships, put their needs above his own, and built a reputation through action where his men respected and trusted his leadership. In an incident dealing with General William Worth, one of his subordinate commanders during the Mexican American war, a conflict arose over the brevet ranks of Brigadier General. The conflict was between General David Twiggs and General Worth over who was senior. General Worth would not accept President Polk's ruling that Twiggs' linear rank had seniority over Worth's brevet rank. 
22
20
21 Bauer,
Zachary Taylor,
Soldier Planter,
Statesman,
of the Old Southwest,
[111]
[112]
[113]
[114]
[115]
[116]
[117]
[118]
[119]
[120]
23
24
25
26
24
27
28
29
30
31
To carry out his advance against the Mexican army on the 9 April 1848, Taylor could not continue to move with his combat trains. The trains slowed his movement, so they would need to move separately and secure themselves for General Taylor's main force to be more maneuverable. Lieutenant Jeremiah Scarritt wrote, "General Taylor directed me to secure the trains in the best manner possible." 
32
The battle of Monterrey, conducted in September of 1846, provides an example of how General Taylor used mission orders. His mission orders allowed his subordinate commanders to operate using disciplined initiative. Taylor used mission orders in this instance for several reasons. His command consisted of three divisions that would all engage the Mexicans in a ferocious fight simultaneously, which limited his ability to control the entire force beyond reinforcing success with reserve forces or artillery. Second, he would not have time to be dictate the exact movements and employments of the divisions in real time due to the complexity of terrain and the time that actions would happen. Runners relaying orders between commanders could not keep pace with the speed of the battle and were of little use for the tactical control of forces. 33 General Taylor's concept of the operation was to envelop the city from both the west and east. General Worth led the column that would attack along the Saltillo road to the west of the city that served two purposes. First, it prevented enemy escape through protected mountain passes. Second, it would destroy the prepared works at Bishops Palace located on high ground.
After a reconnaissance to determine the validity of the plan, General Taylor held a council of war among his subordinate commanders. 
34
35
36
33
Taylor's Mexican War Campaign and His Emerging Civil War Leaders,
[141]
[142]
[143]
35
Taylor's Mexican War Campaign and His Emerging Civil War Leaders,
" 128. 36
37
38
39
41
General Taylor also held councils of war as a way to give verbal operations orders and to share ideas among the leaders on how to precede against the enemy. Prior to most battles throughout his career General Taylor would hold these councils. They served as crude version of the military decision making process (MDMP) and the orders issuing process. Prior to the battle of Buena Vista, he arrived on the future battlefield and talked with General John Wool. They discussed a course of action taking into account the size of the anticipated enemy force from the Mexican General Santa Anna and the rough and restrictive terrain of the battlefield. General Taylor told Wool, "General as you have reconnoitered the ground, and I have not, you will select the field of battle and make such dispositions of the troops on the arrival of the enemy as you may deem necessary." 42 He approved General Wool's recommendation to use a defile to maximize the effectiveness of their smaller force. 
43
42 Bauer, The Mexican War: 1846
-1848, 209. 43
General Taylor practiced the art of mission command to execute his campaign against the Mexican Army in Northern Mexico. Through a military career spanning several conflicts, Zachary Taylor developed and honed his use of the principles of mission command. The use of these principles emerged from experiencing failures and successes, and learning from them. Due to the dispersion of forces on the battlefield and the speed at which combat took place; General Taylor relied on subordinate commanders to operate in a decentralized manner to seize the initiative when opportunities presented themselves. He relied on his professionally trained lieutenants and captains as well as his subordinate generals to assist in determining courses of action to engage the Mexican Army. His character was one that sought the input of others and trusted their advice as well as relying on their loyalty. The mission command style that General Taylor exhibited in the Northern Mexico campaign resulted from a combination of competently trained West Point officers, a larger battlefield that demanded decentralization, and his personal character.
44
General Ulysses S. Grant was born in rural Ohio and was a quiet boy. Through political connections, his father secured the future general an appointment to the Military Academy at West Point from Congressman Thomas L Hamer. 
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
Early battles at Belmont, Fort Henry, Fort Donelson, and Shiloh allowed General Grant to make mistakes and learn from them, while simultaneously building cohesion with his subordinate generals. 
56
57
General Grant in issuing orders to R. J. Oglesby, wrote, "The object of the expedition is to destroy this force, and the manner of doing it is left largely at your discretion, believing it better not to trammel you with instructions." 58 This order from General Grant displayed trust in his subordinate commander that expected R.J. Oglesby to determine the tactical details of how to execute the task given to him. Following the successful attacks on Belmont his subordinate brigade commanders Generals John McClernand and Colonel Henry Dougherty wrote in detail of the tactical actions executed by their formations during the battle. In contrast, these tactical details General Grant left out in his reports and memoirs. 59 General Grant saw his role as a planner that could look at maps and develop a larger concept of action, while expecting his subordinates to use initiative to develop tactical details to accomplish the mission. The success of the operation at Belmont and the flanking maneuver combined with the incorporation of naval forces shows that General Grant planned the operation and did discuss the concept of the operation with his brigade commanders. 
60
These examples of General Grant's early Civil War military career paint a picture of how General Grant would apply the art of mission command during the Vicksburg Campaign.
General Grant was a commonsense leader that understood he made mistakes and so would his subordinates. He knew that learning from failure was important, and to adapt and move forward.
He trusted his subordinate commanders until they proved incapable of command. He remained 
58
60
The first part of the Vicksburg campaign developed by General Grant was a twopronged attack with him leading a force overland from Holly Springs, Mississippi, while General Sherman led an assault down the Mississippi River through the Yazoo River to the north of the city of Vicksburg at Chickasaw Bayou. 
61
62
63
General Grant had the option of waiting and giving the river approach command to General McClernand, who was senior to Sherman and fought under Grant at the Battle of Belmont, but did not due to a lack of trust. 
68
69
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
70
71
Grant also accepted risk in his inability to have any control to coordinate movements with Sherman's forces, due to terrain and the enemy forces between them. He accepted this risk because of the trust, and knowing that General Sherman clearly understood his intent. The complete lack of control by General Grant of Sherman's forces, although good to allow freedom of action for General Sherman, resulted in General Grant's portion of the operation ending before necessary. The lack of communication between the flag officers prevented the coordination of resupply of the overland force via the Yazoo River, and resulted in General Grant abandoning the operation.
The attack on Arkansas Post following Chickasaw Bayou exemplified the team building, mutual trust, and taking of the initiative that existed in General Grant's command. The mutual trust in General Grant's command allowed subordinate commanders to quickly form a team, measure risk, and seize the initiative within the commander's intent to take advantage of an operational opportunity. General Sherman, learning of a supply post and a 5,000 man Confederate force at Arkansas Post, immediately met with Admiral Porter and General McClernand, now in command of Sherman's Corps, to devise a plan to attack and reduce the post. 
75
76
75
76
78
80
77
78
79
80
82
83
89
89
Grant: Personal Memoirs,
273. 90
91
92
93
The third case study looks at the leadership style of General John J. Pershing during his command of the American Expeditionary Forces in Europe during World War I. As Zachary Taylor influenced the development of numerous Civil War generals, General Pershing influenced several future generals of World War II. General Pershing was born in the small Midwestern town of Laclede, Missouri. 
103
105
106
104
105
111
112
113
111
112
114
115
116
117
The implementation of the AEF training systems and desire to have dynamic, resourceful, and aggressive leaders had mixed results across the AEF in achieving a cohesive combat team he could trust. Following the battle of St. Mihiel he talked to General George Cameron who claimed his men were tired despite seeing little combat. General Pershing suspected that it was the commander who was actually tired and not his soldiers. Not long afterward Cameron's corps lost its cohesion in battle, and General Pershing relieved him. 
118
119
120
121
124
125
General Pershing fell victim of trying to develop a well-trained flexible force with dynamic, aggressive, and independent leaders, while simultaneously expanding an untrained force engaged in combat. When his desires met the reality on the ground it appeared as if General Pershing was a micro-manager and fired leaders whenever a leader made a mistake, which is not 
122
123
124
Most importantly, he knew he could not control every detail or personally get every piece of guidance to all leaders himself. To this end, he built a General Staff School and trained leaders through professional schooling, which resulted in our modern staff system. 
126
127
128
It was not due to its commander, but due to the lack luster performance of the division staff to develop plans and to control the division. General Pershing knew the importance of a general staff to formulate plans and to control a unit in order to free up a commander to command and 
126
131
132
133
129
130
131
134
135
5
134
135
137
138
During the Meuse-Argonne campaign in October of 1918 General Fox Conner, then operations officer of the AEF, met with General George Marshall the chief of operations for the First Army to discuss the current situation. During the conversation, General Conner realized an opportunity to attack Sedan, and told Marshall that it was the order of General Pershing to have General Liggett's First Army attack Sedan. General Marshall realized that General Conner decided to attack Sedan during their discussion and not from an earlier order issued by General Pershing. 139 General Pershing's subordinates held a tremendous amount of latitude to make decentralized operational level decisions to seize on opportunities and maintain the offense as long as it fit within his intent. During October of 1918, Pershing continued to visit commanders and push them to drive forward with all possible force. 
140
141
138 Ibid. 
139
140
He left the how to accomplish the mission or the techniques used up to subordinate leaders, and largely expected officers and noncommissioned officers to use their initiative to solve tactical problems on their own. The size, scale, and style of warfare conducted during World War I demanded mission command for a unit to succeed. General Pershing commanded the AEF by inspiring his subordinates and providing guidance in person during battlefield circulation. He relied on his general staff to issue orders and to run and control the operations during their execution. General Pershing commanded while his staff controlled and this occurred across general staffs of the AEF. General Pershing acknowledged the need of general staffs realized that commanders cannot and should not control all aspects of directing operations, but instead should provide mission orders that articulate a commander's intent and end state. The staff would synchronize and provide the resources to subordinate commands, while the commander inspired his formations through his battlefield circulation.
General Pershing when visiting units inspired leaders to continue the attack, but did not tell them how. 
142
143
Americans seem to forget their success of the past as a place to study and draw lessons from in order to shape successful future behavior. Instead, there is an infatuation with studying the continental powers of nineteenth century Europe to draw military lessons. US military doctrine still draws upon the principles established by French military theorists of the nineteenth century. Walter Mead writes about the modern American neglect of past foreign affairs success of the nineteenth and early twentieth century in his book Special Providence: American Foreign Policy and How it Changed the World. Americans forget that foreign affairs occurred successfully prior to 1945, and because of this, look to the Europeans to pull lessons from the past. 144 Also forgotten is the US Army's own doctrinal description of mission orders in the US Army's Field Service Regulations of 1914. The 1914 FSR says, "Field orders are brief short sentences that are easily understood conjectures, expectations, and reasons for measures adopted. 
143
War,
vol. 2,
[335]
[336]
[337]
The command style and forms of maneuver uses by Moltke in 1870 seemed to be very similar with and had direct parallels to those Grant used in 1863. 
153
154
155
156
During the three case studies, the American generals used the principles of mission command successfully to varying degrees. The degree to which leaders employ mission command is largely contingent on the environment and situation the leaders find themselves.  In Figure 
6
Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 6-0, Mission Command, 5.
Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 6-0, Mission Command, v.
Carl VonClausewitz, Carl, On War, ed. and trans. by Michael Howard and Peter Paret  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976), 114-121.    
Robert M. Epstein, Napoleon's Last Victory and the Emergence of Modern War (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1994), 24.
Robert Citino, The German Way of War: From the Thirty Years' War to the Third Reich (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2005), 143 and 148-149.
Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 6-0, Mission Command, 2.
Edward J. Nichols, Zach Taylor's Little Army (Garden City, NY: Doubleday and Company INC, 1963), 31.
Bauer, Zachary Taylor, Soldier Planter, Statesman, of the Old Southwest, xv.   
Bauer, Zachary Taylor, Soldier Planter, Statesman, of the Old Southwest,[148][149][150][151][152] 
Lewis, Trailing Clouds of Glory: Zachary Taylor's Mexican War Campaign and His Emerging Civil War Leaders, 70-89; Edward J. Nichols, Zach Taylor's Little Army (Garden City, NY: Doubleday and Company INC, 1963), 71-88.
Bauer, Zachary Taylor: Soldier, Planter, Statesman, of the Old Southwest, 77.   
K. Jack Bauer, The Mexican War: 1846-1848 (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1974), 59.
George Smith and Charles Judah, Chronicles of the Gringos (Albuquerque, NM: The University of Mexico Press, 1968), 64, 65, and 68. Lieutenant Jeremiah Scarritt in his 12 May 1846 report to Colonel Joseph Totten he describes his observations of the battle of Palo Alto and Resaca De La Palma. Scarritt served temporarily as General Taylor's assistant aide on 8 and 9 May 1846.
Bauer, The Mexican War: 1846-1848, 95.  Major Mansfield was conducting a reconnaissance mission of enemy positions previously ordered by General Taylor.
Lewis, Trailing Clouds of Glory "Zachary Taylor's Mexican War Campaign and His  Emerging Civil War Leaders,[131][132][133] 
Bauer, The Mexican War: 1846-1848, 93-96; Lewis, Trailing Clouds of Glory  "Zachary Taylor's Mexican War Campaign and His Emerging Civil War Leaders," 133.    
Lewis, Trailing Clouds of Glory "Zachary Taylor's Mexican War Campaign and His  Emerging Civil War Leaders," 134.   
Bauer, Zachary Taylor, Soldier Planter, Statesman, of the Old Southwest, 60, 116, 117,  and 181. Some of the West Point graduates and future Civil War Generals that served under General Taylor were General Ulysses S.Grant, General Braxton Bragg, General John Reynolds,  General George Meade, and Confederate President Jefferson Davis.    
Grant, Ulysses S. Grant: Personal Memoirs, 14.   
Grant, Ulysses S. Grant: Personal Memoirs, 19.   
Grant, Ulysses S. Grant: Personal Memoirs, 232.  In an order to General Sherman on 8 December 1862 General Grant told General Sherman to, "as soon as possible move with them down the river to the vicinity of Vicksburg, and with Admiral Porter proceed to the reduction of that place in such a manner as circumstances, and your own judgment dictate."
Fuller, The Generalship of Ulysses S.Grant, 128.   
Fuller, The Generalship of Ulysses S.Grant, 150.   
Ballard, Vicksburg:  The Campaign that Opened the Mississippi, 344-345.
Peter Paret, Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986), 439.
Vandiver, Black Jack:  The Life and Times of John J.Pershing, 27.   
Grotelueschen, The AEF Way of War:The American Army and Combat in World War, 39.
John Pershing, My Experiences in the World War, Vol. 1 (New York, NY: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1931), 134.
Faulkner, The School of Hard Knocks: Combat Leadership in the American Expeditionary Force, 176.
Vandiver, Black Jack:  The Life and Times of John J.Pershing, 772.    
Faulkner, The School of Hard Knocks: Combat Leadership in the American Expeditionary Force, 176.
Grotelueschen, The AEF Way of War: The American Army and Combat in World War, 107.
Faulkner, The School of Hard Knocks: Combat Leadership in the American Expeditionary Force, 267.
Headquarters Thirty-Second Division of the AEF, Tactical Note No. 7, 24 September 1918.
Stackpol, In the Company of Generals: The World War I Diary of Pierpont L.Stackpole, 146.    
Smythe, Pershing:  General of the Armies, 214.
Vandiver, Black Jack:  The Life and Times of John J.Pershing, 972.   
Smythe, Pershing: General of the Armies,[208][209] 
Sheridan, Personal Memoirs of P.H. Sheridan: General United States Army, 502.
California Digital News Paper Collection, "Moltke and Grant," Sacramento Daily Union. Vol. 40 no. 7119, March 8, 1871, accessed October 5, 2014, http://cdnc.ucr.edu/cgibin/cdnc?a=d&d=SDU18710308.2.17#.
154 Donald Cartmell, The Civil War Book of Lists (Franklin Lakes, NJ: New Page Books, 2001), 85; Robert Mackey, The Uncivil War: Irregular Warfare in the Upper South, 1861-1865 (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 2004), 82. Six generals who fought for the Union were Prussian-born, and the son of the King of Prussia Baron Robert von Massow gained firsthand experience with the South, serving in the Virginia
Cavalry.155  Roy Morris Jr., Sheridan: The Life and Wars of General Phil Sheridan (New York, NY: Crown Publishing,
1992). 329-330.156  Sheridan, Personal Memoirs of P.H.Sheridan: General United States Army, 534.   
Thank you to my wonderful wife Christine for assisting with the editing. Thanks to 
Dr. Thomas Bruscino
Command in the 
US Army. SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 8. PERFORMING ORG REPORT NUMBER 9
SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) Advanced Operational Arts Studies Fellowship
Advanced Military Studies Program. 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release
US Army. US Army
Andrew J. Kiser
US Army
determination to succeed in combat, and that the experience of war are important to learning for a combat leader. 
108
The myth of General Pershing is that he was a micro-manager, and fired commanders on a whim. The myth however is untrue and paints Pershing in an unfair light. Mark Grotelueschen in his book The AEF Way of War and Richard Faulkner's book the The School of Hard Knocks, Combat Leadership in the American Expeditionary Forces, wrongly put General Pershing into the box of a micromanager. They also attack him as a naive leader stuck in the past and unable to understand that the infantry and rifle in open warfare was not the answer. They try to portray that General Pershing was unable to understand that artillery and machine guns needed relied on heavily to achieve success on the battlefield. 
109
Pershing's command. 110
(D) The III Corps:
(1) The III Corps will attack the front from the Meuse exclusive to Malancourt exclusive, as indicated on map.
(2) Zone of Action: Right boundary---the Meuse exclusive.
Left boundary---Malancourt exclusive---Cuisy inclusive---Septsarges inclusive---Nantillois exclusive---Cunel exclusive---Hill 299. 2 km. northeast of Cunel inclusive (double red line).
(3) Mission: (a) By promptly penetrating the hostile second position it will turn Montfaucon and the section of the hostile second position within the zone of action of the V Corps, thereby assisting the capture of the hostile second position west of Montfaucon.
(b) With its corps and divisional artillery it will assist in neutralizing hostile observation and hostile fire from the heights east of the Meuse.
(c) Upon arrival of the V Corps at the corps objective (dashed brown line) it will advance in conjunction with the IV Corps to the American Army objective (full brown line).
(d) It will protect the right flank of the advance and organize the line of the Meuse for defense.
(e) When ordered by the army commander it will continue the advance from the Combined Army First Objective (full brown line) to the north, in the zone between Meuse exclusive, and the line 1 km. west of Aincreville --Villers-devant-Dun inclusive---1 km. west of Montigny-devant-Sassey 136
The portion of the field order for III Corps told the corps commander General Robert Bullard what tasks to accomplish and what effects to place on the enemy, but the application resources to accomplish his mission tasks was up to him and his staff to determine. 
136
Detailed instructions for a variety of possible events do not inspire confidence and should be avoided. An order should not trespass upon the province of a subordinate. It should contain everything beyond the independent authority of the subordinate but nothing more." 145 Field orders described in US Army doctrine from 1914 are extremely similar to today's doctrine despite it not receiving the credit for influencing today's doctrine. The 1914 doctrine shows that the army leaders of that era understood the concept of mission command based on the US Army's experiences of the nineteenth century.
Much like foreign policy, Americans tend to forget and ignore the historical military successes and lessons prior to World War II. Instead, focus is on the lessons provided by European theorists and the captivating maneuver warfare of the Blitzkrieg myth. Because of this, we refer to Field Marshal Helmuth von Moltke and believe his adoption of mission orders and decentralized execution during the wars of German Unification is the place to pull American understanding of mission command. The distributed nature of the battlefield, mobilization plan, and separate arrival of all three Prussian armies at Koniggratz demanded decentralized execution.
Field Marshal Moltke had no conceivable way to control the employment of three separate armies from one central command. 
146
149