# ID: a7c6c5bac03d424387c65790caaed3fa
# Title: Cyberwar and BH Liddell Hart's Indirect Approach
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
This study attempts to illuminate cyberwarfare's efficacy as an indirect approach using B.H Liddell Hart's principles of the indirect approach as described in his book, Strategy. His principles are applied to two welldocumented cyber attacks. The first is Stuxnet, which refers to the 2010 U.S.-Israeli cyber operation targeting Iran's nuclear program. The second deals with advanced persistent threats stemming from Chinese cyber espionage. Each attack profile, while sharing a common maneuver domain (cyber), employs distinctive methods in pursuit of different objectives. Stuxnet was purpose built to infiltrate and destroy specific nuclear centrifuges within Iran. Conversely, Chinese cyber espionage is designed to extract massive amounts of data over a period of months and years. This dichotomy provides sufficient breadth in the application of Liddell Hart's principles. The purpose is to evaluate the efficacy of B.H Liddell Hart's principles to cyberwar and gain a deeper understanding of how conflict in cyberspace translates to other domains and across the levels of war. Additionally, the study seeks to answer the following questions. Is cyberwarfare an indirect approach by its very nature? What does an indirect cyber approach look like? Can cyberwarfare achieve decisive results when used as an "indirect approach?" 15.
v ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to thank Staff Group 14A for a year of camaraderie and intellectual stimulation; iron sharpens iron. I am also indebted to Dr. Jack Kem for his total commitment to my personal and professional growth. Through his instruction I learned conceptual and detailed planning, and, I think, how to distinguish between the two. In addition, by his example, I gleaned the skills required to be a more professional military officer. I would like to thank Mr. Bill Knight for truly looking out for the welfare of our entire staff group. I am grateful for the excellent guidance I received throughout this year from my MMAS committee. I am especially thankful to Dr. John Kuehn for his willingness to guide me from start to finish as the committee chair. He was instrumental to the success of this project and continuously encouraged me to push the pace and "do more." Dr. Sean Kalic provided valuable expertise and critiques, and Mr. Brian Gerling provided expert guidance on cyber issues. Thank you for your steady support.
Finally, I would like to thank all my kids for their encouragement and support throughout this year. I absolutely cherish the nights we spent working together on our homework. I especially want to thank my wife. She is the unshakable foundation of our family and I love her with all of my heart. 
In January 2010, news outlets reported that Google was the victim of a deliberate cyber attack resulting in the extraction of intellectual property (IP) that included valuable source code. The attack, known as Operation Aurora, was notable due to its complexity and the type of information extracted. This indicated the attack was state sponsored and not the work of a rogue hacker. The subsequent investigation linked the attack to China. 
1
3
2 Ellen Nakashima, "US Publicly Calls on China to Stop Commercial Cyber-Espionage, Theft of Trade Secrets," The Washington Post, 11 March 2013, accessed 7 September 2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/us-publiclycalls-on-china-to-stop-commercial-cyber-espionage-theft-of-trade-secrets/2013/ 03/11/28b21d12-8a82-11e2-a051-6810d606108d_story.html.
3 Ellen Nakashima, "Chinese Breach Data of 4 Million Federal Workers," Washington Post, 4 June 2015, accessed 7 September 2015, https://www.washington post.com/world/national-security/chinese-hackers-breach-federal-governmentspersonnel-office/2015/06/04/889c0e52-0af7-11e5-95fd-d580f1c5d44e_story.html. unaware. 
4
5
6
7
8
Western countries consider access to information a fundamental right. This perspective informs the way Western governments and their citizens' perceive cyber issues. Arguably, authoritarian regimes consider information to be a weapon that can be wielded in order to censure and repress a populace and as a means to obtain valuable information on adversaries. It should be no surprise that the Chinese are waging a comprehensive cyber espionage campaign aimed at extracting IP and personal information.
States acknowledge that espionage will occur. Arguably, the prevalence and perceived necessity buffers an unwanted escalation of force. In fact, "highly invasive, espionage does not constitute a use of force (or armed attack) under international law absent a nonconsensual physical penetration of the target's state territory." 
9
10
Espionage's cyber variant has exponentially increased the amount of information that can be stolen and reduced the risks of compromise due to issues with attribution. A lack of attribution also makes it difficult to determine motive and consequently to identify the authorizing agent (either a state government or non-state actor). Additionally, as seen in the OPM breach, cyber hacks have the ability to directly affect people not connected to the intelligence or defense community. In short, when compared with traditional forms of espionage the cyber variant is more visceral, cheap and gritty.
This study examines cyber warfare using principles of Basil Henry Liddell Hart's (LH) indirect approach in order to determine cyberwarfare's potential to achieve decisive results at the strategic level of war. Additionally, this study seeks to determine if cyberwarfare constitutes an indirect approach by its very nature. What does an indirect cyber approach look like? Can cyber warfare achieve decisive results when used as an "indirect approach?" Primary Research Question Does cyberwarfare constitute an indirect approach by its very nature; if not, what would an indirect approach look like in the cyber domain?
Secondary Research Questions 1. Can cyberwarfare achieve decisive results or contribute positively to a nation's strategic interests? espionage-costs-445-billion-annually/2014/06/08/8995291c-ecce-11e3-9f5c-9075d5508f0a_story.html.
2. What is meant by cyberwarfare? In other words, has there been a cyberwar to date or only cyber attacks? Additionally, is the term cyberwarfare a misnomer? 3. How does the United States view the cyber domain? What is China's view? Do divergent perspectives lead to tension? 4. What role does private industry play in shaping the ways and means of conflict in the cyber domain? Do they view the threats different than a sovereign state?
5. What role does the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) play in the cyber domain? What capability gaps has DoD identified, if any, in order to maximize effectiveness in the cyber domain?
6. If the variable of attribution is solved, would it make it easier for governments to develop international norms regulating cyber conduct? Significance Cyber security expert and RAND researcher Martin Libicki in his book, Conquest in Cyberspace: National Security and Information Warfare, argues that any discussion on the relevance or applicability of the cyber domain in war is really just a rephrasing of the question, "Which medium dominates war?" He posits that the answer, regarding cyber, is "neither 'yes' or 'no' but 'more so every day 
'." 11
Consequently, the cyber domain is not only useful as a medium for communication but also for commerce, information storage, and controlling critical infrastructure. Arguably, the potential to conduct meaningful cyber attacks increases as nations and citizens continue to demand uninterrupted access to digital information.
Additionally, as companies continue to develop and implant increasingly complex technology into user-friendly devices consumers continue to overlook the myriad methods available to exploit their devices. It is not just a lack of cyber education that is problematic but also an appreciation for an adversary's ends, ways, and means in cyberspace. A recent news article highlighted that within the U.S. National Security Agency there is "an invisible war of lawyers arguing over what counts as a cyber operation." 
12
However, the United States owns no monopoly on cyber operations. For example, nations such as China, Russia, Iran, and India have aggressively taken steps to strengthen their cyber preeminence, as have various non-state actors, criminal organizations, and loosely affiliated groups. 
13
14
13
14
2. The complexity and sensitivity associated with operating in the cyber domain inhibits the incorporation/inclusion of cyber capabilities into traditional military mission sets. This is beginning to change incrementally as DoD builds its cyber capabilities.
3. Citizens will begin to demand that their government protect their cyber personas and information. A lack of effective protection may undermine the government's credibility.
4. The rise of non-state actors and loosely affiliated groups capable of conducting cyber attacks will be viewed as a direct threat against a government's monopoly on the use of force.
The literature review consists of two parts. The first part focuses on LH, his adherents, and critics. The second part will discuss the open source literature on cyberwarfare. LH's Strategy will provide the applicable narrative and the principles of the indirect approach. 
15
Brian Bond originally published his book in 1977. Bond knew LH personally and credited him with launching his career as a military historian. 
16
The second part of the review discusses the open source cyber literature. The purpose is to place the cyber domain in a particular context, understand how this domain informs national security policy, and determine the potential impact on future military operations. A good source for survey level material on cyber security and cyber warfare is Peter W. Singer's and Allan Friedman's, Cybersecurity and Cyberwar: What Everyone   Needs to Know (2014). This book is written by known authorities on the subject and is on the Chief of Naval Operations reading list. Other sources include Martin Libicki's,   Conquest in Cyberspace: National Security and Information Warfare (2007), which argues that friendly conquest of cyberspace may have more inherent benefits than hostile conquest. Jason Healy's, Fierce Domain: Conflict in Cyberspace 1986-2012 (2013), looks at the history of cyber conflict.
Primary sources include the principles of the indirect approach found in LH's Strategy and sources that discuss Stuxnet and Chinese cyber espionage provide the framework for analysis. The purpose is to evaluate the efficacy of LH's principles to cyberwar and gain a deeper understanding of how actions in cyberspace translate to other domains and across levels of war. Secondary sources provide context and point to additional primary source materials.
Chapter 2: Cyber Literature Review This chapter reviews current open source literature on cyberwarfare. The purpose is to understand how various experts, across disciplines, discuss the cyber domain. Martin Libicki's, Conquest in Cyberspace: National Security and Information Warfare (2007), argues that the "Possibilities of hostile conquest may be less consequential than meets the eye while the possibilities of friendly conquest ought to be better appreciated." 
17
Chapter 3: LH Literature Review Brian Bond's, Liddell Hart: A Study of His Military Thought (1991), originally published in 1976, attempts to "Put Liddell Hart's military thought in proper perspective by tracing the origins and development of his principal ideas over his whole career." 
18
John J. Mearsheimer's, Liddell Hart and the Weight of History (1988), reviews LH's writings/arguments/recommendations during the interwar period and directly following. 8. Do not renew an attack along the same line (or in the same form) after it has once failed -You should assume the enemy will be even better prepared next time. 
19
The conclusion will include a synthesis of the analysis. The goal will be to answer, "So what?" Can the cyber domain achieve, or at least contribute to, a decisive result? What is cyber's potential? Are there any capability shortfalls or trends that may create a vulnerability that can be exploited by our adversaries to paralyze, dislocate, or mute U.S. ability to execute an effective response? CHAPTER 2
The current cyber literature provides analysis from a variety of perspectives. The breadth of scholarship makes it clear that experts across disciplines see value in studying the cyber domain and comprehending its efficacy and potential impacts on warfare and conflict in general. The literature focuses on analyzing cyber threats, especially cyber espionage and crime, in order to infer the implications at various levels (social, legal,   political). Additionally, many scholars debate how cyber capabilities (offense and defense) may translate across the levels of war (strategic, operational, tactical) and the instruments of national power (diplomatic, information, military, economic). This breadth indicates two things. First, it shows that cyber's influence extends well beyond computer scientists, network architects, and those with a technical expertise. Second, it demonstrates the subject's lack of overall depth. Arguably, the current lack of depth is helpful because it facilitates a broader and more inclusive discussion. However, it also highlights that our understanding continues to take shape and that no nation or strategy has achieved clear predominance.
The underlining question the literature attempts to answer is, "So what?" Experts studying the cyber domain are particularly interested in understanding how activities in cyberspace reverberate across fields. The answer to this question depends on individual expertise and perspective. The pace of technological advancement, an insatiable reliance on network infrastructure, and a growing body of empirical evidence places the impetus on a careful and thoughtful analysis leading to new insights on the significance of cyber as an instrument of national power.
Before discussing the current literature it is necessary to provide an overview on the cyber domain. The purpose is to gain a survey level understanding of the characteristics, key terms, and important issues. Joint Publication 3-12(R), Cyberspace Operations defines cyberspace as, "A global domain within the information environment consisting of the interdependent networks of information technology infrastructures and resident data, including the Internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems, and embedded processors and controllers." 
20
21
First, the Internet was built on the rapid, open, and free flow of information. Second, every "node" in the network has an "address" making it possible to deliver data to the precise location. The physical infrastructure creates the logical layer of cyberspace, which in turn creates an environment conducive to the development of cyber-personas. 
22
Allan Friedman, a Brookings Institute Fellow, is a distinguished cybersecurity professional with expertise in public policy and computer science. As noted in the title, this book was written for an educated general audience that may not have a technical background. The book is divided into three parts. Part one answers the question, "How does the Internet work?" This section grapples with the concept of "security" and discusses the Central Intelligence Agency-developed security triad comprised of confidentiality, integrity, and availability. "Confidentiality refers to keeping data private . . . Integrity means that the system and the data in it have not been improperly altered or changed without authorization . . . Availability means being able to use the system as anticipated." The "CIA triad" identifies the aspects of security that are most important to the proper functioning of cyberspace and consequentially a target for exploitation.
One side of the security coin is trust. Trust in the network encourages users to cooperate in the cyber domain and intrinsically emboldens people to participate in social media, to buy and sell online, and to store vast amounts of sensitive data in "clouds." However, repeated violations of this trust and a perceived lack of security "undermine(s) trust in the broad digital systems." In this sense, trust constitutes cyber's source of power.
The other side of the security coin is network resiliency. As the authors note, "Resilience is what allows systems to endure security threats instead of critically failing." Resiliency is about "understanding how the different pieces fit together and then how they can be kept together or brought back together when under attack." Simply put, network resiliency allows public and private industries to maintain connectivity and reduce service interruptions. 
23
24
25
Nonetheless, it did lead to the establishment of the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defense Centre of Excellence and the "Tallinn Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare." 
26
Second, the attacks demonstrated the impact a group of resourceful and cyber savvy 
25 Singer and Friedman,
298. 26 Ibid.,
27
28
An analogy in the physical domain would be multiple small units clandestinely infiltrating a city via overland routes in order to conduct special reconnaissance activities that enabled operators to extract multitudes of IP and personal information either 
29 Singer and Friedman,
293. 30 Ibid.,
[92]
[93]
[94]
[95]
Part three of Singer's and Friedman's Cybersecurity and Cyberwarfare provides recommendations for safeguarding the cyber domain. The authors identify three elements that will create a more resilient system. "One is the importance of building in 'the intentional capacity to work under degraded conditions.' Beyond that, resilient systems must also recover quickly, and finally learn lessons to deal better with future threats." 
31
Singer and Friedman,
171. 32
The third strategy includes increasing baseline knowledge of current cyber issues and opportunities throughout "the public and private sectors." Arguably, Singer and   Friedman had this in mind when they wrote their book. Much of cyber's fundamentals remain out of reach for most people due to a combination of a lack of technical knowledge, no experience with cyber attacks, and a general lack of interest. 
33
In cloud computing, "individual machines become less important, and instead the companies that control the data and access to it play an increasingly essential role." The rise and importance of big data may lead to the breakdown of "human social, legal, and ethical boundaries we aren't yet ready to cross." 
34
35
33 Ibid.,
197. 34 Ibid.,
[248]
[249]
[250]
[251]
[252]
[253]
decades ago it was inconceivable to assume that mobile phones would replace landlines or that people would rely on smart phones to socialize and conduct business. The mobile revolution promotes greater access to the logical layer not for connectivity's sake but as a way to generate greater development and utilization of each person's cyber-persona. We are witnessing a situation where our cyber-personas are becoming inextricably linked to our actual selves. This represents a key aspect of the cyber domain that cyber experts are only beginning to fully appreciate.
Additionally, a demographic shift is altering the geographic, cultural, and linguistic origin of the preponderance of cyber-personas in cyberspace. For example, the United Nations "predicts that Chinese-speaking users of the Internet will outnumber English speakers by 2015." Finally, the Internet of Things, which refers to the plethora of household appliances and other devices connecting to the Internet, promises to be the next frontier in efficiency. However, it "also enables cyberattacks to penetrate far deeper into our lives than ever before." The five trends identified constitute key variables that can alter the application of national power in cyberspace. 
36
36
or efficiency gained in one layer translates into a new utility or application in another layer. Additionally, a vulnerability exploited in one layer can reverberate across the other levels, specifically cyber-persona, and oftentimes in ways that are unforeseen. It is also true that while our reliance on cyberspace enabled interaction continues to increase cyber experts and policy makers are only beginning to grapple with the second and third order effects. The next section looks at how the cyber literature perceives the opportunities and challenges present in cyberspace.
A baseline understanding of cyberspace is important before discussing the cyber literature; otherwise it is difficult to determine an argument's strengths and weaknesses.
An excellent starting point is Chris Demchak's and Peter Dombrowksi's, "Rise of a Cybered Westphalian Age," which argues that Stuxnet ushered in a "cybered Westphalian age" characterized by "virtual borders and national cyber commands as normal elements of modern cybered governments." Demchak and Dombrowksi maintain that cyberspace created frontiers that rapidly transformed into commons. These undergoverned spaces are hotbeds for conflict due to an absence of mutually understood rules or entities capable of enforcing standards. This vacuum creates issues for states in terms of sovereignty and the legitimate use of force. "Being able to establish sovereign control is a hallmark of a functioning state." As noted, cyberspace includes physical infrastructure engineered to create the logical layer. Real people are then able to develop a cyber-persona and interact within the logical layer. A "cybered Westphalia" refers to a state's difficulty exerting control over the logical layer, which translates into a reduced ability to protect physical infrastructure and citizens' cyber-personas. "The cybersphere has challenged the security of individuals and states themselves in ordinary systems considered essential to the critical functions of society." 
37
38
The literature also discusses the possibility of a cyber attack with the destructive equivalence of the attack on Pearl Harbor or nuclear explosion. In 2012, Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta warned that a potential cyber-Pearl Harbor launched against the United States remained a real concern. 
39
40
43
Therefore they fail to deter adversaries successfully or defend vulnerable systems.
Cyber literature discusses the offense-defense balance from a variety of perspectives. Keir Liber, a faculty member at the Center for Security Studies at Georgetown University, observes that according to offense-defense theory if technological innovations increase mobility then offense is favored, while innovations increasing firepower favor defense. This distinction is important for understanding what role cyber might play in interstate conflict and the cyber attacks most likely to achieve their objectives. The author concedes that applying offense-defense theory to cyber is difficult but nonetheless argues that, "Both existing and new criteria point to a clear offensive advantage in cyberspace." An offensive advantage may mean that cyber attacks are likely to increase until sufficient defensive measures are created. "Based on the ODT literature, it seems reasonable to worry that the current era of cyber offensive advantage could spell trouble." However, the capacity to conduct an offensive cyber attack does not automatically guarantee an attacker can achieve their end state. "The most general reason to doubt the utility of the offense-defense balance analogy in cyberspace stems from enormous uncertainty about whether cyber attacks can inflict significant military damage on a victim." Furthermore, it remains undetermined if cyber attacks, regardless of severity, can lead to a political victory. For this reason Liber concludes that a "cyber Pearl Harbor" is not realistic and despite cyber's current offensive advantage it is unlikely to convince weaker states to strike a strong state. 
44
However, the thesis does not discuss the cost of more traditional forms of defense like routine law enforcement or conventional military capabilities. Arguably, the cost of defense is usually higher than offense. However, this does not detract from Malone's conclusion because by highlighting the disparity he emphasizes, that similar to conventional weapons, large and wealthy states are the most likely to be able to afford defensive measures, while smaller poorer nations may lack the ability to wage effective cyber offense or defense. 
45
45
that even the most devastating information warfare scenario, which in this context is understood to be cyber attacks, is more comparable to a snowstorm than a nuclear explosion. Libicki argues that the effects of a cyber attack itself "is entirely temporary and rapidly over." For example he concludes that, "Nuclear war creates firestorms, destroying people and things for miles around. By contrast, even a successful widespread information attack has more the character of a snowstorm . . . But the effects of snowstorms, apart from a few random heart attack and accident victims, is entirely temporary and rapidly over." However, what if the snowstorm was manmade by an adversary? Would that change people's perception of a proportional response? Would that affect their patience with the restoration of services? Would people quickly grow tired of throwing snowballs and opt for a firestorm? Libicki's fire versus snowstorm analogy provides a compelling argument but it fails to address people's natural response to being threatened and attacked.
Furthermore, Libicki argues that the hostile conquest of cyberspace may be less than can be accomplished through friendly conquest. Friendly conquest actualizes Joseph Nye's smart power theory and argues that technologically advanced nations, such as the United States, can create an asymmetric dependence. Asymmetric dependence refers to a state's ability to create an "information system attractive enough to entice other individuals or institutions to interact with it by for instance, exchanging information or being granted access." Friendly conquest still denotes conquest and a possibility for miscalculation and the initiation of a security dilemma centered on owning elements of cyberspace. 
46
47
48
What this means is that as more countries seek to close the innovation gap they will simultaneously rely less on U.S. developed technology making the United States less competitive in the international market. One of these countries is China who invested "$500 billion into its national innovation agenda." This poses a direct threat to the U.S. cybersecurity industry in that other countries may be able ellipse U.S. prominence thus creating inherent vulnerabilities and forcing the United States to play catch-up. To avoid this undesirable situation Kao recommends that, "The cybersecurity community will have to learn how to build relationships across the hard skin of organizational boundaries, to be able to establish friendships, alliances, partnerships and collaborations that don't fit the traditional model of defense contracting." 
49
[are] more likely to be nation-states." This contention flies in the face of arguments pointing out cyber's asymmetric essence and capacity to achieve devastating effects.
Upon closer inspection of Stuxnet and Russia's cyber attacks against Georgia the data seems to indicate that even if non-state actors can obtain cyber capabilities the real expertise and relevance will belong to large nation-states. In fact, Gartzke argues that, "cyberwar should be particularly appealing to capable states confronting weaker opponents . . . cyberwar may perpetuate or even increase military inequality." Gartzke concludes that, "Cyberwarfare will most often occur as an adjunct to conventional warfare, or as a stop-gap and largely symbolic effort to express dissatisfaction with a foreign opponent." In other words, cyberwar is a misnomer. The correct term should be cyber attack or cyber conflict, which recognizes that employed detached from a broader conventional approach cyber is unlikely to achieve the anticipated end state. 
The current literature analyzes cyberwar from a variety of perspectives. While identifying the most salient digital weapon remains debatable, it is clear that comprehending and uncovering cyber's efficacy remains an important endeavor. Cyber as a domain continues to evolve in unanticipated ways and with implications that are ambiguous at best. Cyber laws and the creation of cyber boundaries continue to be a topic of discussion, but have not materialized. There are several reasons for this, not least of all is the issue with attribution and the opinion that nations (specifically those with strong cyber capabilities) benefit from an anarchic system. Does this equate to a "cybered Westphalia?" If the answer is yes, does that mean society is we on the cusp of an open ended and dynamic cyber conflict? How does the ever-increasing importance of the our cyber-persona necessitate the establishment of cyber laws and boundaries? These questions continue to be debated.
Perhaps the most compelling arguments analyze cyber's offense-defense balance.
According to many researchers, the assessment that the cyber domain permits greater mobility indicates that offense holds the advantage. However, this does not denote an outbreak of "total" cyber conflict, but will increase the frequency of cyber attacks. It also places an impetus on building robust defense capabilities. One researcher concludes that the offense-defense cost ratio is 1:132 in favor of offense. This means that it is probable that only wealthy and technologically advanced countries will be able to afford strong defensive capabilities. This leaves poorer countries more vulnerable.
It seems clear that researchers and policy makers alike are scrambling to stay ahead of the technology and its potential utility as a weapon. This sense of urgency is warranted. As Silicon Valley and other innovation centers around the world continue to make technological breakthroughs, policy makers and defense officials are left contemplating, "So What?" At some point a peer competitor may ellipse the United States in terms of technological innovation and subsequent technology export.
Undoubtedly, this situation places the United States at a disadvantage in terms of safeguarding network systems and alters the concept of the "friendly conquest of cyberspace."
Additionally there is a vigorous debate over the meaning of cyberwar and its existence. Can a cyber campaign divorced from conventional action achieve political objectives? To date, this has not occurred. However, it is does not mean it is impossible.
It does mean that incentives exist for correctly calculating cyber's potential and calibrating apportionment towards construction of a range of cyber capabilities. The nation with the means and foresight will create a robust cyber capability for two reasons.
First, to conduct offensive cyber operations, including cyber industrial espionage and attack critical infrastructure. Second, to deter adversaries. In this sense, it is not just about ensuring vital systems are impenetrable, or at least resilient, but also about deterrence by denial.
Cyber experts continue to debate the likelihood of a cyber attack equivalent to Pearl Harbor or a nuclear strike. Researchers supporting this view cite the expanded reliance on SCADA controlled critical infrastructure, which despite being air gapped, remain susceptible to a sophisticated attack. Detractors argue that the threat of such an attack is overblown and unrealistic. This may be true. However, researchers should assess the impact of a "Cyber Desert One," meaning a U.S. sponsored cyber attack that fails spectacularly on the world stage. 51 Such a crisis may critically damage U.S. credibility and paralyze decision makers. This could result from inadequate funding, a vague chain of command, and lack of validated interagency interoperability. Arguably, the United States has made great strides towards overcoming such a situation through the establishment of U.S. Cyber Command and the strong operational links to the National Security Agency. However, it is entirely possible that due to cyber's "newness" and high classification requirements that stove piping and a lack of authorities could inhibit success at a critical moment. 
51
52 Bond,
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
55
55
56 Ibid., 32. 
57
Towards the end of 1924, LH moved beyond the study of tactics and into the realm of the operational and strategic levels of war. 
58
59
60
61
58
59
62
63
There are two principal books analyzing the development of LH's military theories. One is Brian Bond's, Liddell Hart: A Study of His Military Thought (1976), and the second is John J. Mearsheimer's, Liddell Hart and the Weight of History (1988).
Brian Bond knew LH personally and worked with him on several projects. John J.
Mearsheimer's book, published twelve years after Bond's, was largely in reaction to Brian Bond's and sought to apply a deeper level of critical analysis.
Brian Bond was a student at Oxford when he first met LH in 1959. LH mentored Bond and helped him launch his career as a military historian. Bond and LH had initiated work on a military history project when LH unexpectedly passed away in January of 1970. Bond hoped that his study of LH's military theories would provide the first "first full-length appraisal of his military thought" and "put LH's military thought in proper 
62
63
perspective by tracing the origins and development of his principal ideas over his whole career." Arguably, Brian Bond's close relationship with LH allowed him to gain a deeper understanding of LH as a person and provided valuable context. 
64
65
66
The first was armored warfare which prescribed combined arms maneuver to strike the enemy's combat forces in the rear areas. Armored warfare was envisioned as a means to break the defensive stalemate that defined WWI. This concept evolved into what is 
64
65
66
67
Mearsheimer notes that LH first began writing about the importance of armored warfare in the early 1920s after being exposed to the writings of respected British tank commander John Fredrick Charles Fuller. "Fuller firmly believed the tank would be the dominant weapon on future battlefields and, if properly employed, would revolutionize land warfare." However, Mearsheimer notes that, "Liddell Hart often asserted during the 1920s, but not the 1930s, that the tank had the potential to revolutionize land warfare." In fact, Mearsheimer argues that the evidence shows that LH supported mechanization but never fully articulated a blitzkrieg strategy and in reality was still convinced that a strong defense held the advantage. By the late 1920s, LH's writings shifted from armored warfare to a discussion on the merits of the indirect approach, specifically deep strategic penetration. 
68
69
70
71
70
71
72
74
75
75
76
76 Bond,
55.
77
78
Additionally, LH feared that the British General Staff, whom he believed mistakenly placed their trust in Clausewitzian principles, would seek to raise a large land army for use on Continental Europe. LH used his prestige and abilities to develop a broad strategic approach that would persuade decision makers not to devote attention and resources towards creation of a large land army.
In the early 1920s, he was interested in mechanized warfare but towards the mid-1920s, and certainly throughout the 1930s, he articulated and proposed the indirect approach. In the aftermath of WWII, LH sought to revive his theory and reputation. He accomplished the former in 1954 by combining mechanized warfare with the indirect approach and retitling his book. Rebuilding his reputation required the remainder of his life.
This study will rely on LH's second revised edition of Strategy originally published in 1967 to articulate his Strategy of the Indirect Approach. This edition reflects LH's third and final update and includes everything in the 1954 edition (including his eight principles) but added is an expanded Part III that looks more deeply at Hitler's strategy and a Part IV that incorporates a discussion on strategy and grand strategy. The 1967 edition also includes two appendices, which comprise two letters from successful military commanders (British and Israeli) who provide details on how they relied on LH's principles to achieve success.
In order to articulate his strategy of the indirect approach LH relied on a comprehensive number of case studies spanning an impressive breadth of history beginning with ancient Greece and up through WWII. This breadth of cases limits depth. This fact coupled with LH's command of military history can make it challenging for the student to discern the most salient lessons beyond what LH addresses. As John J.
Mearsheimer notes, "although his theories are widely applied today, they were shaped by a unique historical context and should be applied with caution to current security problems." 79 LH developed his comprehensive theory with the intent that it would withstand the test of time and apply to multiple cases across time and distance. However, distilled to its essence, LH's The Decisive Wars of History and the subsequent editions were developed in reaction to the British experience in WWI and LH's disapproval of Clausewitzian principles. This study will operationalize LH's eight principles and apply them to cases of cyber conflict. The final insight belongs to Brian Bond whom, while disagreeing with many of LH's historiological methods, provides a compelling reason for LH's continued relevance as a military historian and theorist: Whatever its shortcomings from the viewpoint of scholarship, the Strategy of Indirect Approach can be strongly defended as an educational doctrine. There was a great deal to be said for encouraging a new generation of officers to think for themselves, and in particular to think in terms of achieving success by surprise and superior mobility; to value intellect and professional skill more than tradition and seniority; and to make the fullest use of science and technology to minimize casualties. However, he does identify the linkage between the tactical and strategic levels of war. He argues that, "Strategy not only stops on the frontier, but has for its purpose the reduction of fighting to the slenderest possible proportions." It is important to understand LH's definitions and their anticipated application to correctly actualize his principles. 
83
84
83
84
85
LH's study sinuously transitions back and forth between tactics and strategy. This fluidity can make it difficult to discern his true meaning. This study will rely on LH's definitions as a means to identify context, but follow-on analysis will rely on current DoD approved definitions as outlined in JP 1-02.
LH explains that the indirect approach, distilled to its essence, is simply an understanding of concentration. In the same vein, LH purports that, "True concentration is the fruit of calculated dispersion." In other words, the true objective in war is to concentrate strength against enemy weakness. This asymmetric matchup is the product of dislocating the enemy and causing him to disperse where he should have concentrated.
He notes that the "true aim is not so much to seek battle as to seek a strategic situation so 
85
88
1. Adjust your end to your means. LH argues that at certain points it is wise to embark on a strategy of "limited aim." LH notes that the "usual reason for adopting a strategy of limited aim is that of awaiting a change in the balance of force -a change often sought and achieved by draining the enemy's force, weakening him by pricks instead of risking blows." LH argues that the "Fabian strategy" employed by Roman general Fabius against Carthage's Hannibal was, "not merely an evasion of battle to gain 
87
88
time, but calculated for its effect on the morale of the enemy-and, still more, for its effect on their potential allies." Additionally, LH emphasizes that such an adjustment is not a sign of weakness but demonstrates wisdom and is often necessary to avoid the irrational dedication of resources towards endeavors with little chance to achieve the end state. 89 2. Keep your object always in mind. "Realize that there are more ways than one of gaining an object." This principle highlights the importance of using the right tool for the job and not becoming unnecessarily wedded to a particular "means." In other words, it is important to ask, what instrument of power will achieve the objective? LH observes that, "Just as the military means is only one of the means to the end of grand strategyone of the instruments in the surgeons' case-so battle is only one of the means to the end of strategy." Maintaining a clear eye towards the objective relates equally to an economy of force and the creative combination of available means. 
90
91 89 Liddell Hart,
Strategy,
26,
321,
335. 90 Ibid.,
325,
335. 91
92
93
LH borrows U.S. General William Sherman's famous maxim to illustrate his point, saying a line of operation offering alternative objectives places the "enemy on the horns of a dilemma." The purpose is to force the enemy to be indecisive, dilute his combat power, and fail to concentrate at the correct location. The cumulative effect enables the attacker to move from one objective to another while never facing a numerically superior force. LH believes General Sherman's "March to the Sea" best personifies this principle.
Arguing that, "In the physical and moral effect of this deceptive direction lies the only reasonable explanation of his unchecked progress across 425 miles of country strewn with obstacles . . . in the face of an enemy whose numerical strength was ample for effective resistance." Sherman gained an element of surprise and unpredictability by shifting his line of operation off the rail line. This harkens to the previously explained principles. However, Sherman's line of operation included the essential element of threatening several key Confederate cities along his march eastward. This had a profound psychological effect on the enemy, who "became so 'jumpy' that they repeatedly gave way to this moral pressure, and fell back before they felt any serious physical pressure."
The various cities in General Sherman's path were either symbolically important or critical to the Confederate war effort. Sherman's lack of reliance on rail made it difficult 
93 Ibid.,
327,
335.
A line of operation threatening alternative objectives grants the attacker flexibility while denying the enemy the same. 
94
The purpose is to cultivate a flexibility of mind capable of overcoming immediate problems in pursuit of the overall objective. This principle's underlying concept addresses the dichotomy between concentration and dispersion. Understood this way, LH argues that, "an army should always be so distributed that its parts can aid each other and combine to produce the maximum possible concentration of force at one place, while minimum force necessary is used elsewhere to prepare the success of the concentration."
Arguably, this principle highlights the importance of establishing a military culture that values flexibility and detests rigidity in planning and troop deployment. LH does not explicitly mention military culture as a key component; however, in order for plans and dispositions to achieve the necessary flexibility it is assumed that leaders at every level would be acceptant and expectant that plans would adjust to operational realities. 
95
94
Hart,
Strategy,
135,
212,
330,
335. 95
96
Arguably, this principle recalls the British experience in the Great War, which saw successive waves of troops sent over no-man's land in an attempt to break the defensive stalemate. However, in that conflict instead of breaking through enemy defenses hundreds of thousands of British soldiers were killed conducting seemingly illogical frontal assaults. This principle advises commanders not to reinforce failure by committing additional forces to a floundering assault. Additionally, this maxim reiterates the sixth principle, which emphasized that plans and dispositions should be flexible. 
97
However, a key criticism of LH's historical examples is that, although spanning two millennia, the actions of all the battles, save a handful, were fought on Continental Europe. In this sense, many of his examples could be viewed as an exercise demonstrating the eternality of key terrain.
Additionally, LH's distinction between strategy and tactics is unclear at several points. LH purports that his principles are applicable at the strategic and grand strategic level, but fall short modern doctrinal definitions. As previously stated, and unless otherwise noted, LH's principles will be understood to exist along a spectrum from the tactical through strategic level. However, the case studies reveal that tactical actions, especially in the cyber domain, often translate to strategic effects. 62 Also potentially problematic is LH's assumption regarding how these principles verifiably affected the minds of hostile rulers or influenced the psychological state of the enemy. LH's thesis explicitly states that this is the goal of any strategy but he does not provide any means, vice post-war historical record, to determine if this was achieved in real time. This makes it difficult to determine if such an impact was by design or the result of unintended consequences and the tyranny of events. This chapter analyzes Stuxnet using a case study methodology and applies LH's indirect approach principles. The purpose is to determine if Stuxnet adheres to LH's indirect approach and if the results were decisive. For the purpose of this case study, decisive is defined as an attack's ability to achieve its overall objective, which in this case means destroying Iran's capacity to develop weapons grade uranium, both in terms of physical destruction and national will. Before initiating an analysis it is necessary to establish the key events using the following questions: In February 2003, Iranian President Sayyid Mohammad Khatami "acknowledged that Iran was building a uranium enrichment plant at Natanz" and authorized inspectors from the IAEA to visit the site. The inspectors noted the centrifuges resembled IR-1s of an "early generation Urenco design." At the time, it was unknown how Iran procured the centrifuges. "Centrifuges are metal cylinders with rotors inside that can spin at speeds in excess of 100,000 revolutions per minute to enrich uranium hexafluoride gas." They are a critical component within any nuclear facility and manufactured by a select handful of companies. Soon after the visit inspectors put the pieces together and determined that Khan provided Iran with designs he stole while working at Urenco. 
103
102
103
104
105
107
108
This section discusses the strategic environment immediately preceding the employment of Stuxnet. The previous discussion highlighted Iran's nuclear program trajectory and argued that intelligence gaps and differing conclusions made it increasingly difficult for the United States and United Nations to pursue a unified response beyond economic sanctions. However, there are two principle reasons the United States and Israel did not conduct unilateral or bilateral conventional strikes against Iranian nuclear facilities. First, the United States was engaged in two major land wars geographically buttressing Iran's borders, Iraq and Afghanistan. Second, Israel lacked the ability to conduct an aerial attack without crossing significant distances through adversarial air space, sacrificing surprise, and increasing risk.
In 1981 and 2007, the Israeli Air Force conducted successful air strikes destroying nuclear facilities in Iraq and Syria, respectively. However, in both cases the air force attacked a "single, aboveground facility that was not heavily fortified, and in the case of Syria, the target was close enough to home that pilots could make their strike quickly and return before the Syrians had time to respond." Iran learned that consolidated weapon-program-background-report/history-irans-nuclear-program; Iran Watch, "Iran Nuclear Milestones: 1967-2013," 1 June 2013, accessed 8 January 2016, http://www.iranwatch.org/our-publications/weapon-program-background-report/irannuclear-milestones-1967-2013. aboveground facilities were vulnerable to airstrikes and thus adopted a policy of dispersed, subterranean infrastructure. Israeli intelligence would have difficulty identifying all of Iran's nuclear facilities, while Israeli pilots, flying through contested airspace, would sacrifice the element of surprise and severely jeopardize mission accomplishment. Consequently, the risk associated with a conventional aerial attack exceeded acceptable limits. 
109
110
111
113
114
111
115
"One was an elite, highly skilled tiger team that worked the payload . . . a second tier team [was] responsible for the spreading and installation mechanisms . . . and a third team, the least skilled of the bunch, set up the command-and-control servers and handled the encryption and protocol for Stuxnet's communication." This indicates that developing Stuxnet was a large undertaking requiring significant resources at a national level, both technical expertise, and not the work of a disparate group of "hacktivists." 
116
Stuxnet included five such exploits, one of which made Stuxnet invisible to antivirus machines. Consequently, millions of computers running a Windows operating system became infected. One of Stuxnet's core strengths, which also turned out to be its Achilles heel, was its ability to spread. Additionally, Stuxnet contained "eight different propagation methods," none of which relied on Internet access. The developers knew that accessing the deepest recesses of an Iranian nuclear facility would require "someone carrying the infection from one machine to another via a USB flash drive or, once on a machine, via local network connection." The number of zero days and propagation "counted 12,000 infections at these five targets, and from these initial victims Stuxnet then spread to more than 100,000 machines in more than 100 countries."
119
120
121
122
Initially, the payload targeting 417s was concerned with "targeting the valves that managed the flow of uranium hexafluoride gas into and out of the centrifuges and cascades at Natanz." The anticipated result would be an over pressurization of the centrifuge destabilizing the equipment. However, this tactic was likely unsuccessful and later versions of Stuxnet switched to targeting the frequency converters, which was an easier way to manipulate the spinning centrifuges. 
123
124
125
127
129
Ultimately, Stuxnet was discovered and Iran took all its centrifuges offline in order to wipe the malware. Also of note were assassination attempts against prominent Iranian scientists in the weeks and months following Stuxnet's shutdown. Two of the attacks succeeded in killing Mostafa Ahmadi Roshan, the Natanz's facility manager, and Majid Shahriari, an important nuclear scientist.  Iran's nuclear program but a conventional strike was out of the question and imposed economic sanctions were not likely to collapse Iranian will. In other words, Stuxnet slowed down Iran's overall nuclear efforts and temporarily disrupted their progress, thus granting maneuver space for other instruments of national power such as diplomacy and economic sanctions. For these reasons Stuxnet does adhere to this principle.
Keeping the object always in mind, highlights that accomplishing the objective is more important than the means employed. This principle does not advocate a Machiavellian approach where the ends always justify the means, but is meant to reinforce the importance of maintaining flexibility of mind in the selection and employment of the means. Decision makers determined that their options was not a simple choice between a conventional strike and doing nothing, but included a repertoire of possible actions. Arguably, Stuxnet was one of several possibilities presented to decision makers. The reason for rejecting the others is not known, but it does indicate that Stuxnet was the course of action that optimized risk versus reward. The vast collaboration across disciplines and expertise between the United States and Israel suggests that at the point of execution, both countries locked step towards a clear objective. As the case study mentioned, multiple teams were required to compile and deliver Stuxnet's malware. For these reasons Stuxnet does adhere to this principle.
Choosing the line (or course) of least expectation, is concerned with achieving psychological surprise. Stuxnet's payload was specifically designed to avoid detection throughout the operation. This was necessary to carry out the attack and to foment internal angst within Iranian leadership. It accomplished this by subtly sabotaging the centrifuges while ensuring the associated PLCs reported normal operating parameters.
Iranian researchers were unable to determine the cause of the failures. Were they sold faulty equipment? Did one of their colleagues betray them? The inability to identify and isolate the problem until an outside antivirus company discovered the code demonstrates that Stuxnet would have continued to be a source of speculation and intrigue within the Iranian nuclear establishment. For these reasons Stuxnet does adhere to this principle.
Exploiting the line of least resistance, seeks to achieve physical surprise. Iran learned from Iraq and Syria that consolidated and aboveground nuclear facilities are susceptible to aerial attacks. To overcome this vulnerability Iran employed a strategy of dispersion and fortified subterranean complexes. Arguably, Iran was confident that Western governments lacked the intelligence capabilities and military hardware necessary to identify and strike the many belowground nuclear facilities. This was a valid assumption. The Western intelligence community knew of Natanz at least since 2002 and IAEA inspectors visited this site along with several others. However, the existence and progress of unknown sites caused the greatest anxiety. Western intelligence agencies knew conclusively that there were companies with access to Iran's nuclear sites.
Therefore, Stuxnet was programmed to spread quickly but only attack specific targets. This capability ensured that the malware would end up in a nuclear facility regardless if it was previously known or not. Likewise, secrecy, fortification, and air-gapped systems were irrelevant. Stuxnet did not take the most direct route to its intended target but instead pursued a line of operation guaranteeing access. For these reasons Stuxnet does adhere to this principle.
Taking a line of operation, which offers alternative objectives, emphasizes putting the enemy on the "horns of a dilemma" by forcing the enemy to dilute their combat power and safeguard multiple vulnerable locations. Executed correctly, an enemy's decision making is paralyzed. Stuxnet was purposely extremely specific. It was built to manipulate either S7-315 or S7-417 PLCs, ultimately sabotaging uranium enrichment efforts. In fact, if Stuxnet found itself on a machine without the required Siemens software it sat dormant until it reached a new machine and then queried the system for its specifications. However, "Stuxnet was just one in an arsenal of tools the attackers had used against Iran and other targets." 132 Additionally, it is acknowledged that Stuxnet comprised a small piece of a much larger cyber campaign. 
133
Additionally, it is entirely reasonable to assume that the assassinations of principal Iranian scientists constituted an entirely separate line of effort and was not necessarily the 
132
133
Ensuring that both plans and dispositions are flexible-adaptable to circumstances, discusses the importance of promoting a flexibility of mind that allows planners and decision makers to adapt their approach to the actual situation. In many ways this principle succinctly captures the essence of the previous five. After Stuxnet infected a system, it logged the IP address, the version of Windows, and reported if it found a system with the targeted Siemens software installed. Next, it sent this information back to command servers located in Denmark and Malaysia. This allowed Stuxnet's handlers to determine if the malware reached its intended target. It also allowed developers to tweak the code and make it more effective. This is most likely the reason Stuxnet was released in three distinct waves, each containing minor adjustments. It was observed that the final version of Stuxnet contained the most aggressive "spreading power." Additionally, the code targeting S7-417 PLCs switched from manipulating the "flow of uranium hexafluoride gas into and out of the centrifuges" to attacking frequency converters. Arguably, this was accomplished after reviewing the information sent to the command servers. For these reasons Stuxnet does adhere to this principle. 
134
Even with clear evidence it was still up to the individual decision maker to draw a conclusion. However, Iran was not prepared to defend every function of their nuclear facilities. Physical security and air-gapped systems formed the foundation. Stuxnet defeated both. Additionally, Stuxnet's incremental nature disarmed a conventional response. Stuxnet's "slow and stealthy attack was a compromise of sorts that made it harder to achieve more decisive results but also made it harder for Iran to make a case for striking back." 135 Iran could not evade or parry Stuxnet as long as it remained undiscovered. For these reasons Stuxnet does adhere to this principle.
Do not renew an attack along the same line (or in the same form) after it has once failed, cautions decision makers not to commit additional resources to a failed operation without reassessing the operational variables and employing a different approach.
Arguably, this is a fundamental principle within the cyber community. It is understood that once an attack is conducted the exact construct and zero days utilized are no longer acceptable. Software developers and companies will patch their systems and cybersecurity professionals will add the malware to their antivirus database. Additionally, in many cases, "A cyberweapon [is] the type of weapon that you fire and it doesn't die.
Somebody can pick it up and fire right back at you." 
136
135 Zetter,
Countdown to Zero Day,
365. 136
137
In conclusion, Stuxnet adhered to seven of eight principles and overall conforms to LH's indirect approach. However, the results were far from decisive. It is possible to argue that Stuxnet allowed future diplomatic efforts to succeed. It is equally possible to claim that Stuxnet was a failure. If Stuxnet were able to threaten alternative objectives would it have achieved decisive results? It is difficult determine how this would have improved Stuxnet in a meaningful way without drastically changing a key variable in the decision calculus. Arguably, Stuxnet would have avoided detection for a much longer period, if the developers restricted the malware's capacity to spread. Although Stuxnet did not release its payload unless it found itself on a targeted system, the delivery method caused infected machines to crash continuously.
Stuxnet also showed that for an offensive cyber attack to succeed the attackers must know a great deal about the targeted systems. It is not enough to know the geographical location, information which may not even be necessary. However, malware developers need to know every aspect of the targeted systems. This level of fidelity takes time to obtain. Additionally, once this information is known experts must construct the cyber tools enabling success. All of this requires practicing on systems mimicking the actual configuration. This ensures the code runs as intended and provides opportunities to implant branch attacks. A successful cyber attack capable of penetrating and destroying industrial control systems, especially within nuclear facilities, requires time and the partnership and input of experts across a variety of disciplines. Lastly, the case study applies LH's indirect approach principles to China's cyber espionage. This case study seeks to answer the following:
1. Why is Chinese cyber espionage so pervasive? 2. What strategic underpinnings inform China's reliance on cyber espionage? 3. Does China's use of cyber espionage constitute an indirect approach? Would the Chinese agree? Angela Merkel, were the target of Chinese based cyber attacks. 
141
142
143
144
145
146
Cyber espionage allows individuals with no knowledge of traditional espionage to infiltrate and extract massive amounts of information. Whereas in the past collectors would invest weeks and months recruiting sources, now that time can be spent silently conducting reconnaissance on the targeted system probing for security weak spots and searching for the most valuable data to extract. The most likely scenario is that "human and cyber intelligence collection operations have become complementary elements of a broad Chinese economic espionage campaign." 147 Nonetheless, the barrier to entry for cyber espionage is much lower for a couple reasons. First, as mentioned before, no knowledge of traditional spy craft is necessary which allows collectors to focus exclusively on refining their cyber skills. Second, there is no limit on the types of information that can be collected. For example, in traditional espionage, an agent targeting a defense contractor should have fluent command of the native language and understand the technical aspects of the targeted system. This is far less important in cyber espionage. It is possible to infiltrate government networks, critical infrastructure, businesses, social networking sites, and press organizations. Third, many organizations incorrectly assume that their information is not particularly useful and invest little into cybersecurity, offering attackers a soft target. Fourth, the inability to conclusively attribute cyber intrusions back to a host government creates de facto 147 Jon R. Lindsay and Tai Ming Cheung, "From Exploitation to Innovation: Acquisition, Absorption, and Application," in China and Cybersecurity: Espionage, Strategy, and Politics in the Digital Domain, ed. Jon R. Lindsay, Tai Ming Cheung, Derek S. Reveron (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 56. plausible deniability. This situation reduces a government's willingness to crackdown on unsanctioned cyber activities as long as it supports national interests. Moreover, a lack of attribution opens the aperture on who is authorized to conduct cyber espionage to include government employees, science and technology centers, and freelance hacktivists. Each of these factors makes cyber espionage increasingly appealing to all governments, but especially those seeking to develop advanced military capabilities, control information flow and achieve greater geopolitical influence.  150 Lindsay and Cheung, 74. 
151 Feigenbaum,
163. 152
153
Program and similar initiatives is not to achieve technological development for the sake of scientific discovery, but in direct response to the perception that China remains technologically backwards and ill equipped to compete in the twenty-first century. 
154
The First Gulf War was notable for the speed and ease with which the coalition destroyed Iraq's million-man army. Aerial shock and awe was possible through the employment of a robust electronic warfare and jamming campaign targeting Iraq's Integrated Air Defense System and made more lethal using precision-guided 
154
155
The Chinese military witnessed the 1991 Gulf War with equal parts amazement and alarm. In fact, several Chinese military theorists characterize the First Gulf War as an indication of the emergence of a "new era in warfare, a Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA), in which information technology completely revolutionized warfare and changed the way militaries were organized, led, and fought." 156 Additionally, "U.S. military prowess displayed during Operation Desert Storm convinced China's military thinkers of the need to confront a modern adversary on and off the traditional battlefield." 157 One of the preeminent lessons learned by the Chinese is that, "A key component to the West's success was its reliance on a new set of military options focused on information technologies." 158 This realization implied the importance of obtaining advanced military technology and developing a strategy enabling a technologically weaker force to defeat a stronger more technologically advanced adversary.
The book Unrestricted Warfare provides valuable insights for understanding Chinese cyber espionage. Written by two PLA colonels and published in 1999 by the PLA Press, the book offers military leaders an intellectual framework from which to derive a strategy for dealing with future war. Laced with references to the Gulf War this work is part military history and part philosophy; effectively harmonizing Chinese military strategic culture. The authors argue that the Gulf War, "unfolded and concluded for all to see, with its many combatant countries, and glorious results startling the whole world, who could say that a classic war heralding the arrival of warfare in the age of technical integration-globalization." 159 This perspective forms the nucleus of their argument, which is that the Gulf War fundamentally changed the nature of warfare.
However, the concept of unrestricted warfare is not an oblique reference to the Western concept of total war but describes the importance of combining an everincreasing set of means and ways in pursuit of national objectives. This concept is culturally related to Sun Tzu's description of normal (cheng) and extraordinary (ch'i) 
158
159
160
164
165
166
Employing the side principle means that the most meaningful attacks should be directed 
165 Ibid.,
123,
125,
155,
158. 166 Ibid.,
16,
19,
31.
Categorically, the majority of Chinese sanctioned cyber espionage are APTs. APTs are defined as, "a cyberattack campaign with specific, targeted objectives, conducted by a coordinated team of specialized experts, combining organization, intelligence, complexity, and patience." 184 Cyber experts characterize APTs by their persistent pursuit of specific information. In China's case, "APT targets include defense technology, foreign government policy regarding Chinese interests, positions of US requires administrator or root access. The mission is complete once all relevant information has been extracted. Mandiant observed that APT1 successfully "maintained access to victim networks for an average of 356 days" with the longest being "1,764 days, or four years and ten months." 
189
190
The most common technique for gaining initial access is through "spear phishing." 
191
192
193
190
Krekel,
60. 191 Mandiant,
28. 192
193
Krekel,
55. of urgency." 194
Establishing a foothold ensures "control of the target network's systems from outside the network." Typically, an employee's actual access to the targeted information is irrelevant. It only matters that someone within the organization introduces the malware into the system. In fact, "the users targeted first and the data on their computers are often not the actual target of collection." 
195
's firewall. 196
197
198
199 194 Ibid.,
55. 195 Ibid.,
56. 196 Mandiant,
30. 197 Krekel,
58. 198 Mandiant,
32. 199
200
201
202
203
205
Lateral movement through the network is possible after obtaining sets of "legitimate credentials" and understanding the network's layout. 
206
Maintaining presence is accomplished by installing additional backdoors and obtaining multiple legitimate credentials. 
207
The APT completes the mission after consolidating and compressing the targeted files. 
208
211
Over the years PLA sponsored APTs continue to refine their processes. It is noted that, "China's intelligence agencies in respect to foreign collection has evolved from one of great caution and risk aversion to one of greater operational self-confidence commensurate with China's rising status and influence in the world." 212 Evidence of this is seen in not only by what PLA APTs extract but what they leave behind. In one case, "Attackers selected the data for extraction with great carethey did not simply 'take what they could get' and leave, rather, they chose specific files." 
213
210
211
212
213
214
The remainder of this chapter analyzes how faithfully, and with what correlation, Chinese cyber espionage applies to LH's indirect approach principles. The analysis includes strategic and tactical perspectives with emphasis on why China embraces farreaching cyber espionage and how it is conducted. A detailed explanation of LH's principles is contained in chapter three.
Adjust ends to means, refers to embracing a strategy of limited aim in order to await a favorable shift in balance. Strategically, this principle speaks directly to China's historical efforts at modernization and their desire to develop indigenous innovation through the accumulation of internationally obtained science and technology. China acknowledges that the United States is the dominant military and technological power.
They cannot achieve the global status they seek until they eclipse the United States.
China has the means (technical expertise and national level authority) to develop cyber capabilities. Likewise, cyber espionage facilitates the extraction and importation of valuable technology that China is unable to develop holistically. In this sense, the end is technological parity with the United States and the means is cyber espionage. This principle is also expressed in Unrestricted Warfare as "Limited Objectives: objectives must always be smaller than measures." 215 For these reasons cyber espionage does adhere to this principle.
Keep the object always in mind, highlights that accomplishing the objective is more important than the means employed. It is clear that China embraces a broad cyber espionage campaign that is wedded to their strategic priorities. The international community has repeatedly used the media to accuse China of stealing IP, probing networks, and mapping critical infrastructure. However, China has not stopped cyber espionage operations and has sought to improve its processes. The issues of attribution and acceptable retaliation make it difficult to counter the attacks. Arguably, China understands this well and is steadfastly resolved to achieve their long-term objectives.
Additionally, Unrestricted Warfare includes two related principles. The first is, "Adjustment and Control of the Entire Process: Any attempt to tie a war to a set of ideas within a predetermined plan is little short of absurdity or navet." 
216
Choose the line (or course) of least expectation, is concerned with achieving psychological surprise. Strategically, cyber espionage takes advantage of the misguided perspective among many companies that their IP is both safeguarded and of no value to 
215
Liang and Xiangsui,
179. attackers. 217
Exploit the line of least resistance, seeks to achieve physical surprise. Somewhat related to the previous principle, this one emphasizes that any course can be used "so long as it can lead you to any objective which would contribute to your underlying object."
218
Instead, the attacker must move laterally through the system and elevate their access. For these reasons cyber espionage does adhere to this principle. Take a line of operation which offers alternative objectives, emphasizes putting the enemy on the "horns of a dilemma" by forcing the enemy to dilute their combat power in an effort to safeguard multiple vulnerable locations. Executed correctly, an enemy's decision making is paralyzed. This principle is the essence of the PLA's INEW concept and articulated in Unrestricted Warfare as "Unlimited Measures: The continual enlargement of the range of selection and the methods of use of measures." 
219
220
219
Ensure that both plan and dispositions are flexible-adaptable to circumstances, discusses the importance of promoting a flexibility of mind that allows planners and decision makers to adjust their approach to the actual situation. Chinese programs like the 863 Program are intended to cast a wide net in terms of how science and technology is obtained and introduced into the Chinese system. As mentioned above, cyber espionage constitutes one such method. At the strategic level, cyber espionage is both politically and operational feasible. It is politically feasible due to an inability to achieve conclusive attribution. This hinders defensive cyber efforts and often confines accusations to the court of public opinion. It is operationally feasible because attackers have demonstrated the desire and capacity to strike a broad range of targets in industry and government. This means that attackers have the flexibility to strike soft targets at will and build/obtain the necessary tools to launch attacks against harder targets. The existence of a hard target does not stop cyber espionage and it cannot guarantee impregnable defenses.
Additionally, Unrestricted Warfare contains the principle of "Omnidirectionality: When observing the battlefield or potential battlefield, designing plan, employing measures, and combining the use of all war resources which can be mobilized, to have a field of vision with no blind spots, a concept unhindered by obstacles, and an orientation with no blind angles." 221 For these reasons cyber espionage does adhere to this principle. 115 Do not throw your weight into a stroke whilst your opponent is on guard-whilst he is well placed to parry or evade it, advises not to strike in a way that reinforces an enemy's strengths or consolidates his defenses. This is essentially the overarching goal of INEW, which seeks to neutralize command nodes and paralyze decision-making.
Likewise, this principle applies to the initial reconnaissance phase of an APT attack.
During this phase attackers are able to gain important insights into the company hierarchy and cyber security, which enables the attackers to avoid strengths and attack weaknesses.
Unrestricted Warfare includes the principle "Asymmetry: Create power for oneself and make the situation develop as you want it to . . . often makes an adversary which uses conventional forces and conventional measures as its main combat strength look like a big elephant charging into a china shop."
222
For example, if a spear phishing operation fails it does not infer that the attackers are defeated or cannot try again. The sheer volume and increasing sophistication of the attacks infers the ability to overcome multiple failures. However, at the strategic level it is precisely because cyber espionage achieves success that it is an integral aspect of 116 China's quest to achieve technological parity. For these reasons cyber espionage does not adhere to this principle.
Chinese sponsored cyber espionage does adhere to LH's principles at the tactical and strategic levels of war. It is clear from analyzing Chinese strategic documents that the PLA is intimately interested in pursuing an indirect approach. Arguably, this method is easily understood by Chinese strategists to be the most effective way to counter a militarily and technologically superior adversary. The PLA published book, Unrestricted Warfare, includes eight principles that, while not exact parallels of LH do echo his central concept. Future studies should compare and contrast these principles in order to gain greater insight into PLA strategic thought.
The Chinese Government's obsession with achieving advanced military The United States faces a serious threat from Chinese cyber espionage. The PLA has invested tremendous resources to build and strengthen this capability. While many experts argue that it is difficult to measure with exactitude the financial impact of cyber espionage it is not difficult to comprehend the danger posed by state sponsored APTs.
Mapping critical infrastructure poses a direct threat to U.S. national security. It is unclear how the Chinese plan to exercise this capability in execution, but insights can be obtained by understanding the role of INEW and the importance of generating meaningful combinations of various means to achieve unrestricted warfare.
Cyberwarfare provides fertile intellectual ground for the application of LH's principles. As noted, Stuxnet and Chinese cyber espionage overwhelmingly adhered to LH's indirect approach principles. Arguably, this is due to the elasticity of the principles. However, it can demonstrate that activities in the cyber domain inherently constitute an indirect approach. This is due to three factors. First, offense currently holds the advantage. This balance places value on the development and employment of offensive capabilities. This is especially true if an attacker has more to gain through offensive action than the defender could achieve by doing the same, which is the case with Chinese cyber espionage targeting U.S. institutions. Second, as Joseph Nye observed, "Strategic studies of the cyber domain are chronologically equivalent to the 1960s but conceptually more equivalent to 1950." 
224
225
225 Steve Holland and Doina Chiacu, "Obama Says Sony Hack Not an Act of War," Reuters, 21 December 2014, accessed 28 April 2016, http://www.reuters.com/ article/us-sony-cybersecurity-usa-idUSKBN0JX1MH20141222. process and the input of a prosecution, defendant and a judge. However, President Obama "pledged to respond proportionally to North Korea's alleged cyber assault, in a place, time, and manner our choosing." 226 A few days later, North Korea suffered a nationwide blackout lasting several hours. The United States unconvincingly denied responsibility. 
227
Third, a defender's inability to achieve high confidence attribution lowers the barriers for offensive action. This will continue to plague cybersecurity professionals who must conduct painstaking cyber forensics to determine an intrusion's severity and source. However, this may not ease efforts to prove conclusively that an attack was state sponsored or part of a nation's national strategy. This is evident in Stuxnet and China's use of advanced persistent threats. Fourth, cyber attacks, by their nature, pursue the path of least resistance. A carefully crafted attack can penetrate the severest of defenses.
Stuxnet is an example of this. Similarly, cyber attacks, like Stuxnet, can infiltrate a high priority, yet previously unknown physical locations. This is a profound capability that precision-guided munitions do not have and one that enhances the relevance of offensive 
226
228
Ironically, in Stuxnet's case, a cyberweapon was used to destroy nuclear infrastructure. 
229
228
230
231
230
231 Erik Gartzke argues, "Cyberwar should be particularly appealing to capable states confronting weaker opponents. Rather than threatening to overturn the existing world order, cyberwar may perpetuate or even increase current military inequality." See Gartzke, 63.   123   Stuxnet did not deal a decisive blow to Iran's nuclear facilities and certainly not to its nuclear ambitions. However, it can be argued that Stuxnet provided a certain amount of political time and space enabling nuclear negotiations to occur between the United States and Iran. It also showed Iran, that despite their best efforts, the program was vulnerable to attack and that the United States would not permit a nuclear Iran. In addition, a recent news article described a U.S. developed cyber operation called Nitro Zeus that would have been unleashed if Iran failed to agree to the proposed nuclear deal. 
232
Chinese sponsored cyber espionage has grown out of their fervent desire to modernize the military and achieve parity with the United States in information technology. For the Chinese, cyber espionage constitutes ways and means to achieve national objectives. As a way it supports the INEW concept by conducting valuable peacetime reconnaissance in order to map critical infrastructure and identify key nodes within an adversary's system. As a means it provides Chinese leadership with a powerful capability to extract massive amounts of IP considered vital to their science and technology development strategy and indigenous innovation.
Relentless and pervasive, persistent cyber espionage is less sophisticated than attacks like Stuxnet. An effective cyber espionage campaign does not rely on the meticulous collection and protection of innumerable zero days to achieve success.
Instead, cyber espionage relies on detailed pre-attack reconnaissance to inform a smart spear phishing campaign. This does not meant that cyber espionage requires less technical skills, but it does mean that the preponderance of resources can be invested towards building an organization task organized to target specific regions or towards niche aspects of the cyber espionage cycle such as reconnaissance and exploitation. 
233
There exists debate regarding China's capacity to absorb and integrate all the IP stolen over the past decade. Jon Lindsay and Tai Ming Cheung, both experts in national security affairs, argue that China's aggressive cyber espionage campaign is not a "cheap and effective shortcut for improving industrial innovation" and reject the position that China is "gaining an unfair competitive advantage through cyber espionage." 234 Going further they contend that, "There are real reasons to be skeptical that China's impressive cyber exploitation campaigns can deliver lasting strategic advantage." 
235
233
234
235
239
236
237
238
239
240
240 Mandiant,
59. 241 Ibid.,
25. 127
Must come to grips with fundamental changes in the social, political, and military landscapes. . . . Revolutions in military affairs require the assembly of a complex mix of tactical, organizational, doctrinal, and technological innovations in order to implement a new conceptual approach to warfare or to a specialized sub-branch of warfare. 
242
Historically, the side that can take advantage of new technology in a way that alters the rules gains the advantage. This notion deals with anticipating technology's impact on future conflict. This aspect was evident in Prussia's decisive defeat of Austria in 1870, where "Molke succeeded twice in presenting Prussia's adversaries with innovations to which they could not adapt in time to prevent Prussia from setting the rules of the conflict." 
243
In Unrestricted Warfare, Liang and Xiangsui suggest that advancements in information technology are birthing an emerging RMA. Additionally, "setting the rules" 242 MacGregor 
Knox and Williamson Murray, The Dynamics of Military Revolution 1300
-2050
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 12. 243 Ibid., 104. 244 Ibid., 105. 128
245
Arguably, cyber has begun to change how the U.S. we fights, or at least how we think about future wars. However, we military professionals have not yet codified new doctrinal concepts that drastically deviate from conventional combined arms maneuver. This is largely due to the pace of technological advancements. For example, in the time that a technological exploit is realized a reaction and counteraction are developed. This makes it difficult to determine, with precision, the trajectory that technological innovations will take. Technology will have to stabilize to give doctrine a chance to codify and achieve validation. Future research should analyze Russia's use of cyber in its limited wars against Estonia, Georgia, and their current adventures in Ukraine and Syria.
Arguably, this will elicit a solid understanding of how cyber is integrated within CAM, at least as used by a large nation against its weaker contiguous neighbors in the case of Estonia and Georgia. 129 Conversely, doctrine may require assuming a far less prescriptive role and instead provide a degree of operational latitude permitting deviation in order to take advantage of the fluid nature of technological advancements. 
246
Perhaps the key lesson of cyber is its utility as one of a myriad of means that can be employed in a way similar to the method of additive-combinations outlined in Unrestricted Warfare. Traditionally, the United States does an excellent job combining the various instruments of national power with an emphasis on the diplomatic, economic, and military. 
247
Libicki's,
"Why Cyber War Will Not and Should Not Have Its Grand Strategists,
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
Can Cyber Achieve Decisive Results? Currently, it is unlikely that cyber can achieve decisive results on its own. It is far more probable that cyber will continue to increase in relevance within a broader strategic context. However, as seen in Stuxnet and China's cyber espionage, the cyber domain opens up new possibilities to destroy things in the physical world, extract IP and everywhere in between. In this sense, cyber is not simply an additional domain similar to sea or space but unique and separate because it is entirely manmade.
There are three areas where innovations or improvements could alter cyber's offense-defense balance. First is the improved ability to quickly and accurately achieve high confidence attribution. Second is the adoption and enforcement of laws. This is much more difficult than it would appear, and is dependent on multiple factors, not least of which is, determining whether to emphasize information security or network security.
China and other closed authoritarian systems prefer the former, while Western nations, which emphasize freedom of information, prefer the latter. The development of laws will depend first on improvements in attribution. Third is the expanding development of the cyber-persona. 
248
249
For the near future, offense will continue to hold the advantage. This reality induces states to develop robust cyber capabilities. For smaller nations and non-state actors this requires purchasing commercial exploits or hiring a third party to conduct cyber operations. For large nations like the United States, Russia, and China, this means creating technically expert organizations capable of mounting sophisticated offensive operations. Arguably, it is necessary to develop offensive skills in order to identify and develop a corresponding defensive measure. It is also necessary for nations to conceal the true extent of their capabilities lest they sacrifice a potential advantage. Consequently, we 
248
Advanced Persistent Threat (APT). A cyber attack campaign with specific, targeted objectives, conducted by a coordinated team of specialized experts, combining organization, intelligence, complexity, and patience. 250
Air-Gap. To physically isolate a computer or network from other unsecure networks, including the public Internet, to prevent network-enabled attacks. 251
Anonymous. A decentralized but coordinated collection of users from various Internet forums, who gather to conduct organized attacks, protests, and other actions using cyber means. The most noted of the hacktivist groups, its motives range from political protest to vigilantism to sheer amusement. 252
Botnet. A collection of computers which have been taken over by a malicious attacker (after an intrusion) who controls their collective actions with another set of computers, called "botnet herders" or "command and control servers." Botnets can be rented out to raise money for the attacker or can be used to send spam, engage in fraud, or conduct DDoS attacks. 
253
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT). Organizations located around the world that serve as hubs of cybersecurity technical expertise, collaboration, and security information dissemination. Many governments have their own national computer emergency response teams, as do an increasing number of industrial sectors and large organizations. 
255
250
267
Cyberwar. Actions by a nation-state to damage or disrupt another nation's computers or networks, which are heavily damaging and destructive-similar to the effects achieved with traditional military force-and so are considered to be an armed attack. 
269
265 Ibid.
266 Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), Joint Publication (JP) 3-12 (R), Cyberspace Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 5 February 2013), GL-4.
267 Ibid. 
268
269 Healy,
281. 138
285
286
Virus. A malware program that can replicate itself and spread from computer to computer. 288
Worm. A type of malware that spreads automatically over a network, installing and replicating itself. The network traffic from rapid replication and spread can cripple networks even when the malware does not have malicious payload. 
289
286
287 Ibid.
288 Ibid.
289 Ibid. 
290
50  
50  
69  
69  
81  
81  
127 128 Zetter, 130
251  
251  
Catherine Theohary and John Rollins, Cyberwarfare and Cyberterrorism: In Brief (Washington, DC: Library of Congress, 27 March 2015), 6.
Ellen Nakashima and Andrea Peterson, "Report: Cybercrime and Espionage Costs $445 billion annually," The Washington Post, 9 June 2014, accessed 7 October 2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/report-cybercrime-and-
Martin Libicki, Conquest in Cyberspace: National Security and Information Warfare (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 291.
Kelly McEvers, "Rules for Cyberwarfare Still Unclear, Even as US Engages in It," NPR, 20 April 2016, accessed 27 April 2016, http://www.npr.org/templates/ transcript/transcript.php?storyID=475005923.
The specific version is: B. H. Liddell Hart, Strategy, 2nd rev. ed. (New York: Meridian, 1991).
Brian Bond, Liddell Hart: A Study of His Military Thought (Aldershot, VT:  Gregg Revivals, 1991), iii.
Libicki, Conquest in Cyberspace, 3.   
Bond,
5.
Liddell Hart, Strategy,[330][331][332][333][334][335][336][337] 
Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), Joint Publication (JP) 3-12 (R), Cyberspace Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 5 February 2013), GL-4.
JCS, JP 3-12 (R), v -1-4.
Cisco Networking Academy, IT Essentials: PC Hardware and Software Companion Guide, 5th ed. (Indianapolis, IN: Cisco Press, 2014), 299-304.
Peter W. Singer and Allan Friedman, Cyberspace and Cyberwar: What Everyone Needs to Know (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014),35-36, 173.   
Singer and Friedman, 
Robert Kaiser, "The Birth of Cyberwar," Political Geography 46 (2015): 19.
Chris C. Demchak and Peter Dombrowski, "Rise of a Cybered Westphalian Age," Strategic Studies Quarterly (Spring 2011): 32-61.
Ibid.,  
39-50.   
James J. Wirtz, "The Cyber Pearl Harbor," in Cyber Analogies, ed. Emily O. Goldman and John Arquilla (Technical Report, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, 28 February 2014),7-14.   
Libicki, Conquest in Cyberspace, 
Andrea Little Limbago, "One Size Does Not Fit All: The Multifaceted Nature of Cyber Statecraft," Joint Force Quarterly, no. 78 (3rd Quarter 2015): 84-90.
Mearsheimer,
4,
Liddell Hart, Strategy,
5,
Liddell Hart, Strategy, 195, 327, 336.   
Liddell Hart, Strategy, 147, 336.   
Erich Follath and Holger Stark, "The Birth of a Bomb: A History of Iran's Nuclear Ambitions," Spiegel Online, 17 June 2010, accessed 2 February 2016, http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/the-birth-of-a-bomb-a-history-of-iran-snuclear-ambitions-a-701109.html.
Zetter, Countdown to Zero Day, 82.    
Ibid., 83.   
Follath and Stark, "The Birth of a Bomb: A History of Iran's Nuclear Ambitions," 9.
Ibid., 1.
Follath and Stark, 3; Iran Watch, "A History of Iran's Nuclear Program," 1 March 2012, accessed 8 January 2016, http://www.iranwatch.org/our-publications/
Ellen Nakashima and Joby Warrick, "Stuxnet Was Work of US and Israeli Experts, Officials Say," The Washington Post, 2 June 2012, accessed 27 April 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/stuxnet-was-work-of-us-andisraeli-experts-officials-say/2012/06/01/gJQAlnEy6U_story.html.
  116  Zetter, Countdown to ZeroDay, 64, 178.   
Zetter, Countdown to Zero Day,
6,
6.
Zetter, Countdown to Zero Day,[11][12] 262; Shakarian,
7;
Zetter, Countdown to Zero Day, 60, 92, 97, 338; Shakarian,
5;
Zetter, Countdown to Zero Day, 234; Shakarian, 2, 3.   
Zetter, Countdown to Zero Day, 17, 175, 237, 303; Shakarian 2, 3,
5;
Zetter, Countdown to Zero Day,  
 231, 235; Shakarian,[2][3]
[4]
[5]
Zetter, Countdown to Zero Day, 236, 303; Shakarian,[2][3]
[4]
Broad, Markoff, and Sanger, "Israeli Test on Worm Called Crucial in Iran  Nuclear Delay."    
Zetter, Countdown to Zero Day, 359.   
Lake,
[6]
[7]
Zetter, Countdown to Zero Day,[27][28] 96, 303.   
Ibid., 128, 238.   
Richard Norton-Taylor, "Titan Rain-How Chinese Hackers Targeted Whitehall," The Guardian, 4 September 2007, accessed 5 April 2016, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2007/sep/04/news.internet.
John Markoff, "Cyber Attack on US Nuclear Arms Lab Linked to China," The New York Times, 9 November 2007, accessed 5 April 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/ 2007/12/09/world/americas/09iht-hack.1.8653712.html?_r=0.
Siobhan Gorman, "Electricity Grid in US Penetrated by Spies," The Wall Street Journal, 8 April 2009, accessed 5 April 2016, http://www.wsj.com/articles/ SB123914805204099085.
It is likely that cyber espionage targeting the oil industry and China's territorial claims in the South China Sea reflect two sides of the same strategic coin.
Ellen Nakashima, "Report on 'Operation Shady RAT' Identifies Widespread Cyber-Spying," The Washington Post, 3 August 2011, accessed 5 April 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/national-security/report-identifies-widespreadcyber-spying/2011/07/29/gIQAoTUmqI_story.html.
Ibid., 167.    
Singer and Friedman, 293.   
Mandiant, 34.    
Ibid.
Ibid., 35.    
Ibid.
Krekel, 61.   
Ibid., 57.    
Mandiant, 36.    
Ibid., 36.    
Ibid., 37.   
Krekel, 59.   
Ibid., 185.   
Booz Allen Hamilton, Cyber Theft of Corporate Intellectual Property: The Nature of the Threat (McLean, VA: Economist Intelligence Unit, Booz Allen Hamilton, 2012), 6; Phoenix Contact, "Hacking the Industrial Network" (A White Paper, Phoenix Contact, Harrisburg, PA, undated).
Liddell Hart, Strategy, 335.   
Liang and Xiangsui, 117.   
Liang and Xiangsui, 182.   
Mearsheimer, 10, 87, 89.   
Jack Kim, "North Korea Blames U.S. for Internet Outages, Calls Obama 'Monkey'," Reuters, 28 December 2014, accessed 4 May 2016, http://www.reuters.com/ article/us-northkorea-cybersecurity-idUSKBN0K502920141228.
Liddell Hart, Strategy, 361, 363, 367.   
Erik Shilling, "From 'Byzantine Hades' to 'Titan Rain', Cyber Attack Code   Names are Sci-Fi Poetry," Atlas Obscura, 17 February 2016, accessed 5 April 2016, http://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/from-byzantine-hades-to-titan-rain-cyber-attackcode-names-are-scifi-poetry.
Liang and Xiangsui, 114.   
This includes the widespread belief among employees that sending work related emails late at night and throughout the weekend indicates professionalism, a strong work ethic and loyalty to the organization.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
1. What made Iran's nuclear facility at Natanz a desirable target? What characteristics made Natanz targetable? 2. How did Stuxnet carry out its attack (delivery and payload)?
3. Did Stuxnet meet its objective completely or was it discovered before its mission?
4. Why was Stuxnet launched when it was?
Stuxnet was a sophisticated malware amalgamation purpose built to infiltrate Iranian nuclear facilities and attack associated centrifuges. It accomplished this by adjusting the speed at which centrifuges spun thus contaminating the uranium enrichment process. Stuxnet's genius was its ability to hide this information from unsuspecting Iranian scientists. Stuxnet's purpose was to deny Iran access to weapons grade uranium. 
99
117
"Certificate authorities are the core of trust relationship that makes the Internet function."
Built on complex cryptographic concepts, digital certificates are only distributed to vetted companies, which are typically protected on offline servers. Stuxnet procured valid digital certificates from two different companies. Software developers and anti-virus firms rely on digital certificates to sign products and verify authenticity. "Computers assume that a file signed with a legitimate digital certificate is trustworthy." Stuxnet's use of digital certificates enabled the malware to walk through the front door of the targeted computer systems. 
118
(3) choose the line (or course) of least expectation; (4) exploit the line of least resistance;
(5) take a line of operation which offers alternative objectives; (6) ensure that both plan and dispositions are flexible-adaptable to circumstances; (7) do not throw your weight into a stroke whilst your opponent is on guard-whilst he is well placed to parry or evade it; and (8) do not renew an attack along the same line (or in the same form) after it has once failed. A detailed explanation of each principle is contained in chapter 4 (methodology).
New York Times, 29 November 2010, accessed 12 February 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/30/world/middleast/30tehran.html?_r=0. towards the command headquarters, which constitutes the side element. The asymmetrical relationship created by the side element in relation to the principal element makes this concept powerful. Liang and Xiangsui unpack the concept further by referring to LH's concept of the "indirect strategy." However, they are careful to emphasize that the side-principal constitutes a "principle" not a "theorem" and should be understood "in terms of lines of thought and essence" not "mechanical application." The side-principal concept provides a way to think about the most advantageous line of attack but is not prescriptive in nature. 
167
Liang and Xiangsui,
135,
136,
144,
[146]
[147]
188
185
186
187 Ibid., 8; Stokes, 164. 
188
What can be learned from LH's indirect approach principles? Are they valid? Were they valid in his time? As John Mearsheimer observed, LH was "constantly comparing events, individuals, and situations to find generalizations that would hold across space and time." This unique perspective casts LH's analytical persuasions into equal parts military historian and social scientist. He desperately sought opportunities to apply his knowledge of history to solve Britain's national security problems. His indirect principles are an outgrowth of this desire. However, Mearsheimer and others argue that LH's principles are a circular argument by which all decisive battles throughout history conform to the indirect approach, consequently rendering the framework too elastic to apply objectively. 
223
272
Espionage. The act of obtaining, delivering, transmitting, communicating, or receiving information about the national defense with an intent, or reason to believe, that the information may be used to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of any foreign nation. Espionage is a violation of 18 United States Code 792-798 and Article 106, Uniform Code of Military Justice. See also counterintelligence. 
274
Espionage Against the United States. Overt, covert, or clandestine activity designed to obtain information relating to the national defense with intent or reason to believe that it will be used to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of a foreign nation. For espionage crimes see Chapter 37 of Title 18, United States Code. 
275
276