# ID: a80e7691b19d4d87baf0781f6b5d3916
# Title: Stealth, precision, and the making of American foreign policy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2003.0
# Fulltext:
The end of the Cold War greatly reduced the risk that a limited, peripheral conflict would escalate to a major war between the great powers. It would seem, with this constraint removed, that the United States should be freer to intervene militarily in the affairs of other peoples. Indeed, in the last decade of the twentieth century, the United States intervened militarily as many times as it had during the full forty years of the Cold War.
Alternatively, the decision to intervene had always been based on the best interest of America. With the fall of the Soviet Union, America's most vital national interest, its security, was assured. Logic would dictate a less-interventionist foreign policy, as the need to intervene was drastically reduced. This study examines the paradox by investigating the presidential decision making process that leads to military intervention, determining the relative weight for intervention before and after the Cold War, and assessing the importance of technology -in this case the maturity of the combination of stealth aircraft and precision guided weapons -that made the president's decision to intervene after 1990 easier. The president's decision is influenced by six domestic and international factors: national interest, domestic politics, potential for success, potential cost (in lives), public support, and coalition or alliance responsibilities. Tracking changes in the relative influence of each of these factors over time, the importance of promising technological capabilities emerges as much more significant than the shift in balance of power in explaining the increased intervention policies of the United States. Specifically, conclusions are drawn on the real impact of stealth and precision's ability to reduce not v only American casualties, but also collateral casualties and damage as well. Given the impact of military technological developments on foreign policy, considerations for future policy makers are recommended as new capabilities near fielding. This thesis began as a question: "Should military technology drive national policy, specifically intervention policy?" My initial reaction was that it should not.
Policy, particularly foreign policy, should be carefully informed and only then formed.
In a perfect world, only the national interest should drive policy, with the vital national interest taking precedence over all other variables. Certainly, technology must be carefully integrated into policy, and allowance made for breakthrough or unanticipated revolutionary technologies, but technology itself should not be the arbiter of great power actions. National policy should be formed through the combination of principle and vision, forethought and wisdom, not as a reaction to chance and happenstance.
But study of the historical integration of technology into the policy making process leads to the inevitable conclusion that technology can and does drive policy, to a lesser or greater degree depending on a multitude of circumstances. There is a great difference between what does occur and what should happen, and this thesis grapples with precisely that dilemma. Knowing that technology can and often does drive strategy, and ultimately policy, and aware that the side that fails to acquire and adapt cutting edge technology may lose to the state that does so efficiently, the question became reversed.
Why shouldn't technology drive policy?
With the end of the Cold War, the threat of a superpower conflict that could destroy the United States greatly diminished. The primary national interest, that of survival, became much less threatened. With more time and resources to devote to lesser national interests, policy makers turned growing attention to relations with the minor powers. As the lone superpower in a world rife with problems that military intervention might -or might not -help resolve, the United States, the mightiest nation on earth with the most powerful and technologically advanced military on the planet, faced (and still faces) a most interesting question: "Because we can intervene, should we?" Is there a moral imperative that compels us to try to help solve world problems because we alone have a military capability that is unmatched? These questions are decidedly more than academic, and there is an established body of thought that answers them in the affirmative. For example, former Ambassador to the United Nations Madeleine Albright typified it in her comment to General Colin Powell in 1995 when they were discussing options for dealing with the crisis in Bosnia. When she perceived resistance to the idea of using military force as a solution, she asked General Powell "What's the point of having this superb military that you're always talking about if we can't use it?" 1
According to a 1998 article in the Washington Post, "over the past decade, the United States Army has been used in 29 substantial overseas deployments, compared with just 10 in the four previous decades." 
2
4
to use military force, to risk American blood and treasure in the pursuit of national objectives, easier? Was it simply the end of bipolar conflict? With America's superpower foe effectively vanquished, the United States had less fear of an outlying intervention spiraling out of control and drawing in the great rivals. Yet with its foremost vital national interest, state survival, virtually assured, it would also seem reasonable to argue that military conflict should be less frequent, not more so. Ultimately, one must come to the conclusion that either there were more political goals that justified the use of force, or there was less risk in using the military to obtain existing goals. The end of the Cold War, and subsequent reduced fear of a limited conflict escalating into a nuclear exchange between the United States and Soviet Union, is undeniably a significant factor in the United States' decreased concern about intervening around the world. However, reduced risk of thermonuclear war alone does not seem to justify by itself the increased frequency of the use of military force in pursuit of policy goals observed over the last decade. Another, identifiable factor must have influenced the presidential decision process that led to the use of force. My investigations led to the probability that the key factor was the simultaneous development of militarily decisive technologies.
In 1989, the United States introduced a powerful new weapons system during Operation Just Cause, the invasion of Panama to apprehend dictator Manuel Noriega.
The F-117 stealth fighter, employing laser-guided bombs, had an inauspicious start, but became the centerpiece of American military power in two short years. Its ability to precisely deliver munitions while affording the pilot a previously unthinkable level of protection from harm presented the president with a far less risky means to apply military force. It was now possible to use America's military might with a greatly reduced chance of suffering friendly casualties or equipment loss. It is highly significant to note that the United States government has used or tried to use the F-117 in every planned offensive operation since its debut, and that it has become the ultimate symbol of American military superiority.
There is a clear temporal correlation between the debut of stealth and precision technology and a subsequent, radical increase in the number of American interventions abroad. Is this coincidence or is there a plausible causal link? In other words, did the arrival of the F-117, married to precision strike capability make the presidential decision to intervene with military force easier? In answering this precise question, Anthony Lake, former Assistant to President Clinton for National Security Affairs replied simply, "Of course!" 
5
6
In determining whether or not the decision to intervene with military force became easier after 1989, it is reasonable to look at the principal historical factors affecting the presidential decision to use force, and evaluate how their effect on the decision has changed over time. By isolating the effects of various influences on these factors, it is then possible to determine if change in the factor has made the decision easier or harder. In this thesis, it is asserted that the advent of the F-117 with precision guided munitions (PGM) is an influence that has had a broad impact on many of the factors affecting the president's decision to intervene. The reduction in risk to American lives, and the resulting decrease in collateral damage and casualties during conflict that the new technology offer, affects both domestic and international elements of policy, and perhaps this is not such a lamentable thing.
"A government's most momentous decision is to take its people to war. In the American political system, the president is at the center of the movement toward war." 
7
1
The Decision to Intervene: Domestic Factors Domestically, the president must consider a number of crucial factors when deciding whether or not to put American troops in harm's way. Most of these are a product of the American form of representative government. The president and Congress, both elected by the citizens of the nation, share governing power. As the "center of the movement toward war," the president must first determine whether or not going to war is in the best interest of the nation, whether or not the desired political goal is achievable, and whether it warrants the risk and cost of war. But the president is not alone in this determination. He does not have absolute power. He "shares power with Congress, and a president who ignores the Congressional role assumes greater risks for failure…The president also must moderate conflicting views among his advisors… (and)   consider and then harness, if he can, that amorphous-but always very real-force of public opinion." 
9
10
11
12
While all these factors are interrelated, public support is firmly and inextricably the foundation of the other four domestic factors. Perhaps the single most critical 
9
10
11 
Hess,
5. 12
element shaping public support in the decision to intervene is American historical tolerance for anticipated and actual casualties during the operation, a point to be discussed in detail in Chapter 5. Of late, there is an opinion that "the American public is no longer willing to tolerate American casualties in U.S. wars and military operations." 
13
14
National Interests. The first domestic factor the president must consider when contemplating war is America's national interest. National interests are the goals or ends desired by a nation either domestically or in its relations with other nations. 
15
16
Beyond assuring national survival, determining exactly what constitutes a vital national interest can be difficult to identify in advance of a crisis. Declarations from the Monroe Doctrine to the most recent National Security Strategy have attempted to define 
13
14 Ibid.
15 Donald E. Nuechterlein, National Interests and Presidential Leadership: The Setting of Priorities (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1978), 1-3. 
16
After World War II, the United States chose to intervene militarily numerous times. In a couple of cases, the intervention was a result of a direct threat to American citizens abroad, and the decision was relatively unambiguous. More critical, the vast majority of post-war interventions, if not all, were framed within the context of a global military, economic, and ideological battle for survival between the United States and Soviet Union, making the sudden and dramatic rise in interventions after the Cold War harder to explain in the absence of a superpower rival. Until the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1989, America's consistent foreign policy intent was to contain the expansion of Communism. 17 This policy of 'containment' provided the basis for American interventions during the Cold War. Each was portrayed in some way as a small part of the larger ideological battle raging across the globe, the loss of which would mean the loss of the United States to Communism. 
18
Lebanon in 1982-83. 19
20
17
Larson,
63. 20
21
22
Congressional Support. The second domestic factor the president must consider when contemplating war is congressional support for his foreign policy actions, notably military intervention. Foreign policy consists of "those external American goals for which the nation is prepared to commit its resources." 23 It is the method that the United States uses to pursue its national interests, and the resources to be committed are among the countries most valuable and cherished assets. In the decision to commit these resources, the president is at the center of America's foreign policy process. The Constitution makes the president primarily responsible for national security and appoints him Commander in Chief of the armed forces. The Constitution also grants Congress power with respect to making war. It bestows the power to declare war and the power to control funding for the government and its actions, including the military.
Fed up with the stalemate of the Vietnam War and an 'imperial presidency' that had absolutely dominated foreign policy for an extended period of time, Congress passed the War Powers 
Resolution in 1973. 24
Successive presidents have openly questioned the constitutionality of the law, and adherence to it has been questionable at best. 
25
The resultant impact of this on the president is unclear. 
26
27
28
29
From Nightline, a nightly newscast specifically covering the Iran Hostage Crisis in 1979, to the advent of 24-hour news on CNN and a plethora of imitators, world access to television coverage of unfolding events increased dramatically. 
30
31
33
34
Prospects for Success. The third domestic factor the president must consider, the prospect of success for the intervention, is closely tied to public support. Military intervention is only one option available to the president in the face of a crisis. Other possible means include diplomatic, informational, and economic actions. Circumstances dictate which option, or combination of options, is the most appropriate to employ, and each must be evaluated to determine if it will attain or help attain the desired political goal. Public support has shown a constant trend when military intervention is used. "The higher the probability that the intervention will successfully achieve its objectives, the higher the probability is that the intervention will be supported." 
35
36
33
34 Larson,
xx. 35 Ibid.,
11. 36 Ibid.,
[11]
[12]
[13]
The Vietnam War and Somalia are cases where, as time wore on, objectives became less clear and public support fell in response to mounting American casualties. 
38
Through most of the Cold War, the United States maintained an armed force that in personnel and raw numbers of armaments was significantly smaller than that of the Soviet Union. In the 1970s, America started pursuing an offset strategy, emphasizing technological superiority over numbers, especially in Europe, the expected site of a major war with the Soviets. 
40
42
43
44
45
Prospective and Actual Costs. The fourth domestic factor the president must consider before intervening is the probable cost of the operation. Aside from personal concern for the safety of American lives, the president must gain and maintain public support for an intervention. "A majority of the public is concerned about U.S. casualties when they consider support for a U.S. military intervention…It furthermore is clear that, all else being equal, prospective and observed support for a U.S. military intervention decline as expected or actual casualties increase." 46 As America's dependence on airpower has grown, the public has become very aware of the number of aircrew and 42 Michael Ignatieff, Virtual War: Kosovo and Beyond (New York, N.Y.: Metropolitan Books, 2000), 92. aircraft the United States loses during combat. This is, perhaps, the area where the marriage of stealth and precision technology has had the greatest impact on the president's decision to intervene.
The F-117 and B-2 have amassed an amazing combat record. In over ten years of employment, just one stealth aircraft, an F-117 during Operation Allied Force, has been lost to hostile fire, and in that lone instance the pilot returned safely. And not just friendly casualties are reduced, a factor important to a nation with the sense of righteousness in action. The PGM has reduced collateral damage as well, to infrastructure but more importantly to noncombatants. The ability to strike with precision that is perceived as "laser surgery" 48 means that the United States is ideally capable of hitting precisely, and only, those targets it wishes. Yet this capacity is a sword that cuts two ways. Interest in reducing unintended civilian casualties during war is longstanding, and during the last decade, emphasis on it has grown, with perhaps unexpected ramifications for policy. Military operations were directly affected, for example, from the planning process forward in both air campaigns in the Balkans. 
49
50
47
48 Ignatieff,
92. 49
50
of discrimination than its enemies, perhaps to the long-term best interest of the United
States. This asymmetric constraint has emphasized the importance of accurate intelligence and targeting during an air campaign, increasing again the value of stealth and PGMs. Diplomatic difficulties arose with the mistaken bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade during Operation Allied Force. It also led to much tighter restraints on the coalition's continued use of force. 
51
52
PGMs are used to destroy a target, the chance of unintended civilian casualties is greatly reduced, provided the targeting information is correct. While expectations of perfection may complicate the president's decision to intervene, the reduction in friendly and unintended civilian casualties has significantly reduced the perceived cost of military intervention in terms of human life. This not only eases the president's decision to intervene, but also affects the public's decision to support the intervention, which also affects the president's decision.
While the president must be attuned to the domestic reaction to military intervention, he must also consider the impact on and views of our allies, neutrals, and potential enemies. 
53
52
53
effect on every country on the globe." 54
Alliances and Coalitions. Alliances have existed since the beginning of politics.
They are traditionally formal agreements that enhance both parties' interests and are generally oriented toward a common threat. 
55
56
57
58
59
60
The United States has escalated the frequency of its military intervention in the decade following the end of the Cold War, even as threats to its vital national interests have greatly diminished. The reduced risk of escalation to global thermonuclear war has decreased American aversion to military intervention, but alone is equivocal in explaining the sizeable increase in post-Cold War deployment and use of military forces abroad. The debut and subsequent performance of advanced stealth and precision technology has played a more persuasive role in the apparently easing decision to 
61
Stealth aircraft and precision weapons create the enhanced intervention conditions that permit the President to intervene where and when he sees fit. The United States is no longer bound to a policy of avoiding confrontational or escalation scenarios, regardless of humanitarian or moral imperative. Technology has allowed policy to take a much more liberal stance. It has driven policy. Perhaps this is the way it ought to be. And these conditions will continue to exist as such and as long as the United States maintains its technological advantage.
The time is now near at hand which must probably determine whether Americans are to be freemen or slaves; whether they are to have any property they can call their own; whether their houses and farms are to be pillaged and destroyed, and themselves consigned to a state of wretchedness from which no human efforts will deliver them. The fate of unborn millions will now depend, under God, on the courage and conduct of this army. Our cruel and unrelenting enemy leaves us only the choice of brave resistance, or the most abject submission. We have, therefore, to resolve to conquer or die.
-George Washington Address to the Continental Army before the Battle of Long Island (27 August 1776)
The president of the United States holds primary responsibility for conducting the nation's foreign affairs. The most significant decision the president can make in this regard is whether, and how, to go to war. The decision is complex, and can never be easy; with several key issues weighing heavily in the option to use military force.
Moreover, the president cannot act unrestrained. Although commander-in-chief of the armed forces, the chief executive still must consider the views, partisan and non-partisan alike, of the legislative branch before committing the nation to war. Additionally, he needs to carefully evaluate the views and objectives of allies, who may or may not have a vested interest in the issue. Finally, the president must consider "that amorphous-but always very real-force of public opinion." 
64
64 Gary R. Hess, Presidential Decisions for War: Korea, Vietnam, and the Persian Gulf (Baltimore, Md.:
The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001), ix.
National interests are the goals or ends desired by a nation either domestically or in its relations with other nations. Vital national interests are peculiar to international politics and are comprised of two characteristics: first, the nation is unwilling to compromise on the issue, and second, the nation is willing to go to war over the issue. broad, overriding importance to the survival, safety and vitality of our nation. Among these are the physical security of our territory and that of our allies, the safety of our citizens, the economic well-being of our society, and the protection of our critical infrastructures -including energy, banking and finance, telecommunications, transportation, water systems and emergency services -from paralyzing attack. We will do what we must to defend these interests, including, when necessary and appropriate, using our military might unilaterally and decisively. 
67
do not affect our national survival, but they do affect our national wellbeing and the character of the world in which we live. Important national interests include, for example, regions in which we have a sizable economic stake or commitments to allies, protecting the global environment from severe harm, and crises with a potential to generate substantial and highly destabilizing refugee flows. Humanitarian and other interests are the least likely to prompt the use of military force if they are threatened. Although specific definition of these interests has happened only recently, their intent is consistent throughout America's history. America's national interests provide the framework for the president to shape the country's response to events around the globe. At a time of crisis, the president can relate the situation to broader national interests and establish objectives for America's role in the resolution of the crisis. 70
America's response to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor was the last time the country officially declared war. The attack on United States soil represented a grave threat to the existence of the country. The response could be nothing short of all-out war if America was to exist without fear. After Pearl Harbor, the next attack on American soil would not occur for almost exactly sixty years, and yet the United States engaged militarily around the world numerous times. After World War II, threats to America were less well defined, and they have often rested on ideological foundations.
The  to the Cambodian capture of the American merchant ship Mayaguez. The Cambodians seized the ship in international waters and detained its crew. The United States' response was justified for two reasons: the right to freedom of the seas and the need to protect American lives. Freedom of the seas has long been a tenet of American foreign policy.
It was used to justify the War of 1812 as well as America's entry into World War I (with the sinking of the Lusitania). Freedom of navigation on the seas remains an integral part of its ability to protect its vital national interests, as expressed in the 1999 National Security Strategy: "The United States is committed to preserving internationally recognized freedom of navigation on and overflight of the world's oceans, which are critical to the future strength of our nation and to maintaining global stability. Freedom of navigation and overflight are essential to our economic security and for the worldwide movement and sustainment of U.S. military forces." 88 Acting decisively to protect American lives abroad also has a strong historical precedent.
America had other reasons to respond to the Cambodian aggression. Saigon had fallen only twelve days earlier and Europeans openly questioned the United States' ability to continue to act as a major international force. An unambiguous response to the situation would help diffuse such sentiments. "Public statements concerning possible or eventual U.S. actions concentrated on reacting to the act of piracy, but it was widely understood that other issues were also at stake." 89 Still, central to America's response was President Ford's desire to save the crew of the Mayaguez. In his memoirs, the president states that he was "responding to an act of piracy by doing everything I could to save American lives." 
90
91
The Iran Hostage Crisis--Desert One. In January 1979, a mob of Iranian students stormed the American embassy in Tehran, and took sixty-six Americans hostages. Thirteen were released soon after, but fifty-three remained in captivity for four hundred and forty-four days. President Carter pursued diplomatic efforts and economic sanctions, but was unable to secure their release. In April 1980, an elite military force attempted unsuccessfully to rescue the hostages and met a tragic end when two aircraft collided in a remote desert and eight servicemen lost their lives. 
92
93
Lebanon. In August 1982, United States Marines began a one-and-a-half year, ill-fated deployment to Lebanon. They were initially put there as part of a multi-national force to protect Syrian and PLO soldiers as they evacuated from Beirut, which was surrounded by Israeli forces. This mission was successfully completed by mid-September and most forces left, but they soon returned as civil war broke out. In March Eisenhower had said the same thing. However, considerable debate existed then, as now, as to whether or not interests there were vital. America's interests in the region arguably stem more from ties in the Lebanese-American community, Lebanon's pro-Western stance, historic trade and cultural ties, and other cultural issues than those traditionally considered vital. 
96
The American public apparently did not consider lofty goals of world peace and protecting the region from a non-Western oriented hegemon to be vital national interests, as reflected in the extreme drop off in support for the operation after the barracks bombing. 
97
Grenada. In October 1983, the safety of American citizens abroad was again threatened in the tiny Caribbean nation of Grenada. After a violent coup deposed and eventually killed Marxist President Maurice Bishop, concern for the safety of over 600 95 Ibid., 344. While small contingents of forces were present from some OECS nations, the action was essentially unilateral.
In a press conference, President Reagan outlined the three purposes of the operation. The first was to protect innocent lives. The second was to forestall further chaos. The third purpose was to assist in the restoration of law and order in Grenada,
where "a group of leftist thugs violently seized power…. The Reagan administration came into office concerned about the rise in international terrorism and specifically Libya's role in that rise. 
106
States and ordered American citizens out of that country. In April 1986, a bomb exploded at a German club in West Berlin, killing an American serviceman. When strong evidence of Libyan support for the attack surfaced, President Reagan had the necessary rationale to respond militarily. United States Air Force and Navy aircraft conducted Operation El Dorado Canyon, bombing terrorist-related targets in Tripoli. In selecting the targets, the president was specific in the requirement that they be military, in order to reduce the possibility of civilian casualties. 
108
105
106 Ibid., 77.
107 Ibid., 57.
108 Ibid., 77-78.
terrorist infrastructure and designed to deter acts of terrorism by Libya…." 109 As a response to the loss of an American life and a prevention of similar future losses, the attack was understood to be in support of a vital national interest. It "demonstrated that such uses of force could be carried out with fairly broad support at home and minimal condemnation abroad, especially if the regime being confronted was largely seen as an international 'troublemaker.'" 110
The Panamanian security forces attacked numerous Americans, killing one and severely injuring several others. They also began threatening the remaining 35,000 Americans in the area and threatened the security of the Panama Canal. 
116
114
115 Ibid. 
116
States…." 117 These actions proved reason enough for President George Bush to intervene militarily to safeguard American citizens as well as the Panama Canal. The president explained that Operation Just Cause had four primary objectives: first, protecting the Americans in the region, second, defending democracy, third, combating drug trafficking and apprehending Noriega, and fourth, protecting the integrity of the Panama Canal Treaty. 
118
119
120
121
The Persian Gulf War. Any attempt by an outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault on the vital interests of the United States of America, and such an assault will be repelled by any means necessary, including military force. 
124
The Persian Gulf War marked a departure in America's foreign policy. The collapse of the Soviet Union made containment, the long-standing pillar of its foreign policy, obsolete. The end of the Cold War forced America to reconsider its entire strategy for global engagement. 
127
130
131
This event prompted President Clinton to announce "that the United States would withdraw all combat forces and most logistics units by 31 March 1994." 
132
The lesson learned in Somalia was harsh, but uncomplicated. Restore Hope began as a purely humanitarian operation. Strong bipartisan congressional and public support was evident from the outset. Combating world hunger has long been viewed as an important foreign policy goal, and television images depicting the cruel situation in Somalia demanded some sympathetic action be taken. 
133
130
131 Serafino, 20.
132 Ibid. 
133
134 Brune, 20.  an acceptable price to pay for less-than-vital national interests.
Haiti. On 19 September 1994, American troops landed in Port-au-Prince, Haiti "to create conditions that would allow for the restoration of Haiti's first democraticallyelected President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to office." 
135
we have interests--national interests at stake. Our interests primarily are involved in seeing that war not spread, not see a wider Balkan war, or even a war that spreads out beyond the Balkans. And so that's the national interest but it's not--our survival is not at stake. The survival of an ally is not at stake. 
142
143
This potential spread of violence could also spark large refugee flows, which could further destabilize European order. Much like its involvement in Lebanon in 1982, American action in the Balkans was founded more on the interests of its allies than on its own. This led to great difficulty expressing why United States military forces were necessary to the operation. American air strikes were successful in halting the fighting for a short period, and they did help force the warring parties to sign the Dayton Peace
Accords, but the lull in fighting was only temporary. uncertain, but the total may run into the tens of thousands. In the 78-day air campaign, not a single NATO combatant was lost to hostile fire.
American involvement in Kosovo was essentially a continuation of the previous action in Bosnia. The same ethnic and religious hatreds were fostering the violence.
United States national interest in the region was still in question, so much so that the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff did not believe interests alone were sufficient to warrant the use of military force. 
144
145
146
147
Public support is a critical factor when the president decides whether or not to use military force. The strength of that support is reflected in the public's tolerance for The end of the Cold War removed the primary political adversary for the United
States. Without the framework of containment, American interests outside its borders are much less easily defined. In order to use the military in pursuit of a policy of enlargement, the president faces a much tougher challenge to justify the use of that force in the face of less-than-vital interests. Correspondingly, we can expect public support for such operations to be less deep, as characterized by a reduced tolerance for casualties.
Although former National Security Advisor Anthony Lake asserts, "vital national interest was the most abused term in the last twenty years," it remains that they are the foundation for justifying American military intervention. 
153
149
150 Ibid., xvi.
151 Ibid., xvii.
152 Ibid.
intervention by the United States, and yet, this is markedly not so. Other powerful factors must hold sway over the president's decision to use force in order to overcome this lack of national interest.
War begun without good provision of money beforehand for going through with it is but as a breathing of strength and a blast that will quickly pass away. Coin is the sinews of war.
-François Rabelais Gargantua and Pantagruel
The American form of democratic rule is unique in its simple, codified system of checks and balances. The framers of the Constitution constructed an ingenious system whereby no single branch, executive, legislative, or judicial, could obtain supreme governing power. Each branch has unique powers and successful governance of the country requires cooperation and consensus. As the national leader, the president must work with Congress to implement his domestic and foreign policies. In the past fifty years, Congress's interest in the president's foreign policy has grown. It has used some of its Constitutional powers to attempt to influence those policies. The Vietnam War witnessed the birth of a new potential influence on foreign policy: televised reporting from a war zone. The growth of crisis reporting from the nightly newscast to a 24-hour, constantly available medium presents a new challenge for America's foreign policy makers.
Foreign policy addresses "those external American goals for which the nation is prepared to commit … some application of the economic, military, intellectual, or other foreign policy, and effective control over the process has shifted between the two as the nation has evolved. In times of crisis, Congress has tended to allow the president a relatively free hand to conduct foreign policy. Following crises, Congress generally attempts to reassert itself through increased involvement in and oversight of the foreign policy process. 
155
The president derives much of his authority to conduct foreign policy from the Oath of Office in the Constitution of the United States. The Oath "requires the chief executive to 'solemnly swear (or affirm)' to 'preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.' The oath thus confers upon the president a unique responsibility for the preservation of national security." 
156
157
158 Ibid.
The perceived need for immediate and decisive action contributed to the acceptance of executive dominance in most aspects of foreign policy." 
159
160
161
The Constitution is more specific about the president's role with respect to the The Legislative branch of the United States government does have constitutionally mandated powers with respect to foreign policy. These include the power to appropriate funds and the power to declare war, powers shared by both Houses.
The Senate, due to its authority to review and ratify treaties and presidential appointments, its longer terms of office, and usually larger constituencies, has generally been the body more concerned with the conduct of foreign affairs, while the House of Representatives has typically been "content to play a subordinate role in the foreign policy process." 
166
168
Shortly after the beginning of the Korean War, President Truman "announced approval of a 'substantial increase' in American forces in Europe over the two American divisions already in Germany." 
169
175
176
177
178
175
176
Constitution regarding presidential power to employ the armed forces, but its application has been weak and inconsistent. It has been "rejected by…presidents as unconstitutional and rarely invoked by Congress." 179 Since passage, adherence has varied with each president and the particular circumstances of the crises they faced. In all, presidents have submitted ninety-two reports to Congress because of the requirements of the War Powers Resolution. President Ford submitted four, President Carter one, President Reagan fourteen, President G. H. W. Bush seven, President Clinton fifty-eight, and, through his first year in office, President G. W. Bush six. 
180
181
Instead of filing reports in advance of military action and asking permission, presidents have filed them either right before or after military action has taken place. prior to the date set by the legislation. 
182
183
Congress attempted to insert some of its members into a formal consultation process with the White House, but the president rebuffed these overtures. 
184
185
186
In evaluating the utility of the War Powers Resolution, it is clear that "the record 182 Ibid., 15. 
183
203
Another aspect of the domestic political scene that has changed since the beginning of the Vietnam War is the nature of media coverage of military conflict. These essential changes have raised questions about the effect of media reporting on public opinion as well as its effect on the foreign policy process in America. The process actually began well before the Vietnam War, but the days of Ernie Pyle-style World War II battle reports appearing in newspapers well after the action was over had disappeared by the Tet Offensive in 1968.
Vietnam was…the first 'television war'. Television 'newsreels' having played a rather minor role in reporting the Korean War (1950-3), Vietnam was the first conflict to receive sustained, almost nightly, coverage on the US networks over a period of several years. It was also the first war to benefit from certain technological advances -the use of satellites especially -which made reporting more immediate, and this at a time when American network news first assumed a half-hour format.
There developed a strong belief that television coverage had played a major role in declining popular and congressional support for the Vietnam War. Even President Nixon questioned whether America would ever be able to muster the strength and unity of purpose to fight a war overseas again. 
205
American public is open to question, similar coverage of the ill-fated intervention in Somalia in 1993 seemed at first to have a significant effect not only on public opinion, but also on United States foreign policy. 
206
207
208
servicemen were responsible for the public's desire to withdraw from Somalia." 210
Closer examination, however, refutes both of these assertions. The reason President Bush chose to intervene was that he believed it "would be low in costs, especially casualties, and high in (political) benefit." 211 Media coverage of the situation in Somalia was actually very sparse until after the decision to intervene was announced. 
212
213
215
United States' most media-driven president, yet powerful though they were, the images were probably not the sole reason for United States intervention. The Clinton administration "had been moving toward a more active role in the Balkans, for reasons that included intense pressure from France and U.S. concern that the inability to affect the conflict was eroding the Atlantic alliance and American leadership." 216 Specifically, "the U.S. commitment was born out of a fundamental reassessment of U.S. national interests at the time, not because of media coverage." 217 Media reports served to provide fuel for those advocating intervention and focus public attention on the gravity of the situation (making it easier to explain the need for United States action), but on their own appear not to have caused the United States to change its foreign policy toward the Balkans. 
218
219
The American president had to deal with two rising influences upon his foreign policy in the fifty years following the Korean War. Congress's overt attempts to increase its participation in the foreign policy process and the rise of instant media reporting both appeared initially to have a greater impact than eventually proved out. However, Congress's influence in the foreign policy process is on the rise once again. More traditional tactics such as exercising the power of the purse are directly impacting policy.
The president must pay increasing attention to the wishes of Congress on foreign policy issues in order to ensure the health of his domestic policy. From the days of the 'imperial presidency' where his was the only voice on foreign policy, the president's decision to intervene is harder now with respect to domestic politics. Congress is more active, and the rise of 24-hour media has given ample voice to supporters and opponents alike.
American domestic politics now has a greater influence on the conduct of foreign policy.
Congress's cooperation, however, does not guarantee that the president will decide to intervene. He must also consider whether military force is both appropriate and capable of achieving the desired foreign policy goal.
Will it Work? The Prospects for Success
Weapons are an important factor in war, but not the decisive one; it is man and not materials that counts.
-Mao Tse-tung Lecture, 1938
A critical part of the decision to use force is determining if military means alone, or in concert with other means, can attain the political objective. During a crisis, the president can employ several options to get a satisfactory solution, including diplomatic, informational, economic and military coercion. Circumstances dictate the most appropriate option to employ. In a situation where diplomacy and finesse are required, domestic or international sensitivity may preclude the use of force and military action may not provide the best solution. In addition, the mission may be something for which the military is not equipped or trained. If, in fact, force is deemed appropriate, the president must next consider the prospects for military success. If the chances of success are less than favorable, the president's tolerance of or aversion to risk comes into play.
The American public also considers the chances of military success, especially when less than vital interests are at stake, and has shown a remarkable range of support from fanatic patriotism through complete intolerance for military intervention. Sustaining positive levels of support, likewise, depends on a continuing assessment of this prospect for success as the operation unfolds.
In his analysis of presidential decisions to go to war in Korea, Vietnam, and the Gulf War, Gary Hess outlines how each president brought the nation to arms. In each case, there is obvious consideration of whether there were "reasonable prospects that the anticipated deployment of military power could achieve (the) objectives." 228 Each president made assumptions about the chances of military victory and the effect of that victory on the overall situation. In the Korean War, President Truman fully believed that "once American determination was evident and power properly employed in Korea, the adversary would back down." 
229
In the Persian Gulf War, President Bush faced a more complex situation. After
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, economic sanctions and international diplomatic pressures were brought to bear against Saddam Hussein's regime. When it became apparent that these measures were not producing the desired result of removing Iraqi forces from Kuwait, the president and his advisors began considering other measures. Offensive The potential success of the intervention also has a bearing on how strongly the public will support the action. "The higher the probability that the intervention will successfully achieve its objectives, the higher the probability is that the intervention will be supported." 
232
233
This caused a corresponding decrease in public support for the war. 
234
235
236
237
234
235 Donald E. Nuechterlein National Interests and Presidential Leadership: The Setting of Priorities (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1978), 91. 
236
237 Mueller,
56.
239
240
242
243
246
Estimating the probability of military success can be extremely difficult. The perceived as a critical capabilities test in an anticipated future war in Europe with the Soviet Union. So bleak was the outlook that predictions were made that allied defensive efforts in such a war would last only seventeen days before being overwhelmed. 
248
The United States Air Force (USAF) and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) began searching for a way to develop a stealth aircraft that would be able to defeat Soviet radar. 
249
250
Concepts for the employment of stealth aircraft varied greatly: "Many saw stealth technology as a silver bullet in the form of a limited number of aircraft that could blow a hole through (Soviet) defenses to create penetration corridors for other aircraft." 
251
Because it was simpler, General Lew Allen, the USAF Chief of Staff, and General David Jones, the Chairman of the JCS chose the first approach. It was thought that much could be learned from a smaller program that would later apply to other applications. 
252
254
When Operation Desert Shield kicked off in August 1990, F-117s began deploying to the Persian Gulf Region. Eventually, a total of forty-two would participate in the air war. The F-117s conducted the first bombing raids of Operation Desert Storm on January 17, 1991, striking the air defense heart of the country in downtown Baghdad.
Although they could be detected, the Iraqis could not track the aircraft and thus could not shoot them down. 
255
256
Moreover, the F-117 and Tomahawk cruise missile were responsible for all of the strikes on downtown Baghdad. 
257
253
258
stealthy, low-observable platforms were the keystones of Coalition attacks against the Iraqi air defense system, leadership, and communication targets early on the first day of the war, even in heavily defended areas…(They) needed minimal support from other aircraft but were able to provide stealth to a much larger force by disabling the enemy's air defense system, thus making all Coalition aircraft harder to detect and attack. 
259
260
261
262
263
The air campaign over Kosovo marked the first use of the newest generation stealth aircraft, the B-2. With the ability to strike sixteen separate targets on one mission, the B-2 soon became the darling of the war and "surpassed all expectations during its combat debut." 264 Both the F-117 and B-2 proved once again that stealth aircraft could penetrate the most highly defended areas on earth to deliver their weapons accurately, while tremendously reducing the risk to American airmen.
Precision Weapons. Soon after military men took to the air, they began trying to destroy targets on the ground. Getting a bomb to hit the ground proved easy--the law of gravity is strict. Hitting a specific target proved far more difficult. The problem grew as aircraft increased their altitude to minimize the risk of being shot down by ground fire.
The role of the bombardier became a highly technical specialty, with an array of calculating tools and weapons sites to assist in accurate targeting. By World War II, the United States was using the Norden bombsight in its strategic bombers and bombing from above 20,000 feet. 
265
Bombing Survey shows that performance during World War II was far less than that desired. 
266
267
268
269
270
271
LGBs from the 8 th Tactical Fighter Wing attacked the bridge and dropped one of its spans, putting it out of commission. 
272
273
274
During the Gulf War, one quarter the number of precision munitions were dropped as in the Vietnam War, but their impact on American and world public opinion was vastly greater. Their success had a profound effect on the future structure of American military forces and on the doctrine that guides their use. The roughly 14,000 PGMs dropped represented just nine percent of the total number of munitions expended, but their impact was much more significant than these relatively small numbers would seem to indicate. The LGB was the only weapon dropped by the F-117, which was able to destroy the most highly defended targets in the theater, setting the stage for successful follow-on conventional strikes. The accuracy afforded by the F-117 armed with LGBs was phenomenal. It took only one F-117 and one 2,000-pound bomb to destroy a target.
The CEP was an amazing ten feet. Since the F-117 carries two bombs, two targets could be destroyed in one sortie. 
275
1
Deliberate Force), and only twenty-nine percent of the munitions used were precision guided. 
278
279
281
283
Force Size. America pursued stealth and precision weapons as a means to offset numerical inferiority against the Warsaw Pact. During the Cold War, it was a near certainty that the United States would be outnumbered in a fight against the Soviet Union. 
284
In 1955, right after the Korean War and just before a major drawdown in forces, the United States had 2.94 million personnel in its active military forces (see Table 
2
285
291
292
293
294
295
States total active force equaled 1.45 million and the Russian's a mere 0.78 million.
However, another large force existed on the globe. The Chinese possessed an armed force of 2.84 million, reiterating the need to maintain a military technological advantage When committed correctly, military success seems almost assured. This not only makes the president's decision to use force easier, it makes it more likely that the American public will support the action (which in turn makes the president's decision even easier).
The influence of stealth and precision on the president and public opinion is not limited, however, to just increasing the chance of military success. Its impact is felt across several other factors in the president's decision to use force.
The Cost of Intervention: Casualties and Risk
But the bravest are surely those who have the clearest vision of what is before them, glory and danger alike, and yet notwithstanding go out to meet it.
-Thucydides The Peloponnesian War (Funeral Oration of Pericles)
In a democratic society, government leaders depend on solid public support to maintain national resolve in a crisis. Without consensus, legitimacy falters and the democratic state is unable to act. Continuing public support, however, allows the government to marshal the necessary military and diplomatic means to resolve the situation. When considering the role of military force in a crisis, the president of the United States must assess the nature and depth of the public's support, as it currently exists and over time. The depth of support for military action is evident in the public's tolerance for casualties, both military and civilian.
Americans' long embrace of the liberal democratic method of governing has incurred a sense of broad participation in government action. This means that each citizen -in some personal and meaningful way -shares in the responsibility for decisions to use violence abroad. Perhaps for this reason, the majority of the American public shows deep concern for the number of actual and potential casualties when considering whether to support a specific intervention. 
297
298
Casualties and Support. Since the end of World War II, the United States has committed to large-scale military intervention three times: the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and the Persian Gulf War. Each one had similarities in the amount of public support at the outset. The perceived objectives and interests in the Korean War initially brought strong bipartisan support for President Truman's decision to intervene. 
299
300
301
302
306
310
In the past 57 years, the United States has not been involved in a conflict that has justified a similar, unrestrained cost to obtain its objectives. The Cold War rhetoric of nuclear weaponry, perversely keeping the world safe from World War III by the threat of Mutually Assured Destruction (the MAD policies of the super-powers), could be cited but the abstract level of destruction was mercifully always in the hypothetical realm. 
312
Stealth Aircraft and Casualties. Stealth aircraft technology has had its greatest effect on public support by reducing casualties associated with military action, specifically when airpower is used. Air operations have long been part of the American way of war. From the strategic bombing offenses during World War II through Korea and Vietnam, the United States has attempted to exploit the third dimension to its advantage. Air combat has been romanticized by the exploits of great aerial aces, such as Baron Manfred von Richtofen and Captain Eddie Rickenbacker, and the image of two warriors battling to the death in the sky has become ingrained in American culture.
During the two World Wars, the public showed great interest in the mounting victory totals of its combat pilots. 
313
314
315
316
317
Kennett, The First War in the Air, 1914
-1918
(New York, N.Y.: The Free Press, 1991), 163. 314
315 Paul G. Kaminski, "Low Observables: the Air Force and Stealth," in Technology and the Air Force: A Retrospective Assessment, eds. Jacob Neufeld, George M. Watson, and David Chenowith, (Washington  DC: Air Force History and Museums Program, 1995), 299.  protected the lives of scores of American aviators while they attacked the most important, highly defended targets in hostile territory. Properly employed, stealth aircraft allow commanders to "conduct precision attacks with near impunity against an opponent's core instruments of power, whether they be deployed forces or infrastructure targets." 318 But stealth technology decreases risk to airmen flying other aircraft without stealth capability.
Of equal significance, stealth has reduced the need to mass aircraft in large, mutually supporting packages in order to attack highly defended targets. 
319
320
321
3
347
356
357
The second incident highlighted the need for timely, accurate intelligence.
On the night of February 13, 1991, two F-117s each dropped a 2,000-pound LGB into the Iraqi Al Firdos command-and-control bunker in downtown Baghdad.
Unfortunately, numerous women and children, who, thinking it was safe, had been using the bunker as a bomb shelter, were killed. 
358
359
The fear of further incidents such as this occurring again has affected the American military's approach to war. "Senior officials admit that it has influenced wartime decisions (and) some charge that obsessive attention to safeguarding civilians has undermined military effectiveness." 361
The combination of stealth aircraft and precision weapons has significantly reduced the risk to American airmen in combat. They have given American forces the ability to attack the most highly defended targets and destroy them with greater reliability and efficiency. This has directly reduced the number of American casualties suffered during combat. Not only has the number of aircraft and aircrew losses dropped, but the total number of American casualties suffered has dropped. This is directly attributable to the fact that airpower is the weapon of first choice and first use in military action.
Airpower can prepare the battlefield prior to a ground offensive, such as during the Persian Gulf War, or it can be the only military instrument, like in Kosovo. Stealth and precision have made airpower more effective and this, in turn, has made the entire American military force more effective. We are now able to intervene with confidence that we will not suffer casualties on the scale of World War II.
The reduction in the anticipated cost of intervention has made the president's decision to use military force much easier. No longer does he need to justify the commitment of military force with vital national interests. Public support for military action does not need to be as deep as it was during World War II, because fewer deaths are suffered. As long as casualties remain low, interventions for important or humanitarian interests will be tolerated. The reduction in cost is not limited to American lives. Stealth and precision have given United States forces the capability to almost exclusively destroy only the desired target. This has reduced the risk of harming enemy civilians in collateral damage incidents, further reducing the potential loss of human life in a military conflict. As the concern for incidents like the Al Firdos bunker or Chinese embassy are mitigated, even fewer civilian casualties will occur. This will remove one more eroding force from the base of public support. While increased precision comes with the price of expected infallibility, it is in the process of revolutionizing warfare. The reduction in potential and actual casualties has domestically aided the president, but the influence does not stop at America's borders.
Access is "the ability to visit and use strategically located areas." 
372
373
375
Before the End of the Cold War. During the twentieth century, the United States learned how to fight effectively as a coalition partner, and these coalitions generally held to a consistent pattern. America was in charge of the coalition and set the agenda, action was against a well-defined adversary, the West followed because of a shared vision, and the United Nations was limited to providing a seal of legitimizing approval.
377
384
385
386
387
The Soviets did not make the mistake again, and the UN was incapable of marshalling a united war effort until Russia claimed the Soviet chair in the Council, and refused to veto action against Hussein in Iraq. 
384
396
Kuwait. 397
393
398
402
404
Difficulties arise when a coalition's goals are not of sufficient interest to a partner nation. The first major coalition operation after the Gulf War was United Nations 398 O'Halloran, 63. 
399
400
406
407
409
Getting coalitions to act can be difficult, and once they do, attaining consensus to enable effective operations, especially military, may seem impossible. The two major interventions into the Balkans in the 1990s were prime examples of this. Prior to employing airstrikes in 1995, NATO and the United Nations tried a number of nonviolent, coercive measures to stop the civil fighting in the former Yugoslavia. These measures ranged from economic sanctions against Bosnia to putting UN peacekeepers on the ground to try to stabilize the situation. 
410
405
406
407
408 Haass,
[45]
[46]
421
422
423
These results set a precedent for the war in Kosovo. Senior American leaders refused to send some coalition aircraft into harm's way because of concerns about collateral damage from inaccurately aimed weapons. In all, about 80 percent of all strike missions were flown by American aircraft. 
424
425
Coalition aircraft performed admirably and contributed much to the success of the mission. However, the differences in capability mean that the United States should expect further complications in future coalition fights if the Europeans do not significantly modernize their military forces. 
426
The potential impact stretches beyond the operational level, as well. The growing difference in capability could dilute relations between the United States and its European 
421 Lambeth,
[166]
[167]
423
All of the interventions after the Cold War benefited from the positive aspects of the coalition: legitimacy, access, and cost sharing. However, friction increased in some areas that made coalition warfighting more difficult than in the past. Coalition fighting was certainly not new to the United States, but the nature of the fighting changed.
Interventions such as Somalia showed how a mismatch in goals that do not line up with national interests can cause a coalition to come apart due to a lack of domestic support.
The political complexities of the Bosnia and Kosovo campaigns illustrated how the United States, still the dominant military player, was held in check by coalition concerns to the detriment of effective military operations. The technological chasm between the United States and our next most capable ally is wide, and immediate measures must be taken to remedy it so that a level of inclusiveness is able to keep all coalition members relevant. It seems generally accepted that the United States will fight in a coalition if it is going to fight at all in the future. 
428
It is easier to make war than peace.
-Georges Clemeçeau Speech, 1919   This discussion began with a question about whether advances in military technology should drive foreign policy. The answer to that is almost trite--of course not.
Foreign policy should be carefully considered and well founded in attaining that which is best for the nation. It should not be reactive, shaped by what we can do militarily. The ability to intervene does not convey an automatic responsibility to do so. This, of course, supposes that we work and live in the sterile land of theory. In the real world, the ability to intervene can be seductive. Facing a situation where military intervention may stop needless suffering and potentially improve the human condition can create strong a impulse to do something. As such, technologies that can ease the difficulties of military intervention may lead to a more interventionist foreign policy. The key points of the logic presented in this thesis are that technology will drive policy, that states and statespersons should attempt to understand those drivers (in advance if possible), and that technology-driven policy is not necessarily a bad thing.
The president must be the one who ultimately makes the decision to intervene. Domestic and international elements sway that decision. Numerous factors influence the amount of dominion each element will have. Domestically, national interests, domestic politics, the prospects of success of intervening, and the potential and actual cost (primarily in lives) of intervening are all considered. Internationally, maintaining good relations with allies and friends forces consideration of their perspective, and alliance relationships may demand intervention in spite of domestic factors. The advent of both the F-117 and PGM have had a perhaps startling effect on many of these factors, directly affecting the ease of deciding to use military force.
While this opinion may result from being the subject of that acrimony, Congress did make an overt attempt to limit the president's war-making power with the passage of the War Powers Resolution in 1973. The law has proven to be without teeth, but it has provided a point of departure for discussion when the president considers or does use military force. It provides those in Congress who object to presidential intervention a legitimate vehicle to express their dissent. While every president since its passage has questioned the Constitutionality and utility of the law, the fact that they consistently reported their actions to Congress shows that they considered the possible ramifications of ignoring it. More traditional Congressional methods, like exercising the power of the purse, have been more effective. As the trend of globalization continues in the world, the lines separating domestic and foreign policy blurs. 
434
The rise of 'on-demand' news began shortly before the passage of the War Powers Resolution. Progressing rapidly from same-day reports from war zones to 24hour, constantly available news, the news media has become ever more present in the public consciousness. Initial fears about inordinate ability to influence policy makers seem to be oversold, but the media has had a distinct effect on the domestic political scene. presidential detractors now have a much more accessible platform from which to express their dissent with current policy. This can have a negative effect on American public support for military intervention. If political leaders support an intervention, it is highly likely that the public will as well. However, perceived rifts in political support are just as likely to be mirrored in the public, and public support is an important factor considered by the president. 
435
Both the president and the public consider the prospects for military success before deciding whether to support intervention. The president must determine first if military action is the correct vehicle to obtain his desired political goal. He must then ascertain if the military is capable of attaining that goal within the political constraints laid upon the action. The public is much more likely to support intervention if the perceived chance of success is high. 
436
In the 1990s, airpower became the weapon of first choice. The outstanding record of effectiveness with minimal loss of American life has created an almost unreachable expectation of perfection in the minds of the American public. There is no question about whether our armed forces will succeed, but the expectation is for a bloodless victory. The proven combat record of the F-117 and PGM have made the president's decision to intervene much easier, and greatly increased the likelihood of public support, but have made the measure of success much more difficult. The loss of a single aircraft to hostile fire may become such a rare event that the intervention is considered a failure.
The expectation of sure success makes the military more likely to be used, and goes a long way to ensuring public support.
The marriage of the F-117 and PGMs has had its greatest effect on the potential and actual costs, in terms of human lives, of military intervention. Both have significantly reduced the risk to American airmen in combat and have given United States forces the ability to attack the most highly defended targets and destroy them with greater reliability and efficiency. American casualties have been greatly reduced since the combat debut of the F-117. Fewer people die on both sides of the conflict when America uses airpower, and the F-117 and LGB combination are one major reason for this. Given that the American public shows concern with the potential and actual number of casualties when considering whether to support military action, stealth and precision's ability to decrease those casualties increases the chance of public support. This single fact gives the president a large degree of freedom regarding intervention. If no Americans die, he is able to intervene for less-than-vital interests. The perfect example of this is Operation Allied Force in Kosovo. There were no vital national interests at stake. European nations were reluctant to act militarily, so there were no alliance pressures compelling action. The American public was not tremendously concerned about another situation developing in the far-away Balkans, especially if the rest of Europe (in whose backyard this was occurring) did not care. Yet President Clinton was able to conduct a 78-day air operation that achieved his political goal. Stopping the barbaric ethnic-cleansing campaign in Kosovo was not in America's vital interest, but it was the right thing to do. America had the military capability to defeat the Bosnian Serbs and was able to do so. Since there were no combat deaths, public support did not falter enough to warrant stopping the operation.
In addition, stealth and precision have given United States forces the capability to almost exclusively destroy only the desired target. This has reduced the risk of harming enemy civilians in collateral damage incidents, further reducing the potential loss of human life in a military conflict. While this capability is in the process of revolutionizing warfare, it comes with the price of expected infallibility. In addition to making the president's decision to intervene easier on the domestic front, internationally it has had an effect as well. Reduced collateral casualties look favorable in the eyes of our coalition allies. Less collateral damage means that there will be less to rebuild after the war is over, further reducing the financial burden of war.
Coalitions and alliances were an integral part of American war fighting in the twentieth century. The United States has always held a dominant role (especially militarily) in these relationships. The Soviet Union provided a common enemy that focused not only the United States foreign policy, but that of our allies during the Cold War. That enabled us to put aside any number of differences and combine our efforts to stop the spread of Communism. The demise of the Soviet Union has created a more equal-partner relationship in American alliances. Whether through an actual shift in political power or American retreat from its former level of political dominance, the United States no longer throws its political weight around without due consideration of allied views. The Balkans in the 1990s, once again, showed this. America was unwilling to intervene unilaterally, although it possessed the military capability to do so. It was not until NATO agreed to act that we acted militarily.
Operationally, the United States' military capability is well ahead of any other nation on earth, allies included. This demands compromises when we act in a multilateral action. The United States must either compromise doctrinally, as in Kosovo, or operate alone, in parallel with allied operations. Neither of these situations promotes the effective, efficient use of military force. This, however, may be the price of admission on the world stage. In order to avoid becoming universally despised, the United States will still have to fight with other nations to gain the benefits of coalition warfare: legitimacy, access, and cost sharing. A distinct danger lurks, though. As the United States continues to develop its dominating military force and outstrip the military capabilities of its allies, the ability to act unilaterally grows. At some point, this extreme advantage may obviate the need for the benefits provided by fighting with a coalition. With the end of the Cold War, alliances such as NATO have found themselves looking for a unifying concept that will continue to bind them. If they are unable to find this focus, the benefits of maintaining them may diminish to a point where they become relics of the Cold War and are no longer dominant factors in international politics. The political constraints on unilateral intervention may become too bothersome, causing the United States to act as it sees fit, perhaps not caring about the international political ramifications of its actions.
Former National Security Advisor Anthony Lake feels that this is an impulse that must be checked, for the results could be grave.
437
The original intent of this paper was to determine if developments in military technology, specifically the F-117 and PGMs, had an effect on American intervention policy. Did it make it easier for the president to decide to use military force? Intuitively, the answer is yes. In reality, there is a strong correlation between the debut and continued use of these weapons systems and increased intervention, suggesting a causal relationship. Table 
3
2
By having a broad-ranging impact on numerous the decision factors, the benefits brought by stealth and precision have had a significant effect on the president's decision to their reasons for action. As shown, there are risks inherent in intervening where there is little public support. Lack of support for the Vietnam War cost President Johnson his office. As our capability continues to grow, there will certainly be situations like Rwanda in the 1990s where, after the fact, the world will condemn the lack of American intervention. As threats to our vital interests are eliminated, the decision to intervene may become more moral-based than interest-based, in which case the frenetic operational pace of the 1990s will seem a relative calm as we become the de facto world policeman.
Integrating technological capability into policy making is not easy, and it is fraught with danger, especially when that capability is in development and its full potential is not realized or understood. When the Nazis developed the V-2 rocket during World War II, they pursue d a radical, expensive technology without considering how to integrate the capability it brought into their overall wartime strategy. Consequently they were unable to take advantage of their efforts in a strategic sense. 
438
Advances such as this have impacts on policy, many of them unintended. The accuracy of the LGB, developed to reduce American airman exposure to risk during a bombing mission, has driven an almost obsessive policy of reducing collateral casualties during conflict. We view weaponizing space as a distinct technical possibility and there are those that assert we should pursue it because we can. But, we must consider the policy ramifications of such a decision. It is impossible to determine in advance what may or may not happen as a result of weaponizing space, but it is imperative to realize that there will be unanticipated policy complications and unintended consequences. Advances in military technology alone should not drive policy, but they have an impact. As long as we acknowledge that fact, we can try to anticipate some of the consequences of our decisions.
Power of Congress, eds. David M. Abshire and Ralph D. Nurnberger (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications, 1981), 301. 26 Richard F. Grimmett, War Powers Resolution: Presidential Compliance, 29 Susan L Carruthers, The Media at War: Communication and Conflict in the Twentieth Century (New York, N.Y.: St. Martin's Press, 2000), 108. 30 Strobel, 172.
munition, which was a corresponding American technology developed for Cold War advantage. With these paired capabilities, bombing accuracy and lethality increased over the years as first optically guided, then laser guided, and finally global positioning system (GPS) guided weapons were developed. The astonishing increase in bombing accuracy achieved from World War II to the Persian Gulf War meant that fewer aircraft were required to destroy the same number of targets.
munition, which was a corresponding American technology developed for Cold War advantage. With these paired capabilities, bombing accuracy and lethality increased over the years as first optically guided, then laser guided, and finally global positioning system (GPS) guided weapons were developed. The astonishing increase in bombing accuracy achieved from World War II to the Persian Gulf War meant that fewer aircraft were required to destroy the same number of targets.
44  
44  
aircraft are needed for a comparable level of damage inflicted, thus fewer planes and aviators are put directly in harm's way.
aircraft are needed for a comparable level of damage inflicted, thus fewer planes and aviators are put directly in harm's way.
The most significant event regarding America's entry into war in Vietnam occurred on 2 August 1964. North Vietnamese patrol boats fired on the destroyer USS Maddox, cruising in international waters in the Gulf of Tonkin, in the first of two attacks on American ships over the next two days. President Johnson called upon Congress to pass a resolution making it "clear to all that the United States is united in its determination to bring about the end of Communist subversion and aggression in the 81 Dennis M. Drew and Donald M. Snow, The Eagle's Talons: America's Experience at War
The most significant event regarding America's entry into war in Vietnam occurred on 2 August 1964. North Vietnamese patrol boats fired on the destroyer USS Maddox, cruising in international waters in the Gulf of Tonkin, in the first of two attacks on American ships over the next two days. President Johnson called upon Congress to pass a resolution making it "clear to all that the United States is united in its determination to bring about the end of Communist subversion and aggression in the 81 Dennis M. Drew and Donald M. Snow, The Eagle's Talons: America's Experience at War
1983, the State Department outlined the United States' goals in Lebanon: first, the withdrawal of all foreign forces, second, securing Israel's northern border, third, restoring and reinforcing a stable central government in Lebanon, supporting Lebanese sovereignty throughout the country, and finally, the safety and security of Lebanese citizens.
1983, the State Department outlined the United States' goals in Lebanon: first, the withdrawal of all foreign forces, second, securing Israel's northern border, third, restoring and reinforcing a stable central government in Lebanon, supporting Lebanese sovereignty throughout the country, and finally, the safety and security of Lebanese citizens.
On 2 August 1990, Iraqi forces invaded and occupied Kuwait. Bent on 'liberating' Iraq's so-called nineteenth province and re-incorporating it into Iraq, Saddam Hussein stationed his forces in a threatening manner on the border with Saudi Arabia. President George Bush took swift action and immediately implemented 117 Ibid., 314.
On 2 August 1990, Iraqi forces invaded and occupied Kuwait. Bent on 'liberating' Iraq's so-called nineteenth province and re-incorporating it into Iraq, Saddam Hussein stationed his forces in a threatening manner on the border with Saudi Arabia. President George Bush took swift action and immediately implemented 117 Ibid., 314.
122  
122  
128  
128  
surrendered and acquiesced to the demand to return Aristide to power. United States forces remained until February 1996, but when they left, Haiti had still failed to institute democratic governmental practices. United Nations presence there remains, continuing its laudable, if so far futile, attempts to help establish a stable government and economy.
surrendered and acquiesced to the demand to return Aristide to power. United States forces remained until February 1996, but when they left, Haiti had still failed to institute democratic governmental practices. United Nations presence there remains, continuing its laudable, if so far futile, attempts to help establish a stable government and economy.
144 Jeffrey Record, Serbia and Vietnam: A Preliminary Comparison of U.S. Decisions to Use Force, Center for Strategy and Technology Occasional Paper No. 8, (Maxwell AFB, Ala.: Air University Press, May 1999), 4. 145 Benjamin S. Lambeth, The Transformation of American Airpower (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University 147 Lambeth, 186-187. 148 Christopher Layne, "Blunder in the Balkans: The Clinton Administration's Bungled War against
144 Jeffrey Record, Serbia and Vietnam: A Preliminary Comparison of U.S. Decisions to Use Force, Center for Strategy and Technology Occasional Paper No. 8, (Maxwell AFB, Ala.: Air University Press, May 1999), 4. 145 Benjamin S. Lambeth, The Transformation of American Airpower (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University 147 Lambeth, 186-187. 148 Christopher Layne, "Blunder in the Balkans: The Clinton Administration's Bungled War against
Serbia," Policy Analysis No. 345 (May 20 1999)
Serbia," Policy Analysis No. 345 (May 20 1999)
166  
166  
While the War Powers Resolution may be on shaky Constitutional ground, Congress has not hesitated to use its other Constitutional powers. Prior to 1994, the Democratic Party held a majority in Congress for forty years. During the 1980s, these "Democratic majorities…enacted numerous provisions that sought to block what (Republican) Presidents Reagan and Bush hoped to accomplish overseas." 191 When challenged on their recalcitrance, "Democratic leaders defended congressional prerogatives." 192 When the Republican Party won majorities in both houses of Congress in 1994, Democratic President Clinton faced the same difficulties, with the Republicans "merely giving as good as they (had) got." 193
While the War Powers Resolution may be on shaky Constitutional ground, Congress has not hesitated to use its other Constitutional powers. Prior to 1994, the Democratic Party held a majority in Congress for forty years. During the 1980s, these "Democratic majorities…enacted numerous provisions that sought to block what (Republican) Presidents Reagan and Bush hoped to accomplish overseas." 191 When challenged on their recalcitrance, "Democratic leaders defended congressional prerogatives." 192 When the Republican Party won majorities in both houses of Congress in 1994, Democratic President Clinton faced the same difficulties, with the Republicans "merely giving as good as they (had) got." 193
201  
201  
216  
216  
260 Ibid., 273.  261  
260 Ibid., 273.  261  
280  
280  
Sources: S. H.
Sources: S. H.
353  
387  
387  
395 396 Ibid., 236. 397 Ibid., 237-238.
428 O'Halloran, 65.
Anthony Lake, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, interviewed by author, 12 December 2001.
Stealth aircraft and laser guided bombs are not the only significant military technologies to mature in the late 1980s. The cruise missile (Tomahawk Land Attack Missile and Conventional Air Launched Cruise Missile) both played major roles in American intervention starting with the Persian Gulf War. In fact, they were the only weapons employed in the attacks on terrorist training camps in Afghanistan and Sudan and Operation Desert Fox in 1998. While these systems are unmanned, virtually eliminating risk to American servicemen, their precision targeting ability is more limited than weapons delivered by manned platforms, decreasing their ability to reduce collateral damage. For this reason, this study is limited the effects of precision weapons delivered by stealth aircraft.
Gary R. Hess, Presidential Decisions for War: Korea, Vietnam, and the Persian Gulf (Baltimore, Md.: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001), 1.
Ibid., ix.   
Hess, 168.   
Serafino, 25.   
Perry, interview.    
Serafino, 26.   
Available from http://www.cato.org, 10.
Anthony Lake, Assistant to President Clinton for National Security Affairs, interviewed by author, 12 December 2001.
David M.Abshire and Ralph D. Nurnberger, eds., The Growing Power of Congress, (Beverly Hills,  Calif.: Sage Publications, 1981), 7.   
Crabb and Holt, 5.   
Ibid., 8.   
The United States Constitution, Article II, Section 2, Clause 1.
Abshire and Nurnberger, 44.   
Richard F. Grimmett, War Powers Resolution: Presidential Compliance, Congressional Research Service Issue Brief for Congress (Washington DC: The Library of Congress, 8 January 2002), 1.
Susan L Carruthers, The Media at War: Communication and Conflict in the Twentieth Century (New York, N.Y.: St. Martin's Press, 2000), 108.
Ibid.   
Fred Halliday, "Manipulation and Limits: Media Coverage of the GulfWar, 1990-1991," in The   
Strobel, 178.   
Carruthers, 200.   
Strobel, 179.   
Ibid., 181.   
Ibid., 173.   
Ibid., 180.   
Larson, xx-xxi.   
Ibid., 78.   
Gary R. Hess, Presidential Decisions for War: Korea, Vietnam, and the Persian Gulf (Baltimore,
Ibid.,[234][235] 
Mets, "History of Armament," 12.   
Anderegg, 124.   
US Department of Commerce. 369.
Barry Turner, ed., The Statesman's Yearbook, 2000:  The Politics, Cultures and Economies of the World, 136 th ed. (New York, N.Y.: St.Martin's Press, 2000), 446-1726.   
Eric V.Larson, Casualties and Consensus:  The Historical Role of Casualties in Domestic Support for U.S. Military Operations, RAND Report MR-726-RC (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND, 1996), 7.
Ibid..   
Ibid., 20.   
Ibid., 22.   
Ibid.,[28][29] 
Ibid., 35.   
Ibid.,[34][35] 
January 2002
Anne M. Dixon, "The Whats and Whys of Coalitions," Joint ForceQuarterly, Winter 1993-1994, p. 26.   
Vol. 23, no. 3 (September 2000), 59.404  Bowman, 2-3.
Ibid., 11.   
Anthony Lake, Assistant to President Clinton for National Security Affairs, interviewed by author, 24
See Michael J. Nuefeld. The Rocket and the Reich: Peenemunde and the Coming of the Ballistic Missile Era (New York, N.Y.: The Free Press, 1995).
I extend my gratitude to 
Professor Everett Dolman
Professor Anthony Lake
the 
US Government, Department of Defense
Major O'Mara
Tactical Fighter Squadron at Kadena AB, Japan
Test Squadron at Tyndall AFB, Florida
Evaluation Squadron
Eglin Air Force Base
Major O'Mara
Flight Commander
Air Force (Acquisition) in Washington DC
Deputy Chief of the Operational and Export Policy Division
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
LGBs also gave the United States its only capability to destroy the extensive system of Iraqi bunkers and hardened aircraft shelters, vulnerable only to a precision bomb with a penetrating warhead. Along with other precision weapons like the Maverick, they were essential to the successful destruction of the dug-in Iraqi armor in the Kuwaiti theater. 
276
LGB accuracy had increased to the point that it was no longer a question of hitting the right building, but of which window on which floor.
Some of the most vivid images broadcast from the theater during the Gulf War were of precision guided munitions striking their targets with startling accuracy. This amazing precision and the ability to observe it at home on the television brought "the Western public [to] come to think of war like laser surgery." 
277
During Operation Allied Force, precision weapons once again played a key role.
The air campaign was much longer than the previous Bosnian action (Operation 
275
276
Keaney and Cohen, 192. 277 Michael Ignatieff, Virtual War: Kosovo and Beyond (New York, N.Y.: Metropolitan Books, 2000)
The Foreign Factor: Alliances and Coalitions Equal and exact justice to all men, of whatever state or persuasion, religious or political; peace, commerce, and honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none… -Thomas Jefferson First Inaugural Address (March 4, 1801)   The president's decision to intervene militarily is not governed by domestic factors alone. Other nations or states may be directly or indirectly affected by military action. The president must solicit major and regional allies to determine if they will support the planned action as well as determine the position of the United Nations. 
362
'" 364
The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001), 5. the war was manpower. 
378
379
380
383
388
389
390
391
392
The final American intervention prior to the end of the Cold War was the 1989 invasion of Panama. While the apprehension of Manuel Noriega was a unilateral military action, President Bush "justified the action in a letter to Congress as necessary to protect…American citizens…and to fulfill U.S. treaty responsibilities regarding the 
388
389
390
415
416
417
418
419
420
Operation Allied Force was the difference in technological capability among the coalition partners. The differences caused a large number of interoperability problems that hampered the planning and execution of the operation. Many countries did not have the appropriate radios to allow them to communicate with American forces in a secure 
415
416
The Soviet Union provided a focus for American foreign policy. NSC-68 clearly outlined a threat to the existence of the country, and provided a framework to shape America's global engagement strategy. 
429
430
431
432
One of the most important aspects of the president's domestic support is his relationship with Congress. Former Clinton National Security Advisor Anthony Lake asserts that that relationship has become more acrimonious, especially in recent years. An intervention was considered major if it was a planned offensive action or American troops deployed with the specific purpose to fight. Also considered major were those peacekeeping or humanitarian operations that, through tragedy or mission creep, involved the loss of American lives as a direct result of the intervention.
The One Year Report of the Air War Over Serbia: Aerospace Power in Operation Allied Force, Vol. I, Decisive Aerospace Operations (U). Headquarters US Air Force. Washington DC: US Air Force. October 2000. (Secret NOFORN) Information extracted is unclassified.
A National Security Strategy for a New Century. The White House. Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, 1999.