# ID: a857095051ea4ba896d1bf7d3bc850f7
# Title: Aerospace operations in urban environments: Exploring new concepts
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2000.0
# Fulltext:
Three years later, the Yeltsin government had another opportunity to "get it right" when it went to war a second time against Chechnya in August 1999, this time in response to a spate of apartment bombings in the Moscow region that it alleged to be the work of Chechen terrorists.
In that second attempt to subdue the Chechen rebellion and impose Russian control over the separatist republic, both the Yeltsin leadership and Russia's military commanders showed evidence of learning from past experience when they combined massed firepower and a refusal to get drawn into urban combat into what amounted to a siege strategy centering on annihilating the Chechen resistance from a safe distance.
This time, Russian commanders avoided close-in urban engagements and opted instead to use their air and artillery assets in standoff attacks against assumed rebel targets in the city.
In late December, Russian ground forces did enter the city, replaying the earlier experience of bloody fighting and large loss of life.
Fortunately for the Russians, ground fighting in the city was fairly short-lived this time around.
This 6-month siege eventually led to a victory for Moscow in late January 2000, after Russian firepower had finally reduced Grozny to a smoldering shell and driven what remained of the rebel forces to flee the city and continue their resistance from the surrounding mountains.
This time, as if to emulate Israel's resorting to standoff operations during the second challenge it faced from southern Lebanon, the Russians avoided committing large numbers of their infantrymen to early urban combat and sought instead to surround Grozny, sever the supply routes to the surrounding mountains emanating from Grozny, and block the southern passes toward Georgia through which fleeing rebels might seek to escape.
Those in command admittedly chose a better time of year, from a weather perspective, to commence air operations, and they definitely sought to employ aerospace power as a substitute for a ground invasion.
Moreover,* although the Russians had suffered 1,500 or more combat fatalities by the time the heaviest fighting had ended, they succeeded in minimizing their losses to friendly fire this time by taking determined care not to insert their own troops into areas in and around Grozny where Russian bombs would be falling.