# ID: a913d4fb4f2a4be8972b15f2b098724b
# Title: Desert Storm's Siren Song; Examining Revolution in Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1994.0
# Fulltext:
This study refutes the claims by many air power advocates that Operation Desert Storm stands as a revolution in warfare.
According to their logic, the success of the Gulf War air campaign proves air power has become the dominant force in modern warfare.
As this study demonstrates, these arguments promoting Desert Storm as a revolution in warfare are based more upon emotion than logic. After evaluating the Gulf War on a cognitive level, one finds it only appears a revolution when viewed as a single event. However a true revolution requires a sample size larger than one.
Unless the Desert Storm victory is validated through time and repetition, talk of revolution is premature.
Worse yet, inaccurately labeling the Gulf War a revolution could lead the U.S. military to develop a force structure which is unable to deal with the full gamut of twenty-first century threats.
To evaluate Desert Storm on a cognitive level, this study uses Ulysses S. Grant's 1864-65 American Civil War campaign to establish criteria against which to measure the Gulf War.
By examining this campaign, one finds a revolution in warfare is marked by an enduring change in the fundamental elements of warfare: time, space and mass.
Air power devotees make a compelling argument that technology and intellectual advances allowed planners to utilize a strategy of paralysis which did indeed alter the basic elements of warfare in the Gulf.
While this may be true, this paper reveals Desert Storm still will not satisfy the full criteria for revolution in warfare until it passes a test of time. Since this criterion can only be judged through historical retrospection, it will be many years before one can determine if Operation Desert Storm represents a true revolution.
Enroute to this dissatisfying .endstate stiff Egyptian resistance continually surprised and bloodied the IDF.
Knowing of the Israeli overconfidence and preoccupation with a mobile offensive doctrine, the Egyptians countered with a more balanced combined arms approach. Along with their Soviet tanks and fighter jets, the Egyptians also fielded substantial numbers of infantry highly trained in anti-armor tactics. To protect these ground forces from air attack, the Arabs constructed a dense surface-to-air missile umbrella which decimated the IAF before Israeli ground units finally overran the sites.
The failure of the Israelis to dominate the Arabs resulted from an overconfidence rooted in the Six Day War.
Although this after-the-fact conclusion might initially seem presumptuous, it is significantly buttressed by Israel's own post-war observations. In 1974, the Agranat Commission, a high-level Israeli council convened to assess IDF failures, The study concludes the United States needs the military capability to simultaneously fight two major regional contingencies (MRC).' 1 It cites a remilitarized Iraq and an aggressive North Korea as probable major regional entities against which the U.S. would likely fight." 2 As Dr Eliot A. Clearly these campaigns showcased a variety of military innovations which Napoleon introduced to warfare. National conscription, the corps system and the central position strategy were all part of this military metamorphosis.
However, returning to the previous analogy which likened revolution in warfare to a planet, these changes were part of the outer mantle and not the central core. The essence of Napoleonic warfare, the quality which made it unique and enduring, is found in the relationship he established between the'core elements of time, space and mass.
The two leading nineteenth century chroniclers of Napbleonic warfare, Jomini and Clausewitz, both grasped the significance of this relationship. In book three of on j•ja,   The rifled musket increased the effective range of the infantryman's weapon from not much over 50 yards to 250 yards, and the extreme range from 250 yards to about half a mile. Against rifled firepower, the only safety was in trenches or behind other kinds of protection. To rise up and deliver a frontal attack became almost always futile against any reasonably steady defenders.
Even well-executed flank attacks tended to suffer such heavy casualties as experienced rifleman maneuvered to form new fronts against them that they lost the decisiveness they had enjoyed in the Napoleonic Wars. Thus the kind of campaign that General Grant had in mind was one that would be characterized by a series of battles--some fought sequentially, others simultaneously--that would be distributed across the entire theater of war. No one would likely be decisive, but the culmination of the effects of all would.49 According to Grant, continuous hammering against the South's military fortress would eventually, by exhaustion through attrition, force the confederacy to capitulate.'"  Viewed in its true light, aerial warfare admits of no defense, only offense.
We must therefore resign ourselves to the offensives the enemy inflicts upon us, while striving to put all our resources to work to inflict even heavier ones upon him. This is the basic principle which must govern the development of aerial warfare. It is a conceded fact that Overlord and Anvil will not be possible unless the German Air Force is destroyed.
Therefore, my personal message to you-this is a must--is to destroy the enemy air force wherever you find them, in the air, on the ground, and in the factories.'  Victory smiles upon those who anticipate the changes in the character of war, not upon those who wait to adapt themselves after the change occurs. In this period of rapid transition from one form to another, those who daringly take to the new road first will enjoy the incalculable advantages of the To facilitate such testing this study used the American Civil War to derive criteria against which to evaluate Desert  Volume I, is a comprehensive work which analyzes the weaponry, tactics, leadership and systems effectiveness of both sides in the conflict.
For the Egyptian point view, there is The Crossing of the Suez, by retired LTG Saad el Shazly. As Chief of Staff of the Egyptian Armed Forces during the war and the years immediately proceeding it, Shazly's memoirs provide insights as to how the Egyptian military overcame the humiliations of 1967 and fielded a credible fighting force in 1973. To balance Shazly's interpretations of Lhe war, one can read On the Banks of the Suez by former Israeli MG Avraham "Bren" Adan, who commanded an armored division which fought in the Sinai in 1973. Adan's book candidly admits that the IDF suffered from over confidence after the sweeping victory in 1967.
He credits the fighting prowess of the individual soldier as the key to eventually overcoming this shortcoming in 1973. Willmott describes the Japanese as developing victory disease after triumph piled upon triumph in the early days of their campaigns in WW II. The disease reinforced, with disastrous results, a belief among the Japanese that the methods of warfare which worked against unprepared enemies would continue to be effective against enemies who were now stronger and better prepared.
The parallels between the Japanese and Israeli over confidence seems to make the term appropriate for the Israelis mindset at the outset of the 1973 Yom Kippur War.
Les Aspin, The Bottom-Review: Forces For a NeW Era, (Washington: United States Department of Defense, 1993), 5. 12. Ibid. 13. Eliot A. Cohen, "Dump the Bottom-Up Review," New Republic, 7 March 1994, 7.
14. Gunther E. Rothenberg reports a similar occurrence during the mid-eighteenth century after Prussia's Frederick the Great compiled an impressive string of victories. As Rothenberg writes in The&rt of Warfare in the Age of Napoleon, "it was a period of considerable ferment and agitation in military circles, yet many disputes were settled by the statement: 'Oh, but I saw it in Prussia"' (p 19). A similar condition now exists an American military basking in the afterglow of the Desert Storm victory.
82. The phrase quick, decisive victory with minimum casualties is derived from the U.S. Army's capstc.ie doctrinal manual, FM 100-5 Q•rtin. It is a paraphrase of the ideas found in chapter one, page 1-2 under the heading "The American View of War." 83. This information supplied to the author by Col John A. Warden III.
84. 
Atkinson,
48.
Had the objectives been unlimited, as Grant's were, a much more robust ground war, one with successive operations, would have become necessary.
In this case a strategy of exhaustion would have been more evident and reflective of a second wave war. Instead, it appeared a revolution had taken place when in fact the limited nature of the war made the objectives more easily attainable.