# ID: a98eefe3c22b4f81a0db18d5a721ac94
# Title: The grand strategy of the United States
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
The Grand Strategy of the United States From the earliest days of the Republic, the outlines of an evolving American grand strategy have been evident in our foreign and domestic policy. 
1
Grand strategy can be understood simply as the use of power to secure the state. 
2
American grand strategy cannot be understood without a historical grounding.
Prior to the Revolution, the defense of the colonies as a whole was left to the British crown, and the colonial militia handled local defense. Contention between the great powers (Spain, the Netherlands, France, and Great Britain) on the North American continent bred an enduring distaste among the colonists for international intervention in the Western hemisphere. Prerevolutionary warfare was endemic and nearly constant in North America, fostering on the one hand a familiarity with conflict, but on the other a distrust of standing forces that would condition American strategic thought for several centuries. 
3
4
5
6
7
8
Throughout the 19 th century, the United States grew and evolved as a rising regional power, only achieving great power status at the beginning of the 20 th century.
The collapse of the Spanish empire in South America and the 1867 emergence of Canada as an independent commonwealth nation accelerated an effective end to European presence in the Western Hemisphere that was rendered final with the ejection of Spain from Cuba and Puerto Rico in 1898. 
9
Overshadowing everything else in the 19 th century is the American Civil War.
Vast in scope and scale, the Civil War fundamentally challenged the survival of the Nation and its constitutional system. More Americans died in the Civil War than in all other U.S. wars. Over the course of the conflict, large land and naval forces were raised, conscription was invoked, and modern technologies like mass production, military railroads, the telegraph, breech-loading, rifled artillery, repeating rifles, and iron-clad warships were introduced. Modern military professionalism and generalship replaced the notion of the talented amateur. Profound political questions were settled, most importantly the central role and importance of the Federal Government and the President as chief executive and commander in chief. There would be no going back.
Though the military establishment returned to prewar levels following the Civil War, the precedent of mass mobilization under an organized War and Navy Department and professional generals and admirals had been well established. Professional military education took root, notably at the Naval War College at Newport, Rhode Island, and at the Army's School of Application for Infantry and Cavalry (later the Command and General Staff College) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. 10 Up through the Spanish-American War, the Army performed essentially constabulary duties, while the Navy steadily evolved toward a modern, capable, technically proficient arm of the service with a coherent doctrine.
By the end of the 19 th century, the general tenets of American grand strategy were well established and consistently applied by Presidents and congressional leaders of both parties. The overriding principle was, and remains, the protection of American territory, citizens, our constitutional system of government, and our economic well-being. These "vital interests" were secured and enabled in the 1800s through protection of trade and freedom of navigation on the oceans; a prohibition against European military intervention in the Western hemisphere; a capable navy; a small but professional army, capable of rapid expansion in time of crisis; and a readiness to provide support to civil authorities when needed. Protected by two vast oceans, with an industrialized and increasingly global economy and a large and growing population (enabling the raising of a potentially huge land force if threatened), the United States generally enjoyed a stable security environment.
The new century would transform American grand strategy in different but comparable ways. By a wide margin, the 20 th century would prove to be the most catastrophic in history. The Spanish-American War, while revealing many shortcomings in organization and supply for the land forces, showcased a powerful and competent Navy with global reach and made the United States an imperial power with newly won possessions in the Caribbean (Puerto Rico) and the Pacific (the Philippines and Guam). America had now moved decisively onto the world stage.
In the second decade of the century, it became clear that war loomed in Europe, as armies assumed massive proportions, professional general staffs perfected the machinery of mobilization, and industrialization and advancing technology equipped armies and navies for large-scale, protracted war. The United States, preoccupied with colonial concerns in the Philippines and protected by an impressive fleet and the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, genuinely pursued a neutrality that would eventually founder on two key strategic dilemmas: the protection of trade and markets, and the potential rise of a hostile power in control of the European landmass. American pride was certainly touched by unrestricted submarine warfare, but what could not be borne was the isolation of U.S. commerce from European markets or the prospect of German control of all of Europe's economic and demographic resources. If that occurred, Germany could conceivably threaten the continental United States both militarily and by setting the terms of trade. While cultural and ideological affinities with European democracies played important roles and a politically powerful isolationist movement offered resistance, these life-and-death strategic considerations compelled America's entry as an active belligerent. 
11
13
14
In retrospect, Allied victory seems to have been inevitable. At the time, it was anything but. Over time, enemy strategic missteps, the accumulation of experience at all levels, and most tellingly, the sheer size and mass of Allied (particularly Russian and American) forces began to turn the tide. It is difficult to argue that, man for man and unit for unit, the Allies eventually became better than our adversaries (at least in Europe). 
15
Any sound analysis of World War II must conclude that in the end, U.S. material superiority proved the decisive factor. 
16
18
19
20
21
In June 1950, the United States stumbled into an unexpected confrontation with the Communist bloc when the North Korean army invaded South Korea and took Seoul. Unaccountably, North Korea and its Chinese partners seemed not to fear America's nuclear arsenal. At the outset, the lack of strategic warning, poor military preparedness, and uncertainty over U.S. strategic aims muddled the American response, contributing to the indecisive outcome. Although still in possession of a nuclear monopoly (Moscow detonated its first nuclear weapon on August 29, 1949, but did not have a true deployable nuclear capability until several years later), the United States greatly feared a Soviet lunge into central Europe, clearly a more critical strategic priority. 22 U.S. strategists could not be sure whether the North Korean invasion was directed by Moscow to distract Washington and its allies. Given the intense ideological perspectives that dominated at the time, a judgment was made that communist states acted more or less monolithically and that an armed response was needed to contain further communist expansion. The Korean conflict ultimately absorbed much of the military capacity available against a peripheral, not central, strategic priority-a huge gamble. Its unsatisfying outcome, a negotiated armistice leading to a frozen conflict, reflected America's unwillingness to mobilize or commit totally to victory in a war not well understood or supported by the public. This "no win, no lose" approach would be seen again, with similar results. 
23
Deterrence and containment became the means by which the ends of grand strategy were fulfilled. While powerful conventional forces were maintained, few strategists reckoned that the United States and its North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies could prevail in a conventional war with the Soviet Union in Central Europe.
Instead, nuclear systems at the tactical, theater, and intercontinental levels proliferated on both sides in an arms race only partially limited by arms control treaties. While the willingness of U.S. leaders to use nuclear weapons in Europe-to "trade Washington for Bonn"-was never certain, the consequences of miscalculation for either side were almost unlimited, and deterrence in this sense proved remarkably stable. In only a single instance, the Cuban missile crisis, did the two superpowers approach the abyss, and even then the prospect of mutual destruction induced both to step back.
The long and painful experience of the Vietnam conflict shared almost eerie similarities with the one in Korea. Both featured ethnic populations, artificially partitioned. In both, the aggressor was a communist movement enabled and supported by China and the Soviet Union. Both featured large, conventional forces fighting from protected sanctuaries. In both, the United States fought on the Asian mainland, far from the homeland in a country with weak governance structures and a poorly developed infrastructure. And in both, U.S. airpower and seapower were unable to secure decisive battlefield results, even against a technologically inferior opponent.
Like Korea, Vietnam eventually consumed huge military resources at the expense of U.S. forces in Europe, miring the United States in a protracted, peripheral war with weak popular support. 
24
All that changed when the Berlin Wall came down. Whereas superpower rivalry had previously inhibited the actions of ambitious regional powers and limited the influence of nonstate actors, the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 led to immediate changes in the system that had governed international relations for over four decades. Overnight, the manifest threat ceased to exist. As a result, the United States and its allies were forced to adjust their strategic focus. At the same time, an increasingly interdependent global economy and emerging revolutions in information and communications eroded the concept of state sovereignty in fundamental ways. The result was a rise in international organized crime, quantum increases in international and domestic terrorism, ecological deterioration, disease, mass migration and refugee overflows, multiple outbreaks of ethnic and religious conflict, and a proliferation of failed states. These trends culminated in 9/11 and its painful and protracted aftermath.
The architects of the post-Cold War drawdown assumed, quite naturally, that the military would be far less busy in a world that would be more tranquil than before. Military forces were drawn down across the board. In one of the more interesting paradoxes of history, the end of the Cold War was followed not by retrenchment or relaxation but by a rapid increase in conflict and in U.S. military commitments abroad. No longer driven by superpower rivalry, national security policy evolved to advance U.S. interests in a more fragmented, multipolar system largely defined by ethnic, religious, and cultural enmities as old as they were implacable. New challenges-economic, environmental, and factional as well as national, regional, and ideological-now confronted the United States in an international setting of greater complexity and variety. These trends also fueled the rise of new actors on the international political landscape. The budget, influence, and level of activity of the UN and its many organizations increased substantially in the 1990s. Nongovernmental organizations and private voluntary organizations became increasingly active, pursuing numerous ambitious agendas in many different areas. Traditional national security concerns receded as the United States and other Western powers attempted to reap the dividends of peace. A fundamental shift took place, largely unnoticed, in the way many Americans viewed national security and the role of the armed forces in providing for the common defense.
The drawdown of the 1990s was wrenching. In a single decade, 700,000 U.S. military personnel slots (about one-third of the active force) were eliminated, but the loss of combat forces was even more severe. In combat structure, the Army declined from 18 active divisions to 10, the Navy went from 566 ships to 354, and the Air Force went from 36 to 20 fighter wings, an overall reduction of 45 percent.
The defense budget in general terms dropped by 40 percent. In the midst of these changes, the military was asked to shoulder a heavier operational load. Stability operations in the Balkans, Haiti, and the Sinai in the 1990s stressed a force preoccupied with massive downsizing. Peacekeeping, peace enforcement, and humanitarian assistance operations as well as "theater engagement" missions exploded.
While the military had undertaken these types of missions throughout its history, the sheer number of deployments dwarfed those conducted in the past. Examples include refugee assistance in northern Iraq following the Gulf War, security and disaster relief efforts in Somalia, humanitarian aid to refugees in the Rwandan crisis, restoration of democracy in Haiti, stability operations in Macedonia and peace enforcement operations to implement the Dayton Accords in Bosnia, and the Kosovo air campaign and later enforcement of the Military Technical Agreement in Kosovo. 
26
The 9/11 terrorist attacks struck the heart of grand strategy as they represented the first large-scale, direct attack on the homeland by an outside power since the War of 1812. Political unwillingness to confront the gathering threat and serious intelligence shortcomings represented strategic failures for which the United States paid a high price. Following 9/11, defense spending increased substantially as the conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq began and endured. Over several years, the active Army grew from 470,000 to 548,000 and the Marine Corps expanded from 158,000 to 202,000, while Air Force and Navy end strengths remained static or declined slightly. In keeping with Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld's "transformation" initiatives, significant investments were made in command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance systems and in precision munitions, as well as in force protection enhancements such as up-armored wheeled vehicles.
Nevertheless, legacy combat systems-planes, tanks, and ships-first delivered in the 1970s and early 1980s remained the backbone of the military services (as they do today), while many next-generation programs were canceled or downsized. 
27
28
29
At the conclusion of more than a decade of counterinsurgency, the United States finds itself repeating a familiar historical pattern. In the fiscal retrenchment that accompanies the end of every conflict (exacerbated by the economic collapse of 2008 and the Budget Control Act of 2011), active Army forces will bear the brunt of defense reductions, while the Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps will be less affected. 
30
What does this portend for American grand strategy?
First, it is important not to confuse enduring, core strategic interests with others that are less central. The current security environment, described in the 2014 Quadrennial Defense Review as "rapidly changing," "volatile," "unpredictable," and "in some cases more threatening" is certainly all those. Yet addressing this environment in fact aligns comfortably with American grand strategy over time. Broadly speaking, U.S. vital or core interests remain remarkably consistent: the defense of American territory and that of our allies, protecting American citizens at home and abroad, supporting and defending our constitutional values and forms of government, and promoting and securing the U.S. economy and standard of living. These four core interests encompass virtually every strategic dynamic and dimension. Grand strategy is by no means confined to our military forces and institutions but is far broader, encompassing all forms of national power. That said, we must beware of attempts to define everything in terms of national security. Any discussion of grand strategy quickly loses coherence and utility when we do. 
31
32
33
34
In this regard, we often see references to "asymmetric" threats posed to "thwart U.S. conventional military advantages." 
35
The broad threats that face us have deep roots but have also evolved over time.
In order of importance, they can be summarized as: ◆ ◆ Use of weapons of mass destruction against the homeland. These could be nuclear, chemical, biological, cyber, or explosive/kinetic in nature (such as the 9/11 attacks) delivered by either state or nonstate actors. Single or multiple attacks causing huge mass casualties could lead to partial or complete economic collapse and loss of confidence in our governance structures, imperiling our standard of living and way of life in addition to causing loss of life. 36 ◆ ◆ Economic disruption from without. The crash of 2008 was largely self-induced, but the health and stability of the U.S. economy can also be affected by the actions of foreign powers. Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait in 1990, which jeopardized the international economic order by threatening the free flow of oil from the Persian Gulf, is an example. A major cyber attack against the financial sector or the closure of the Straits of Tiran or the Straits of Malacca by a hostile power could be another. 
37
There are, of course, other threats of concern to national security practitioners that fall below this threshold. An attack on a U.S. Embassy, the kidnapping of U.S. citizens abroad, or the pirating of U.S.-flagged vessels on the high seas would be examples. U.S. political leaders might also contemplate the use of military force under the evolving doctrine of "responsibility to protect" as in the cases of Somalia in 1991 and Libya in 2011, or when national pride has been touched (as in the Mayaguez or Pueblo incidents). However, these by definition do not engage grand strategic objectives, and statesmen assume risk when treating them as though they do, primarily because strong and sustained public support is less assured. 
40
41
42
The crisis in Ukraine presents a different case study. While the likelihood of committing U.S. forces to defend Ukraine following the seizure of Crimea is low, the postwar security architecture in the Euro-Russian space, so carefully constructed for a generation, has been thrown over. The North Atlantic Council voted to defer NATO membership to Georgia and Ukraine and did not station NATO troops in the new member states, largely out of deference to Russian security concerns. These confidence-building measures notwithstanding, Russia sent troops into Georgia in 2008, where they remain today. 
43
44
The unfolding collapse of the Iraqi state may fall somewhere in between. Across the American public and in both political parties, there remains a strong aversion to reintroducing a large ground presence into Iraq. A direct threat to the homeland has not yet emerged, and the prospect of lending military and material aid to the Shia regime in Baghdad, itself both supported and at least partially controlled by Tehran, is unpalatable. On the other hand, major human rights violations and the prospect of spillover and accelerating destabilization of the region could compel strong action against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and its Sunni confederates. Should ISIS successfully establish a safe haven and launch attacks against Europe and the United States, decisive U.S. and coalition military action would almost certainly follow. Major disruption to the free flow of oil through the Arabian Gulf and attendant economic shocks would also compel a powerful military response.
These and similar examples raise the question of whether the United States consciously pursues an imperial or hegemonic grand strategy. Many scholars, both domestic and foreign, explicitly or implicitly assert that it does. 
45
46
Typically, huge sums are spent on development and infrastructural improvements.
On its own or when asked (as in the Balkans, Somalia, Haiti, Panama, and Iraq), the United States usually withdraws and goes home. Even close allies remain free to opt out of military ventures, as seen in the invasion of Iraq in 2003 and in Libya in 2011.
The net effect has been to bring into being, largely if not entirely through America's own efforts, a rules-based international and economic order that has widely benefited much of the world:
interdependence does not happen. Indeed, free trade and interdependence have occurred in the modern international system only during the hegemonies of Victorian Britain and postwar America. 
47
48
The "means" of grand strategy are similarly enduring over time. Its basic components include fostering strong alliances and bilateral security arrangements; 49 maintaining a strong and survivable nuclear deterrent; fielding balanced, powerful, and capable military forces, dominant in each warfighting domain, that can project and sustain military power globally and prevail in armed conflict; and providing intelligence services that can ensure global situational awareness and provide strategic early warning. These components are intrinsically linked to a powerful economy and industrial base, advanced technology, an extensive military reserve component, an educated and technically skilled population fit for military service, 50 and a political system that is based on classically liberal democratic values and able to make clear and sustainable policy and resource decisions. 
51
52
53
The use of "soft power" also deserves consideration in this discussion. 
54
55
56
While U.S. determination to act forcefully in support of the international order may be more open to question and U.S. economic and military power may not be as dominant as it has been in the past, in absolute terms the United States remains by far the preponderant power in the world. Possessed of great actual and potential strengths, the United States is unequalled in hard power. Nevertheless, coherent and effective political direction is the essential precondition to strategic success. Since the end of the Vietnam War, mounting conflict between the legislative and executive branches, spurred by a fractious polarization of American politics, has reached alarming proportions. Repeated wars have led to a concentration of the war power in the executive branch, arguably resulting in more frequent uses of force that may not command public support. Unquestionably, a healthy and stable set of political arrangements that provides for effective sharing of power, while ensuring popular backing, is essential. 
57
How the United States addresses direct threats to its core or vital interests over time is the essence of grand strategy. Typically, America's solutions are not new, although the technologies employed often are. The first principle is to meet the threat as far from the homeland as possible. Thus, since the end of World War II, the United States has established bases, positioned forces, and stockpiled weapons and munitions around the globe, buttressed by economic and development assistance, exercises, formal treaties, coalitions of the willing, and alliances. 
58
59
61
Yet when vital interests are at stake, the United States will act unilaterally if necessary. 
62
63
As the preponderant global power, the United States attempts to shape the international security environment to prevent or ward off security challenges where it can. 
64
65
66
67
68
Single-service or one-dimensional applications of force have repeatedly failed of their promise to deliver strategic victory.
Likewise, political leaders and strategists should be mindful of strategic culture, that mélange of history, tradition, custom, worldview, economy, sociology, and political systems and mores that largely shapes how nations fight and for what causes.
There may be no agreed upon American theory of war, but an "American way of war" surely obtains, based on concepts of joint and combined warfare, mass, firepower, technology, strong popular support, and a focus on decisive and clear-cut outcomes. 
69
70
71
As we assess a complex security environment, our historical experience provides useful context and guideposts to understanding the present, even when security threats are harder to define and address, as in the case of cyber attacks. 
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
It is also useful to note that the formerly sharp distinction between the military instrument and others has become blurred. The definition of national security is now more expansive, encompassing a great domain of homeland defense, with dozens of civilian agencies and large military organizations (such as U.S. Northern Command) intimately linked with and often working in subordination to other civilian entities. Even in conflict zones, tactical formations engaged in daily combat can find themselves with scores of embedded civilians representing civilian departments. 
79
Taking the long view, and acknowledging the strong impact of new technologies and threats, the framework of American grand strategy as described here will remain relevant and current for decades to come. The international security environment will remain anarchic and uncertain, with the state mattering more than supranational organizations, even as nonstate actors of many kinds proliferate. Conflict will remain endemic, and state-on-state conflict will recur. WMD attacks against the homeland will be attempted and may be successful. Pressures to intervene-in the Middle East, in Africa, in Eastern Europe, and perhaps even in East Asia-will persist or surface anew. Strategic "shocks"-unanticipated crises requiring strategic responses-will be more the norm than not. 
80
Strategists must accordingly consider and refine the ways and means by which our traditional and enduring interests may best be defended. Along the way, a certain humility is helpful; as Henry Kissinger wrote, "The gods are offended by hubris.
They resent the presumption that events can be totally predicted and managed." 
81
1 Defining grand strategy is admittedly onerous. Colin Gray defines it as the "purposeful employment of all instruments of power available to a security community." Robert J. Art excludes nonmilitary instruments from grand strategy, while Christopher Layne calls it simply "the process by which the state matches ends and means in the pursuit of security." Sir Hew Strachan sees grand strategy as forward looking, aspirational, and oriented on preventing or managing great power decline. Edward Luttwak is particularly opaque: "Grand strategy may be seen as a confluence of the military interactions that flow up and down level by level . . . with the varied external relations that form strategy's horizontal dimension at its highest level.  
38
39
2 "Strategy" is more properly limited to "the deployment and use of armed forces to attain a given political objective." See Michael Howard, "The Forgotten Dimensions of Strategy," Foreign Affairs 57, no. 5 (Summer 1979), 975. 3 The list includes the Anglo-Dutch Wars (1652-1654, 1665-1667, 1672-1674, 1780-1784), King William's War (1688-1697), Queen Anne's War (1702-1713), the War of Jenkins' Ear (1739-1748), King George's War (1744-1748), and the French and Indian War (1754-1763). The first clash in North America between European powers was the 1565 Spanish massacre of French Huguenots at Fort Caroline in present-day Florida. 4 5 Eugene V. Rostow, A Breakfast for Bonaparte: U.S. National Security Interests from the Seymour Martin Lipset, American Exceptionalism: A Double Edged Sword (New York: Norton, 1997), 17-19. War, Economy, and Society, 1939-1945 (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1980), 75. 17 20 According to Dean Rusk, "By the summer of 1946 . . . we did not have one combat ready division or air wing in the U.S. military." Cited in Rostow, 355. which 26 Bosnia and Kosovo both evolved into lengthy and protracted commitments lasting many years. 27 The F-22 and F-35 aircraft programs, intended to replace the F-15 and F-16, experienced significant cost overrun, production delays, and operational problems and were curtailed but protected in the Pentagon budget. 28 Despite a clear and compelling priority in Europe, both Korea and Vietnam eventually became the central focus for the U.S. 32 This trend is driven in part by a desire to access defense budgets to fund programs not traditionally considered as defense-related. Stanley Hoffman put it succinctly as far back as 1987: "There has been a trend towards indefinite extension of U.S. interests. '
41  
41  
"The Red Army suffered 29,629,205 casualties from
June 1942-9 May 1945, of   
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or