# ID: a9ea39cd1950411abb54ae19d77ede85
# Title: Russia's Evolution Toward a Unified Strategic Operation
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
The RAND Corporation is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help make communities throughout the world safer and more secure, healthier and more
Russian planning for regional and large-scale war is trending toward a so-called unified strategic operation. This notional concept is an organizing construct for a future Russian force structure with increasing conventional capacity to engage critical targets at the regional and global levels. It includes a nonnuclear and nuclear component and involves the coordinated action of multiple joint strategic commands. The conventional tasks within a unified strategic operation likely are oriented toward the destruction (degradation) of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) aerospace system and civilian infrastructure to terminate the conflict prior to nuclear escalation. The offensive tasks could include the following:
• strikes against NATO sea-launched cruise missile platforms • suppression and destruction of NATO orbital satellites • air and ground missile strikes against NATO air and missile defense and command and control systems • disorganization of NATO command, control, communications, computers, intelligence,  surveillance, and reconnaissance through the use of electronic warfare systems • destruction or disruption of critically important NATO infrastructure through the use of air-launched cruise missiles, long-range aviation, frontal aviation, ground-based missile systems, and cyber weapons.
In this report, we examine why Russia is evolving toward a unified strategic operation and the capabilities related to the execution of these tasks. The primary research for this report was completed in January 2022, before Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. The few references to the war in Ukraine were added prior to publication. The research reported here was completed in March 2022 and underwent security review with the sponsor and the Defense Office of Prepublication and Security Review before public release.
This research was sponsored by the Russia Strategic Initiative, U.S. European Command, and conducted within the International Security and Defense Policy Center of the RAND National Security Research Division (NSRD), which operates the National Defense Research Institute (NDRI), a federally funded research and development center sponsored by the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Staff, the Unified Combatant Commands, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the defense agencies, and the defense intelligence enterprise.
For more information on the RAND International Security and Defense Policy Center, see www.rand.org/nsrd/isdp or contact the director (contact information is provided on the webpage).
During the Cold War, the primary military challenge for the Soviets was rapidly defeating an economically, technologically, and demographically superior alliance that possessed nuclear weapons and a large amount of strategic depth. By the 1970s, the Soviet military leadership concluded that leading with nuclear weapons against a nuclear peer was a dubious approach to achieve desired political ends. 2 They arrived at deep ground operations to quickly sever the ability of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to escalate with theater nuclear weapons. The prevailing principle for the Soviets was that overwhelming mass and closure speed into the depths of the adversary were essential to the success of the rapid offensive.
The military problem and leading principles remain the same today for the Russian military. Russian operational thinking continues to emphasize that offensive actions must be conducted rapidly and throughout the entire depth of NATO to overwhelm its ability or willingness to continue the war. The critical question for Russian strategists over the past 30 years has centered on the means with which to conduct such actions in a theater that has grown increasingly disadvantageous for Russian operations. Notably, as NATO depth was expanding in the 2000s, vi Russia decreased its land forces to approximately 300,000 personnel. 
3
However, Russia's lack of conventional strike capacity reduces flexibility in planning. For the first two decades of the post-Soviet era, the state of the Russian economy and armed forces dictated an approach that was reliant upon nuclear deterrence and retaliation. In the early 2010s, a prominent idea was to use Russia's limited conventional long-range strike assets to target energy and electricity supplies and other critical infrastructure-that is, a countervalue campaign, in modern Russian parlance. At that time, nonstrategic nuclear weapons were still the leading edge of a "counterforce" campaign to destroy NATO military infrastructure related to the aerospace attack deep into Russia. Despite the modernization of the armed forces since 2011, Russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons remain the primary instrument of regional deterrence. Leading Russian military experts consider long-range conventional strike assets auxiliary tools in regional and large-scale war scenarios. 
4
Looking ahead to the 2030s and beyond, the notional unified strategic operation concept is designed to coordinate Russia's increasing nonnuclear strike and electronic attack assets to engage NATO targets at the regional and global levels while retaining sufficient capacity to escalate to nuclear use. This single concept would merge two developing operations-the general-purpose forces operation (GPFO) and the strategic deterrence forces operation (SDFO). The GPFO likely is intended to isolate a conflict at the local level with exclusively conventional weapons, deterring external intervention through the threat of long-range precision strike and nonstrategic nuclear weapons against military targets and civilian infrastructure-that is, something akin to the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine, which has been ground-centric and in which long-range precision munitions did not play a leading role in the initial period of war.
Russian formations equipped with missiles with ranges of more than 500 km make up Russia's strategic deterrence forces. 
5
6
7
8
As a merger of the two concepts, the unified strategic operation would not require a strict delineation of assets and tasks between local and regional war. Prior to the Syria conflict, the Russians apparently were thinking either about a local war along the periphery that did not involve the employment of long-range precision munitions or about a regional war in which nonstrategic nuclear weapons were the primary means to repel a NATO aerospace attack. The expected increase in conventional strike capacity is creating a new environment for Russian operational planning that must account for how to allocate and employ these and other weapons in an increasing number of conflict scenarios.
The key military tasks of the unified strategic operation are all related to engaging targets beyond the range of Russian ground forces and artillery. These tasks are long-range conventional 
5
6
Rogozin, ed., Voina i mir v terminakh i opredeleniiakh, Moscow: Veche, 2017, p. 155. 8
9
Table 1.
Russian military thought since the early 1990s has been focused on the proliferation and employment of conventional long-range precision munitions. 
10
11
At more-serious stages of conflict escalation, but still within the pre-nuclear stage, remote civilian infrastructure facilities can be targeted in order to minimize the loss of civilians and inflict tangible economic damage on the aggressor, for example, by taking down power plants (except nuclear) that provide energy to megacities. 
12
13
14
15
16
Vol. 3, No. 57, 2021, p. 16. 14
', No. 1, 2021b, p. 43. 15
16 Zarudnitskii, 2021b, p. 39.
In sum, Russia's evolution in operational concept development is derived from the need to coordinate and sequence the actions of increasingly diverse and destructive offensive and defensive forces under a single plan to destroy NATO's long-range precision strike system and ability to sustain a war as an alliance, while retaining the ability to cross the nuclear threshold (see Chapter 2). 
18
In the future, we must assume that the lines between SDFO and the GPFO will merge into a unified strategic operation. The prerequisites for this are already being seen from the perspective of trends in updating the Russian concept of strategic deterrence, de-escalation, and suppression of military threats. The strategic offensive forces represented by the strategic nonnuclear forces [i.e., assets able to engage targets beyond 500 km] are already integrated into the traditional sphere of general-purpose forces in terms of fighting local wars. Thus, the clear separation of strategic deterrence forces [SDF] and general-purpose forces, between the SDFO and the GPFO[,] is collapsing. This portends further integrative associations in the direction of a single strategic operation. 
19
As stated above, a future NATO-Russia war may expand beyond military targets. Energy supply facilities and other critical infrastructure to sustain a war and national economies would be at risk for both sides from the outset of the conflict. 
20
18
19
21
22
23
24
25
We examine Russia's evolution toward a unified strategic operation and associated capability development. To do this, we explore the following questions:
• What are the key military problems that have influenced Russian operational concept development since the late Cold War?
• What is the unified strategic operation, and how does it fit in with this history?
• What are the key military tasks that may be associated with this operation, and how is Russia developing its forces to carry out these tasks?
Chapter 2 presents a brief history of Russia's operational concept development to the present. The General Staff is dealing not only with a qualitatively different military adversary but with an armed force that is far removed from what Soviet planners had at their disposal. The chapter shows how these and other factors are driving operational innovation. In the remainder of the report, we examine Russia's transition to build a "new-type" military that can execute the offensive tasks associated with a future unified strategic operation concentrated in the European theater.
26
1
Russian operational concepts take shape against Russia's perception of future war. To put our analysis into that context, we draw on three NATO-Russia war scenarios from Russian military literature since 2008. The primary source is a 2008 article by Colonel Arkadii Borzov, then a professor at the Academy of Military Sciences. Borzov analyzed NATO exercises from the early 2000s and speculated on a possible NATO force package to attack Russia that NATO built up prior to the attack. 27 He depicted the Russian forces arrayed in four fronts-northern (fronts 1 and 2) and southern-which roughly correspond to present-day joint strategic commands (JSCs) North, West, and South. (See Chapter 2 for a discussion of fronts and JSCs.) General-Major Vasilii Burenok, the current president of the Russian Academy of Military and Artillery Sciences, and Konstantin Sivkov, who served for 12 years within the Russian General Staff, also offered versions of expected NATO force buildup and actions against Russia that generally align with Borzov's analysis. 
28
1
a The forces listed within an "operational direction" seem to be included in those listed for the "strategic direction," although the numbers do not always add up.
To be sure, Russian threat forecasts from the mid-2010s included several different scenarios, such as crises in the Baltics, Belarus, Ukraine, and the southern Caucasus. 29 A war between Russia and NATO might result in part from NATO's belief that it needs to respond to a crisis with a military force buildup to deter Russian actions. From there, assuming that the conflict could not be isolated along Russia's periphery, it would initially center on Russia's ability to disrupt NATO's force generation and conduct of long-range precision strike in the initial period of war. The geographic disposition of main forces demands it.
Because we examine a notional concept for Russia-the unified strategic operation-some speculation is involved. At the same time, the objectives and tasks in this report are drawn from years of following Russian military literature and capability development. Since the early 2000s, the Chiefs of the General Staff and other senior officers have emphasized the criticality of using all available means to disrupt NATO's ability to execute conventional long-range strike. In 2019, the Chief of the General Staff, General Valerii Gerasimov, discussed the idea of preemptively attacking areas where NATO cruise missiles could be launched, 30 and he has repeatedly described EW as a priority in force development to challenge advanced militaries. 
31
Reach, Russian Military Forecasting Translation Volume: 1999
-2018
, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A198-5, 2022, pp. 71-73. 30
31 Valerii V. Gerasimov, "Sovremennye voiny i aktual'nye voprosy oborony strany," Vestnik Akademii voennykh nauk, Vol. 2, No. 59, 2017b, p. 12; Valerii V. Gerasimov, "Vliianie sovremennogo kharaktera vooruzhennoi bor'by na napravlennost' stroitel'stva i razvitiia vooruzhennykh sil Rossiiskoi Federatsii. Prioritetnye zadachi voennoi nauki v obespecheniia oborony strany," Vestnik Akademii voennykh nauk, 
Vol. 2, No. 63, 2018, p. 19;
Gerasimov, 2019
. 32 Zarudnitskii, 2021b, p. 41.
1
33
1
34
The most important source for this report was a 2019 article, cited above, discussing the latest trends in Russian operational concept development. 
35
36
37
38
39
A final important source for this study was the late General-Colonel Andrian Danilevich. Danilevich served from 1964 to 1990 on the Soviet General Staff in the Main Operations Directorate. He led a collective effort in the 1970s to develop the Strategy of Deep Operations. 
40
NATO is an alliance with a massive amount of military and economic potential protected by thousands of kilometers of strategic depth. It also possesses the conventional and nuclear capability to generate decisive military effects in future war. The central military problem for the Soviets and Russians, therefore, has been how to conduct offensive operations rapidly and throughout the entire depth of NATO to overwhelm its ability or willingness to continue the war. 
41
42
This chapter, and the remainder of this report, is focused on this fourth era of Russian operational concept and capability development. However, the second and third eras remain relevant, and we will highlight the most-salient factors from these periods in the opening sections of this chapter. We will show how Russia is in the midst of a transition away from nuclear dependence toward nonnuclear means, such as cruise and ballistic missiles, EW, counterspace, and cyber weapons, to engage targets at long range. Russia's operational concept innovation is centered on coordinating and employing these disparate capabilities from across Russia's military districts while retaining the ability to cross the nuclear threshold with dual-use platforms. According to leading Russian military strategists, as of 2021, Russia is still reliant on nonstrategic nuclear weapons as the primary tool for regional deterrence and warfighting. The transition to the fourth era of operational concept development, which aspires to a unified strategic operation weighted more heavily toward nonnuclear capabilities, remains incomplete.
Overcoming NATO's Strategic Depth: 1976-1984   Up to the mid-1970s, the Soviets were primarily focused on how to decisively employ nuclear weapons against NATO. 
43
To do this, Soviet planners wanted to conduct rapid, conventional ground and strike operations "to the beaches at the western edge of [Europe]." 
44
45
46
[T]he main condition for a successful offensive without the use of nuclear weapons is the creation of superiority over the enemy in tanks, artillery, and aviation in the directions of the main strikes. The choice of the direction of the main attack should ensure the successful penetration of the tactical defense zone, the movement of forces in a short time to the areas where the enemy's most important objects (nuclear attack weapons, command posts, airfields, etc.) are 
43
Cass, 1992, p. 192;
V. A. Zolotarev, ed., Istoriia voennoi strategii Rossii, Moscow: Kuchkovo Pole/Poligrafresursy, 2000
, pp. 461-465. 44 John Hines, Ellis M. Mishulovich, and John F. Shull, Soviet Intentions 1965
-1985
: Vol. II, Soviet Post-Cold War Testimonial Evidence, McLean, Va.: BDM Federal, Inc., September 22, 1995, p. 7
45 Hines, Mishulovich, and Shull, 1995, p. 7. 46
47
48
49
At the present time the combat capabilities of troops, aviation, and navies, their maneuverability, and the long range of their munitions has drastically increased [since World War II]. Timelines for concentrating strike groupings and replenishing them have been reduced. The conditions and methods for executing operational and strategic tasks with large, joint formations have changed. Additionally, supreme military command can directly and decisively influence the course and outcome of the war. As a result, previous forms of employing large, joint formations have become obsolete in modern conditions. The primary operation is no longer the front operation or even the multi-front operation, but it is rather a modern, large-scale operation in the theater of military operations. 
50
51
52
53
2
54
At the same time, the theater strategic operation with conventional forces demonstrates the complexity of planning a war against a large, nuclear alliance. When the defending side has nuclear weapons, the political rationale of the attacker can quickly be rendered moot if the adversary cannot be defeated quickly and conflict escalation ensues. Thus, if a conventional war is to be won, there is a temptation to try and win it quickly to put the opposing side in a position in which capitulation looks more appealing than nuclear escalation. The economic and military challenge is to build up and coordinate sufficient offensive capacity to decisively overwhelm such a powerful adversary with a large amount of strategic depth. Nevertheless, Ogarkov designed a ground-centric operation that called on as many as five fronts to execute rapid ground operations to the depths of Western Europe.
The Soviet operational development at that time had a dual effect. First, senior Western military commanders believed that Soviet execution of operational concepts would create serious problems for NATO. According to a 1987 report by the congressional Office of Technology Assessment, On several occasions, NATO's Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR), General Bernard W. Rogers, has warned that were the Warsaw Pact to attack NATO, it would only be a few days before he would have to ask NATO political leaders for permission to use nuclear weapons. . . . Some analysts believe that the Soviets might overrun NATO so quickly that NATO would not have time to decide to use its theater nuclear weapons [exactly Ogarkov's plan]. Only strategic nuclear weapons would be left. 
55
Ogarkov apparently never fully consolidated Soviet concepts into the single theater strategic operation. He was dismissed in 1984, and later Russian references show that the Soviets and Russians retained multiple operational concepts for large-scale war. Gorbachev eventually took the Soviet Union and the military in an entirely different direction based on his perception of the unsustainability of the Soviet approach to military and domestic policy. In the late Cold War period, the Soviets adopted a defensive doctrine that was followed by force reductions and a shift away from an offensive force posture. The tack to defense proved to be short-lived, however. By the 2010s, the Russians had returned to some of the leading principles of the theater strategic operation, albeit within a very different geopolitical environment, theater force posture, and overall force structure. 
56
At the same time, there were significant changes in the way the West was preparing to wage modern war. The employment of conventional precision-guided munitions (PGMs) was reducing the role of land forces and providing new ways to engage critical targets beyond the tactical depth without a large ground force or nuclear weapons. Even prior to the U.S.-led intervention in the Persian Gulf War in 1991, the Soviets were grappling with how technological developments might affect the theater strategic operation. 
58
In 1991, Glantz summarized the Soviet view on technology and future war: ensure that combat remains fragmented. Fragmented combat, characterized by forces striving to achieve point or area objectives rather than securing lines (linear battle), also hinders employment of high precision and tactical nuclear weapons. This is, in essence, analogous to the Soviet anti-nuclear techniques of the 1970s, only now writ large. 59
All of these changes-economic, geographic, technological-meant that Russian operational concepts would have to evolve. The theater strategic operation could no longer be the primary planning construct for regional war; there would not be enough ready ground forces to move all the way to central, southern, and western Europe, where NATO's greatest military potential outside the United States resided. The Russians nevertheless did not waiver from the principle that offensive actions needed to be conducted throughout the depth of the theater. But there were serious questions regarding the means with which this principle could be matched with an operational plan.
Prominent Russian strategists were adamant that defense alone would not be suitable against an adversary with significant long-range strike capability. For one, NATO might execute conventional strikes not exclusively on first or second echelons but also on the militaryeconomic potential of the country (which remains an enduring concern for the Russians). In 1994, A. P. Bondarenko, N. I. Turko, and S. I. Fedorchenko, all Russian colonels at the time, examined how strategic operations would need to evolve given the ongoing changes in modern warfare. They concluded that the protection of Russian military-economic potential in the interior of the country would have to be done through the coordinated offensive actions of a joint force to destroy the aerospace enemy at the point of departure, deep within its territory. 
60
61
Notable in Danilevich's analysis was the explicit rejection of a massive ground operation into the depths of the European continent to rapidly destroy NATO's ability to launch a conventional aerospace attack. Russian force structure was moving in the opposite direction, downsizing considerably, a trend that would continue for the next two decades. 
63
Danilevich was looking to a reality that would not exist for Russia for another 25 years. And, even then, it would exist only at a nascent phase. The idea of Russia targeting military or civilian targets in central and western Europe with long-range precision munitions remained mostly hypothetical until the mid-2010s. This meant that other solutions would have to fill the gap until Russian force structure caught up with the theory. Several other Russian analysts, who appear to remain influential today given their ties to General-Major Sterlin, repeatedly connected Russian conventional strike inferiority to preemptive nuclear escalation in regional war. 
65
66
2
69
70
Although these authors were writing at a time of great economic upheaval in Russia, the discourse on the relationship between conventional capacity and operational planning for regional and large-scale war has not changed significantly among authoritative Russian sources since the late 1990s. Writing in 2011, Burenok and Pechatnov echoed the remarks of Khriapin and Kreidin above. In their work on strategic deterrence, they reached two important conclusions. First, the Russian general-purpose forces were not sufficiently manned and equipped to respond to conventional aggression from NATO. 
73
74
The operational result of such ideas appears to have been SODCIT. 
75
The 2020 and 2027 State Armaments Programs are major efforts to invest the resources required to overhaul the Russian military and prepare it to deter and conduct modern warfare. Most relevant to this discussion have been Russian investments in a conventional theater strike complex, EW, counterspace, and cyber weapons. 76 These are the means with which Russia can threaten NATO at the regional and global levels without resorting to nuclear escalation, which is fraught with unpredictable and existential escalation risks. Developments in Russian strategic operations throughout the 2000s have in some ways related to how to most effectively and efficiently employ formations equipped with such weapons to counter NATO throughout its strategic depth.
73 V. M. Burenok and Iu. A. Pechatnov, Strategicheskoe sderzhivanie, pre-publication copy, 2011, p. 101. 
74 Burenok and Pechatnov, 2011, pp. 101, 151-152. 75
A notable trend has been the consolidation of operational concepts. The purpose of consolidation is to simplify operational planning and improve the speed at which heterogeneous forces can be coordinated and concentrated to deliver maximum destruction of the enemy in the shortest time possible. In the 1960s, the primary focus was on coordinating all elements of the nuclear triad to deliver decisive strikes against key enemy military-industrial, command and control (C2), and nuclear weapons facilities to set the stage for rapid ground operations deep into Western Europe. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Ogarkov sought similar objectives, but primarily with conventional forces, with the leading role assigned to the land troops at breakthrough points in central Europe.
The post-Soviet period has seen a renewed consolidation of strategic operations to overcome NATO's strategic depth, with the specific aim of destroying NATO's aerospace attack system and critical civilian infrastructure to terminate the war on Russian terms. 
77
78
These [strategic air and air defense] operations were practiced, as a rule, in the same airspace, with practically the same forces and means, with largely similar goals and objectives. In the absence of a theater commander [apparently rejected after Ogarkov's departure], and due to technical issues, command and control until recently was carried out by multiple branches of the Armed Forces (Air Force and Air Defense Forces). Now this imbalance in the organizational plan has been partially eliminated by the merger of the Air Force and Air Defense Forces into a single branch of the Armed Forces [now the Aerospace Forces (VKS)]. In this regard, to simplify the planning, organization, and conduct of operations in the air domain, to reduce the number of operational documents being developed, and to make actions more dynamic, it is proposed to plan one air operation in the theater of operations instead of two (air and air defense). 
79
77 Reach, Blanc, and Geist, 2022. 78
Kupriianov, 2004
, pp. 48-52. 79 Kupriianov, 2004, p. 51
80
2
81
[The development of various U.S. concepts, such as Conventional Prompt Global Strike,] is one of the reasons behind the transformation of a strategic operation to destroy critically important targets and the strategic operation of nuclear forces into a new form of employing the Russian Armed Forces-a strategic offensive forces operation-which will ensure efficient allocation of enemy targets between [Russia's] nuclear forces and forces equipped with strategic nonnuclear weapons. This will facilitate joint planning and employment of nuclear and strategic nonnuclear forces in a coordinated plan under the Supreme Commander-in-Chief and under direct control of the 
Russian General Staff. 82
83
2
85
86
83
84 Sterlin, Protasov, and Kreidin, 2019, p. 16
This delineation is collapsing for Russia because of the current geographic disposition of opposing forces and the expanding role of conventional PGMs and their delivery platforms across the spectrum of conflict escalation. As a result, Russia may eventually coalesce around a unified strategic operation that could entail the integrated employment of all available forces and means to destroy the enemy, which makes it possible to achieve fires superiority. Comprehensive destruction of the enemy [will be] realized by the advanced planning of all types of effects, which ensures a gradual transition from strategic deterrence measures to direct fires destruction. 
87
2
Considering the ongoing force structure expansion in strike platforms and munitions, Russia is in a transition to a spectrum of conflict that can be broken down into three phases (see Figure 
2
88
89
The second phase is the conventional destruction of NATO's military-economic potential and other critical civilian infrastructure. In this phase, the focus will be on creating "cascading effects" that are highly disruptive to modern life in states participating in the war (e.g., the infrastructure required to supply a large city with fresh water or energy). The final phase, albeit undesirable because of NATO's ability to respond in kind or escalate, is the preemptive employment of nonstrategic nuclear weapons against primarily military but also hard civilian targets followed by the use of strategic nuclear weapons against cities, military-industrial centers, and administrative-political infrastructure.   Politika. Konversiia, No. 4, 2010; Danilevich and Shunin,  1992; Makhmut Gareev, "Problemy sovremennoi sistemy voennogo upravleniia i puti ee sovershenstvovaniia s uchetom novykh oboronnykh zadach i izmenenii kharaktera budushchikh voin," Voennaia mysl ', No. 5, 2004, p. 67;  Gerasimov, 2019; A. A. Protasov, S. V. Kreidin, and Iu. A. Kublo, "Aktual'nye aspekty razvitiia silovykh instrumentov i kontseptsii strategicheskogo sderzhivaniia," Vestnik Akademii voennykh nauk, Vol. 3, No. 76, 2021; Rogozin, 2017;  and Sterlin, Protasov, and Kreidin, 2019. NOTE: SNNW = strategic nonnuclear weapons. 
The employment of strategic nonnuclear weapons can be carried out sequentially, by increasing the degree of threat along the "stages" of deterrence. Thus, at the first stage of a conventional conflict, strategic nonnuclear munitions could target military facilities, and then, if necessary, against military-economic and civilian infrastructure. If such measures are insufficient and if the war continues, it is not ruled out that strategic nonnuclear forces will strike at strategic nuclear forces, nuclear power plants, and chemical enterprises. 
91
92
91 Danilevich and Shunin, 1992, p. 53.
93
94
95
96
97
93 Rogozin, 2017, pp. 235-236. 94
Bērziņš, 2020, p. 365. 95
96 Slipchenko and Gareev, 2007, p. 18.
98 Reach, Blanc, and Geist, 2022.
99
The question of Russia's decision to preemptively escalate to nuclear use is not possible to answer definitively; nuclear escalation is ultimately a political decision. Russia has operational concepts and means for this course of action, which is explicitly allowed by the Military Doctrine when the president decides that the existence of the state is at risk. But Russia also has incentive to convince the West of its readiness to escalate in any number of conflict scenarios that are not existential. In 2012, a former commander of the Aerospace Defense Forces cast doubt on the utility of broad nuclear employment but did allow for the possibility of limited nuclear use:
At the end of the twentieth century, it was generally recognized that in full-scale forms [the operation of strategic nuclear forces] was dangerous for both sides, could lead to a global ecological catastrophe-a "nuclear winter" and "nuclear night"-and therefore, in practical terms, such an operation should be ruled out. Its role remains as a symbol of deterring the aggressor. At the same time, under certain circumstances, it cannot be ruled out that the operation of strategic nuclear forces [now folded into the SDFO] can be conducted with a strictly limited number of means with a deliberate minimization of the number of targets and strike methods to avoid unpredictable impact on the territory of one's own country and the natural environment. 102 99 V. V. Kruglov and A. S. Shubin, "O vozrastaiushchem znachenii uprezhdeniia protivnika v deistviiakh," Voennaia mysl 
', No. 12, 2021, p. 31. 100 Kofman, Fink, and
Edmonds, 2020
Rogozin, 2017. 102 Ostapenko, Baushev, and
Morozov, 2012, p. 99.
103
104
2
105
Operation at the Regional Level (European Theater)
NOTE: Russia will build out its conventional capability to accomplish the majority of offensive destructive tasks in a unified strategic operation. Nuclear weapons (likely nonstrategic nuclear) probably will be phased out over decades. Implicit in phasing out (or having a lesser role for) nonstrategic nuclear weapons is the idea that a conventional destructive capability is more credible in most scenarios than the threat of nuclear escalation against a nuclear adversary, such as NATO.
As in the past, organization of C2 of multiple JSCs-West, South, North, and Central-will be a critical initial task for a unified strategic operation. Ogarkov experimented with what was called a theater of military operations command, or a theater commander and staff responsible for the coordination of perhaps two to four fronts. This C2 layer was an intermediary between front commanders and the high headquarters (Stavka) of the General Staff. The Soviets sought to eliminate the problem of front commanders not effectively coordinating their actions under a unified plan. One analyst has suggested that Russia could revive the theater command concept to coordinate JSC West and South at a minimum. 
106
Experience had shown that the most rational approach was the participation of the theater commands in the advance planning of strategic operations under the leadership of the General Staff and the organizational work of preparing for and executing operations. In the course of operations, the most difficult decisions should have been made by the High Command of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief taking into account the recommendations of the theater commands, and then directives to the fronts should have been passed through the General Staff. . . . Strictly following this protocol for decisionmaking and operational planning-Stavka (General Staff) à Theater Command à Front-command and control was bogged down and the operational utility of directives reduced, which was unacceptable in the conduct of operations at that time.
107
In his analysis of Russian strategic exercises from 2009 to 2016, General-Major I. A. Fedotov cited additional C2 challenges of a modern joint force whose mission was evolving from ground-centric to strike-centric:
Attempts to effectively resolve issues of planning and C2 of new force groupings of Air Force, Air Defense, and Navy that were not an integral part of the C2 system in the past not only did not lead to the desired result, but in fact increased the volume of functional obligations of those responsible for the command apparatus of the OSK [Joint Strategic Command].
Information overload of the command staff on account of the increase of functional groups led to an imbalance in the work of the OSK staff during operational planning and, as a result, led to incredibly poor decisions for the practical resolution of tasks.
The commander of the [OSK], as a rule, is a representative of the tank or motor rifle forces and has a thorough understanding of the structural elements of the OSK in commanding the Ground Force grouping. However, at the present time he is in no way prepared to effectively command a force grouping of Air Force, Air Defense, and Naval forces that are included in the [OSK]. 
108
In sum, multiple JSCs will be required to participate in a future strategic operation based on Russian expectations of NATO actions of future war, which could span from the Arctic to Crimea in the initial period of war. The U.S. experience in C2 of a joint force has shown that this is a highly complex task from many perspectives. 
109
108 I. A. Fedotov, "Napravleniia razvitiia operativno-strategicheskogo komandovaniia voennogo okruga na sovremennom etape stroitel 'stva Vooruzhennykh Sil Rossiiskoi Federatsii," Vestnik Akademii voennykh nauk, Vol.  4, No. 57, 2016, p.  
Every Soviet strategist going back to the 1920s has grappled with how to defeat an economically and technologically superior alliance, and each era of warfare presented its own unique challenges. Unlike his pre-nuclear era predecessors, Ogarkov faced an economically and technologically superior alliance with thousands of kilometers of strategic depth and a nuclear arsenal that could achieve a decisive outcome in a short time. To overcome this military problem, Ogarkov and the Soviet General Staff developed operations that required a huge military force to conduct preemptive conventional operations deep into NATO territory. It is questionable, and indeed Gorbachev concluded so, that this strategy was sustainable within the economic constraints of the late Soviet Union.
Today, the Russian General Staff and, in particular, the Main Operations Directorate must develop an operational concept that can rapidly engage NATO at the regional and global levels within the economic constraints of the Russian Federation. The same pressures that Ogarkov faced toward offense and rapid destruction and the questionable utility of nuclear weapons against a nuclear peer are still relevant. Gerasimov, like Ogarkov, needs conventional mass and speed to preempt NATO and inflict sufficient damage deep into NATO territory to alter the correlation of forces, to prevent the use of nonstrategic nuclear weapons against Russia, and to change the political calculus in NATO capitals. Russia appears to have gone some way in achieving high readiness, but the question of mass (strike or attack capacity) is arguably as important. Can Russia afford to build and sustain the conventional capacity it needs to convince NATO that the Russian military can conduct decisive destructive operations in the initial period of war in a theater where the main forces are territorially divided?
A future unified strategic operation could be a middle ground between the extremes of conventional strategy for large-scale operations (see Table 
2
To investigate the correspondence between Russian force structure and the operational tasks introduced above, and to understand recent statements by senior Russian military officers, we need a firmer grasp of where Russia is in a transition to a force that has the conventional "mass" to wage the type of war Russia believes it would need to fight if deterrence failed. The remainder of the report begins to get into the details.
Senior Russian military officers continually discuss the role and importance of long-range precision strike in large-scale operations in modern and future war. These same officers have highlighted the limitations of Russian long-range precision strike in a regional war in Europe or a global war stretching into the United States. This is a critical contradiction, and it calls for deeper analysis into why Russian officers express this view. This issue of Russian conventional longrange strike capacity is at the heart of the evolution of Russian operational thinking, and the remainder of this report is in some way related to this central factor.
This chapter outlines the primary tasks for strategic nonnuclear offensive forces in a notional unified strategic operation, the capabilities and disposition of Russia's strategic nonnuclear deterrence forces as of 2021, and how those forces might change qualitatively and quantitatively to 2030. Because air-and sea-based nonstrategic nuclear weapons are considered part of strategic offensive forces, we include a brief discussion of the roles and capabilities of nonstrategic nuclear weapons if conflict de-escalation or cessation cannot be achieved conventionally. Finally, the chapter offers some conclusions on the capabilities of Russia's conventional precision strike systems in support of the tasks described in the previous chapters.
Our analysis focuses on priority tasks for Russian strategic offensive forces as derived from Russian strategy, military science literature, and leadership statements. Finding specific numbers for Russian precision strike inventory and production capacity from open-source Russian reporting proved to be our greatest challenge. Russian officials do not provide comprehensive information about their military forces, nor do they discuss inventory levels or production or procurement patterns with specifics. Other sources of information in Russia are also declining; in 2021, Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB) put forth a draft law to label any entity or individual reporting on Russian military "locations, numbers, and armaments" a foreign agent.
110
Russian officials do not speculate on the precise number of weapons in or the composition of their conventional precision strike arsenal-especially what they might need to successfully achieve strategic operations, such as a unified strategic operation against the United States alone or NATO as a bloc. We can only interpret the few data points that are available from military science literature, Russian news sources, and Russian launch platforms, about which there is more information. For example, authors offer vague anecdotes, such as, "The number of landbased, sea-and air-launched long-range cruise missiles grew by 37 times . . . between 2012 and 2020," providing no numbers but specifically highlighting the Kh-101 and Kalibr submarinelaunched cruise missiles (SLCMs).
111
The unified strategic operation concept is a response to forecasted U.S. or NATO warfighting concepts of operations. 112 Russian strategists have assessed for over a decade that the United States and NATO are attempting to create their own "unified combat information space" by the early 2030s. 
113
115
the General Staff. 116
General-Major Sterlin and colleagues explained in 2019 that Russia's current operations and planning model divide Russia's deterrence forces into three areas: (1) global deterrence, which is the responsibility of nonstrategic nuclear weapons and strategic nuclear weapons; (2) regional deterrence, which is achieved by nonstrategic nuclear weapons and strategic nonnuclear deterrence forces to de-escalate and suppress major nonnuclear threats; and (3) local deterrence, which is achieved through the presence of strategic nonnuclear weapons and general-purpose forces to block local nonnuclear threats and prevent the nuclear threshold from sliding into the lower-echelon local wars and armed conflicts. 
117
119
• Conventional strikes to cause "functional destruction" of an enemy's strike power.
Specifically, this means targeting C4ISR infrastructure and enemy naval platforms that can launch long-range strikes and destroying enemy aviation and UAS. • Conventional strikes against military-economic potential and other critical civilian infrastructure. Russian sources often focus on energy infrastructure and industrial targets using kinetic means (nonkinetic means will be examined in subsequent chapters of this report). • The use of nonstrategic nuclear weapons against military facilities or critical civilian infrastructure if strategic nonnuclear deterrence forces fail to end the conflict or restrain it to the conventional level. Strategic nuclear weapons would be used against an enemy's nuclear forces and population centers in the event of a general nuclear war, or in limited employment to reduce casualties and environmental fallout.
Each of these tasks has a different targeting strategy, and each is intended to achieve different operational effects. First, demonstration strikes can occur at any point in a conflict and are intended to show Russia's capability and resolve to win or escalate if necessary. Targets for demonstration strikes include enemy forces in transit to conflict areas, naval forces in active areas of operation, forces deploying to border areas, and other individually selected targets. Counterforce targets, in the Russian understanding, are military targets that, if damaged or destroyed, will allow Russia to gain or regain the initiative and halt enemy aggression; this set of targets likely consists of forces in theater, originating bases from which air or naval forces launch, and forces in transit to a theater of operations. Points of debarkation at airports or ports, units on the march, airfields, warehouses, repair bases, and weapon storage facilities are all valid military targets in this context. 
120
This and subsequent sections build on the conventional strike tasks and context for future war that we described in Chapter 1. 
122
120
121
122 For an additional discussion of counter-military strikes in the opening phase of the war, see V. I. Poletaev and V. V. Alferov, "O neiadernom sderzhivanii, y ego rol' i mesto v visteme stategicheskogo sderzhevaniia," Voennaia mysl ', No. 7, July 2015.  particularly in the early stages of a conflict. Key tasks to degrade or destroy NATO airpower potential will likely occur in the initial period of war. Russian airstrikes will target critical infrastructure (C2 and logistics systems), air defense systems, airfields, and strike aircraft. 
123
124
125
126
129
Russia has a variety of precision-guided cruise and ballistic missiles to strike the targets discussed above. As Table 
3
This information is relevant also because Russian strategists often assess how the United States conducts operations, and their assessments have likely informed aspects of Russian strike planning. At times, Russian estimates of U.S. operations are fairly accurate. For example, it was noted that in Operation Desert Storm, the United States used 300 Tomahawk Land Attack Missiles (TLAMs) and CALCMs, a number that is not far off official U.S. estimates. 
130
131
132
133
134
135
137
138
142
3
143
144
145
143 Ponomarev, Poddubnyi, and Polegaev, 2019, pp. 97-98
144
145
146
In the ground domain, to defeat enemy ground forces, sources suggest a threshold of 50-60 percent losses upon most units and 70 percent losses of enemy helicopters. 147 Suppression of enemy forces is achieved with 20-30 percent losses or by delaying their arrival by attacking railway and highway bridges. 148 For countering land power, Russian strategists recommend using PGMs (air-to-surface and surface-to-surface missiles) for rail and large road crossings, using guided bombs for enemy mechanized forces, using mines for ports and rivers, and even launching airstrikes to induce avalanches in winter. 
149
As the preceding chapters showed, there is an operational incentive to attack an enemy's military-economic potential and dual-purpose critical infrastructure. Specific infrastructure targets include energy facilities, communication nodes, and other military-industrial targets. 
150
151
Chekinov and Bogdanov;
Danilevich,
Burenok and Pechatnov;
Slipchenko;
and Sterlin,
Protasov,
and Kreidin. 152
153
5, 2000;
Rog, 2012
. 148 Rog, 2012. 149
150
151 Vladimir Slipchenko, "Voini shestovo pokoleniya. Reshayushaya rol' v nikh budet prinadlezhat visotochnomy oruzhiyu," Na Strazhe Rodiny, No. 117, July 5, 1997. In 1997, Slipchenko assessed that destroying 300 important economic targets would require 9,000 high-precision munitions, or roughly 30 missiles per target. In actuality, far fewer munitions are needed for this type of target (sometimes as low as one PGM missile per target), but Slipchenko's initial assessment occurred before some of the most modern PGM campaigns took place (Rogoway,  2016a). The United States fired one Tomahawk missile per radar site in recent strikes against Houthi-controlled radar sites in Yemen. 
152
154
155
156
157
3
154
155
156 "Genschtab: Osobennostiu konflictkov budushevo stanet primeneniye robotov i kosmicheskix sredstv," 2018. 
157
• the likelihood that the missile will reach the target (whether the target is defended with air defenses or undefended) • whether the target is part of a structurally durable system (whether destroying a particular target or small group of targets will cause a system-wide failure) • whether the target is stationary or dynamic (dynamic targets require more data via intelligence [i.e., human spotters or ISR]). Therefore, we conclude that if Russia were to target military-economic potential and other critical infrastructure during a conflict with NATO, it would need to devote considerable planning effort and would likely prioritize key nodes to maximize the impact of its strikes. Such key nodes could include major power plants that supply other aspects of the electrical grid, other energy-related infrastructure, and major rail hubs that are necessary for the onward movement of troops, equipment, and vital supplies. As referenced in the preceding chapter, Sterlin, Protasov,  and Kreidin, 2019, argued that strategic nonnuclear weapons were not a viable alternative to nuclear weapons at that time for the conduct of a countervalue campaign at the regional level.
Russian official policy documents and other Russian sources explain that there are circumstances in a great-power conflict where it might become necessary to use the entire strategic deterrence system, up to and including nuclear force. 
158
There is a consensus in Russian literature that nonstrategic nuclear weapons will remain a critical component of deterrence of regional and global wars for some time. Several authors argue that, although Russia's nonnuclear strategic forces are growing quickly and assuming roles and responsibilities that, not long ago, only nonstrategic nuclear weapons could achieve, Russia still is unable to rely on conventional deterrence against the United States or NATO. This is due to a mismatch in Russia's conventional precision strike inventory versus the combined U.S. and additional NATO inventory. As late as 2021, some argued that Russia was not yet able to rely on nonnuclear deterrence, emphasizing the continued utility of nonstrategic nuclear weapons as a warfighting tool:
The concept of nuclear deterrence and the foundations of its implementation in the new conditions will change. There is increasing likelihood of putting into practice the concept of preventive limited use of strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons to force the enemy to end (de-escalate) a nonnuclear military conflict at various stages. 
159
160
161
162
Russia could launch fewer nuclear cruise missiles than conventional cruise missiles to destroy an air base, for example. FOI estimated that it would take the Russian military 35 conventional warheads to disable an airfield but just five tactical nuclear warheads. 163 Others 159 Kuzmin and Frolov, 2021, pp. 36-37.   160 Charap et al., 2021, p. 94.   161 "Putin Demands Smart, Precision-Guided Munitions from Defense Industry," 2018. 
162
163 Westerlund et al., 2019.  note that conventional damage simply is not permanent enough. For example, Russian analysts noted that the United States launched around 60 cruise missiles against the Shayrat Air Base in Syria in 2017, which did not permanently disable the location. 
164
165
Stockholm-based think tank SIPRI assesses that, as of 2020, Russia has 1,875 warheads for nonstrategic nuclear forces across all services. 
166
167
164
165
174
175
177
178
180
181
182
Russian additions to the force have resulted in an overall increase in launch capacity for PGMs but not an overall force size expansion. Qualitative upgrades are occurring, whether via new air defense systems, such as the SA-21; the retiring of many third-generation aircraft (e.g., Su-24 and Su-25 fighters) and their replacement with fourth-generation or more-advanced aircraft; or the retiring of SS-21 SRBMs and their replacement with fewer but more-capable Iskander systems (equipped with SS-26 SRBMs and SSC-7 GLCMs). A major refurbishment program is underway for aspects of Russia's surface fleet that are capable of launching Russia's newest SLCMs and ASCMs. The same is true of Russia's strategic bombers and the Kh-101 missile. For example, Russia has plans to build ten new TU-160M2 by 2030. 
183
Over the next decade, Russia's strategic nonnuclear forces are likely to be modified and expanded. There appear to be two primary efforts to do this: modification in the near term and creation of next-generation weapons by the late 2020s and early 2030s. In the near term, Russia is experimenting with different missions and different launch domains for the precision strike systems that it currently has. By repurposing tried-and-true missiles and launchers for different roles or different domains-as opposed to creating new systems from scratch-the Russian military would gain flexibility in the arsenal it has, retain reliability, and likely achieve some cost savings. This approach would allow Russia to flexibly tailor its relatively limited inventory as needs change rather than committing to single-purpose missile families. For example, the Russian defense industry and military are currently experimenting with converting coastal defense cruise missiles and sea-launched anti-ship missiles into land-attack roles as needed. 
184
• Iskander-M SRBM (NATO name: SS-26 Stone): The original mission of this missile is stationary ground targets, but the military will experiment on immobile marine targets, such as anchored ships at ports or potentially at sea. In recent years, Russia has begun to consider ports and other stationary offshore sites. This updated target set was achieved by new warhead design. 185 • Kh-101 ALCM (NATO name: AS-23A Kodiak): A Russian defense firm is testing a smaller version of the Kh-101 ALCM, which, although it has a smaller range, can be carried by tactical aviation to strike command posts, storage depots, air defenses, missile launchers, and other critical targets. 186 • Kinzhal: The Kinzhal air-launched ballistic missile (ALBM) can be used in both anti-ship roles (mainly against aircraft carriers but also to strike many other maritime targets) and land-attack roles. 
187
193
The second effort to 2030 is introducing new, modernized conventional PGMs with longer ranges, improved accuracy, and higher speeds (including hypersonic missiles). Some strategists argue that these new missiles will "permit shifting the bulk of strategic deterrence from the nuclear to nonnuclear sphere." 196 Russia anticipates that hypersonic missiles mounted on different types of delivery vehicles will play an increasing role in the future. One of the earliest announced missions for new hypersonic weapons is defeating U.S. and NATO missile defenses, according to Defense Minister Shoigu. 
197
199
200
201
3
To estimate overall Russian theater strike capabilities to conduct notional unified strategic operation tasks, we consulted open-source Russian reports and other Western sources to identify a composite number of Russian precision strike inventories and launch capacities. Actual numbers of munitions might be lower or higher than our estimates, so we offer a range of estimates to account for this uncertainty in Russian inventory numbers. If Russian official statements are accurate, we think it is unlikely that we failed to capture the upper boundary for munitions.
For the Russian Navy, Russian procurement plans from the early 2010s targeted around 240 Kalibr missiles by 2020. 
202
203
(For reference, it took the U.S. Navy 20 years to procure approximately 5,000 Tomahawks.
204
205
According to our analysis, the affiliated launch tubes resident in these formations suggest that, as of 2021, Russia's western fleets had a total capacity of 360-376 launch tubes capable of launching Kalibr-family missiles (the SS-N-30A Sagaris LACM, SS-N-27A Sizzler ASCM, and SS-N-26 Strobile ASCM, which all fit in the same launch tube), as well as some launch tubes that can fire older P-500 Bazalt and P-700 ASCMs. Our analysis of individual Russian fleets that could be called upon in a NATO contingency, as of 2021, is shown in Table 
3
We also evaluated platform availability and launch capacity for long-range conventional PGMs from the VKS. We did not include tactical aviation in our estimates for 2021 capacity, since the capability is nascent, except for the MiG-BM that was recently upgraded to carry the Kinzhal ALBM, which we did include. Because many of the launchers are part of the LRA and not subordinate to military district, we separated those strategic bomber platforms and their launch capacity for the entire fleet of available Tu-22M Backfire, Tu-95 Bear, and Tu-160 Blackjack bombers as of 2021 (Table 
3.6
206
3
Russia most likely would position some of these vital aircraft in alternate bases for survival and would likely keep some percentage ready for a nuclear mission, although we do not have estimates of what percentage could be allocated for this purpose. Thus, if we assume that 50 percent of aircraft will be withheld for nuclear missions or other purposes, the number of launch cells for conventional munitions would drop to roughly 500 for LACMs, roughly 100 for antiship missiles, and roughly 15 for Kinzhal ALBMs. Again, Russian models of a NATO air attack on Russia estimate that Russia might need, at minimum, 400-500 total conventional Kh-555 ALCMs in its inventory to defeat key NATO air bases; according to our analysis, Russia could launch these missiles in large salvos. 
207
208
210
211
3
3
3
The next phase in our analysis is to depict a variety of missile futures so that we can explore how they might be used against targets in Europe that correspond to the theater strike tasks in Chapter 1. We focused our analysis on forces that would participate in a Europe-based conflict with NATO: the combined ground and naval holdings of the Western Military District, Southern Military District, Northern Fleet, Caspian Sea Flotilla, and the strike forces of the Central Military District. 
212
In Table 
3
3
3
3
Vignette 1 focuses on military targets-air bases, heavily fortified military C2 facilities, and SLCM platforms. Vignette 2 uses the same military targets but peels off half of estimated Russian strike capacity for soft or hardened civilian infrastructure targets. The results of this analysis are presented in Table 
3
3
Over the past decade, Russia has achieved several meaningful internal benchmarks regarding conventional precision strike that would allow it to inflict long-range conventional strikes on multiple NATO targets that were formerly only in the range of nuclear weapons. In 2009, to understand what Russian planners considered to be success, Burenok offered a vision of what a force capable of a notional regional operation should be able to accomplish. In his view, the Russian military would execute combat tasks in a nonnuclear war using conventional PGMs and "reach all categories of targets and achieve surprise with a high probability of overcoming air defense systems." 213 Specifically, Burenok listed the following characteristics of precision strike capabilities:
• increasing roles for conventional precision strike • increasing accuracy for conventional PGMs • increasing range for conventional PGMs • the addition of hypersonic vehicles and UAS to neutralize enemy air defenses and conduct attacks in depth where air defense is missing. 214 213 Burenok, 2009.
214 Burenok, 2009, pp. 14-16.  Since that time, Russia has fielded multiple new conventional systems that are capable of striking targets that could formerly only be ranged by nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Accuracy has improved for new systems as they are used operationally in such places as Syria. Russia has plans to 2030 to extend the ranges of multiple systems that are currently fielded. Finally, Russian officials characterize hypersonic missiles and missiles with unusual trajectories as a method for overcoming missile defenses. To this end, the Russian military has unveiled the following systems that are designed to defeat missile defenses and range enemy targets rapidly and accurately up to 2030: six new superweapons designed to "neutralize" the U.S. "global missile defense system" and advanced Prompt Global Strike and other PGM forces. 
215
As our estimation of Russian missile launch capacity has shown, if Russia is able to manufacture at least one intermediate-or long-range conventional cruise or ballistic missile per launcher, it will be able to inflict damage on several target categories across Eastern Europe, and probably several in Western Europe-be they critical military targets or a more dispersed set of critical infrastructure targets. However, according to the unacceptable damage criteria that some Russian strategists have laid out, discussed earlier in this chapter, Russian conventional forces will not be able to achieve these effects at scale across Europe unless they are able to produce roughly three times as many munitions as they have launchers, or roughly 1,700 ALCMs, 1,100 launcher SLCMs or ASCMs, or roughly 600 SRBMs or SLCMs (our Scenario C inventory). 
216
Strategic nonnuclear weapons are not a rational military-economic alternative to nuclear weapons in solving the tasks of global and regional strategic deterrence. It follows that the search for criteria for the sufficiency of strategic nonnuclear capabilities should be limited to solving the key tasks of local wars. 217 
215 Sterlin, Protasov, and Kreidin, 2019
216
217 Sterlin, Protasov, and Kreidin, 2019.
Our analysis in this chapter focused exclusively on the European theater. However, if the conflict expands to include eastern Russia or the continental United States, all of these capacity problems will be compounded. The expansion of the conflict with NATO geographically will further strain Russian operations, planning, and capacity to execute conventional attacks in a high-intensity conflict.
In addition, Russian weapons face some technological limitations. In 2009, Russia was a generation behind developed countries, such as the United States, in critical military technologies and would need to "skip" a generation entirely. The critical gap areas were reconnaissance, communications, hypersonic weapons, and "combat platforms." 218 Some Russian military watchers have suggested that Russian precision strike weapons, particularly ASCMs, are limited not by their range but by ISR factors, thus limiting their reach. For example, some of Russia's long-range ASCMs, such as the Tsirkon, are designed to engage remote maritime targets in the "far sea zone" and could end up outrunning the ISR that guides them. This would potentially degrade the functional distances of these weapons to 500 km or less because of ISR limitations from maritime patrol aircraft (that could be intercepted and shot down), limitations from terrestrial over-the-horizon radars, or lack of support from space-based targeting. 
219
218 Burenok, 2009, pp. 14-16.
Russia also has uncertainties in its approach to targeting and strategic operations like the unified strategic operation. Russian military leaders know that unacceptable (deterrence) damage, from the enemy's perspective, is a subjective value, will be difficult to accurately predict in conflict, and could lead to critical errors or unwanted conflict escalation. Some Russian analysts have suggested that there are limits to game theory or probabilistic methods like calculations or modeling. They argue that using supercomputing or artificial intelligence might provide additional insights to reduce uncertainty. 
221
222
223
Russia has limitations in kinetic attack to disrupt NATO's theater precision strike operations. At the same time, other capabilities can potentially augment Russian capacity constraints. For example, Russia is making a significant investment in electronic attack and will employ jammers to counter a wide variety of U.S. and NATO systems. 
224
225
In this section, we will discuss some of the jamming concepts that are relevant in this analysis and examine each of the jammers included in a notional laydown and their potential operational utility. This includes showing relevant range rings around the jammer locations and alternate locations within Russia when applicable.
Before analyzing specific Russian EW systems and jamming targets, it is worth discussing some of the jamming principles that will come into play for different jamming types. Because we are looking at a broad set of systems, not all of these factors will be relevant for every system, and there are additional factors to consider beyond those that we list. Nevertheless, keeping these ideas in mind should clarify why our assessments will not always align with advertised or stated performance.
First, both the emitter and receiver characteristics of the system being jammed are critical in jamming effectiveness. Whether a jammer is trying to bury the signal in jamming energy or insert false signals into the system's processor, the jamming signal will generally be compared with the emitted signal in one way or another, making the signal coming from the emitter rather important. The receiver, notably the antenna and the resulting pattern from its shape and other characteristics, could be even more important. Most antennas have a spatially variant response, so the effectiveness of the jammer could be significantly degraded if the jammer is not positioned in an advantageous location. The characteristics of the transmitted signal, including the frequency, modulation, and related attributes, can vary greatly and will affect how well the applied jamming technique will perform. On a related note, systems can also be equipped with electronic protection (EP) techniques that are designed to counter adversary jammers.
Although analysis of detailed jamming and EP interactions is outside the scope of this report and likely not feasible because of data limitations, it is worth noting that these interactions can drive whether the jamming succeeds or not. For example, frequency agility is an EP technique that changes the operating frequency at a certain rate. If the jammer is jamming at the wrong frequency, it could be completely ineffective. If the jammer can adjust its frequency fast enough to keep jamming at the correct frequency, it could suffer no degrades at all. There are various other potential outcomes with frequency agility, such as reduced jamming effectiveness due to the spreading of jamming energy over multiple frequencies or "donut hole" effects in which the jamming is effective for ranges beyond the jammer and ineffective for locations between the jammer and the targeted receiver. For the jammers that are discussed here, such techniques as these might be discussed briefly, but specifics are not included.
The other major factor that is relevant to the analysis is the operational geometry of the jamming engagement. Once again, jammers target the receiver, and the receiver antenna gain in the direction of the jammer can drive the result. Thus, the configuration of the emitter and the receiver, as well as the role of the system and the location of the jammer, will determine the angle between the jammer and where the receiver is pointed. This geometry will also determine the ranges between the emitter, the receiver, and the jammer, which can be key in jamming effectiveness against certain systems. For radar jamming, the range between the jammer and the entity the jammer is trying to protect is also relevant. Finally, and most importantly for certain systems, the location of the jammer relative to the receiver will determine whether the jammer is blocked by the horizon.
Table 
4
The Murmansk-BN 400-kW (56-dBW) jammer has a 36-dB power ratio when jamming the same notional 100-W HF system that was considered in the report. 
228
The analysis by Barnett and colleagues assumes smooth earth propagation, where signal losses scale with the fourth power of propagation distance. HF propagation, however, is much more complex. Figure 
4
4
230
It is important to remember the assumptions behind the 300-km range ring because these assumptions represent a different kind of HF communications setup than HFGCS. The assumed transmitter power was 100 W, and the separation between the transmitter and the receiver was 30 km, which is more akin to a tactical situation, possibly for communications between adjacent U.S. Army units, than support of, for example, a long-range air strike. That said, similar results may be achieved by alternative means, such as high-power transmitters or a more densely populated network of transmit stations.
Overall, the ability of the Murmansk-BN to disrupt HFGCS should complicate HF communications in the region, causing the United States and NATO to rely on alternative HF architectures or SATCOM. Depending on the specifics of the conflict, SATCOM might be the preferred communications method anyway. However, losing HFGCS would still be relevant because it would remove the safety net provided for situations in which SATCOM is jammed or otherwise unavailable.
The primary SATCOM jammer that we consider in this analysis is the Tirada-2S groundbased jammer, which is expected to jam satellite uplinks up to 30 GHz in frequency. Our Russian EW laydown also includes the Bylina-MM ground-based jammer, which transmits at frequencies above 30 GHz and may affect satellites communicating in the Ka and W bands. There are more open-source data available for the Tirada-2S, so we focus on it here.
The Tirada-2S is expected to have a much smaller effectiveness footprint than the Murmansk-BN, with open-source ranges of "several tens of kilometers."
231
To assess the operational impact of the Tirada-2S, we assume that the Tirada-2S is effective only when it is located within the mainbeam of the satellite. There are a few reasons for this assessment. First, there is likely to be a steep drop-off in antenna gain outside the mainbeam, with the standard sidelobe level being 13 dB below the mainbeam level, and sidelobe levels 30 or more dB down being possible with antenna weighting. Second, certain anti-jam techniques might be applied against sidelobe or backlobe jammers. Third, the mainbeam footprint of a low earth orbit satellite is on the order of "several tens of kilometers," aligning our assessment with that in our source.
For a notional low earth orbit satellite operating at 500-km altitude with a 5-degree sensor half angle (10-degree beamwidth), the coverage diameter is 88 km. 
232
4
4
Another satellite-enabled communications method that could be affected by jamming is GPS. Unlike SATCOM uplink jamming, the targeted GPS communications receivers will be on the ground or in the air rather than in space, making horizon blockage relevant. This should be especially true for the R-330Zh Zhitel jammer, a Russian ground-based system that lists GPS navigation systems as one of its targets. 
233
4
The final ground-based communications jammer in our beddown is the R-934UM very highfrequency (VHF) jammer. The higher frequency (100-400 MHz) compared with the Murmansk-BN should prohibit the R-934UM from being used beyond the horizon, which should significantly limit its utility. In addition, it operates with significantly less power than the Murmansk-BN; the R-934UM has at least 500 W (27 dBW) of transmitter power, which is nowhere near the 400 kW (56 dBW) that the Murmansk-BN has. 234 It is not surprising, then, that the R-934UM has a much lower reported maximum range, of 250 km. 
235
To analyze the R-934UM, we take a similar approach to analyzing as the Murmansk-BN, using the jamming power ratio to determine the corresponding effectiveness range ratio from Figure 
4
For a range ratio of 2, the VHF transmitter and receiver must be 125 km apart for the R-834UM to be effective at the maximum 250-km range. This range is plotted with the dark purple rings in Figure 
4
235
One of the most noteworthy jammers in this analysis is the Divnomorye, because of both the systems that it targets and the number of them in this laydown. The Divnomorye is a groundbased jammer that seems to target any aircraft that has a radar; its target set includes fighters, drones, helicopters, the AWACS, and even cruise missiles.
236
237
The Divnomorye could also have adequate power for satellite jamming, but there are additional factors to consider. These factors include the jammer being limited by radar EP and sidelobe gain levels (similar to the Tirada-2S) if the jammer is located outside the satellite radar mainbeam and the slant range between the Divnomorye and the satellite being greater because of the 500-km+ altitude of the satellite. Because we do not know the power of the Divnomorye and there are several potential terrestrial targets to consider, we focus on airborne targets, but we acknowledge that space sensors could be jammed by this system as well.
Because we assume that the Divnomorye is effective to the radar horizon, the effectiveness range in this analysis is mostly a function of the altitude of the airborne radar. Figure 
4
238
4
4
4
Cellular phone jamming is generally more of a tactical problem, but we examine it here because Russia's employment of this jamming uses UAS, a different kind of platform from Russia's manned EW vehicles. The Leer-3 jammer is installed on the ORLAN-10 UAS, which has a range of 150 km. In addition to the horizon advantages that come with an airborne jammer, putting the Leer-3 on a UAS extends the effective range of the jammer to include the UAS range, and Russia might be more likely to operate an unmanned platform in enemy territory. 
239
240
241
4
242
The Mi-8MTPR-1 helicopter-mounted jammer can interfere with SAM radars in the 5-11-GHz range. 
243
244
Although this jammer seems, by its frequency coverage and power levels, to be designed to counter ground-based engagement radars, its role could expand beyond this. Our sources list airborne radar as a potential target for this jammer, which is reasonable. Airborne intercept radar on fighter aircraft might be in the band of this system, and these radars are smaller and might be more susceptible to jamming than more-powerful systems on the ground. AWACS and other radar with a search role tend to operate at lower frequencies, such as L-and S-band, but alternate jamming packages may extend to these bands. As we discuss below, the introduction of helicopter-based jammers adds a new element to Russian jammer analysis.
Figure 
4
There are employment considerations that might come into play, since multiple helicopter sorties might be required to jam an enemy system for the length of time that is required. Helicopters also might be more vulnerable to attack, depending on the operational geometry, among other things. In the case of the Mi-8MTPR-1, the frequency coverage of the system seems geared toward jamming tracking radars, and detections from non-trackers might enable the employment of air assets even if the SAM system is unable to engage directly. On the other hand, the agility of a helicopter, compared with that of a ground unit or fixed-wing aircraft, might allow Russia to deliver an EW capability more quickly than the other systems could.
In this analysis, we have mostly categorized each Russian jammer by a single target set, discussing jammer utility in the context of the target type that we most expect the jammer to be useful against. For a few reasons, this characterization is far from perfect. First, there are limited data available for several of these systems, and we have derived their expected roles from opensource reporting or author assessments. Second, roles and target sets can evolve as systems are developed. Third, and perhaps most importantly, systems can be used for more than one purpose. For example, the Il-22PP turboprop aircraft is a key Russian jamming platform that can perform several functions.
Despite the lack of technical data available on the Il-22PP, sources list many roles for it. One source lists radio communications, the AWACS, other communications systems, and navigation satellites as targets. 
245
246
249
Although we will not attempt to quantify the effectiveness of a platform with so many unknowns, we do point out that there exists another turboprop jamming aircraft with multiple roles: the U.S. EC-130H Compass Call. This aircraft is primarily a communications jammer, designed to disrupt adversary C2 and coordination among forces, but it also has a secondary mission of jamming early-warning and target-acquisition radars. It has a combat crew of 13 people, including EW officers and cryptological linguists. It has been operational since 1983, and its versatility has enabled it to bring electronic attack capability to "virtually any combat situation." 
250
246 Diana Mikhailova, "S shiroko otkrytymi glazami: vozdushnaya radioelektronnaya bor'ba. Chast' 2," LiveJournal, January 24, 2018. 247 Michael Peck, "Russia's II-22PP Is a Satellite Zapping Powerhouse," National Interest, August 19, 2021.
248 "'Porubshchik-2' kak ubiytsa sputnikov," Voennoe obozrenie, July 9, 2018.
249 nonothai, "Il-22PP Porubschik Electronic Countermeasures Plane," Thai Military and Asian Region, blog, last updated August 9, 2018. 250 U.S. Air Force, "EC-130H Compass Call," webpage, last updated May 2015.
22PP. That said, the limitations of the EC-130H could provide insight into expected limitations of the Il-22PP. A turboprop aircraft is unlikely to have the speed, stealth, and maneuverability to be survivable in high-threat environments. As with the EC-130H, there are currently limited quantities of the Il-22PP available, which would make it critical that each Il-22PP aircraft avoid being intercepted. Thus, we expect that these aircraft will be limited in terms of where they are employed.
Overall, the Il-22PP could be a formidable threat. It has the potential to jam many signals and perform multiple functions. There is much that we do not know about it, including its expected effectiveness against each of its potential targets, but many of the limitations for other jammers (e.g., horizon, satellite field of regard) would apply here as well.
Russia has invested heavily in EW assets, developing systems that are built to affect NATO signals in different domains and across the electromagnetic spectrum. These systems range from over-the-horizon communications jammers that could affect the whole European theater to tactical jammers that should affect only their immediate area. The importance of such jammers will depend on the geometry of their employment, the level of risk that Russia is willing to accept in terms of their location, and the relevance of the targeted NATO assets to their intended mission.
For a long-range NATO strike mission coming from central Europe, we expect Russian jammers to be much more relevant as NATO forces near the Russian border. Although the Murmansk-BN might be able to limit HF communications for most of the theater, other communication methods (e.g., VHF, SATCOM) are likely to be denied only if they are within direct-line-of-sight distance of the jammer or closer. Similar trends are apparent for other signals (e.g., radar, GPS), with most range rings that we show being confined to the Baltics and northern Poland.
As aircraft near the Russian border, the challenges to NATO C4ISR should increase considerably. Powerful ground-based jammers could deny communications and degrade detection from radar sensors. Airborne jammers, some unmanned, could extend the reach of Russian jamming and add a level of flexibility and agility to their employment. Because certain key NATO strike functions (e.g., target geolocation) will likely need to occur when aircraft are within the line of sight of targets in Russian territory, the ability of Russian jammers to affect systems in this region could be critical.
There is a myriad of factors that will determine the effectiveness of this jamming, notably the EP features that NATO systems might include. In addition, the platforms carrying these jammers could be targeted, as most jammers will need to be located near the assets they are protecting to be effective and their emissions could highlight their location. Because we do not have details on NATO EP and other data that would be required for a firmer assessment of Russian jammer effectiveness, we stress that interactions between jammers and sensors are complex and the existence of a capable jammer does not guarantee effective signal suppression.
The Russian EW threat is diverse and growing, and it will need to be accounted for by NATO systems operating in key regions in Europe. We do not expect this threat to be insurmountable, however, as there are physical and operational challenges that Russian jammers need to overcome to be successful.
In this chapter, we examine the role of Russian anti-space capability in a notional unified strategic operation. As General-Colonel V. B. Zarudnitskii articulated in a 2021 article on future war, "Innovative weapons systems located on space combat platforms may soon become a new means of waging modern warfare." 251 As a result, Russia has integrated its capabilities in space and its defensive actions from space into thinking on asymmetric options to disrupt an attack from NATO. 252 Russia's aerospace forces are contemplating new forms of warfare in outer space, including anti-satellite (ASAT) combat to disrupt state infrastructure that supports space missions and counterspace operations. 253 Space assets could become a primary target to disrupt NATO's military capacity as envisioned in Prompt Global Strike, even in the early phases of a regional war. Outer space is also a key domain in the preconflict phases during which Russia's counterspace capabilities are used to signal and deter a potential adversary. Furthermore, most of Russia's counterspace capability is effective in low earth orbit, which is full of civilian and dualuse satellites used by the West, raising the possibility of targeting commercial communications satellites as part of critical infrastructure.
In this chapter, we will explain Russian military thinking on conflict in space as articulated in the literature of the past 15 years. We will then review the major counterspace systems to assess how they might fit within a notional unified strategic operation.
Russia sees space as an increasingly important domain for nation-states. In addition to being a nuclear weapon state, Russia sees itself as second only to the United States as a space power. This view is derived from its history of achievements in space, from the theories of its 19thcentury rocket theorist Konstantin Tsiolkovsky to its major firsts in space, including the first satellite in orbit and the first man, woman, and dog in space, as well as its extensive accomplishments in long-duration manned spaceflight. 
251
252 Alexey Arbatov, "Nauchno-tekhnologicheskaia proektsia kosmicheskoi deiatel'nosti," in Kontrol' nad vooruzheniiami v novykh voenno-politicheskikh i tekhnologicheskikh usloviiakh, Moskva, 2020b, p. 94. 
253
Russia has been critical of the militarization of space on the part of the United States. The U.S. withdrawal from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty in 2002, development of ballistic missile defense, rapid expansion in dual-use space applications, and recent creation of the U.S. Space Force have reinforced a perception that the United States intends to dominate the space domain. 
259
260
261
The Pentagon has recently many times declared its intention of using space for military purposes. With this goal, a new armed service-Space Forces-is being formed and this creates conditions for the militarization of outer space. All these actions may lead to acute aggravation of the military-political situation, emergence of new threats, to which Russia will have to respond with mirror and asymmetric measures. 
263
265
Russia's strategic objectives of aerospace defense as they relate to space-based systems are threefold. First, Russia views its space-based systems as essential to providing its senior leadership with timely warning of an aerospace attack, with either conventional or nuclear weapons, so that it can make key decisions for its response. 267 A foundational element of that early-warning requirement is ensuring that Russia can defend its nuclear deterrence capability from a conventional first strike so that decisionmakers have that option. Second, Russia intends to use its relevant space and anti-space capabilities to suppress and defeat an aerospace attack. 
268
269
270
Russian space-based assets provide reconnaissance of adversary force posture and the launch of certain weapons, specifically ballistic missiles. Knowledge of force posture and launches informs senior Russian leaders so that they can decide on a deliberate response. As part of its military modernization effort, Russia developed the Unified Space Detection and Combat Control System (in Russian, EKS OiB). 
271
272
273
Related to Russia's early-warning systems, Russian nuclear deterrence depends on protecting Russia's strategic nuclear forces from conventional attack. Russia relies in part on scattering road-mobile ICBMs in times of international tension or in the preconflict phase of a crisis. The effectiveness of a mobile land-based system was reliable in the late 20th century because there was sufficient time for individual launchers to move between the detection of a hostile missile and its impact. The U.S. concept of Prompt Global Strike, with its capability to hit targets around the globe with conventional warheads or, more recently, the future use of hypersonic missiles, makes such mobile land-based systems more vulnerable to a conventional missile attack. 
274
275
As we explained in Chapter 2, Russia seeks to ensure that it can respond to NATO and the United States through the use of strategic and operational nonnuclear capabilities and, if necessary, nuclear weapons. It also needs to protect its industrial base and critical infrastructure from being targeted by conventional weapons. Therefore, Russia not only needs to ensure that it can maintain the requisite space support for its offensive weapons but also must degrade U.S. space-based systems that the United States and NATO rely on to target Russian industrial capabilities. According to our assumptions about unified strategic operation tasks, this is accomplished through the functional suppression or destruction of the adversary's space-based assets. 
276
277
278
Second, co-orbital systems are satellites that are present in or can be quickly launched into outer space to rendezvous with an adversary satellite and affect it in several ways. They can temporarily disable some of its capabilities through jamming or dazzling its sensors, permanently make it ineffective, or even destroy it by kinetic means. Russia has been testing co-orbital technology since the 1960s, and its latest series of tests began in 2013. These tests included both ground-launched and air-launched co-orbitals. Like any ASAT system, co-orbitals have certain 
276 Romanov and Cherkas, 2020, p. 38.
Palitsyn and Zhilenko, 2020, pp. 10-12. 278
A third means of degrading adversary satellites is directed-energy weapons, normally in the form of lasers that can either dazzle (temporary) or blind (permanent) satellites. Russia has developed or is in the process of developing three systems: The Kalina system is a fixed groundbased ASAT system, Peresvet is a mobile ASAT weapon, and Russia continues to work on an airborne ASAT laser called Sokol-Eshelon. 
279
Fourth, Russia can apply its EW capabilities against the United States and its allies. Such capabilities could be used during a period of political crisis preceding an actual conflict. Electronic interference of satellites can be reversible, allowing Russian forces to modulate the effects of their EW platforms. Furthermore, GPS jammers within Russian territory can degrade the navigation systems of NATO assets executing an aerospace attack. 
280
281
283
Russia also plans to use the S-500 Prometheus, made by Almaz-Antey. This is the fifthgeneration ABM system that will be deployed around Moscow. Development of the S-500 began in 2010 as a follow-on SAM to the S-400. 
287
288
289
290
291
292
In 2009, the renewed desire for an airborne direct-ascent ASAT led the Ministry of Defense to award contracts for Kontakt. 
293
294
295
The Soviet Union has a long history of co-orbital weapon development. In the early 1960s, the Soviet Union began developing its Istrebitel Sputnikov (IS), or satellite fighter, because of a concern that the United States would develop orbital bombardment systems. An SS-9 rocket would be used as the launch vehicle for the IS, and, once in orbit, the IS would maneuver itself into close proximity to the targeted space vehicle and detonate, causing shrapnel to destroy the spacecraft. 
296
298
In 2013, Russia resumed testing co-orbitals. Central to Russia's co-orbital effort is the Central Scientific Research Institute of Chemistry and Mechanics, located in the suburbs of Moscow. The institute was involved in the early co-orbital program of the 1960s and has continued its work on military satellites. Bart Hendrickx notes that it is working on a system referred to as Nivelir. 
299
Co-orbitals, with their ability to conduct rendezvous and proximity operations (RPO), present a challenge for determining intent because they can be used for many peaceful purposes, such as the inspection and repair of satellites and intelligence gathering, but also as a weapon system that can degrade, disable, or destroy a satellite. Over the past decade, Russia has continually tested its co-orbital capabilities, and the United States claims that some of these tests have been weapons tests in outer space. In 2013, 2014, and 2015, Russia conducted launches from its Plesetsk Cosmodrome to deploy such co-orbitals. In some cases, the co-orbitals were not disclosed beforehand. For instance, Russia would announce the deployment of three satellites, only to later deploy a fourth satellite. Initial RPO by the satellites were conducted with the upper-stage Briz-KM booster.
Beginning in 2017, however, Russian RPO were conducted using two satellites. 
300
301
In November 2019, Russia launched Cosmos 2542, which later released a subsatellite, Cosmos 2543. Cosmos 2543 then positioned itself to conduct RPO on the U.S. intelligence satellite USA-245. Cosmos 2543 came within 20 km of USA-245 several times in January 2020. Again, U.S. government officials were critical of the proximity of the Russian vehicle to U.S. satellites. In June 2020, Cosmos 2543 maneuvered to within 60 km of Cosmos 2535; in July, orbital debris was observed between the two satellites. 303 U.S. Space Command asserted that this was a weapons test similar to the activity of Cosmos 2521 and Cosmos 2523 in summer 2017. 
304
Russia has also conducted RPO in geostationary orbit. In September 2014, Russia launched a geostationary orbit satellite, Luch, which was owned by the GRU. 
305
A capability related to the co-orbitals discussed above is Burevestnik. Burevestnik is an airlaunched ASAT system. 307 Similar to the Kontakt direct-ascent ASAT, Burevestnik would be launched from a modified Mig-31 to rapidly place a space vehicle into orbit. This space vehicle could serve as a co-orbital ASAT, much like Cosmos 2543. Maturity of such a system has not been publicly acknowledged, but, at a minimum, such a system is in development. The benefit of using a system like Burevestnik is the ability to conduct rapid launches of ASAT weapons. There are several ways in which a Burevestnik vehicle could damage or destroy a targeted satellite, including the use of nitrogen gas to conceal itself and degrade the other satellite and the use of explosive charges to create fragments. Burevestnik might be related to or a part of the Nivelir coorbital program led by the Central Scientific Research Institute of Chemistry and Mechanics. 308 303 Weeden and Sampson, 2021, p. 2-9.   304 U.S. Space Command Public Affairs Office, 2020.
305 
Weeden and Sampson, 2021, p. 2-11. 306
307
308
Russia has also invested in less destructive counterspace capabilities in the form of directedenergy or laser weapons. Perhaps the most developed directed-energy ASAT system in the Russian arsenal is Peresvet. Directed energy is commonly used to either dazzle or blind satellites. Introduced publicly by Putin in 2018, Peresvet is a ground-based laser carried around by mobile trucks. A video released by the Russian Ministry of Defense stated that Peresvet could "efficiently counter any aerial attack and even fight satellites in orbit." 309 Specifically, General Gerasimov acknowledged that the task of Peresvet was to conceal the movements of mobile missiles. 
310
311
In addition to ground-based mobile directed-energy weapons, the National Air and Space Intelligence Center has reported that Russia is developing an airborne laser system designed to degrade space-based missile defense sensors. 
313
314
310
312 Hendrickx, 2020b.  can often avoid weather conditions that can affect ground-based systems. The Sokol-Eshelon system is a laser that is deployed on the A-60 Beriev aircraft, a modification of an Il-76 transport plane. 
315
316
317
318
319
In addition, Russia is likely working on a stationary ground-based system designed to dazzle or blind satellites. 320 Known as Kalina, the project is associated with the Krona space tracking complex in the North Caucasus. Krona is a radar complex that has a laser optical locator to detect satellites in high orbits. Russia appears to be upgrading the Krona complex with a laser ASAT capability. The concept is tied to the idea of using lasers to help get rid of orbital debris; however, Hendrickx found contractual evidence that the mission of Kalina was for the "functional suppression of electro-optical systems of satellites . . . using solid-state lasers and a transmit/receive adaptive optics system." 321 It is possible that Russia intends to provide its Krona space tracking and surveillance complex with the ability to dazzle satellites.
As mentioned in Chapter 4 of this report, Russia has significant jamming capability. In the preconflict and conflict phases, Russia would likely use its radio-EW capabilities against NATO. The Russian military has a strong tradition of using EW in a conventional fight, which provides an asymmetry that is particularly suited to space because the effects of electronic jamming can be reversible and local and because it does not create additional space debris. Jamming of satellites can be used throughout the spectrum of conflict, from the posturing phase to an actual conventional or even nuclear war. It is especially useful because its effects can be attenuated to the desired goal, be it to degrade or to destroy the targeted satellite. Of note, Russia employs several radio-electronic jamming systems against communications and reconnaissance satellites, even though their primary design is to interfere with ground and airborne assets.
On land, Russia has deployed a system of GPS jammers within its territory that is intended to disrupt the navigation systems of weapons that would be launched against its territory. 322 In space, Russia is also applying EW to counter space-based capabilities. Russia is developing two systems that are designed to conduct uplink jamming of communications satellites: the Tirada-2S and the Bylina-MM. The Tirada-2 is a descendant of the Soviet Tirada-1 jammer. Development of the Tirada-2 began in 2001, and there are several versions of the base system, depending on which band of the electronic spectrum it targets. 
323
324
The other Russian uplink jammer is the Bylina-MM system. The Bylina is described as a C2 system for radio-electronic jamming with additional subunits. 
325
322 Weeden and Sampson, 2021, p. 2-24.   323 Hendrickx, 2020c.
324 Vitalii Orlov, "Voina nevidimaia i effektivnaia: Sovremennye kompleksy REB sposobny neitralizovat' edva li ne liuboe oruzhie protivnika," Voenno-promyshlennyi kur'er (VPK), 
August 24, 2021
. 325 Hendrickx, 2020c.
326
327
328
329
330
Perhaps a more likely form of counterspace activity from Russia will come from the cyber domain. Unclassified sources note the threat that cyber activities can pose to spacecraft; 326 Hendrickx, 2020c.
327 "Source Reveals Tech Details of New Russian Anti-Satellite Warfare Plane," Sputnik News, July 9, 2018.
328 Orlov, 2021.
329 Hendrickx, 2020c.
330 Alexsey Ramm, "Minoborony smozhet zaglushit' Iridium I OneWeb," Izvestiya, August 30, 2016. 
331
however, public knowledge of Russia's ability to affect U.S. and NATO space-based platforms is scant. As is mentioned in the following chapter, Russia maintains a robust cyber capability, which it counts on to provide an asymmetric advantage against its adversaries. In the space domain, Russia is likely to use cyber technology to disrupt NATO's space assets. Modern examples are not public; however, in 1998, hackers based in Russia accessed a U.S.-UK-German ROSAT satellite and changed its rotation toward the sun, which rendered its sensors unusable. 332 Faced with the deployment of thousands of military and dual-use satellites by its adversaries, Russia cannot rely only on its counterspace weapons. It will have to try to use its cyber capabilities to penetrate space-related ground systems to disrupt U.S. and NATO space operations. 
333
Russia also maintains an array of space surveillance control facilities, which make up its Russian Outer Space Control System. Russia's civilian and military functions overlap in some areas, and, as with most national surveillance systems, information is shared. Control of Russia's military space and counterspace assets takes place from several facilities around Moscow, including the 821st Main Space Surveillance Centre, the 820th Main Centre for Missile Attack Warning, and the 153rd Main Trial Centre for the Testing and Control of Space Means. The three control centers are part of Russia's Outer Space Control System.
Russia's primary space surveillance assets are Okno and Krona. Russia maintains an Okno complex near Nurek, Tajikistan, which it recently upgraded. Okno uses ten electro-optical sensors, which have an estimated range of detection of 40,000 km, to monitor space objects in low earth orbit and geostationary orbit. 336 Work has reportedly begun on a second Okno site in Primorski Krai, in Russia's Far East. The Krona complex near Starozhevaya, in the North Caucasus, uses electro-optical and radar sensors for the identification and tracking of space objects. The Krona complex in Starozhevaya also has an associated 30J6 component facility that uses optical telescopes and lasers. 337 Russia had planned to build four Krona facilities; at the moment, however, only a second Krona complex is being developed, near Nakhodka in the Far East. In addition, the Altai Optical Laser Centre, near Savvushka, Siberia, provides highresolution images of space objects. 
338
340
Since the early 2000s, Russia has reinvigorated its military space and counterspace capabilities. Much of their development is a continuation of Soviet legacy systems that were periodically delayed because of arms control, political, or financial considerations. The U.S. withdrawal from the ABM Treaty, combined with Russian observations on conflict in the 21st century, leads Russian military leaders to prioritize and prepare for conflict in space. This is especially important because Russia views U.S. and NATO dependency on its satellite systems as a potential vulnerability that can be exploited to Russia's advantage. Space is seen as a domain that is essential to NATO's military capability.
Russia's effort to develop its counterspace capabilities as part of a notional unified strategic operation is one that is deserving of attention by the United States and its allies. As shown in this chapter, Russia is developing such capabilities using multiple means, from direct-ascent ASATs to jamming and cyber capabilities. Its recent test of the Nudol ASAT missile and its weapons testing on co-orbitals through its Nivelir system demonstrate both an improved capability and the will to use kinetic weapons against space-based assets. Still, it is unclear whether Russia believes that its counterspace capabilities are sufficient to achieve its objectives, despite pronouncements in the open press.
We do not know how Russia would sequence its counterspace operations, although the sequence of tasks in Chapter 1 suggests that Russian actions to disrupt NATO space surveillance could take place early in a conflict. There are the three command centers around Moscow, but the roles and types of activities that would be used as the conflict escalates are unknown. Counterspace is one of several capabilities addressed in this report that is available to the Kremlin which can impede an aerospace attack from the West until a resolution is achieved. Some of these capabilities, such as Russia's direct-ascent weapons, are costly in terms of the debris that they create when used, and they can also negatively affect space vehicles in low earth orbit, as seen in the recent test of Nudol. Nonetheless, they might be worth it as a form of demonstration or to hit high-value space targets. At the same time, Russia continues to improve ASAT systems that are more measured and that can be reversible. Radio-electronic jamming systems and directed-energy weapons provide such a capability. While less is known in unclassified reporting about the capabilities of Russia's co-orbital program, it appears that Russia is experimenting with different co-orbital ASAT capabilities. Similarly, our knowledge of Russia's ability to disrupt U.S. and allied space operations through cyberspace is limited (see Chapter 6).
Russia's counterspace programs contain several shortcomings that could reduce the Russian military's ability to functionally suppress NATO's use of its space-based capabilities in a conventional or nuclear fight. Many of Russia's aforementioned counterspace systems and much of Russia's thinking evolved from the Soviet era. During the Cold War, the Soviet state was the driver of space technology and capability. The number of orbiting satellites was relatively small because the cost of launch was expensive. As a result, satellites carried multiple payloads. Incapacitating a high-use satellite using a direct-ascent ASAT like the Nudol or an air-launched co-orbital killer satellite, such as the Burevestnik, was a reasonable asymmetric option. The ability to jam a small number of satellites that rely on direct links with terrestrial stations also made jamming a viable countermeasure. In addition, Russia held an advantage for several years as one of the few launch providers. However, changes in technology and the rise of the commercial space sector in the West pose significant challenges to Russia's ability to disrupt NATO operations in space.
Unlike Russia, whose space industry is overwhelmingly state driven and resourced, the West has benefited from an expansion of its commercial space sector. This civilian capacity and innovation has resulted in an exponential increase in the number of satellites, as well as improvements in the costs, capabilities, and sizes of the vehicles. This development has several consequences for Russia's counterspace capabilities. First, the dispersion and proliferation of smaller satellites, including dual-use satellites, make it harder for direct-ascent ASATs and coorbital ASATs to target enough satellites. The number of targets can surpass the number of ASATs, and, even if satellites become disabled, the growth in launch capability and the ability to replace satellites in rapid order with greater launch capacity reduce the effectiveness of kinetic weapons. Perhaps more significant is the development of intersatellite links, which allow satellites, particularly in low earth orbit, to transmit to each other to facilitate communication and provide redundancy. Space-based optical communications made with laser technology can reduce the effectiveness of jamming and allow greater security against cyber intrusions.
341
Finally, Russian limitations in counterspace have resulted in a push for space arms control. Russian experts, such as Alexey Arbatov and the Russian Foreign Ministry, have promoted a new treaty limiting weapons in space. 342 Submitted jointly with China, the proposed treaty would limit the testing of ASAT and space-based weapons. Russia argues that the proposed treaty would contribute to strategic stability, but such a treaty is also viewed by the Kremlin as a means for offsetting the advantage that the United States has over Russia in terms of space power. However, the push for arms control in some ways inhibits Russia's ability to test and deploy counterspace systems. As a result, Russia can be expected to continue to pursue asymmetric ways to degrade NATO's operations through the space domain, although Western proliferation of space-based assets puts pressure on Russia's counterspace capacity.
Russian defense strategy broadly refers to the importance of using information, and information technologies, to achieve economic, political, and military goals. 
343
344
346
In this chapter, we begin by considering the historical factors that led to the development of cyber capabilities in Russia in the years following the fall of the Soviet Union. We then examine the major state and nonstate actors involved in Russian cyber operations and discuss their interrelationships, roles, and responsibilities. Finally, we consider ways in which cyber capabilities might be harnessed as part of a unified strategic operation, the role of cyber operations in future war, and factors that could prevent Russia from fully realizing the possibilities associated with cyberwarfare.
The role of cyber operations as an element of contemporary Russian military strategy dates back several decades. The fall of the Soviet Union occurred in the early 1990s, a time when computers were becoming increasingly accessible to ordinary people in their homes. In Russia, these concurrent events facilitated the growth of small communities of hackers, particularly in cities and towns where the collapse of the Soviet Union had led to more-severe economic turmoil. As investigative journalist Daniil Turovsky explains, in the 1990s, increased interest in hacking and the formation of groups of hackers were especially noticeable in the cities of Siberia. According to Turovsky, during the Soviet period, economic life in these cities had typically been "organized around a large industrial enterprise." 347 With the fall of the Soviet Union, however, in the typical Siberian town, "the plant closed and most of the residents lost their jobs." 348 Over the course of the 1990s, there was an increasing sense of "dissonance between [this] everyday Russian reality," on the one hand, and the seemingly "endless possibilities of the Internet," on the other. 349 With the growth of communities of hackers across Russia, a "market for buying their services gradually began to form." 350 By the early 2000s, as online forums for hackers emerged, hacking "began to turn into an industry" and hackers "gradually evolved into de facto organized groups." 351 At the same time that these online forums were providing a space for hackers to develop their skills, more-formal options for acquiring computer skills also emerged as technical universities across Russia created new information technology and security departments. 
352
364
For many years, cyber operations were the "exclusive domain of [Russia's] security services," and the FSB led the coordination of early cyber and disinformation campaigns. 
365
369
371
373
375
The work of state agencies is also supported by an ecosystem of state research institutes, most of which are associated with the Ministry of Defense and provide cyber research and support to operations. 378
In addition to the state actors described above, various nonstate actors support Russian cyber operations. Among these nonstate actors are several commercial companies, including the Internet Research Agency, Concord Consulting, Digital Security, Kvant Scientific Research Institute, and Kaspersky Labs. 379 As Turovsky describes, there is an ongoing flow of cyber personnel between these companies and Russian security and military services. 
380
The extent to which Russian state actors rely on patriotic hackers remains unclear. Experts have generally characterized the activities of patriotic hackers as "somewhere on the spectrum between state-integrated and state-ignored." 
385
Within the context of a notional unified strategic operation, cyber operations could be employed to magnify the effects of conventional operations. However, Russian military experts especially emphasize the utility of harnessing cyber operations to achieve effects against critical infrastructure targets. The importance of targeting critical infrastructure stems from the outsized effect that the disruption of related services can have on both military and civilian populations. Critical infrastructure facilities are viewed as "vitally important for a country" because "the disruption of their work or their total destruction" can "have irreversible negative effects on national and economic security, health care, [and] law and order." 389 Not only can targeting critical infrastructure cripple an adversary's military capabilities by eliminating access to civilian services during a conflict, but these targets are especially vulnerable to cyber intrusions. Cyberattacks on critical infrastructure can even have a "potential[ly] destructive impact on military systems" absent the "direct invasion of [an adversary's] territory"; one group of Russian experts characterizes this dynamic as a "distinctive feature of the global critical infrastructure." 
390
391
392
387
Turovsky, 2019, p. 149. 388 Hakala and
Melnychuk, 2021, p. 21. 389
Globalization," Military Thought, Vol. 29, No. 3, 2020
, p. 82. 390 Starodubtsev et al., 2020
, p. 83. 391 Starodubtsev et al., 2020
, p. 83. 392 Starodubtsev et al., 2020, p. 83.
395
397
398
399
402
403
404
405
406
407
403
Mandiant, FIN12 Group Profile: FIN12 Prioritizes Speed to Deploy Ransomware Against High-Value Targets, Milpitas, Calif., 2021. 407
operations are "shrouded in much secrecy." 408 Even so, Western analysts have characterized Russia as posing a "serious cyber threat to industrial control systems (ICS), pharmaceutical, defense, aviation, and petroleum companies." 409 This characterization fits with past Russian cyber operations in Ukraine, where Russia has "demonstrated both a willingness and an ability to target critical, civilian infrastructure for the purpose of creating a feeling of insecurity among the Ukrainian population not directly related to simultaneous military operations." 410 Beyond Ukraine, Turovsky alleges that Russian state actors have gained access to the "largest industrial enterprises, government and military entities, financial institutions . . . and sports organizations." 
411
The vulnerability of critical infrastructure targets results from the fact that the most-advanced countries have become "heavily dependent on telecommunication networks for virtually all activities, be they public, private, social, economic, or military." 414 This heavy reliance on information infrastructure provides a vast array of targets for potential hackers. As a result, cyber operations can be used to As another group of Russian military experts explains, "vulnerable objects of urban infrastructure" are particularly vulnerable to cyberattacks; although these experts rate transportation networks as perhaps the "most secure part of the urban complex," they note that "there, too . . . cyber and information attacks" are possible. 
416
418
419
The fall of the Soviet Union and the resulting economic turmoil coincided with a period during which ordinary people had increasing access to computers. These factors facilitated the development of a robust community of hackers in Russia. Early on, the Russian defense establishment recognized the utility of cyberattacks as a means of achieving military effects at a relatively low cost. Beginning in the late 1990s, Russian hackers conducted a series of cyberattacks on targets in the United States, Estonia, Georgia, and Ukraine. These attacks have been carried out by both state actors-specifically, hackers working for the Russian security services-and nonstate actors, including commercial entities, cybercrime organizations, and individual patriotic hackers. The exact nature of ties between the Russian security services and these nonstate hackers remains unclear, but the fact that patriotic hackers typically conduct attacks that further Russian interests suggests that there is some degree of coordination. What is clear is that Russian military strategists view cyber operations as a particularly useful tool for achieving effects against adversary critical infrastructure targets.
While there are clear indications-related to both Russian activities in cyberspace and Russian military scholarship and statements on the subject-that Russia conceives of cyber operations as an integral part of future war, several factors might limit Russia's ability to fully realize this vision. These limiting factors relate to the nature of Russia's available cyber labor force and the potential negative effects of competition between powerful state actors in the cyber realm.
First, although Russia has historically benefited from a labor force with substantial technological skills, it has struggled to retain a dedicated cyber labor force. Experts have noted the "persistent emigration of technological expertise from Russia," which has had negative implications for the available cyber workforce. 
422
423
To understand the key factors influencing Russian operational concept development, we have explored the evolution of Russian operational concept development from the mid-1970s to the present and Russian capability development to execute key regional tasks in a future unified strategic operation in the European theater.
Chapter 2 of this report explained that, during the era of strategic nuclear parity in the latter part of the Cold War, the Soviets tested a theater strategic operation that called for echeloned heavy ground formations to conduct conventional deep operations "to the beaches of Western Europe." 
431
In the post-Cold War period, the enlargement of NATO at the expense of the Soviet Union and the large reduction in land forces have played a critical role in Russian operational concept development. These factors place the military burden on Russia's long-range strike capacity (greater than 500 km) to overcome the geographic separation of main forces (see Figure 
7
432
As late as 2021, Russian officers questioned Russia's ability to sustain a regional war with NATO at the conventional level, suggesting that the SDFO was oriented primarily toward nuclear missions. Conventional precision weapons and electronic attack continue to be seen by Russian strategists as auxiliary tools in a regional war; if Russian experts believed that these conventional weapons could generate sufficient effects, they likely would not describe nonnuclear strategic weapons as the primary means of deterrence at the regional level. As Russian conventional capacity grows over the next two decades, nuclear targeting at the regional (and local) level will be replaced by precision conventional strikes. The unified strategic operation is the concept to prepare for that eventuality.
Russia's Challenges in Engaging Targets Throughout the Depth of NATO with Nonnuclear Weapons
In Chapters 3-6 of this report, we examined ends, ways, and means of Russia's current force structure to execute the primary offensive tasks that Russia wants to accomplish in a future unified operation at the regional level.
Chapter 3 presented the details of the conventional theater strike tasks listed above. Our preliminary analysis aligned with the rhetoric of senior Russian officers and analysts cited in Chapter 2. Our examination of Russian conventional theater strike capacity suggested that Russia's ability to achieve its desired effect of long-range conventional strike over a sustained period could be limited by its platforms and munitions. The platform ceiling is arguably a bigger issue for Russia than munitions, but there is more work to be done to estimate Russian munitions stockpiles and to understand the effects that Russia could generate against assumed target sets.
Chapter 4 of this report noted that Russian EW systems might present challenges for NATO communications across domains, particularly as NATO forces near the Russian border. (The use of Belarusian territory is an important question in this and other domains.) However, electronic protection and other countermeasures, such as the use of terrain, suggest that the problem is not insurmountable. NATO communications are likely to be denied only if they are within directline-of-sight distance of the jammer or closer. Similar trends are apparent for other signals (e.g., radar, GPS) and are largely confined to the Baltics and northern Poland.
In Chapter 5, we observed that although Russia is building out several systems that could threaten NATO's space-based assets, the proliferation and use of commercial technology by Russia's adversaries could dilute Russia's capacity in this area. One solution, proposed by the head of the General Staff Academy, could be to target ground-based terminals that facilitate the functioning of space-based communications.
As discussed in Chapter 6, Russian cyber capacity remains an open question. Real-world evidence suggests that there is a considerable threat to civilian infrastructure in both Europe and the United States in the event of a crisis or conflict. The lasting effects of such attacks on a military campaign or society and how to think about offensive capacity in the cyber domain are important areas for future study.
Overall, we did not find evidence that Russian military officers and analysts believe that augmenting capabilities in EW, space, and cyber could fully compensate for a lack of conventional theater strike capacity.
Russia is in the relatively early stages of exploiting the so-called revolution in military affairs identified by Soviet officers in the 1970s. Its lack of conventional long-range munitions and platforms, combined with NATO's strategic depth, imposes a continued reliance on nonstrategic nuclear weapons for regional deterrence and warfighting. The more conventional-laden unified strategic operation might be a decade or more away, according to authoritative Russian sources, examination of recent NATO conflicts, and the research in Chapter 3 of this report.
This cuts several ways. Were a large war to break out in Europe between NATO and Russia in the near term, NATO would need to be prepared for the Russian SDFO, which accounts for the allocation and employment of Russia's nuclear and long-range conventional weapons and means of electronic attack to generate highly destructive and cascading effects in targeting. On the other hand, in the near to middle term, Russia is unlikely to embark on a course of action that it does not think it can execute without the use of nuclear weapons against a nuclear peer. Russia may well be deterred from taking preemptive military action against NATO, in part because of a lack of conventional capacity to-over a sustained period-engage targets throughout the European theater and the U.S. homeland. As Russian conventional strike capacity grows into the 2030s, NATO will need to continue to evaluate and consider countermeasures to Russia's ability to engage greater numbers of targets with conventional weapons and electronic attack weapons. 
433
Table 
7
7
433
434 Reach, 2022;
Reach, Blanc, and Geist, 2022;
Reach et al., 2022;
Reach, Kilambi, and Cozad, 2020.
To understand why this trend is occurring, this report examined Russia's evolution toward a unified strategic operation and associated capability development, focusing on four areas: long-range conventional strikes against critical military and civilian targets; electronic warfare to disrupt NATO command, control, communications, computers,   intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; counterspace actions; and cyberattacks against critical infrastructure.
27 Arkadii Borzov, "Vchera -Iugoslaviia. A kto zavtra?" Vozdushno-kosmicheskaia sfera,
27 Arkadii Borzov, "Vchera -Iugoslaviia. A kto zavtra?" Vozdushno-kosmicheskaia sfera,
SOURCES: Features information from N. V. Ogarkov, "Doklad nachal'nika Shtaba rukovodstva-nachal'nika General'nogo shtabe Vooruzhennykh Sil SSSR Marshala Sovetskogo Soiuza Ogarkova N.V.," in Materialy rasbora operativno-strategicheskogo komandno-ucheniia '
SOURCES: Features information from N. V. Ogarkov, "Doklad nachal'nika Shtaba rukovodstva-nachal'nika General'nogo shtabe Vooruzhennykh Sil SSSR Marshala Sovetskogo Soiuza Ogarkova N.V.," in Materialy rasbora operativno-strategicheskogo komandno-ucheniia '
109  
109  
SOURCE: Features information from
SOURCE: Features information from
NOTE: ALBM = air-launched ballistic missile; CDCM = coastal defense cruise missile; IOC = initial operational capability; N/A = not applicable; TEL = transporter, erector, launcher.
132 U.S. Department of Defense, 135 Westerlund et al., 2019. 136 138 John A. Tirpak and Brian W. Everstine, "Syria Strike Marks Combat Debut for JASSM-ER," Air Force Magazine, April 15, 2018.
SOURCES: Features information from Samuel Charap, Dara Massicot, Miranda Priebe, Alyssa Demus, Clint Reach, Mark Stalczynski, Eugeniu Han, and Lynn E. Davis, Russian Grand Strategy: Rhetoric and Reality, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-4238-A, 2021, p. 94; Durnev and Sviridok, 2021; "Genschtab: Osobennostiu konflictkov budushevo stanet primeneniye robotov i kosmicheskix sredstv," TASS, March 24, 2018; Pavel Ivanov, "Borodatye 'Tomagavki,'" Voenno-promyshlennyi kur'er, (VPK), No. 14, April 12, 2017; Hans M. Kristensen, "Russian Nuclear Forces," in Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, SIPRI Yearbook 2020, Oxford University Press, 2020; Kuzmin and Frolov, 2021, pp. 139 Sivkov, 2019.
SOURCES: Features information from Samuel Charap, Dara Massicot, Miranda Priebe, Alyssa Demus, Clint Reach, Mark Stalczynski, Eugeniu Han, and Lynn E. Davis, Russian Grand Strategy: Rhetoric and Reality, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-4238-A, 2021, p. 94; Durnev and Sviridok, 2021; "Genschtab: Osobennostiu konflictkov budushevo stanet primeneniye robotov i kosmicheskix sredstv," TASS, March 24, 2018; Pavel Ivanov, "Borodatye 'Tomagavki,'" Voenno-promyshlennyi kur'er, (VPK), No. 14, April 12, 2017; Hans M. Kristensen, "Russian Nuclear Forces," in Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, SIPRI Yearbook 2020, Oxford University Press, 2020; Kuzmin and Frolov, 2021, pp. 139 Sivkov, 2019.
167 169
178 Hoehn, 2022.   
198 "Army; 200 Edward Geist and Dara Massicot, "Understanding Putin's Nuclear Superweapons," SAIS Review of International Affairs, Vol. 39, No. 2, Summer-Fall 2019. 201 "Ordnance; Nuclear-Powered Cruise Missile Can Stay in Air for Days -Deputy Defense Minister," Interfax: Russia & CIS Defense Industry Weekly, 2018. SOURCES: Features information from Geist and Massicot, 2019; "Ordnance; Nuclear-Powered Cruise Missile Can Stay in Air for Days -Deputy Defense Minister," 2018; Westerlund et al., 2019. Weapon system data were retrieved between September 2021 and March 2022 from multiple sources: the International Institute for Strategic Studies, the Swedish Defence Research Agency, and Janes publication series, such as Weapons: Air Launched and Missiles and Rockets. NOTES: N/A = not applicable. a See Andrey Mihayloff, "Russia's New Kh-95 Hypersonic Missile Ends the Arms Race with the United States," Pravda, November 10, 2021. b See Ankit Panda, "Report: Russia Developing 4,500 Kilometer Kalibr-M Range Land-Attack Cruise Missile," The Diplomat, January 10, 2019.
SOURCES: Features information from Congressional Research Service, The New START Treaty: Central Limits and Key Provisions, Version 82, Washington, D.C., R41219, updated February 2, 2022; International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2021.
211 Dave Johnson,
NOTE: These are estimates only, based on launch tube capacity. Official numbers may vary. Air-launched numbers are based on 50 percent of Russia's overall launch capacity, assuming a 50-percent withhold for nuclear missions. Sea-launched numbers are based on all of Russia's fleets minus the Pacific Fleet, which would not be expected to participate in a European conflict scenario. Ground-launched numbers are based on all brigades except those in the Eastern Military District.
opted to list Russian Navy launchers, which can fire the Kalibr family of SLCMs or ASCMs, with 100percent LACM allocation. In reality, Russian ships could be outfitted with a combination of LACMs and ASCMs, which would reduce ground targets that could be engaged and increase the number of enemy ships that could be targeted. This table is intended to demonstrate Russian capacity and not a real-world strike plan.
Viktor Khudoleev, "Voiska s velikoi istoriei," Krasnaya Zvezda, 2015.    
A. A. Protasov, S. V. Kreidin, and Iu. A. Kublo, "Aktual'nye aspekty razvitiia silovykh instrumentov i kontseptsii strategicheskogo sderzhivaniia," Vestnik Akademii voennykh nauk,Vol. 3, No. 76, 2021, pp. 44-45.   
Russia's ground forces, in addition to participating in the execution of several such tasks, could seize and hold territory commensurate with their numbers and logistics capacity.
Timothy Thomas, "The Evolving Nature of Russia's Way of War," Military Review, July-August 2017, p. 39.
This work remains classified or inaccessible to non-Russian analysts.
We explained the reasons for the Soviet and Russian preference for offensive, destructive operations in a previous study
(Reach, Blanc, and Geist, 2022)
Russian President Mikhail  Gorbachev took the Soviet military in a different direction from 1985 to 1991. A defensive approach was adopted, and forward forces were moved to the rear. This was an aberration in the post-World War II era, when the Soviets and Russians by and large were thinking about how to structure and employ forces to destroy the adversary in offensive operations throughout the depth of the theater.
U.S. Congress, Office of TechnologyAssessment, 1987, p. 15.   
A definition of operation of strategic deterrence forces (SDFO) captures the blending of nonnuclear and nuclear strikes into a single operation. See the definition a few pages below.
Kokoshin et al., 2021, pp. 60-65;
and V. N. Kuzmin and N. A. Frolov, "
Greg Whisler, "Strategic  Command and Control in the Russian Armed Forces: Untangling the General Staff, Military Districts, and Service Main Commands (Part Two)," Journal of Slavic MilitaryStudies, Vol. 33, No. 1,  2020, p. 101. See alsoKipp, 1991, p. 631.   
Makhmut Gareev, "Ob organizatsii voennogo upravleniia na strategicheskikh napravleniiakh," Natsional'naia  oborona, No. 10, 2010.   
"Russia's FSB Unveils Broad List of Topics that Could Result in 'Foreign Agent' Label," RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty, October 1, 2021.
"Number of Long-Range Cruise Missile Carriers in Russia Up 13 Times Since 2012," TASS, December 22, 2020.
U.S. General Accounting Office, Cruise Missiles: Proven Capability Should Affect Aircraft and Force Structure Requirements, Washington, D.C.,GAO/NSIAD-95-116, April 1995.   
Slipchenko and Gareev, 2007, pp. 26-27.   
Durnev and Sviridok, 2021.
Mikhail Rostovskii, "Sergei Shoigu rasskazal, kak spasali rossiiskuiu armiiu," Moskovskii komsomolets,
September 22, 2019.
Mark Ashby, Caolionn O'Connell, Edward Geist, Jair Aguirre, Christian Curriden, and Jonathan Fujiwara,  Defense Acquisition in Russia and China, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A113-1, 2021;
Radin et al., 2019.
Janes Defense Weekly, "Russia Cuts State Armament Programme Funding,"
July 22, 2020.
H. I. Sutton, "Russia Increasing Submarine Cruise Missile Capacity as US Navy Decreases Its Own," RUSI, August 19, 2021.
Justin Bronk, Russian and Chinese Combat Air Trends: Current Capabilities and Future Outlook, London: Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies, Whitehall Report 3-20, October 2020.
According toHoehn, 2021, p. 24, "From FY [fiscal year] 1998 through FY2018, the Navy spent $5.87 billion on 4,984 Tomahawk cruise missiles."
Sivkov, 2019.
Westerlund et al., 2019
Sivkov, 2019.
Center for Strategic and International Studies Missile Defense Project, "9K720 Iskander (SS-26)," Missile Threat, last updated August 2, 2021b.
International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2021;
Westerlund et al., 2019.
We do not count the forces from the Eastern Military District, as they will have responsibilities for Russia's eastern borders.
Akimenko, 2021.   
Radin et al., 2019.
Tactical employment of Russian EW systems, such as those found within the organic EW companies of the Russian maneuver units, is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Dmitriy Boltenkov, "Zakryt' volnu:  kak sredstva radioelektronnoy bor'by izmenyat silu flota," Izvestiia,
November 22, 2020.
Despite being called "high" frequency, the HF band is the lowest one that is used by the jammers discussed in this report.
Because the HF transmitter in this example is notional, we do not include any effective power gains from EP techniques.
Giuseppe Aureliano Fabrizio, High Frequency Over-the-Horizon Radar: Fundamental Principles, Signal  Processing, and Practical Applications, McGraw-Hill Education, 2013.   
Although the range ratio that we are using for the Murmansk-BN was developed using a notional 100 W transmitter, the transmit power of the HFGCS is likely less than 100 W (FAS source).
Novyy oboronnyy zakaz. Strategii, "Tirada-2S," webpage,
September 25, 2019.
This coverage diameter assumes a flat earth, which is effectively true when the half angle is small and becomes less true as the angle increases.
Rosoboroneksport, "R-330ZH: Avtomaticheskaya stantsiya pomekh abonentam sistem sputnikovoy svyazi 'INMARSAT', 'IRIDIUM' i sputnikovoy radionavigatsionnoy sistemy GPS," undated.
One source (Roman Skomorokhov, "Stantsiya REB R-934U 'Sinitsa'. Kogda 'Sinitsa' v pole, zhuravlyam v nebe tyazhko," Voennoe obozrenie, November 3, 2017) says R-934UM has at least 500 W, and another (unpublished 2019 RAND research by Barnett and colleagues) says at least 1,000 W.
Vladimir Lytkin, "Perspektivnyye sistemy REB Rossii: chto prikhodit na smenu 'Krasukhe-4'," Voennoe obozrenie, July 16, 2020.
Bart Hendrickx, "Russia  Gears Up for Electronic Warfare in Space (Part 1)," Space Review, October 26, 2020c.
Our baseline laydown placed both Kaliningrad jammers at the same location, making them appear as a single system in Figure4.10.
Anton Lavrov, "Russian UAVs in Syria," Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies, undated.
Kirill Ryabov, "Den' innovatsiy YUVO: kompleks REB RB-341V 'Leyer-3,'" Voennoe obozrenie, October 16, 2015.
Kelsey D. Atherton, "Russian Drones Can JamCellphones 60 Miles Away," C4ISRNet, November 16, 2018.    
Although the total effective range is 250 km, it requires the ORLAN-10 to be located 150 km from the center of the range ring. Thus, to achieve a true 250-km range ring, multiple ORLAN-10 UAVs would be required.
"Vertolet radioelektronnoy bor'by Mi-8MTPR1 na forume 'Armiya-2019,'" Voyenno-tekhnicheskiy sbornik'Bastion', January 29, 2020.   
"Kompleks 'Rychag-AV' -pomoshchnik vintokrylykh mashin: ob uvelichenii chisla vertoliotov s sistemami radiopodavleniya," Voennoe obozrenie, November 13, 2020.
Center for Strategic and International Studies Missile Defense Project, "S-500 Prometheus," Missile Threat, last updated July 1, 2021a.
National Air and Space Intelligence Center, Competing in Space, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, December 2018, p. 21.
Oleg Groznyi, "Fundament oboronosposobnosti otechestva nadezhen," Krasnaya Zvezda, December 28, 2019.   
Weeden and Sampson, 2021, pp. 2-34-2-35.   
Kevin P. Chilton and Lukas Autenried, The Backbone of JADC2: Satellite Communications for Information Age Warfare, Arlington, Va.: Mitchell Institute for AerospaceStudies, Mitchell Institute Policy Paper, Vol. 32,  December 2021, pp. 23-24.   
Arbatov, 2019, pp. 154-158.   
Hines, Mishulovich, and Shull, 1995, p. 7. Quote is as recorded by Hines from an interview with General-Lieutenant Gelii Batenin.
The Russians might not formally embrace this concept or the nomenclature. More important are the factors driving Russia's operational evolution, the objectives and tasks that Russia believes it needs to accomplish in a regional or large-scale war, and the challenges of coordinating the actions of a joint force in a high-intensity conflict.
We are indebted to 
Mike Albertson
James Black
Perhaps the most daunting system that we consider here is the Murmansk-BN ground-based jammer, with its 400-kW power and expected range of 5,000 km. 
226
227
Our approach to HF jamming uses a method developed in unpublished 2019 RAND Corporation research by D. Sean Barnett, Henry Hargrove, Matthew Lane, Nicholas O'Donoughue, Barry Wilson, Katharina Ley Best, Stephen M. Worman, William Mackenzie, Clint Reach, and Jordan Willcox. This method relates the ratio of the power levels of the jammer and transmitter to their range ratio, determining how close the jammer needs to be to the receiver to be effective for a given separation distance between the HF emitter and receiver. In Figure 
4
Space is an increasingly important domain in great-power competition. According to Russian experts, space is a new sphere of military and political confrontation in a multipolar world. 
254
255
In thinking about interstate conflict, Russian military and national security experts recognize that outer space and space-based assets will be critical in a future war. 
256
257
Taking note of the U.S. use of space-based assets in the Gulf War in 1991 and in the air campaign against Serbia in 1999, Russia observed how space-based assets could be used for conducting military operations in a future noncontact war. Within the Russian General Staff, there was an evolution in thinking about the application of military power through space. In the late 20th century, space was viewed as a support arm to conventional and strategic forces, providing navigation, intelligence, and timing. Today, Russia's military leaders accept that the role of outer space is undergoing a transition from a supporting role to one of combat operations. 
258
To achieve its strategic objectives in space, Russia has developed several systems that it believes provide an asymmetric counter to U.S. and NATO space-based capabilities. These systems can be categorized as direct-ascent ASAT weapons, co-orbital ASAT systems, directedenergy weapons, EW jammers, and cyber systems. Associated with most of these systems is the required support infrastructure, from launchpads to tracking and communication facilities that are integral to Russian plans to degrade or defeat Western space-based systems. Several of these systems are the progeny of Soviet concepts, some of which date back to the 1960s and 1970s. In this section, we will examine the major Russian systems in further detail and assess their development using available information.
Russia's most mature direct-ascent ASAT weapon is the PL-19 Nudol. It is a two-stage rocket that uses its velocity to kinetically destroy its target. Tracing its ancestry back to Moscow's original ABM defense during the Cold War, the Nudol may have been conceived initially as an ABM system. 284 Unlike the A-135 interceptors that served as the initial ABM system around Moscow, which were nuclear tipped because of the risk of inaccuracy, the Nudol is a hit-to-kill missile. However, the Nudol's primary role appears to be that of a kinetic ASAT weapon capable of hitting satellites in low earth orbit. The system is designed to be stationed on mobile vehicle launchers (transporter-erector-launcher) and consists of a two-stage missile fueled by a solid propellant. 
285
Nudol testing began in 2014, and Russia tested the system twice in 2020; however, none of the tests targeted an actual satellite. On November 15, 2021, Russia launched a Nudol missile against one of its decaying Tselina-D satellites in low earth orbit at approximately 460 km. 
286
284 Weeden and Sampson, 2021, p. 2-15.