# ID: aaa0555bf9d347bb8168d4d41a1365ff
# Title: Adapting Short of Doctrine: US Military Counterinsurgency in Iraq March 2004-December 2006
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
In 2003, as the insurgency in Iraq gained a foothold, the Army and Marine Corps had not updated their respective doctrines to face such a threat in at least a generation.
While each had some doctrine for stability actions, counterinsurgency was not a form of warfare for which the services trained their officers.
Eventually, the two services would come together to develop a common doctrine.
However, this combined manual would not appear until December 2006.
Therefore, commanders and their staffs had to become imaginative in their efforts to develop operational approaches.
At that point, it was important for the Army and Marine Corps to have provided their officers with a wide range of developmental, educational, and training experiences from which these officers could draw in order to adapt to unfamiliar situations.
Further, doctrine that instilled a broad understanding of war and diverse ways of warfare was important to provide a basis that officers could use to construct relevant operational approaches.
This has implications for the future.
The Army's view of the future, outlined in TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, Win in a Complex World, envisions multiple types of threats without centering on one in particular.
Using four harbingers of future conflict (competing powers such as China and Russia; regional powers such as Iran and North Korea; transnational terrorists organizations; and transnational criminal organizations) Win in a Complex World attempts to develop universal principles applicable across the spectrum of conflict rather than focus on a single enemy.