# ID: aaa0555bf9d347bb8168d4d41a1365ff
# Title: Adapting Short of Doctrine: US Military Counterinsurgency in Iraq March 2004-December 2006
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
This study argues that officers who have a broad base of developmental, educational, and training experiences will likely be able to apply critical and creative thinking while drawing on their experience, history, theory, and doctrine to develop effective operational approaches in situations for which doctrine and training have not specifically prepared them. In order to show this, this paper explores the development of operational approaches to the insurgency in Iraq from March 2004 until the publication of the US Army Field Manual 3-24, Counterinsurgency, in December 2006. The monograph delves into the education, training, and development of Army General George Casey, Marine Majors Generals James Mattis and Richard Natonski, and Army Colonels H.R. McMaster and Sean MacFarland. It further looks at the foundations of doctrine and examines what doctrine was available to these officers. From there, the paper describes the development of each of these officers' operational approach and its effectiveness. The paper concludes by drawing linkages between the education, training, and development of these officers and their ability to adapt to the insurgency in Iraq prior to the publication of an updated manual for counterinsurgency.
After a sweeping victory over the forces of Saddam Hussein's Iraq in the spring of 2003, the US military and its coalition partners took over the task of stabilizing Iraq. US government decisions led to the removal of a majority of Saddam-era Iraqi government officials leaving a void. US Central Command (CENTCOM) commander General Tommy Franks retained command of the invasion; however, once military forces captured Baghdad, Franks handed military command to Lieutenant General (LTG) Ricardo Sanchez and his V Corps headquarters. While the task of governance ostensibly fell under the control of Presidential Envoy to Iraq L. Paul Bremer and the newly created Coalition Provisional Authority of Iraq for which he was the administrator, military units quickly found themselves providing government services as part of their attempt to stabilize the country. Additionally, an insurgency began to brew that further complicated the situation. It soon became clear that the coalition needed a more robust headquarters and staff to deal with the changing situation. In response, the coalition created the Multi-National Force-Iraq (MNF-I) headquarters out of Sanchez's V Corps and President George W. Bush appointed US Army Vice Chief of Staff General George Casey to lead this newly created headquarters.
Casey arrived in theater in June 2004 and directed his staff to study the problem in Iraq.
The commander and his staff determined the coalition faced an insurgency and developed a plan to counter it. 
1
2 Under Casey and subsequent commanders, division headquarters served as multi-national divisions named for the region of Iraq they controlled. The division headquarters generally had several units under it that were not organic to it modified table of organization and equipment. around the situation in Baghdad was to extend the tour of the 172nd Stryker Brigade Combat Team.
With approval from US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, Casey retained the unit in Iraq for four more months. With some members having already returned to their home station in Alaska, the extension became a national news item and prompted question about the security situation in the country. 
3
4
Many works have focused on the successes of Petraeus and the failures of Casey.
Fred Kaplan's The Insurgents paints Casey as a counterinsurgency illiterate who initially embraces the concept and then rejects it. Kaplan, in contrast, paints Petraeus and his band of "coindinistas" as the true intellectual foundation for counterinsurgency understanding in the military. 
5
8
9
5
6
7 David Cloud and Greg Jaffe, The Fourth Star: Four Generals and the Epic Struggle for the Future of the United States Army (New York : Brown Publishers, 2009). 
8
9
there has not been an effort to explore Casey's own approach to counterinsurgency or that of his subordinates. While there is evidence that many US commanders and their staffs not only understood the situation they faced but developed sound operational approaches to deal with the problem, this subject has not been explored. Thus, the employment of operational art for the purpose of countering an insurgency during Casey's tenure remains an understudied field. The primary purpose of this study is to determine how commanders at different levels were able to develop operational approaches to the problem of insurgency in Iraq without the benefit of a current, consolidated doctrine. In doing so, this study will analyze the career education and development of these commanders prior to their command's in Iraq. The study will further explore how these commanders and their staffs used theory and history as the basis of an operational approach and how they may have used current and older doctrine to inform their decisions.
In order to explore these inquiries, this study will examine the development of the operational approaches of different level headquarters during this period to determine how they adapted prior to the consolidated doctrine that the Army and Marine Corps would publish in December 2006. First, the study will examine in depth of training and education that leaders received prior to their deployments to Iraq beginning with their commissioning sources. The focus will be institutional learning and doctrine available to them as they progressed from commissioning to the rank they held at the time of their command and developmental experiences throughout their careers. This study will also examine the personal study habits of these officers that developed their ability to frame the problem and think critically and creatively about it. The study will then look at the theater level, focusing on Casey and his staff, the division level, focusing on 1st Marine Division and the brigade level, focusing on 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment and 1st Brigade, 1st Armored Division (both Army units). This monograph will examine how each of these headquarters developed their operational approaches. As part of these assessments, the study will look at the effect of each approach. Since results in counterinsurgency are difficult to judge in isolation, the goal will be only to demonstrate recognizable outcomes of the approaches rather than to assign a degree of success to the commanders. This study assumes that the current US Army definition of operational art is consistent with the methods commanders applied during the timeframe in questions. Thus, the study will use the definition of operational art as defined and described in Army Doctrine Reference Publication 3-0, Unified Land Operations. This publication defines operational art as "the pursuit of strategic objectives, in whole or in part, through the arrangement of tactical actions in time, space, and purpose."
10
This study argues that officers who have a broad base of developmental, educational, and training experiences will likely be able to apply critical and creative thinking while drawing on their experience, history, theory, and doctrine to develop effective operational approaches in situations for which doctrine and training have not specifically prepared them. The results of this study may be applicable to future military leaders who find themselves faced with situations where current US military doctrine falls short. US Army Training and Doctrine Command Pamphlet 525-3-1, Win in a Complex World foresees a future where the military cannot predict accurately its operating environment or adversaries. 11 Military leaders must focus their preparations and cannot train for every contingency. Thus, it is likely that in the future military leaders will find themselves in charge of units in an environment for which current doctrine and training is inadequate. However, it is unlikely that any future situation will be so revolutionary that a competent staff and commander are unable to use theory and history along with past and current doctrine to develop a sound operational approach to the problem they face. Therefore, understanding how past units have done this will help these commanders and staffs to quickly adjust to an unfamiliar environment, adversary and situation. Further, this study should inform officers' understanding of the value of service and joint education and the relevance of a broad range of developmental and operational experiences and personal study.
Chapter 2 will first examine the education and training leaders received during their career that prepared them for the situation in Iraq. The chapter will look at doctrine as well to determine how it may have influenced the thinking of commanders and staffs. Chapter 3 will then examine the development of operational approaches by Casey (commanding MNF-I) Major Generals James Mattis and Richard Natonski (commanding 1st Marine Division in succession), Colonel H.R.
McMaster (3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment), and Colonel Sean MacFarland (1st Brigade Combat Team, 1st Armored Division). Chapter 4 will draw conclusions and make recommendations.
This study focuses on five officers who entered the military during the Cold War and served throughout the post-Cold War era prior to arriving in Iraq. Each of these officers followed a career path that took them through a commissioning source and then through a career of developmental experiences and education designed to prepare them broadly for the challenges of command. Along the way, each received and participated in diverse training. Stipulating that education prepares one broadly for the unknown, training for the known or anticipated, and development prepares one for both, then each officer's career path potentially had the most profound impact on his ability to adapt to the situation in Iraq. Casey was certainly familiar with the concept of counterinsurgency even if he was not well versed or practiced in it prior to his year in Bosnia-Herzegovina. The Army published an update to its Vietnam-era counterinsurgency field manual, Field Manual 31-16, Counterguerilla Operations, in 1967 while Casey was a cadet at Georgetown University. 
13
14
15
16
Additionally, while the Army curtailed counterinsurgency instruction in the 1970s, during Casey's attendance of the basic and advanced infantry officer courses, students still received instruction on the subject. According to Andrew Birtle, the Infantry School offered "several dozen hours" of course work on the subject until 1978. 
17
He had a broad base of experience in a wide range of operations focused on the populace. Mattis and Natonski both wrote student papers while at their service schools. Those that survive demonstrate that these officers considered a diverse range of warfighting topics. 
21
19
20
22
23
In 2007, following Mattis's assumption of command of US Marine Forces, CENTCOM, the general published a required reading list for Marines and sailors deploying to his area of responsibility. The list is heavy with counterinsurgency works published in 2006 or later but also contains books such as Bing West's The Village and Andrew Krepenivich's The Army in Vietnam. 
24
Mattis read this prior to 2004. 
25
29
26
Counterinsurgency and
Contingency Operations Doctrine 1942-1976, 480. 27
28 See Rick Atkinson, The Long Gray Line: The American Journey of West Point's Class of 1966  (New York: Owl Books, 1989) for a discussion of Vietnam War veterans teaching at the United States Military Academy.
veterans, especially among their non-commissioned officers providing them some understanding of counterinsurgency at least as it related to Vietnam. McMaster's regimental commander during Operation Desert Storm was then-Colonel L. Don Holder, a veteran of Vietnam. McMaster further wrote a doctoral dissertation on the Vietnam War, which he published as the book Dereliction of Duty in 1997. 
30
McMaster's intellectual curiosity and the furthering of his understanding of war.
MacFarland is not a graduate of the US Army War College but rather the Industrial College of the Armed Forces. He is also a graduate of the School of Advanced Military Studies, indicating he received a broad base of education in operational art and history. As journalist Fred Kaplan concluded when analyzing the colonel's career and self-study, "In short, [counterinsurgency] was not at all a new subject to MacFarland." 31 MacFarland wrote two monographs while at the School of Advanced Military Studies. One focused on the applicability of Soviet doctrine to US Army concepts. 
32
33
Kaplan,
The Insurgents,
245. 32
33
Each of these officers came up through the ranks learning doctrinal concepts similar to what would later be described in codified counterinsurgency doctrine. Certainly by the mid-1990s, the Army returned to thinking about and codifying low-intensity conflict doctrine. Former Army Chief of Military History John Sloan Brown notes that, "Most soldiers and virtually all combat units had served in stability operations since DESERT STORM…" 34 This is true for Natonski, MacFarland, and Casey. Following Operation Desert Storm in 1991, the Army added into its capstone doctrine, Field Manual 100-5, Operations, a section on operations other than war (previously part of pre-Vietnam versions). Field Manual 100-23, Peace Operations, followed this.
The Center for Army Lessons Learned collected and distributed lessons from these operations and officers contributed to the subject through student papers, professional journal articles and blog postings and discussions. Combat training centers integrated guerillas, hostile civilians, refugees, and even non-government organizations from the mid-1990s on. As Brown concluded, "…the underlying principle [of low-intensity conflict] seems to have been grasped by most." 
35
Even the Army's and Marine Corps' capstone doctrines, the primary war fighting publications of both branches, prepared these officers to serve in counterinsurgency or stability operations environments and to develop sound operational approaches. While these manuals historically focused on a single type of warfare, they contain principles and concepts applicable to all types of warfare. The Army's doctrinal roots are largely based on French and Prussian concepts with particular emphasis on precepts described by Swiss theorist Baron Antoine Henri de Jomini and Prussian theorist Carl von Clausewitz. 
36
37
38
39
36 Kretchik, U.S. Army Doctrine. 
37
38 Kretchik, U.S. Army Doctrine, 248-55. 
39
Counterinsurgency was not necessarily an overlooked or dismissed form of warfare in capstone doctrine. In 1979, Chief of Staff of the Army General Edward Meyer worried that the new version of Field Manual 100-5, Operations-still in writing at the time-did not dedicate space to counterinsurgency. Ultimately, the commander of Training and Doctrine Command, General Donn Starry convinced him it was better to focus on the most dangerous task-war in Europe-and the forces could react to other forms of war if necessary. Both Starry and Meyer would have preferred two forces and two doctrines, one for general purpose and one for Europe, but ultimately acknowledged it was not feasible. 
40
The doctrinal roots of the Marine Corps are different than those of the Army. The Marine Corps' culture historically has split between amphibious operations and small wars or imperial policing. 
42
43
40 Trauschweizer,
The Cold War U.S. Army,
218. 41
42
43
operations in a small area. 
44
45
46
44
45
46
While neither the Army's nor the Marine Corps' capstone doctrine at the outset of the insurgency in Iraq appears sufficient for guiding a force in how to conduct those types of operations, both manuals provided a philosophy of war and framework that provided useful tenets and precepts for military forces in all types of warfare. In that, these manuals contributed to the broad base of knowledge and experience that the officers in this study possessed at the outset of their deployments. While none may have possessed a how-to counterinsurgency manual, each was nonetheless prepared for the challenge due to a career of institutional education, experiential learning, and training as well as personal self study that provided them an ability to think critically and creatively. None of the officers was a specialist in any form of warfare. All trained in maneuver warfare and learned its doctrine in various military courses. However, each additionally had experience or had studied non-maneuver warfare or military tasks, whether that was peacekeeping, noncombatant evacuation, humanitarian assistance, or counterinsurgency.
That each of these five officers came into command with the ability to adapt to the insurgency they faced speaks volumes about the military's ability to select and develop officers. whereas Mattis had a very conventionally focused career. Casey served in various roles in the capital region. What all of these officers had in common was that they each had similar key positions such as platoon leader, company commander, operations officer, executive officer, and battalion commander. Further, they each had a broad base of military education and demonstrated intellectual curiosity from an early point in their career whether that was through personal reading, civilian education or both. These were officers worthy of their ranks who could take their experience, education, training and doctrinal knowledge and combine that with focused research to think critically and creatively about the problem they faced. The sections that follow will demonstrate that these officers arrived in their positions prepared for the challenge and applied history, theory, and doctrine (both contemporary and older versions) to develop operational approaches tailored to their situations.
Developing the Operational Approach at the Top: Multi-National Force-Iraq Unlike some of the commanders in this study, Casey had very little notice he would be taking command in Iraq. Of the other four, only Natonski also took command of an organization already in Iraq. Casey arrived expecting to find a completed campaign plan, but the plan was still in draft form. 
47
48
49
47
48
Casey,
Strategic Reflections,
20. 49 Ibid.,
24.
51
52
53
54
1
55
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
In addition to continuing the work of the Red Team, Casey and his director of strategy, plans, and assessment, Air Force Brigadier General Stephen Sargeant, gathered a group of experts to increase the staff's competency in counterinsurgency. This group largely consisted of PhD holders who worked for the RAND Corporation as well as Army Colonel William Hix, a Special Forces officer with experience in counterinsurgency operations in the Philippines. Hix recruited Kalev Sepp, a former history instructor at West Point with a PhD from Harvard. 
60
Casey felt that his forces needed a greater understanding of the practice of counterinsurgency. His "perception, from observing and talking to subordinates, was that [the coalition] understood the doctrine well enough, but that [they] all had a lot to learn about how to apply that doctrine, particularly in Iraq." 61 Therefore, he directed the staff in September 2004 to distill relevant lessons from history that they could share and implement. Sepp became the point 59 See Robert Jervis, System Effects: Complexity in Political and Social Life (Princeton University Press, 1998); Casey, Strategic Reflections, 157. 
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
This strategic vision was also incorporated into the December 2005 Campaign Progress Review. 
67
68
65
66
67
68
bases his troops owned. 69 However, it was not a terrible departure from the conclusions of Sepp's article and there were political considerations as well.
If MNF-I did significantly degrade the primarily anti-government insurgent forces in Iraq, then Casey's operational approach was sound. Evidence suggests this may be the case. As Casey stated, the main source of violence in the 2006 time frame came from sectarian violence. While this portended a civil war, it also demonstrates that the main anti-government insurgency was significantly blunted. Thus Casey's approach adequately dealt with the threat that existed when he arrived but may have overlooked other potentially destabilizing sources of violence. Reducing the influence of the main anti-government group in Iraq may also have created a situation where Sunni's felt compelled to fight for themselves thus triggering an increase in Shia militant actions.
Due to the improved security that came during Petraeus's tenure, many have concluded that that commander and not Casey developed the operational approach that restored security to Iraq.
However, given the history of counterinsurgency, it is hard to believe that actions of one commander over eighteen months could have led on their own to such a dramatic turnaround.
Certainly, Casey and his staff helped lay the groundwork even if a later commander altered some of their tenets. First, Casey established the framework MNF-I actions in the four lines of effort.
Second, Casey developed the COIN and Phoenix Academies, which continued to train commanders and advisors through Petraeus's tenure. Third, Casey built the infrastructure and security forces to a point that provided Petraeus the means to implement a reimagined operational approach.
It is easy to see how Casey and his staff employed operational art. Casey's focus was on fulfilling his United Nations mandate and ensuring his military operations aligned with the political (strategic) goals of the ambassador and president. Casey did not generally direct tactical operations, however, he did oversee four lines of effort and three specific tactical missions: training and advising security forces, tactical operations, and special operations missions. Casey and his staff 69 See Robinson, Tell Me How This Ends; Ricks, The Gamble; West, No True Glory.  used elements of operational art such as centers of gravity, basing, and lines of effort in building their approach.
They also demonstrated an understanding of theories of war and warfare. Above all, the main ideas of Prussian theorist Carl von Clausewitz and Swiss theorist Antoine Henri de Jomini, well entrenched in Army doctrine, stand out in his adherence to political directives and arrangement of tactical missions. Counterinsurgency theorists also influenced the operational approach that MNF-I developed. While Casey does not mention any particular theorist in his memoir aside from T.E. Lawrence, he does indicate that his staff studied and understood counterinsurgency theory.
Similarly, Casey and his staff employed a wide survey of history to develop their operational approach. Further, many members of the staff and Casey himself had experience in the 1990s succession of peacekeeping and stability operations that informed them. Casey and his staff were further able to adapt doctrine to the situation at hand using a mix of stability, peace keeping, offensive, and operations doctrine.
Casey and his staff were a highly experienced and informed group. Casey had more than 30 years of experience and military education. His deployment to Bosnia certainly informed him about the type of warfare MNF-I was engaged in. Beyond that his graduate studies, fellowship, experience with Congress, and service as Vice Chief of Staff informed his understanding of the strategic context and political dimension of the war. Casey learned throughout his career to deal with other government agencies and political leaders. Sepp had earned a PhD as well as taught and participated in counterinsurgent warfare. Hix had at least twenty years of experience and military education as well as operational counterinsurgency experience. Many other members of the staff held doctorates. Casey and his staff used their broad development, their educations and theory, history and doctrine to develop their approach. Far from being dull, Casey was a thoughtful, well educated, and highly experienced officer prepared for the complexity of Iraq.
The development of the 1st Marine Division's operational approach started at Camp Pendlelton, California several months before Casey took charge in Iraq. Major General James Mattis and Lieutenant General James Conway, commander of 1st Marine Division's parent unit 1st Marine Expeditionary Force, discussed their approach while looking at the problem prior to the division's February 2004 deployment. Mattis's division would be the primarily ground element for Conway's force. Therefore, both generals worked together on their operational approach. They decided to try a population-centric approach with a heavy emphasis on the development of indigenous security forces.
As he did throughout his career, Mattis studied intently prior to deploying. In this case, he used a mix of expired doctrine, history books, and even National Geographic magazines. 
70
71
72
Mattis also required his Marines to read the Marine Corps Small Wars Manual. 
73
70
71
74
75
2
76
74
75
76
[W]e are now going into what we consider to be a counterinsurgent effort, and that required what I called the three P's [sic]: patient, persistent, presence. Patience you understood. That word sends a message. Persistent, you can't go in and come out, you can't be episodic. And presence, you've got to be there or you're not influential. And this included building Iraqi security forces, which unfortunately had been basically put together with uniforms and a modicum of training, rather than taking the time to build them correctly. 77 Mattis and his staff added to this approach by creating an opening gambit that served as an interim-operating concept. His staff issued this plan through Fragmentary Order 0011-04 titled "Fallujah Opening Gambit" which was known colloquially around the division as "First 15 Plays" (See Appendix A). The order consisted of kinetic operations designed to increase security, defeat the enemy and build the capacity of indigenous security personnel such as police and border patrol as well as civic action such as populace engagements, distribution of necessary supplies and 
77
78
The tenets of the plan are deliberately vague to allow freedom of action. These prescriptions reflect a balanced approach to the problem and demonstrate an understanding of the concepts of counterinsurgency. Mattis stated in an interview that this approach "was based on a study of history, understanding of COIN doctrine, and a recognition that this was going to be an ethically and morally bruising environment that we had to prepare the troops for." 
79
80
81
79
80 Camp,
Operation Phantom Fury,
[89]
[90]
[91]
[92]
82
Mattis attempted to continue his original operational approach following the cease-fire but Vigilant Resolve emboldened insurgents and made civic actions difficult inside Fallujah. However, with insurgents occupied in Fallujah, the 1st Marine Division saw better success outside the city. 
83
Therefore, the 1st Marine Division focuses on providing security, stability operations, securing routes, and training an Iraqi security force that would be effective and legitimate. 
84
85
In August Mattis left Iraq and turned his division over to Natonski. Natonski's new deputy, Brigadier General Joseph Dunford who had been Mattis's chief of staff until August, noted that 82 Ibid., 80.
83 Kenneth Estes, "U.S. Marine Corps Operations in Iraq, 2003-2006" (Occasional Paper, History  Division, United States Marine Corps, 2009), 41-8. 
84
85
there were no major changes to the operational approach at the handover referring to Natonski's direction as "continue to march" in Anbar. 
86
87
Natonski's operational approach demonstrated the characteristics of the so-called classic counterinsurgency theory, particularly that of French theorist David Galula. The second operation to clear Fallujah in November and December 2004, where Natonski was the ground force commander, adheres to Galula's theory that the first step at the tactical level is the "[d]estruction or expulsion of the insurgent force" from an area of operations. The Frenchman notes that the initial clearance operation is not an end, but a means to allow more nuanced operations. Despite his talk of destruction or expulsion, Galula acknowledged that this first step will not actually destroy the enemy so much as clear him from an area. 
88
86
87 West,
No True Glory,
258.
Province." 
89
90
91
92
90
91
92
93
94
Galula's next three steps are: Contact with and control of the population, destruction of the insurgent political organization, and local elections. 
95
96
97
The Marine operational approach developed first by Mattis and refined and furthered by Natonski demonstrates a mixture of theory, doctrine, and history. Like the Army, the Marines had not updated their counterinsurgency doctrine since Vietnam. However, Mattis understood that existing operations doctrine and even old manuals could provide useful guidance. Thus, he not only referred to a sixty-four year old manual but also forced his Marines to digest the doctrine. Mattis further dedicated himself to a deep study of Iraq and a thorough study of counterinsurgency history, particularly Marine operations in Vietnam. While Natonski's particular interest in history is hard to pin down, his career provided him a wealth of understanding. Over a lifetime of service, Natonski's experience became a form of history of its own informing him what was important. This is likely why Natonski so readily accepted the majority of Mattis's approach; he appeared to take what 
94
95
96
97
Mattis had built and apply specific changes rather than develop a new approach. Natonski stated in an interview that he used lessons from Mattis to alter his approach. 
98
Counterinsurgency at the Brigade Level: Tal Afar and Ramadi McMaster immersed himself in the counterinsurgency writings of past theorists and practitioners. Along with books, he seized on the proceedings of a 1962 RAND corporation 
98
101
Lawrence, who had led indigenous insurgents against the Ottoman Empire during the First World War. 
102
103
104
105
106
103
104 Steven Clay, Interview with Colonel Sean MacFarland, 17 January 2008, Contemporary  Operations Studies Team, Combat Studies Institute, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 8.  that a large operation [was] necessary to defeat the terrorist organizations such that economic and political development [could] proceed, and so we [could] set conditions for the introduction of Iraqi security forces --a reconstituted police force and the Iraqi army -so the improvement in security in the city [would be] permanent, and then on the back end of that operation, to conduct reconstruction, to rekindle hope among the population and to set sort of the foundation for reconciliation between the Sunni and Shi'a populations within the city. 
107
110
111
After Casey decided to move US forces out of Tal Afar, MacFarland received orders to move to Ramadi in June 2006 to replace 2nd Brigade Combat Team of the Pennsylvania National Guard's 28th Infantry Division. Prior to their arrival, the previous unit had only been able to secure major lines of communication, the government center of Ramadi and military bases. Thus, while MacFarland and his staff had been able to fall in on an operational approach focused on counterinsurgency in Tal Afar, they would need to develop a new one to deal with Ramadi's unique issues. MacFarland received guidance to "Fix Ramadi but don't do a Fallujah." 
112
113
114
They had taken extensive notes of the method the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment used and that became the base of their plan. 
115
117
[M]y idea was, given the combat power that I had at hand, we would use the 'clear, hold, and build' concept to clear and hold one neighborhood at a time or a couple neighborhoods at a time and then, once I had that neighborhood pretty well secured and the enemy beaten down, I would turn that over to the Iraqi Security Forces [ISF] and move forward into another neighborhood and establish a web of combat outposts that would secure all the key locations around the city and basically deny the enemy their safe haven. 
118
119
120
121
123
119
120
121 Russell,
Innovation,
Transformation,
and War,
113.
Wheeler,
Interview with MacFarland,
181. 123 DiMarco Concrete Hell,
197.
The success of MacFarland's operational approach is not as readily apparent as that of McMaster and MacFarland were two well-educated, thoughtful commanders who used history (recent and modern). Both developed operational approaches that took into account their own understanding of war, the theory and history of counterinsurgency and the unique particularities of their areas of operation. Thus, these brigade commanders used similar processes as 
124 Michaels,
A Chance in Hell,
209.
In 2003, as the insurgency in Iraq gained a foothold, the Army and Marine Corps had not updated their respective doctrines to face such a threat in at least a generation. While each had some doctrine for stability actions, counterinsurgency was not a form of warfare for which the services trained their officers. Eventually, the two services would come together to develop a common doctrine. However, this combined manual would not appear until December 2006. Therefore, commanders and their staffs had to become imaginative in their efforts to develop operational approaches. At that point, it was important for the Army and Marine Corps to have provided their officers with a wide range of developmental, educational, and training experiences from which these officers could draw in order to adapt to unfamiliar situations. Further, doctrine that instilled a broad understanding of war and diverse ways of warfare was important to provide a basis that officers could use to construct relevant operational approaches. This has implications for the future. The Army's view of the future, outlined in TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, Win in a Complex World, envisions multiple types of threats without centering on one in particular. Using four harbingers of future conflict (competing powers such as China and Russia; regional powers such as Iran and North Korea; transnational terrorists organizations; and transnational criminal organizations) Win in a Complex World attempts to develop universal principles applicable across the spectrum of conflict rather than focus on a single enemy. 
125
The commanders and staff in this study all faced a similar situation. None had ever been in a counterinsurgency situation and only McMaster had conducted any formal research into the subject. However, even McMaster's doctoral studies were limited in applicability. His research focused largely on the interactions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the White House; McMaster was a brigade commander. Therefore, his research likely served him better in particular in his time on the working group for a solution to the Iraq problem, dubbed the "Council of Colonels," which he served on following his command. Still, his research, thought, and writing on the subject certainly shaped his views. Natonski had a long career of civil focused operations but had never been in a situation similar to Iraq. Thus, each had to reach into the past to develop plans for the future.
Despite the challenges, these commanders were not interlopers in a conflict for which they were not prepared. Casey, Mattis, Natonski, McMaster, and MacFarland all were able to adapt to a complex situation. These officers employed many of the tenets of counterinsurgency that Field Manual 3-24 would codify. However, they did not have the benefit of the manual when crafting their approaches. How were they able to adapt so readily to this unfamiliar form of warfare?
In each case, the commanders used history to shape their operational approach. In Casey's case, the prime link to history came in the form of Kalev Sepp who had studied and taught counterinsurgency. Sepp's studies brought to light more than fifty counterinsurgency situations just in the previous century, with the large majority of those instances not directly involving the United States. Casey also brought his Bosnia experience and used his international relations education. The other four all took it upon themselves to look into past instances of insurgency. Natonski theories by comparing them to history and then used that study to inform a review of his operational approach. Mattis used a wide range of theorists to develop his operational approach, and his successor Natonski implemented precepts that Galula had described a half century earlier.
McMaster read the writings of Galula, Kitson, and Lansdale. Similarly, as part of Sepp's review for Casey, MNF-I looked into history and compared it with theory. MacFarland also demonstrated use of Galula's theories.
Use of doctrine is more explicit than that of theory. Casey employed the Army's capstone doctrine. He directed the use of operational art to develop his operational approach. From his perch, Casey focused on broad actions rather than tactical precepts. He and his staff adapted existing operations doctrine to fit their needs. The Small Wars Manual influenced Mattis and, by extension, Natonski. Their operational approaches, like that of Casey, employed counterinsurgency precepts.
However, each demonstrated a foundation in service warfighting doctrine. Thus, Mattis's operational approach combined current and outdated doctrine. This is similar for the two brigade commanders. While McMaster's and MacFarland's operational approaches demonstrated an understanding of counterinsurgency, each contained fundamental elements of capstone doctrine such as offense, defense, and stability operations, and, to a large degree, operational art. Like the generals, these officers adapted current operations doctrine to build an approach for which the doctrine had not been designed. What this demonstrates is the applicability of capstone doctrine to wide range of conflicts. Doctrine has rarely been adequate to guide initial operations in war as Walter Kretchik shows throughout U.S. Army Doctrine. However, commanders generally have been able to adapt doctrine to the needs of the situation.
Perhaps the greatest influence on any of these officers' (and their staffs') ability to adapt to an unfamiliar situation is not what they did just prior to or during their time facing the counterinsurgency in Iraq. Rather, it is the breadth of their professional training, education and developmental experience that enabled these officers and their staffs to think critically and creatively about the problem and find solutions where doctrine was insufficient. It is improbable that officers wholly unprepared for counterinsurgency were able to adapt solely through pre- The officers also experienced a diverse range of training and experiences. All entered the service during the Cold War and trained on the doctrine of the times. However, as the world situation shifted in response to the break up of the Soviet Union, training events adapted to the new environments. Throughout the 1990s, the US was involved in what came to be known as operations other than war. Operations in Somali, Bosnia, Kosovo and Haiti, among others, provided the military an understanding of a world that required military forces to be able to achieve results without resorting solely to applying force against an enemy and occupying territory. In response, training at the combat training centers and across the services changed. Therefore, officers who had served in the 1990s and then led organizations in Iraq in 2004 or later had received training experiences that provided some familiar scenarios to what they faced in Iraq. These five officers all possessed the requisite intellegence to extract relevant lessons from these experiences and apply them to Iraq.
Each of these officers had some operational experience prior to 11 September 2001. These were diverse experiences that ranged the gamut of mid-intensity war in Iraq to humanitarian operations in Somali. What these experiences did was allow the officers to apply their doctrine to a range of situations. Surely even during Operation Desert Storm, Mattis, Natonski, and McMaster found a need to tweak operations doctrine. Not only did these officers gain from the valuable experience as leaders and commanders, they grew in their understanding of war. Like their education and training, it is the breadth of the experience rather than the suitability to the problem of counterinsurgency that prepared them for operations in post-Saddam Iraq. This demonstrates that the Army and Marine Corps properly prepared these officers for the challenges they faced. While none could be seen as being completely prepared for counterinsurgency, each was well educated, trained, and experienced in war. Doctrine provided a theoretical basis of war from which they could adapt. Each arrived to Iraq with the ability think creatively and critically. While Mattis has the most conventional career of any of the officers, none appears to be a model for how a military officer becomes a senior leader. Each took a different path to their commands and as of this writing each became at least a lieutenant general in their service. 
126
Each of these officers also supplemented their education experiences with self-study. This is speculative with respect to Natonski though the author finds it likely. None were content to let the Army or Marine Corps develop them alone; they took it upon themselves to take it a step further. In a 2014 article, McMaster places personal and participative self-development on the same level of importance as operational experiences and institutional learning. 
127
These findings have implications for future generations of officers who are likely to face problems for which doctrine does not fully guide them and for which their training and education has not fully prepared them. First, at least for these officers, the institutional and operational experiences the Army and Marine Corps provided may not have prepared them specifically for counterinsurgency but did adequately imbue an understanding of war and planning. They also provided a base for critical and creative thinking. Officers should seek to get the most out of their developmental, educational, and training experiences and see them not as preparing them for a specific event so much as providing them a broad ability to adapt. Second, these officers supplemented their experiences with personal study. This demonstrates the importance of self-study in breadth and depth. Rather than seeking to be experts on one form of warfare and or one campaign or conflict, officers should read for knowledge over a wide range of military and leadership subjects. Third, the officers here maximized non-standard career opportunities. This contact with politicians and other agencies. MacFarland attended the School of Advanced Military Studies as well as graduate school for engineering. These non-standard opportunities helped shape their thinking. Officers should not shy away from unique opportunities that take them away from the operational force but rather see these as assignments that will prepare them for future operations. Fourth, these officers sought to adapt current and obsolete doctrine and searched theory and history to supplement their own knowledge and experiences. Theory, history, and doctrine are great models for developing operational approaches, but appear best suited when employed by officers with a broad base of personal development.
The future will likely bring Army and Marine officers in contact with problems and situations for which they have not been specifically trained and for which doctrine is not easily applicable. In these situations, officers who have a broad base of developmental, educational, and training experiences will likely be able to apply critical and creative thinking while drawing on their experience, history, theory, and doctrine to develop effective operational approaches. Thus, the time to prepare for tomorrow's unknown conflict is today and the key is to maximize experiential opportunities and supplement them with personal study.
72  
72  
Linda Robinson, Tell Me How This Ends: General David  Petraeus and the Search for a Way Out of Iraq (New York: Public Affairs, 2008), 17.
See Fred Kaplan, The Insurgents: David Petraeus and the Plot to Change the American War of War (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2013) for a description of the development of the manual.
Army Doctrine Reference Publication 3-0, Unified Land Operations (Washington, DC: Government Print Office, 2012), 4-1.
Army Training And Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Pamphlet 525-3-1, Win in a Complex World (Washington, DC: Government Print Office, 2014), 10-14.
"General George Casey's Biography," Military Connection, accessed 22 February 2017, www.militaryconnection.com/george-casey-bio; "Jim Mattis Biography," US Department of Defense,
Austin Long, The Soul of Armies: Counterinsurgency Doctrine and Military Culture in the US and UK (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016), 128.
Casey's father died in helicopter accident in Vietnam on 7 July 1970 around the time Casey's commissioning.
Walter Kretchik, U.S. Army Doctrine: From the American Revolution to the War on Terror (Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 2011), 190-1
Ingo Trauschweizer, The Cold War U.S. Army: Building Deterrence for Limited War (Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 2008),
  17  Birtle, U.S. ArmyCounterinsurgency and Contingency Operations Doctrine 1942-1976, 480.    18 "General George Casey's Biography."
Michael Valenti, "The Mattis Way of War: An Examination of Operational Art in Task Force 58 and 1 st Marine Division," (MMAS Thesis, US Army Command and General Staff College, 2014), 60-1.
Jill Russell, "With rifle and bibliography: General Matis on professional reading" (7 May 2013), Strife Blog, accessed 22 February 2017, http://www.strifeblog.org/2013/05/07/with-rifle-and-bibliographygeneral-mattis-on-professional-reading/. Emphasis in the original.
24 "LtGen James Mattis' Reading List," Small Wars Journal, accessed 22 February 2017, http://smallwarsjournal.com/blog/ltgen-james-mattis-reading-list.
Kaplan, The Insurgents, 245.   
Ricardo Herrera, "Brave Rifles at Tall 'Afar, September 2005," in  In Contact: Case Studies from the Long War, Volume I, ed. William Robertson, 125-147 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2006), 131.
Gordon and Trainer, The Endgame, 166.   
Public Broadcasting Service, Interview with H.R. McMaster, accessed 30 March 2017, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/endgame/interviews/mcmaster.html.
Malkasian, "Counterinsurgency in Iraq, 
John McCuen, The Art of Counter-Revolutionary War: A Psycho-Politico-Military Strategy of Counter-Insurgency (Bath, England: Pittman Books, 1966), 128.
George Bush, "Remarks to City Club of Cleveland," (20 March 2006), accessed 22 February 2017, https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2006/03/20060320-7.html.
Herrera, "Brave Rifles in Tall 'Afar," 147.    
Clay, Interview with MacFarland;  MacFarland needed permission to develop a campaign plan since doctrine does not allow brigade commanders to develop campaign plans.
 
As of this writing MacFarland (Commanding General, III Corps) and McMaster (National
H.R. McMaster, "Studying War and Warfare" (26 October 2014), accessed 22 February 2017, http://mwi.usma.edu/2014111studying-war-and-warfare-by-major-general-hr-mcmaster/.
Camp, Operation Phantom Fury, 37.   
I would like to thank my wife, Lindsey, for her support in my educational pursuits and her encouragement. Next, I would like to thank my monograph director, 
Dr. Thomas Bruscino
Colonel Eric Laforest
Finally, I would like to thank 
Dr. Dean Nowowiejski
SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-
2301 AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) Advanced Military Studies Program 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release
• Interact with local tribal, administrative, and religious leaders.
• Distribute school, medical, and children's recreational supplies.
• Meet with local governing councils to build rapport and gain credibility.
• Integrate the actions of the Combined Actions Program (CAP) units in order to enhance Iraqi confidence and support. • Diminish Iraqi populace support for or tolerance of anti-coalition forces. Reduce Iraqi unemployment by creating public-sector jobs as rapidly as possible and establish job security.
• Increase effectiveness of public services and local governing bodies.
• Develop Sunni advisor program.
• Initiate former Iraqi military engagement program. Use "veteran's points" to bring former military to the forefront of employment and reduce adversarial relationships with them.
• Coordinate and disseminate IO [information operations] message to introduce Marines to the local populace and gain information superiority.
• Conduct patrols to include emphasis on joint patrols with Iraqi forces in order to build confidence and assess their abilities. • Increase effectiveness of Iraqi security forces to include the police, Iraqi Civil Defense Corps, highway patrol, border patrol, and Facility Protection Service by providing basic/advanced training, close integration into our formations, and supervision.
• Defeat anti-coalition forces in coordination with Iraqi forces.
• Disrupt enemy infiltration of Iraq through overland movement or movement along waterways. Special attention will be paid to the border regions to disrupt the introduction of foreign fighters, with an initial emphasis on the Syrian border, avoiding adversarial relationships with legitimate smugglers who may be able to assist us. 
128