# ID: ab436237b10e4135908dff33a6d833a4
# Title: Sixth Military-revolution: Warfare in the Fourth Industrial Revolution
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
Historians MacGregor Knox and Williamson Murray originally suggested only five militaryrevolutions had occurred in the history of the western way of war. However, in 2017 Murray published America and the Future of War and said a sixth military-revolution was unfolding in the modern era and it was mostly influenced by rampant technological change. He went on to suggest that society was only in the nascent stages of understanding the 6th MR and understanding what it might mean for present-day militaries. Thus, the researcher's aim in this thesis was to expand on Murray's basic description of the 6th MR by exploring the root causes of change in the first five military-revolutions in order to formulate an argument for what was driving change in the 6th MR. After the historical precedents for revolutionary changes to war were considered, the researcher used the lessons gleaned from that analysis to examine how technology and other factors were influencing the character of war in the modern era. Ultimately, the author's conclusions presented in this thesis offer an expanded explanation of the 6th MR and considers the implications for the present-day U.S. Military.
-Defense Secretary James Mattis, Remarks to Senior Leaders at CENTCOM Commander's Conference, 2017
Military professionals, and political leaders responsible for the employment of the armed forces, have an obligation to understand the character of war and possess a reasonable appreciation for its changes throughout history.0 F 1 Managing and anticipating change is a perennial consideration for those in positions of leadership, regardless of industry or discipline, but nowhere is this truer than in the life and death circumstances of war.1 F 2 Williamson Murray, a historian who's written extensively on the changing nature of war's character, believes that society is currently experiencing an extraordinary level of technologically driven change that is fundamentally altering the character of modern warfare.2 F 3 Murray labels this observation the "sixth military-revolution" and it is a continuation of his previous work that created the Military-Revolutions and Revolutionsin-Military-Affairs (MR-RMA) framework to help leaders understand changes throughout war's history. If Murray is correct, and the character of war is indeed being fundamentally altered by rampant technological change, then this author proposes that military professionals, and political leaders, have an obligation to understand what factors are influencing such revolutionary changes in the current environment and consider how the U.S. Military is adapting to effectively engage in 21st Century warfare.
When he proposed the existence of a sixth military-revolution (6th MR), Murray offered that it was an emerging and poorly understood phenomena that required additional research and analysis.3 F 4 He identified technology as the root cause of change in the 6th MR, but left out any technical descriptions about which technologies were most influential, or how those technologies were affecting present-day military forces.4 F 5 Murray's reason for omitting such an assessment was intentional because he stated it was a nearly impossible task to come to such definitive conclusions while the 6th MR was still developing.5 F 6 However, he did offer that this should not deter modern researchers from exploring the topic altogether as those efforts could be of some value to shape contemporary military innovation efforts and influence foreign policy debates towards meaningful reform.6 F 
7
The origins of modern thinking about military-revolutions is generally attributed to historian Michael Roberts and his lecture "Military-revolution, 1560-1660" given at the Queen's University of Belfast in 1955.7 F 8 Robert's research explored how Maurice of Nassau and Gustavus Adolphus radically transformed 16th Century warfare primarily through linear formations and drilled musketeers.8 F 9 A byproduct of this historical analysis was the creation of a new paradigm for contextualizing the changes that occurred in the history of warfare.9 F 
10
17
The significance of this study is twofold; first, explaining how the United States is experiencing an all-out MR versus just another RMA carries extraordinary implications for the entire defense apparatus. Second, exploring the effects of the 6th MR on the present-day U.S. Military should prove useful in ascertaining whether or not the U.S. is effectively adapting to changes in the current environment. Consider historian Thierry Gongra's view on the matter:
Establishing whether we are confronted by [an MR] or [an RMA] carries significant policy implications. If we are facing a military-revolution, the policy debate should transcend issues of technology and operations to embrace such fundamental aspects of defence policy as the nature of future conflicts; the size, recruitment mode, and make-up of armed forces; the financing of defence; and the shape of the defence industrial base . . . if we are only confronting an RMA, then the challenge becomes more manageable, and can be met within the current framework of defence, so long as the military maintain the ability to innovate.2 2 F 23
To define the key characteristics of change in the 6 th MR, the author first sought to learn about the historical precedence for revolutionary change established in the first five MRs, and then use that analysis to inform explanations about the 6th. This approach required a mixed methodology research approach that is given a full description in Chapter Three. For now, it is sufficient for the reader to become familiar with the primary and secondary research questions that drove this study and understand the unique research framework that is periodically referenced before getting to Chapter Three.
The primary research question in this project was: What are the key characteristics of the 6th MR and how are they effecting the United States Military? The primary research question was intentionally broken into two parts. The first part of the primary research question was designed to explain the characteristics of the 6th MR to a broad audience and the second part of the primary research question was drafted to consider what the 6th MR meant for the U.S. in particular. The two part nature of this primary research question is what necessitated a mixed methodology research approach and a full description of that methodology is given in Chapter Three.
While studying to answer the primary research question the subjects of politics, economics, technology, doctrine, organization, and strategy emerged as reoccurring themes in the literature.2 3 F 24 Authors such as Murray, Knox, Lynn, and others generally used politics, economics, or technology to describe the most influential factors revolutionizing the conduct of warfare in a particular MR.2 4F 25 Then, they typically asserted that the MRs they were describing had profound effects on the doctrine, organization and strategy of militaries of that particular time in history.2 5F 26 Combining the political, economic, and technological themes with the doctrinal, organizational, and strategy themes led to the creation of the PET-DOS framework that is used in this study.
Henceforth, any mentioning of the acronym PET-DOS is meant to consider how some element of politics, economics, technology, doctrine, organization, or strategy effect the character of war within a particular MR. Figure 
1
Military-Revolutions -MRs are the first part of the dual lens approach that Knox and Murray used to explain revolutionary changes in the character of war. MRs are analogous to large earthquakes that constitute massive and irreversible changes in society and war. Examples of MRs include the creation of the modern nation-state, the industrial revolution, and the invention of nuclear weapons. These events fundamentally altered the conduct of society and had cascading effects on how humans engaged in war.2 9F 30
Revolution-in-Military-Affairs -RMAs are the second part of the dual lens approach used by Knox and Murray to explain the smaller changes in war that affect the battlefield, but not necessarily society as a whole. Consider them the pre-shocks and after-shocks that accompany the larger MR earthquakes.3 0 F 31 The most commonly used example for RMAs is the German Blitzkrieg when a proliferation of armored vehicles transformed the battlefield in World War II. Mechanized warfare certainly affected the battlefield, but did not alter how society functioned.3 1F 32 6th Military-Revolution -The 6th MR is the phrase that Murray gives to the military-revolution that is presently already underway. In this study, the 6th MR is defined as the fusion, or networking, of a broad range of technologies across the physical, digital, and biological domains that is altering how people live, work, and how wars are fought.3 2 F 33 Total War -For the purposes of this study, a war is to be considered a total war if the responsible government has the expressed political aim of completely overthrowing one's enemy and pursues that goal with the entirety of its military capacity.3 3 F 34 Limited War -For the purposes of this study, a war is to be considered a limited war if the responsible government expresses a political objective that is anything less than the complete overthrow of their enemy or pursues that goal with anything less than the entirety of its military capacity. In other words, the warring government restrains its military commitment as a matter of judgement or will and not ability.3 4F 
35
Chapter one provided the broad context required for the reader to navigate and interpret the results of this study. At this point, it should be clear what research is being conducted, generally how that research was performed, and why the findings might be of any significance to military professionals and policy makers in the present-day. Next, Chapter two provides a synopsis of the most influential sources used to inform the results of this study. Chapter Two is not all-inclusive of every source used in this project. It simply provides the reader with a review of the sources that were most influential to the results of this study. Where other sources were used, the endnotes and bibliography section provide additional clarity or give credit to other author's ideas. 
1
2 Ibid., 60-61.
3 Ibid., 60. 
4
62-65. 5
6 Ibid. 
7
Part II: Military-Revolutions and Revolutions-in-Military-Affairs Knox and Murray were greatly influenced by the First Gulf War RMA debates of the 1990's and offered their MR-RMA model in 2001 to provide an intellectual and historical framework to the defense community that could be used to inform sound military policy decisions.5 7 F 23 At the time of their publishing, and still true today, significant debates were taking place as to how the military should spend its discretionary budget towards technology innovations in order to maintain overmatch against other nations.5 8F 
24
The 1st MR was primarily influenced by the 17 th Century creation of the modern state.6 3F 29 As is common with many of the revolutionary eras, this event does not have a specific date. However, the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia is emblematic of the type of political change experienced in the 17 th Century.6 4 F 30 The treaty brought an end to the Thirty Years' War and Eighty Years' War, also known as the wars of religion, and ushered in the wars of Realpolitik.6 5F 31 Under the treaty a prince was free to determine the religion of his own state. Moreover, Christians living in any land where their denomination was not the established one, were free to practice their religion in both public and private accommodations.6 6F 32 Aside from the new religious freedoms, the treaty also codified the concept of state sovereignty. Each nation, large or small, was free to govern its peoples within its territorial boundaries free from interference from other nations. This became known as Westphalian Sovereignty and is an essential legal underpinning of the United Nations Charter today.6 7F 
33
Lynn highlighted technology's minor influence on the 1st MR using France's 17 th Century military, the Grand Siècle, as his primary example. Under the reign of Louis XIV, the grand siècle adopted the use of flintlock and bayonet weapons and made a fledgling attempt at artillery integration. However, neither of these weapon systems, or any other technological developments, did much to change the conduct of warfare during this period. Instead, Lynn argued the Grand Siècles' doctrinal, organizational and tactical changes were much more indicative of the nature of change underway in the 1st MR.7 1F 37
According to Lynn, a battle culture of forbearance was a tangible side effect of the creation of the modern state.7 2F 
38
To instill the discipline required for the state to wage war with large armies, Louis XIV made revolutionary changes to the doctrinal and organizational components of his grand siècle.7 4F 40 First, Louis XIV took a fanatical approach to drilling his troops. He issued a series of ordinances and directives that increased the frequency and intensity of all drilling in the French military. Additionally, he would often drill with the units personally to demonstrate his resolve in the importance of training.7 5 F 41 McNeill observed that these intensive drills enhanced group cohesion through "muscular bonding" -resulting in a perceptible change in the psychology of soldiers that translated into enhanced esprit de corps and the forging of group identity.7 6 F 42 Finally, Lynn suggested another ingredient in explaining the grand siècles' success was its organizational restructuring.7 7 F 43 Specifically, Lynn pointed to the newly standardized military community, the regiment. Under Louis XIV, regiments were standardized with regards to manning, equipping, and training. As a result of these newly formed units drilling and living together, they became the focus of an individual's cultural identity. Exercising authority over these new military communities was a prescribed cadre of officers with clearly defined ranks and functions. Thus, the traditional notion of the "regimental chain of command" was born. This differed greatly from the previous practices of social pedigree and personal bonds defining the hierarchy of authority within units and the traditions established here under the French Regiments is still echoed in the titles, ranks, and command relationships in use today.7 8 F 44
The Second Military-Revolution Much like the 1st MR, the 2nd MR was primarily influenced by political change.7 9F 45 Napoleon and the Napoleonic Wars, as emblematic of the French Revolution as they may be, were only made possible because of the cultural, political, and social changes that took place in France between 1789-1799.8 0F 46 During this period, France underwent a radical transformation that effectively ended monarchial rule and replaced it with a burgeoning republic. The inhabitants of France transitioned from feudal subjects to national citizens and a pathway for upward mobility in society existed as a meritocracy instead of a birthright. During this period of political-revolution the military became more important in society because it provided a way for increasing one's status in life.
Because of this, and the newly adopted policy of near universal conscription, the French Army grew to a size of more than 750,000 men by 1794.8 1F 
47
2F 48
Napoleon Bonaparte was a military genius, but his brilliance would likely not have been fully realized had he not lived during the French Revolution. To his credit, Napoleon seized upon the opportunity that was present and built an empire that dominated the European landscape during his lifetime and beyond. His most significant contributions can be viewed through the three categories of politics, doctrine, and strategy. Politically, Napoleon went to great lengths to elevate the status of the soldier in society and perfected the previously existing policy of near universal conscription. He transformed that policy into a Levee en Mass that called on all of the French citizenry to serve in the military and aide in the expansion of France's dominance on the European continent. Napoleon's Levee en Mass was so successful that it created a French military that grew to more than two million men between 1800 and 1814.8 3F 49 Doctrinally, Napoleon took the tenets of the army regulation of 1791 and perfected them in theory and practice. Specifically, he took existing formations and built them around an "all-arms" division and corps headquarters structure.8 4F 50 The systematic pairing of infantry, cavalry, artillery, and support units formed the basis of the combined arms fight still foundational in today's doctrine. Strategically, the most powerful contribution Napoleon brought to the French Revolution was "unity of command." As the Emperor of France, he was both head of state and head of the military. This concentration of power in one man, made France extremely powerful yet also vulnerable. Powerful in the sense that he could wield absolute power to achieve his political objectives, but vulnerable in the sense that there were no checks and balances to keep his ambitions from overextending the military's capacity.8 5 F 51 Knox did not address the economic influences of the 2nd MR in great depth, but that does not suggest they were unimportant. Much like the 1st MR the economic characteristics of the 2nd MR were a byproduct of the political revolution. Knox acknowledged the importance of the economic factors at play in the 2nd MR by opening his essay with this statement: "the revolution of industrial capitalism . . . is the greatest transformation in human existence since the coming of agriculture."8 6 F 52 However, Knox also argued that the effects of true mass production in the industrial age had not quite taken hold in France during Napoleon's time and much more could be learned about the 2nd MR by studying the France's political and technological factors.8 7F 53 Knox used a fair bit of his essay explaining how technology did very little to affect the 2nd MR. His argument was countering the 1990's American RMA enthusiasts' narrative that MRs were influenced primarily by advancements in technology. Knox suggested the only piece of technology that had any impact of the battlefield during the 2nd MR was the Gribeauval Artillery System and it was of minor importance.8 8 F 54 In essence, the Gribeauval Artillery System simply made artillery pieces lighter, more mobile, and more accurate.8 9F 55 While they were exclusively employed by the French during the majority of the Napoleonic Wars, it is worth mentioning that they had been in existence since the 1760s without any decisive advantages to the French on the battlefield.9 0F 56 In other words, it is fair to say Napoleon's unique employment of mobile artillery gave him an advantage over his enemies, but it would be inaccurate to suggest this single piece of technology was of greater importance than the economic, doctrinal, and organizational advantages he enjoyed from the fruits of the political-revolution.9 1F 57
The Third Military-Revolution In stark contrast with first two politically driven MRs, Grimsley argues the 3rd MR was most profoundly impacted by innovations to technology and economics.9 2F 58 In his essay, Grimsley makes a compelling argument that economic policy, fueled by the monies of the Industrial Revolution, was the greatest determinant in the Union's defeat over the Confederate South in the American Civil War.9 3F 59 Before going any further it is necessary to acknowledge that Knox and Murray used the American Civil War to portray the effects of the 4th MR, not necessarily the 3rd MR as done here. However, while the American Civil War rightly fits into the 4th MR when viewed as a whole, its technological and economic features still serve as a valid examples about the character of war in the 3rd MR, especially when one's target audience is of American nationality. For this reason mass-politics, which also greatly affected the conduct of the American Civil War, was unobserved for this study.
Political influences aside, the technology that fueled the Industrial Revolution and the economic power that resulted from such a mass production of goods, fundamentally changed the conduct of warfare in the late 19 th Century.9 4F 60 These technologies included ironclad warships, steam and rail transportation, the telegraph, and a myriad collection of other machines that enabled the transition to mass-production instead of limited quantity hand-made goods.9 5F 61 Grimsley explained that even though technology was the primary catalyst for change in the 3rd MR, it failed to achieve a decisive victory for either side in the Civil War because there was no asymmetry. Both North and South had access to the same types of technology and were therefore able to employ them in a similar fashion.9 6 F 
62
68
69
The mostly civilian-driven grand strategy debates of the next four decades served to define the conduct of warfare in the Cold War era.  Schwab acknowledged that many view the current situation as merely a continuation of the third industrial revolution and it did not merit its own labeling as a fourth.1 21 F 87 However, he pointed to three characteristics of the current environment that mark a clear distinction from the previous revolution: velocity, breadth and depth, and systems impact. First, the sheer pace of change is on a completely different scale from the previous revolutions. He described the change as exponential rather than linear and the hyper-connected nature of the world only precipitated an increase in velocity as society moves forward. Second, the convergence of all these technologies across the physical, digital, and biological worlds was leading to unprecedented paradigm shifts in the economy, business, society, and individuals. Talking about the convergence issue, Schwab stated "It is not only changing the "what" and "how" of doing things but also "who" we are."1 2 2F 88 Lastly, he described how the fourth industrial revolution was transforming entire systems "across (and within) countries, companies, industries, and society as a whole." 123 F 
89
In the physical domain he pointed to autonomous vehicles, 3D printing, advanced robotics, and new materials as essential elements of the revolution.1 24 F 90 In the digital domain, Schwab highlighted computing power, a vast array of sensors, blockchain technology, and the networks that permit all these things to communicate instantaneously as central to the 4th IR. As an example, he highlighted how these technologies have created what is now called the "on-demand economy" and brought into question the very nature of what is considered valuable. His quote from media strategist Tom Goodwin was a powerful illustration as to the nature of the change underway: "Uber, the world's largest taxi company, owns no vehicles. Facebook, the world's most popular media owner, creates no content . . . Airbnb, the world's largest accommodation provider, owns no real estate."1 2 5F 
91
In the third and final chapter, Schwab discussed the implications of all of these technological advancements across a broad range of audiences. He gave specific analysis on the impacts to the economy, businesses, governments, society and the individual person. He then provided recommendations to each audience about how to adapt in the face of the 4th IR. It is beyond the scope of this thesis to cover the entire range of implications and recommendations. Instead, the most important components are integrated into chapter four to show how each element helped define the key characteristics of the 6th MR. For now, it is sufficient to highlight the central theme of the empowerment paradigm shift that is present throughout his book. The empowerment paradigm shift explained changes in "how governments relate to their citizens; how enterprises relate to their employees, or how superpowers relate to smaller countries."1 28 F 94 Historically, the larger entities held the power. The government was more powerful than its individual citizens and bigger states were more powerful than smaller states. The essence of the empowerment paradigm shift underway in the 4th IR was that power was shifting from governments to its citizens, from businesses to their employees, from the nation state to non-state entities.1 29F 95 In other words, individuals empowered by globally connected technologies were changing the balance of power around the world. They weren't reclaiming all or even a majority stake in the available power pool, but there was a dramatic rebalancing taking place.
The material presented in chapter two represented the most influential sources of  
Choosing between qualitative or quantitative methodologies was a simple task because the primary and secondary research questions were not empirical investigations requiring mathematical, statistical or computational explanations.1 30F 1 Instead, the research questions were about providing descriptions and meaning to an existing qualitative framework; the MR-RMA concept. However, the task of determining what type of qualitative research methodology to pursue was more challenging. Ultimately, a mixed methodology was chosen that combined the techniques of content analysis with that of a case study style of inquiry. This mixed methodology was chosen because the first part of the primary research question was best suited to a content analysis approach and the second part of the primary research question was best examined through a case study methodology.
Answering the first part of the primary research question required a content analysis approach because the content analysis coding techniques were useful in succinctly categorizing the ideas presented from various authors in the literature review.1 31F 2 This coding technique was useful because each author took a unique approach to explaining the first five MRs and those complex explanations needed to be distilled into broad categories to identify potential themes amongst them. After studying each of the first five MRs, the themes of politics, economics, and technology emerged. Essentially, each author used one of these broad subjects to make an argument for what they believed was the primary catalyst for change and then considered what influence that catalyst had on the character of war at that time in history. For example, Knox suggested the 1st MR was a critical outcome of the emergence of the 17th Century modern state and it had tremendous implications for the doctrine and organizational structure France's Grand Siècle.1 32 F 3 In this instance, politics was deemed the primary catalyst for change and the text was coded "p". In Grimsley's essay, he made the argument that economic factors were the most influential aspect in determining the victor of the American Civil War, so his text was coded with an "e". In Bailey's essay, he suggested the introduction of indirect fire artillery on the battlefield was the impetus for revolutionary change in the 4th MR so his text was coded with a "t".1 33 F 4 After reviewing each of the first five MRs, and categorizing each text as either a "p", "e", or "t", it was concluded that any explanation of the 6th MR had to address its political, economic, and technological factors to be considered comprehensive. Thus, the PET of the PET-DOS framework was built and secondary research questions two through four were drafted to explore the political, economic, and technological factors influencing changes to war's character in the 6th MR.
The second part of the primary research question was examined through a case study methodology because it mirrored the techniques used by historians who studied the first five MRs. In their descriptions of revolutionary change each author used specific technological, tactical, doctrinal, organizational, or strategy developments as evidence to support their deductions. For example, Knox used France's Grand Siècle, the systematic drilling of troops, and the organizational development of regiments as evidence to persuade his readers that revolutionary changes to war had occurred as a result of the 17 th Century creation of the modern state. After determining that a case study methodology was suitable for answering the second part of the primary research question, secondary research questions about doctrinal, organizational and strategy changes were drafted to explore the effects of the 6th MR on the U.S. Military. The specific categories of doctrine, organization and strategy were chosen because they broadly conformed to the original definition of RMAs established by Marshall and reinforced by Knox and Murray.1 37 F 8 Particularly insightful was their explanation that RMAs tended to be subordinate elements of MRs and militaries experiencing a MR inherently underwent changes in their tactics, doctrine, organizational structures, and strategies for war if they were innovating to remain relevant.1 38F 9 Based on this definition, if the U.S. Military was indeed experiencing a MR then it followed that they were also experiencing observable changes to their doctrine, organizational structures, and strategies for war. From that deduction, the DOS of the PET-DOS framework was built and the research framework was complete. Now that the reader understands how the PET-DOS framework was built, it is necessary to explain what function it serves in this study. Simply put, the PET-DOS framework serves to structure the author's argument in a logical fashion and then offer the findings of the study in a succinct manner displayed in a single chart. Below, Figure 
2
2
In Chapter Four, the author explains the analysis that was conducted and presents the findings derived from this study. As a reminder, the primary task in this study was to define the key characteristics of the 6th MR, and consider their effects on the present-day U.S. Military. The purpose of providing a more complete definition of the 6th MR was to help military professionals and policy-makers better understand their current environment as they make decisions about military innovations and foreign policy decisions in the modern era. Chapter Four is structured to follow the PET-DOS framework that was introduced in Chapters One and Three. First, each of the previous MRs is analyzed and its corresponding portion of the PET-DOS chart is presented. This process is repeated for MRs two through five until a consolidated PET-DOS chart is displayed at the end. In the analysis of each MR, the researcher shows what data was analyzed, why it was considered relevant, and the deductions made throughout the process. After each of the previous MRs is analyzed, the author transitions to defining the specific characteristics of the 6th MR within the PET-DOS framework and completes the primary task of this project. After the primary research obligation has been met, the researcher then presents an additional finding derived from this study before transitioning to conclusions and recommendations in Chapter Five.  Recognizing the significance of three-dimensional warfare, and battlefield geometry in general, was a critical concept to grasp in order to understand the effects of the 6th MR on the U.S. Military in the present-day. Bailey's assessment was the first of its kind during the course of this study, but the reshaping of battlefield geometry occurred twice more in MR's five and six. In the 4th MR, IDF created three-dimensional warfare.
In the 5th MR, nuclear weapons and rocket technology created four-dimensional warfare.
Then in the 6th MR the battlefield geometry transformed again as the introduction of the cyber domain created a fifth-dimension to warfare. The key deduction from this analysis was that each restructuring of the battlefield geometry appeared to require significant modifications to military doctrine, organization, and strategy. Combining this realization with the previous finding about the psychology of warfare in the digital age, led the researcher to examine what unique strategies for warfare might exist within 6th MR. The results of that analysis are listed as an additional finding as the end of this chapter under the subheading "Non-attributional warfare".  
In this section, the researcher presents the findings derived from the overall study and directly answers the primary research question. The findings are structured to follow the PET-DOS outline by first addressing the political, economic, and technological factors influencing the 6th MR before transitioning to the doctrinal, organizational and strategy implications for the U.S. Military. This section concludes by presenting the completed PET-DOS chart in Figure 
9
Continuing the trend that began in the 3rd MR, technology, not politics, appears to be the primary catalyst for change in the 6th MR.1 68F 24 However, change rarely happens in a vacuum and the 6th MR has many implications for the political element of warfare in the 21st Century. As briefly discussed in Chapter Two, the central theme to political change in the 6th MR is the empowerment paradigm shift.1 69F 25 Schwab stated that a transition of power is occurring in the world that is unprecedented in its scope and scale.1 70 F 26 In the "old regime" nation-states were the supreme players on the international citizens of these countries to act against their governments in a surprisingly powerful manner. Each of these events support the idea that the 4th IR is characterized by a rebalancing of power between governments and the governed. Hierarchical institutions no longer hold a monopoly on power. The empowerment paradigm shift that Schwab addressed in his book is affecting every industry and nearly every person on the planet.1 75 F 31 This shift in power is analogous to the transfer in power that took place in the French Revolution. In the French Revolution people transitioned from subjects to citizens.1 76F 32 In the 6th MR people are transitioning from citizens to power brokers. If one's government fails to act within their best interest, then the tools of circumvention are readily available at their fingertips.1 77 F 33
To understand the effects digitally empowered citizens have on the 6th MR consider Clausewitz's statement that the phenomena of war is a paradoxical trinity that is composed of "primordial violence, hatred, and enmity . . . the play of chance and probability . . . and instruments of policy that are subject to reason alone."1 7 8F 34 The first element of the trinity pertains to the will of the people, the second element relates to a commander and his Army, and the third is the purview of governments waging war.1 79 F 35 A radical change in the balance of power between governments and its people affects every element of war's trinity. The first part of the trinity is affected because the will of the people now has the capacity to play a greater role in the conduct of war through a distributed power system. The second part of the trinity is affected because the 6th MR provides new and complex means of wars for the commander's employment. Specifically, cyber as the fifth domain in war has dramatically altered the ways and means in which modern military commander can prosecute their wars. Finally, the third element of the trinity is greatly affected because governments may still control policy, but they cannot subject the war to their rationale alone when the people have such powerful means to influence war's activities.
Clausewitz's Trinity shows how war is a human endeavor -people run governments and governments wage war so understanding how people think, behave and interact with one another in 4th IR also provides insights about how people engage in conflict in the 6th MR. To understand the changing nature in people's behavior in the 4th IR, the researcher studied Dr. Suler's Psychology of the Digital Age to conclude that governments are not only effected by the empowerment paradigm shift, but they also appear to be affected by fundamental changes in the human psyche".1 
80 F 36
38
There has been considerable research in the cyberpsychology field since Suler introduced his initial findings in 1996.1 90 F 46 However, there did appear to be a significant gap in the body knowledge when attempting to study its implications for military purposes. Trying to bridge the gap between cyberpsychology and contemporary military operations led to reviewing literature on covert political warfare, cyberwarfare, clandestine operations, and operations in the gray zone. There were countless publications1 91F 47 about U.S., Russian or Chinese operations in these areas, but no one appeared to be addressing the underlying cyberpsychology issues Suler suggested permeated the contemporary environment.1 9 2F 48 In light of this finding, a unique observation about character of war in the 6th MR was made and it is addressed as an additional finding within this thesis under the sub-heading "Non-attributional warfare".
Economic change in the 6th MR proved to be just as disruptive as the political environment.1 93 F 
49
Facebook, the world's most popular media owner, creates no content . . . Airbnb, the world's largest accommodation provider, owns no real estate."1 96 F 52 These realities bring into question the very nature of what is considered valuable; the platform or the underlying asset? This shift in what is considerable valuable is offered as a defining characteristic of economic change in the 6th MR. As sources of wealth transition from material goods to data and information services, businesses begin to lose physical control over their revenue generating assets and this creates a unique security challenge.
Consider the Chinese firm Huawei as an example of how economic principles can impact international relations and national security in the 6th MR. Huawei is the largest telecommunications-equipment manufacturer in the world1 97 F 53 and in 2017 the Chinese government enacted the National Intelligence Law that obligates Chinese companies to hand over any data on their networks upon request from the government.1 9 8F 54 Huawei's infrastructure is embedded into many industries around the world and provides information services to both the private sector and foreign governments. How do government leaders respond when the Chinese government demands access to the data on Huawei networks? How do businesses respond when their intellectual property and primary revenue generating assets are subject to theft and coercion? Nations have historically gone to war when their national interest were threatened by a foreign entity In December of 2018 the U.S. Army published "TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1 Multi-Domain Operations" which outlined the Army's future operating construct to replace ULO. Multi-Domain Operations (MDO) marks a clear transition in thought from its predecessors. Evidence of this is found by examining both MDO and ULO's core definitions. ULO was defined as, "Simultaneous offensive, defensive, and stability operations or defense support to civil authorities tasks to seize, retain, and exploit the initiative to shape the operational environment, prevent conflict, consolidate gains, and win our nation's wars as a part of unified action".2 07F 63 MDO's central operating principle states "Army forces, as an element of the Joint Force, conduct Multi-Domain Operations to prevail in competition and when necessary, Army forces penetrate and dis-integrate enemy anti-access and area denial systems and exploit the resultant freedom of maneuver to achieve strategic objectives (win) and force a return to competition on favorable terms".2 08 F 
64
First, the Army has envisioned its role transitioning from "conducting offensive, defensive, stability operations . . . on land . . . to win wars" to "conducting multi-domain [land, sea, air, space, and cyberspace] operations . . . to prevail in competition . . . ." The MDO doctrine echoes the same idea that Schwab shared in his assessment of the 4th IRrecall Schwab stated it was the "fusion of various technologies . . . across the physical, digital, and biological domains . . . ." that mattered most2 09F 65 MDO's land, sea, air, space, and cyberspace approach to conflict is representative of the interrelationship that Schwab claims exist within all of these domains. Clausewitz acknowledged the two overarching strategies of total versus limited war as early as the 19 th Century and stated "The first, the supreme, the most far-reaching act of judgement that the statesman and commander have to make is to establish the kind of war on which they are embarking".2 19F 75 Murray himself points out that the Crimean War of 1853-1856 is a classic example of a limited war strategy before the 5th MR era.2 2 0F 76 Despite limited wars not being a new development in the 5th MR they did become the prevailing norm for military strategy when nuclear armed nations were involved in the conflict.2 21 F 77 American military operations in the post 9-11 era are widely viewed as limited wars and with good cause.2 22 F 78 While there is a reasonable argument to be made that the initial invasion of Iraq in 2003 was a total war strategy, the justification often provided fails to meet the two defining criteria for total war strategies outlined in chapter one.
Those two criteria stated the political aim of the war must be the complete overthrow of one's enemy and the nation must pursue that goal with the entirety of its military capacity. The United States clearly possessed an outwardly expressed political aim of overthrowing the Saddam regime in Iraq and replacing it with a democratic regime that would be a "beacon of democracy for the Middle East".2 
23 F 79
The United States' other major post 9-11 conflicts, namely the Afghanistan War and the war against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), share similar explanations as to why they constitute being defined as a limited war strategy. Again there are 
As periodically referenced in the preceding sections, while the researcher was studying the PET-DOS characteristics of the 6th MR a gap was revealed in the body of knowledge when trying to understand what Suler's principle of dissociative-anonymity meant for the conduct of warfare in the modern era. While trying to answer this question by exploring the previously mentioned subjects of covert political warfare, cyberwarfare, clandestine and gray zone operations, an inconspicuous characteristic that was present in both the 4th and 5th MRs appeared to be missing in the 6th. In the previous MRs, it has been relatively taken for granted that you could readily identify who or what you were fighting. In the Napoleonic Wars, France knew they were at war with Prussia and the rest of Europe. In World War II, the Allies plainly knew they were at war with the Nazis and Imperial Japan. And in the Cold War the U.S. knew it was at war with the Soviet Union. This does not imply there was absolute clarity in the conflict. Differentiating between combatant and non-combatant or accounting for your enemy's deception campaigns are inherent difficulties in war that Clausewitz's described as fog and friction.2 25 F 81 But the creation of the cyber-domain greatly complicates the positive identification of adversarial actors and this is why Suler's ideas are so important. His research addresses what happens when the links between actor, activity, and consequence are broken and contemplating what that means for the conduct of warfare led to the researcher's conclusions about non-attributional warfare.
Non-attributional warfare (NW) is a concept that is not defined in doctrine, policy, or academia; rather, it is a theory for consideration that attempts to explain the unique challenges of warfare in the 6th MR. Attribution, or definitively associating actor to activity, is a unique challenge in the 6th MR, but not an altogether new idea. Political warfare, espionage, covert and clandestine operations, and a handful of other related terms have a long history in the conduct of warfare; however, NW in the 6th MR is markedly different from each of these activities. Covert operations attempt to conceal the actor, clandestine operations attempt to conceal an activity and each is statutorily defined with the requisite legal framework to govern its conduct.2 
26F 82
As an example, consider the differences between the 1987 Iran-Contra affair and the 2017 Russian NOTPETYA virus. Both of these activities were undertaken at the behest of a nation-state to promote political objectives in a foreign country, but each event took place within different military-revolutionary eras and serves to highlight some of the unique characteristics of the 6th MR. Beginning in 1981 the Regan administration initiated covert operations to facilitate weapons sales from the U.S. Government to Iran.2 2 7F 83 The money from these sales was subsequently used to fund the Contra rebel fighters in their struggle against the socialist government of Nicaragua.2 28 F 84 The sale of weapons to the Iranians was in violation of an arms embargo and the funding of the Contras was in violation of the Boland Amendment.2 29F 85 Therefore, key individuals inside the U.S. government chose to resort to covert and clandestine operations to pursue national objectives. When the events became public, it resulted in fourteen administration indictments, eleven convictions, and a serious setback for the United States' foreign policy objectives around the world.2 30 F 86
Compare the consequences of those covert and clandestine operations with the consequences of the activities of the Russian NOTPETYA virus. In 2017 (alleged) Russian hackers inserted the NOTPETYA virus into the Ukrainian owned business of Linkos Group.2 31F 87 One of the Linkos' applications provided financial services to a large number of businesses in the region and the Russian cyberattack was designed to disrupt and deter financial relationships between the Ukraine and their international partners.2 32F 88 Intentionally or unintentionally, the NOTPETYA virus ended up infecting the global shipping company Maersk and brought 17 of their 76 shipping terminals to a screeching halt for over 72 hours.2 33 F 89 Shipping manifests, accounts payable, and countless other forms of financially sensitive information were lost or destroyed. Cranes sat dormant and 18wheelers were backed up for miles in cities all around the world. 234 F 90 The virus not only infected Linkos and Maersk, but it impacted everyone who did business with them.
NOTPETYA was a catastrophic success for the Russians that cost the global economy over $10billion across dozens of industries and hundreds of companies worldwide.2 35F 91 It was the single most expensive cyberattack in history and begs the question: what was the consequence for the Russian government who orchestrated its execution? The answer is nothing; there were no meaningful or enduring consequences. No indictments, no convictions, no restitution to be paid by the Russian government. The only cost imposed on the Putin administration was a smattering of strongly worded demarches and political chastisement from the global community all because NOTPETYA could not be legally traced back to the Russian government.
The Iran-Contra Affair and the Russian NOTPETYA virus show the clear distinction between covert and clandestine operations versus NW activities. In covert and clandestine operations concealment was paramount to success and when events were made public there was a significant cost to be paid. In NW, the actions were never intended to be kept from the public's view. Instead, they were simply designed to include just enough obfuscation that the responsible party could not be held accountable. The NOTPETYA virus is but one of dozens of examples that could be used to examine the unique characteristics of conflict in the 21st Century. The NOTPETYA virus should make clear that strategies for obtaining political objectives and promoting national interest have evolved in the 6th MR. The theory of NW that is described below was devised to examine how military professionals and policy makers might consider unique methods for achieving political objectives and defending against them in the present-day.
In its broadest definition, Non-attributional warfare is an actor's employment of any means (physical or digital, lethal or non-lethal) to achieve their objectives with the deliberate attempt to disassociate the actor or activity from the responsible party. This definition's specific use of the word actor is meant to be inclusive of the full range of state and non-state actors in the global community. However, if someone wanted to use the theory of NW to devise a definition for national strategy, the definition could be modified to read: Non-attributional warfare is a nation's employment of any means to achieve its national objectives with the deliberate attempt to disassociate the actor or activity from the responsible government. Drawing on the previous discussion about differentiating between covert, clandestine, and NW operations, an actor's NW activities are not relegated to denial of their existence. Instead, they can be openly conducted in the public's view as long as the activity can't be legally attributed to the responsible actor. Thus, it is Suler's ideas about the disassociation between actor, activity, and consequence (enabled by the anonymizing tools of the 4th IR), that is the central and uniquely defining characteristic of Non-attributional warfare in the 6th MR.
Chapter Four explained the analysis that was conducted and presented the findings derived from this study. As a consolidated answer to the primary research 76 question the reader can consider the following assertion. The key characteristics of 6th MR consist of three elements: first is the empowerment paradigm shift that adjust the balance of power between governments and its governed citizens. Second, the 6th MR is heavily influenced by a transition to the information and on-demand economies that fundamentally change the nature of what is considerable valuable and therefore what is considered worthy of securing by force. Third, and most importantly, the root cause of all of this change is a fusion of a broad range of technologies across the physical, digital, and biological domains that converges in a manner that fundamentally changes the way people live and work and how government's wage war.
As a result, these three characteristics of the 6th MR have already had a tremendous impact on the present-day U.S. Military in three ways. First is the U.S.
Army's doctrinal development of Multi-domain Operations and the second is the U.S.
Military's creation of USCYBERCOM and AFC. These doctrinal and organizational changes represent precisely the type of substantive change Knox and Murray said militaries experience when MRs occur.2 3 6F 92 Lastly, while no discernable change was observed in the United States' tendency to engage in limited war strategies in the postnuclear era, hopefully the theory of Non-attributional warfare offered the reader a unique insight about the changing character of warfare in the 21st Century. 
1 Lynn,
[35]
[36]
[55]
[56]
As Defense Secretary James Mattis quipped about looking for new ideas in old books, the author hoped to study the lessons of history to glean useful ideas about warfare in the modern area.2 37 F 
1
The purpose of the study was to provide a more thorough explanation of the 6th MR and help military professionals and policy-makers better understand their current environment as they make decisions about military innovations and foreign policy decisions in the 21st Century. Chapter Five offers four conclusions and two areas for further study as a result of this research project.
The first conclusion in this thesis is that the 6th MR is primarily influenced not by a single piece of technology, but by a convergence of a broad range of technologies across the physical, digital, and biological domains. The findings presented in this thesis asserted that technology has been the primary catalyst for revolutionary changes to warfare since the expansion of the industrial revolution in the late 19 th Century, but the manner in which that has played out has varied. In the 4th MR Bailey asserted IDF was the most important technology of the era. In 5th MR Murray, Freedman, and Carver all   asserted that the atomic bomb was overwhelming responsible for the changes to warfare in the post 1945 world. While the trend appears to have continued, and technology is again revolutionizing the conduct of warfare in the modern era, it is now a convergence of a broad range of technologies instead of one particular piece of technology that is most important. This distinction is significant because as Schwab argued throughout his book the power of these technologies are best harnessed when they are fused together.
Elevating one in importance over the others diminishes the synergistic effect that can be achieved when they are viewed as a whole. Thus, this researcher cautions against military innovation efforts elevating any one piece of technology as being singularly important during an interwar-period. Instead, each new piece of technology should be considered as a part of a much larger whole and the manner in which that technology shares information across all three domains and fuses with existing capabilities is probably more important than any other consideration.
The second conclusion in this thesis is that the character of warfare in the 6th MR is greatly influenced by the empowerment paradigm shift in which long standing formal institutions are ceding power to more informal and distributed forms of governance.2 38 F 2 Just as radical change occurred in the 2nd MR due to the French people transitioning from feudal subjects to national citizens, people now appear to be transitioning from citizens to power brokers through a technology enabled diffusion of power. This diffusion of power is significant because, as the previous discussion about Clausewitz's Trinity alluded to, those responsible for sending nations to war must account for these new actor's influences on the battlefield as they mobilize for and prosecute wars in the contemporary environment. Today, it is insufficient to solely gain international acceptance for war through traditional methods such as United Nations Security Resolutions. Now, once that traditional acceptance is gained, it must be maintained in a way that keeps the collective will of non-traditional entities from usurping the legitimacy of formal governing bodies.
Maintaining legitimacy and the will of the people is certainly not a new concept in the 6th MR, but it has evolved to include a greater number non-traditional actors who are globally connected through a diverse set of information networks.
The third conclusion in this thesis is that the character of war in the 6th MR is also influenced by the emergence of the information economy and nations already appear to be responding to this reality through a reevaluation of their national security objectives. The specific examples of Uber, Facebook, and Airbnb in the on-demand economy showed how businesses who own very little physical assets can generate massive quantities of wealth through ownership of information and digital platforms.2 39F 3
The Huawei example showed how contemporary national security debates are already being affected by this transformation. The change occurring in the 6th MR is that information and digital platforms require just as much protection as physical assets much like the traditional national security interest of maintaining access to oil.
The fourth conclusion in this thesis is that the U.S. Military is already responding to the effects of the 6th MR in a manner that is commensurate with Gongora's description of how militaries ought to adapt when faced with a MR versus an RMA.2 40 F 4 The development of the Army's Multi-domain Operations doctrine mirrors the evolution of the combined arms doctrine that followed from the introduction of three-dimensional warfare. Also, the establishment of USCYBERCOM and AFC are indicative of the types of organizational adaptation required as militaries are confronted with the magnitude of change found in adding a fifth dimension to warfare. That said, it is still too soon to tell if these responses by the U.S. Military will be enough. As Murray said, society is only in the nascent stages of understanding and adapting to the 6th MR, so it likely that similar types of changes will be required in the years ahead. For now, the utility in this observation is that while the U.S. Military appears to be adapting and innovating in an appropriate manner, these organizational and doctrinal changes are not final and more change is likely to occur in the years ahead.
If conclusion number one is valid, and technological convergence is the root cause of change in the 6th MR, then military innovation efforts might be well served by prioritizing the types of cross-domain networks that make convergence possible. Schwab offered that the power of modern technologies was the ability to fuse them together across the physical, digital, and biological domains for a synergistic effect.2 41 F 5 The key word in that phrase is fuse as it alludes to the importance of the cross-domain networks that enable data to rapidly traverse these three domains. Consequently, this researcher recommends that cross-domain networks should be a priority for military innovation efforts in order to harness the potential synergistic effects that the 4th IR portends.
These themes emerged primarily from reading Knox and Murray's The Dynamics of Military-Revolution. It is also necessary to highlight that the term strategy used in this thesis adheres to the broad definition of the word used by Peter Paret in The Makers of Modern Strategy. On page three of that work he described the broad use of word strategy, but stated his use of the word was meant to consider the full range of ways that militaries and governments engage in war that includes the tactical, operational, and strategic levels of war.
This is the researcher's assessment about the conclusions presented by these author's essays within The Dynamics ofMilitary-Revolutions, 1300-2050.   
Ibid., 98. Murray and Knox,[
5][6][67][68][69][70][7][8][9][10
MacGregor Knox
Mass Politics
French Revolution and After
1300-2050
MacGregor Knox
Williamson Murray
57-60
John McGrady
CGSC C500
Scott Hammish
Oxford Handbook
975-977
Edward Luck
12-20
John A. Lynn
Forging the Western Army in Seventeenth-Century France
1300-2050
MacGregor Knox
Williamson Murray
35-45
Dr. Donald
Scott) Stephenson
CGSC H100
35-56
William H. McNeil
Keeping Together
35-56
35-56
57-60
Mark Grimsley
Civil War
1300-2050
MacGregor Knox
Williamson Murray
84-86
Ibid., 76. Ibid., 84. Ibid.,[
88][89][7][8][3][4] 15
14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21] 8. Ibid.,[67][68][68][69][70][60][61][62
67-68
20-25
Charlie Savage
WikiLeaks Indictment
13-14
57-60
John R. Suler
Humans Become Electric
Ibid., [
95][96][97][98][99][100][101][102][103][104][105][106][107][108][109][110][111][112
Ibid., 68-112. Ibid.
Ibid.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other
It should now be clear why this particular research methodology was chosen and how the PET-DOS framework was used to explore the key characteristics of change in the 6th MR. The mixed methodology qualitative analysis was chosen primarily because it mirrored the approach taken by authors who studied the previous MRs. Next, Chapter Four uses the PET-DOS framework to structure an argument towards answering the primary and secondary research questions of this project. 
1
2 Alan Bryman, Business Research Methods (Cambridge: Oxford University Press, 2011), 1-5. In a content analysis research project all of the available research material is read and placed into categories according to the researcher's purpose. In the context of this research process the researcher's purpose was to determine an author's conclusion about why a military-revolution occurred and categorize it as either politics, economics, or technology (PET). 
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 Schwab, 67-69.  Ibid., 28-32.   Ibid., 13.   Murray, 6.   Roger's model of punctuated equilibrium is still referenced is modern academic writings about military-revolutions. Murray himself used the model to explain elements of the 6 th MR in the modern era. So while there is no consensus on the issue of how or even if revolutionary changes occur in war, the fact that Roger's model is still referenced in contemporary literature on the subject lends credit to the argument that his model is still influential. Lynn's description about the economic factors influencing the 1st MR were brief, but insightful. In summation, he asserted that the state's ability to effectively and efficiently tax its subjects, and generate large quantities of wealth, was a perquisite to funding the types of large scale wars experienced by Louis XIV's Grand Siècle.1 47F 3 Flintlock and bayonet weapons are listed because Lynn used those weapon systems to highlight technology's very minor role in influencing the 1st MR.1 48F 4 Studying the political, economic, and technological influences of the 1st MR was useful because it helped to understand the interrelationships that exist between these elements and their effect on the conduct of warfare in general.
Finally, the researcher examined Lynn's descriptions of doctrinal, organizational, and strategy changes within the Grand Siècle to discern what effects the 1st MR had on the conduct of warfare during that period. Hence, the "systematic drilling of troops", "the regimental system", and "battle culture of forbearance" are listed in Figure 
4
9
This finding was formulated based on the conclusions presented in Grimsley's, Bailey's, Murray's, and Freedman's writings on the subject.1 55F 11 Consequently, Figures 
6, 7,
8
Grimsley's assertion about the leading role the industrial revolution played in the 3rd MR, particularly the amalgamation of steam engines, railroads, ironclad warships and the telegraph, was a formative bit of analysis.1 56 F 12 Grimsley's explanation was useful 
The information presented in the previous pages showed the reader what analysis was conducted, why certain pieces of evidence were chosen, and the deductions derived from that analysis. Below, Figure 
9
The creation of USCYBERCOMMAND is the most recognizable and probably most important organizational change experienced by the United States Military in the 6th MR. In 2010 Secretary Gates directed the creation of USCYBERCOM as a subunified command under the control of USSTRATCOM.2 12F 68 Previously, cyber activities of the United States had been operating under various ad-hoc organizations such as Joint Task Force -Global Network Operations.2 13F 69 Effectively, Gates' action transitioned an emerging capability into a formal and permanent structure within the military enterprise.
In pondering the significance of this action consider the long term effects created by the combined arms divisions under Napoleon's reign. Those formations still serve as the core framework upon which the United States Army's infantry divisions are organized today.
Building on Gates' formalization of the nascent cyber command, Secretary James Mattis, elevated USCYBERCOM from a sub-unified command (three-star billet) to become the 10 th unified combatant command (4-star billet). According to Secretary Mattis, the decision to elevate USCYBERCOM was in "growing recognition of the centrality of cyberspace to U.S. national security and an acknowledgement of the changing nature of warfare".2 14 F 70
A final observation about organizational change in the 6th MR is the creation of another four-star command, Army's Futures Command (AFC). Much like the creation of USCYBERCOM, the formation of AFC is representative of the Army's recognition that a confluence of technological advancements is rapidly changing the character of modern war. Just as Figure 
2
The information presented in the preceding section directly answered the primary and secondary research questions. First the researcher provided a detailed explanation about the political, economic, and technological factors influencing the 6th MR and then examined the doctrinal, organizational, and strategy implications for the U.S. Military.
The results of that analysis are presented in their completed form in Figure 
9
Finally, the theory of NW appears to be a unique characteristic of warfare in the 6th MR and additional research into the effects of dissociative-anonymity are warranted. Specifically, the findings in this thesis asserted there was a gap in the body of knowledge that fails to explain the effects of dissociative-anonymity on governmental organizations.
Governments are comprised of many individuals and if they each engage in a variety of digitally anonymous behaviors, especially when interacting with other nations, then what is the cumulative effect of their actions? How are international politics, and by extension the wars that result from failures in diplomacy, influenced by the psychological factors Suler suggested permeate the hyper connected society? Hopefully, these questions stimulate curiosity in future researchers as they explore what it means to be at war in the fourth industrial revolution. 
1
2 This conclusion is drawn from Schwab's definition about the empowerment paradigm shift and adapted for relevance to the discussion on MRs. 
3
4
5 Schwab,
[13]
[14]