# ID: ab436237b10e4135908dff33a6d833a4
# Title: Sixth Military-revolution: Warfare in the Fourth Industrial Revolution
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
As periodically referenced in the preceding sections, while the researcher was studying the PET-DOS characteristics of the 6th MR a gap was revealed in the body of knowledge when trying to understand what Suler's principle of dissociative-anonymity meant for the conduct of warfare in the modern era.
While trying to answer this question by exploring the previously mentioned subjects of covert political warfare, cyberwarfare, clandestine and gray zone operations, an inconspicuous characteristic that was present in both the 4th and 5th MRs appeared to be missing in the 6th.
In the previous MRs, it has been relatively taken for granted that you could readily identify who or what you were fighting.
In the Napoleonic Wars, France knew they were at war with Prussia and the rest of Europe.
In World War II, the Allies plainly knew they were at war with the Nazis and Imperial Japan.
And in the Cold War the U.S. knew it was at war with the Soviet Union.
This does not imply there was absolute clarity in the conflict.
Differentiating between combatant and non-combatant or accounting for your enemy's deception campaigns are inherent difficulties in war that Clausewitz's described as fog and friction.2 25 F 81 But the creation of the cyber-domain greatly complicates the positive identification of adversarial actors and this is why Suler's ideas are so important.
His research addresses what happens when the links between actor, activity, and consequence are broken and contemplating what that means for the conduct of warfare led to the researcher's conclusions about non-attributional warfare.