# ID: ab95f1017f8f4bc5993322538a41ae1e
# Title: War Plan Juan: the strategy of Juan Trippe and Pan Am in Latin America and Africa before and during World War 2
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
Thanks to John Hill, Curator-in-charge of aviation at the San Francisco Airport museum. Mr. Hill provided valuable insight into where Juan Trippe was looking to expand his corporate empire. He also provided me with some great leads on sources and contacts Thanks to Colonel Tim Schultz whose eye for detail and tenacity for precision drove me to new heights just when I
Major Matthew Brady was a 1999 graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point, where he majored in economics. His 13-year career on active duty with the Army has taken him to a variety of assignments from Division Cavalry to Special Operations units. He is married and has three sons.
He talked people out of Money. He talked governments out of concessions...He is a very able man; and if we are to have a monopoly, I want to see Juan Terry Trippe at the head of it. "Hello, Bob, this is Juan Trippe in New York. Say, I just had a call from the State Department and was told that there were some twentyodd Lockheeds and Douglas planes which they wished to get as quickly as possible to the British in Egypt, and wanted to know whether between us we could assemble twenty captains, co-pilots, the necessary radio operators and navigators, and fly them across the South Atlantic. I told them I thought we could and I'd get in touch with you to see if you had some extra pilots who were familiar with these types of ships." "Sure," Mr. Gross replied, "how many do you need and where should they report?" "About twenty," Trippe confirmed, "and they should report to Miami in a couple of days." "O.K.," said Gross, "they will be there." 
1
2
Stimson's concern about German intervention in South America was not the product of intuition alone, nor was it a simple case of projecting Japanese expansionist tendencies onto the Germans. As early as December 1927, in a memo from the US military attaché in Brazil to the War Department, a US intelligence agent outlined the increasing activities of German agents attempting to link the old world with the new.
In the report, the agent concluded that no scheme for linking Europe to South America seemed practicable without Brazilian cooperation, and further noted that U.S. engagement with Brazil was lacking. 
10
During their meeting, Stimson asked Trippe to improve his network of airfields, communications facilities, and seaplane bases in Of all the relationships Trippe forged with the political and military elite of the day, none was more important than that with President Franklin D. Roosevelt. As Undersecretary of the Navy in 1917, Roosevelt had helped Trippe, then a Yale freshman, to get into the Naval Air Service despite potentially disqualifying eyesight deficiencies. 
12
13
15
16
17
Communicating from a secret radio room in the White House called the "map room," Roosevelt would assure Churchill that a defeated Germany and a free Western Europe was in the interest of both nations. 
18
19
20
Intermediate bases in Central America and the Caribbean would have to be constructed to make Trippe's South American air network usable to the vast armada of Army Air Corps airplanes that would eventually roll off U.S. assembly lines. Though he would rather not associate with Trippe any more than necessary, and wary of creating a monster in Pan American with the backing and power of the United States government, President Roosevelt carefully "reforged" the chosen instrument to operate on behalf of national security. Trippe would need to establish a strong relationship with the War Department to effectively integrate his instrument with the full panoply of national power.
As a Navy veteran and aviator, Trippe realized the importance of forging an effective relationship with the military, especially the Army Air Forces. The Army would pay good money to Pan American to construct bases and provide air transport services in both South America and Africa. However, the Chief of Staff of the Army Air Forces, General Hap Arnold, had a sort of "love-hate" relationship with the Pan American Airways president. Arnold viewed the commercial airlines and Pan Am as a natural reserve for the AAF and valued their contributions. But Arnold always seemed a bit wary of Pan Am's increasing power, unsure if a commercial aviation monopoly was in the best interest of the country. 
21
In 1927, then-Majors Henry "Hap" Arnold and Carl Spaatz conceived an idea to counter what they perceived as foreign encroachment on the Western Hemisphere by international airlines.
Italian, German, and French carriers were all laying claim to basing and routes in South America, creating security concerns around border sovereignty and strategic waterways, namely the Panama Canal. Arnold believed if he could create a cross-continental, or "Pan American" airline to counter this foreign commercial land grab, the United States could prevent future enemies from achieving positional advantage in the Hemisphere through proxy commercial agents. He and Spaatz even considered resigning their commissions to develop their venture fulltime. Both men ultimately decided the country needed them in the service and not in business. 
22
23
24
Protection of the Brazilian bulge from Axis lodgment and aggression therefore became a fundamental component of American plans for Hemisphere defense. 
34
"In general the Nazis in Latin America, according to the cables I received from our diplomatic missions, were making no secret of their plans and were boasting openly that Germany could easily conquer South America. Their plans ran as follows:
1.
Use the British, French, Scandinavian and other merchant fleets to carry on commerce with Latin America at rates that would put American lines out of business.
Blanket Latin America with German aviation lines carrying freight and passengers at rates with which American lines could not compete..." 
35
37
39
A most important feature of this strategic expansion was the multiplication of the Company's routes in the shoulder of Brazil, most of the new lines tapping small towns with very limited traffic potentialities. The strategic value of this area to the defense of the hemisphere, or to an invading force, is well understood today. Condor also opened a route from Corumba to Porto Velho in the depths of the Brazilian interior. It has been suggested that the company was eager to obtain this route as an excuse to operate unobserved in a locality within striking distance of the Panama Canal. At the time when all these routes of dubious commercial value were being opened up, Condor made no attempt to expand its operations in heavily populated areas, such as the states of Sao Paulo and Minas Gerais. 43 39 Burden, 42. 
40
Burden,
43. 41
42
43
44
Conversely, it is obvious that the ground facilities, the radio and photographic equipment, and the personnel of those lines would have been of utmost value to an invading army. Additionally, the German air operations offered a means whereby Axis agents could enter South America, lightweight strategic raw materials could be smuggled out, and, most importantly, observation of American and British merchant shipping and land or maritime military movements could occur undetected. 
46
46
necessary and generally satisfactory service they provided, all contributed to the popularity of the German airlines in South America, as well as to a growing sense that the Germans just might be up to something in that part of the world.
To counteract the aggressive commercial, cultural, and military activities of the Nazis in South America, the State and War Departments fogs that prevailed along the east coast of South America. Furthermore, instrument flying was only in its initial stages and was considered too dangerous for routine commercial flights before 1940. 51 
49 Burden,
[27]
[28]
(July, 1938), 431. Folder #6, box #405, PAA Archives. 51
Although the United States looked with disapproval upon the expanding German air operations in South America, little could be done until the events in Europe in May-June 1940. Because of the importance of air travel facilities to Latin America, it was virtually impossible to eliminate Axis airlines completely until the end of 1942, when substitute services, either through Pan American or through local airlines, were made available. 
52
62
First, SCADTA and Condor Syndicate airlines would have to be eliminated from South America. These front companies for the SS and Luftwaffe in Colombia and Brazil, respectively, were a valuable intelligence source for the Nazis. 63 With these companies gone, Germany would lose a valuable propaganda machine in the region. They would also lose access to environmental and intelligence information necessary for a successful sea or airborne-based invasion. Lack of a sophisticated intelligence network to aid Hitler in developing a comprehensive and focused air campaign would cost him the Battle of Britain just 18 months later, dashing any hope of a successful invasion. Second, a system of bases and airways would have to be built and manned in Central and South America to defend against the threat of an Axis assault from West Africa. Should the French and British lose control of their West African colonies, the Axis would be positioned within 1900 miles of Brazil. This was a threat to the Western Hemisphere the President was unwilling to accept.
With Germany firmly entrenched in Poland and turning its gaze westward, elimination of German front companies from Latin American seemed more urgent than ever. There was one piece of information Pan American had not readily provided the government that made the calculus of South American defense seem a little less complicated. Juan Trippe informed the War Department he had secretly purchased 85% of SCADTA in 1930. 
64
65
74
75
Under the pressure of these circumstances, President Roosevelt entrusted to Pan American Airways, Inc. the task of expanding its existing commercial airfields in Latin America and of building a string of new airports, ostensibly designed for civilian air transport, but actually to provide a chain of military bases for the United States. 
76
77
78
86
91
92
97
"The matter is one of vital importance to national defense. We all agree that German controlled airlines in South America provide Germany with the means for spreading Nazi propaganda, for communication with German agents and sympathizers in South America, and for familiarizing German military personnel with South American terrain. They also provide bases which would be of great strategic value to an invader. Consequently, these airlines constitute a definite threat to the security of the United States in the event of war with Germany. America" and difficulties in obtaining needed materials, as major reasons for the apparent lack of progress. 
115
116
117
118
119
Medium and heavy long-range bombers had no need for a chain of fields, but short-range fighters and smaller planes required such a network. Satellite fields also had to be built for alternate landing sites. Several airports developed under the ADP were not very useful after the war for commercial aviation purposes, but military necessity determined where they were built. Similarly, as the Battle of the Atlantic turned in favor of the Allies, and as larger bombers and transports were designed and produced with more robust instrument flying capabilities, some of the bases deemed essential in 1940 became somewhat insignificant as time passed. 
134
135
136
137
The ADP airfields made their greatest defensive contribution in support of anti-submarine operations. Even through Nazi submarines concentrated on the North Atlantic sea lanes for most of the war, they did U-boat wolf-pack out of offensive operation for a few hours at a time. 
144
145
Finally, the losses which we suffered in those distant waters were also inflicted, as far as we were able to ascertain, in the most part solely by aircraft. Our hopes that by operating in distant waters we should be able to cut down our losses had not materialized." 
146
The ADP bases were also used to transport necessary strategic war material to the United States from Latin America. Before the introduction of alternate synthetic material, the famous "banana runs" 144 Louis Shores, Highways in the Sky, The Story of the Army Air Communications System, (New  York, 1947), 65. 
145
Doenitz,
417. 146 Doenitz.,
418.
147
148
165
166
167
168
169
1. Negotiations to enable ADP to enter the various countries using contracts, licenses, concessions and permits. Department was a matter of sheer necessity in the administration's eyes, and risk to intra-American relations was necessary. Further, it can be argued that the Roosevelt administration was doing no more than using Pan American in the same manner that Germany had been using its airlines, under Deutsche-Lufthansa, throughout South America.
Reactions to the disclosure that the United States government and the War Department were the driving forces behind the ADP project varied from country to country. Some countries were aware almost from the start that the bases were intended to be used for military purposes.
Not surprisingly, these were the countries with which the United States maintained close connections. As far as these governments were concerned, the idea of building large, modern airports in their countries received a cordial response. 
179
180
181
182
The airline did obtain some unique benefits from its part in the Airport Development Program. The most important of these were the modern airport facilities created with President Roosevelt's emergency funds. These facilities were strewn throughout important Latin American areas in which Pan American was the dominant carrier. Of almost equal commercial value to the company was the intensive and expanded training of PAA employees through the Airport Development Program. 
183
184
Encroaching even more on Pan American's Southern monopoly were the new local Latin American airlines developed under lend-lease.
Following the war, competition for commercial aviation business in Latin America was fierce. It is somewhat ironic that the ADP airports, built with United States funds by a United States airline, ended up being a means of limiting that airline's operations in Latin America. The ADP fields were all turned over to the countries in which they were built. Pan American also gave up most of its stock in the local airlines in which it once held a controlling interest, such as Panair Do Brasil. 
185
186
Stimson to Trippe, dated 3 September, 1945. Folder #31, box #252, PAA Archives. 190
Of all the world-girdling division and subdivision of the Pan American Systems, only Pan American Airways-Africa, Ltd., has run the complete cycle of conception, birth, development, maturity, and demise...It packed into its sixteen months of existence all the despair and delight of a hardship and accomplishment not previously experienced by any airline in so short a span... Airways-Africa (PAA-A) enlarged, expanded, and equipped fourteen airfields across the midsection of the continent. Two hundred and fifty six hangars, repair shops, mess halls, dormitories, hospitals, and recreation facilities for personnel were erected in the dense jungle and sub-Saharan desert. 
192
At one time, the native payroll listed 7000 men. 
193
South. 194
By the spring of 1941, British troops in North Africa were facing a double threat. General Erwin Rommel was pressing the British Eighth Army against the Suez Canal with his Afrika Korps, while supplies were threatened by Axis efforts to neutralize the key island base of Malta.
Were the Mediterranean to fall under Nazi control, Rommel could drastically shorten his supply lines while British lines would instantaneously increase by 4000 miles. 
195
193
194
Craven and Cate, Vol. 7, 53. 195 Philip Guedalla, Middle East, 1940
-1942
: A Study in Air Power, (London, 1944), 79. 196
Prime Minister Churchill diverted vital resources to give a "blood transfusion" to his embattled African force. 
198
199
The only viable alternative proposed by British military planners was the resurrection of the Takoradi route from West Africa to Egypt. 
201
202
Imperial Airways, Ltd. became the British "chosen instrument" for most African services. 
203
209
210
213
Though the country was at peace, and the President was publicly opposed to getting involved in another continental war, he was secretly posturing the United States to support the British militarily in Africa and defend against Axis incursion into the Western Hemisphere. To avoid accusations of collaborating with a belligerent nation, Roosevelt and Churchill had to convey their intentions through intermediaries, often through the President's advisor, Harry Hopkins. "Leaving today with President," Hopkins would inform Churchill, "appropriations bill should pass soon…moving rapidly to get materials required [to] Middle East.
Similarly, the inter-state military contact had to be kept secret. On several occasions beginning January 1941, the British chiefs of staff met secretly in Washington with their American counterparts to agree on mutual military objectives. These meetings lasted for four months, with British military leaders dressed in civilian clothes at the War Department to prevent drawing the ire of American isolationists. 
216
In March of 1941, the military's desire to aid Great Britain received a helpful boost. The Lend-Lease Act allowed the United States to begin building and distributing a vast "arsenal of democracy" to her friends and allies. Two provisions of the act, however, were problematic. First, the act could only provide "credit" for weapons to foreign countries, meaning the United States couldn't deposit the goods on Britain's door- the United States from distributing weapons paid for with lend-lease money to "war zones" on merchant vessels. 
217
218
219
220
227
228
229
230
231
In late May, 1941, Pan American Air Ferries, known as Atlantic Airways, was slowly forming to become part of the air transportation system developed by the United States Army Air Transport Command under the guidance of Major General Harold L. George, Commanding General of the Air Transport Command. As Army Air Forces men and materiel began converging on Miami, General George inferred anything having to do with oceanic flight would involve Juan Trippe. Somewhat resentful that General Arnold had not "read in" the Commanding General, General George called Trippe to inquire into the nature of the organization and find out who was in charge.
"An organization known as Atlantic Airways has been formed," Trippe replied. "John Steele, I think you know him, is in charge. I understand he will be in to see you tomorrow morning and that he has ten crews ready to take your ships overseas just as soon as the planes are ready to go."
At the same time, the pilots who had been recruited were arriving in Miami loaded with questions. "Where is Atlantic Airways? Who is Atlantic Airways? What is it all about? Who is in charge?" Everyone seemed to be very "hush-hush" and even those familiar with the situation appeared to know nothing.
The following morning, John Steele met General George and together went to Miami to start organizing what seemed to be a haphazard assemblage of forces. Pointing to a group of old airplanes in the corner of Miami field, Steele asked one of the mechanics "what do you know about these old planes?" "A couple of days ago, last Sunday, May 25th, a bunch of pilots flew these old crates in here and they have been under guard ever since. We asked them what they were for and they told us they were going 'overseas.' All we could think of was, 'what the hell do they want to send this junk over for, and how can we get these ships in any condition to go?' They have been here for several days and as far as I know have not been touched or taken care of. They are certainly the biggest collection of ragged equipment ever gathered together for any one job, but somehow or other, if they have to go, we will get them ready." Down the flight line, the two men observed pilots both uniformed and civilian, British and American, crammed into a flight operations building haggling over which way to fly to Brazil. The British wanted to go to San Juan while the Americans were keen on flying there directly. "What difference does it make which way we go," lamented one American crew member, "just as long as we get there!" In the corner of the smoke filled room, a radio crackled to life just as the crews were about to depart, silencing the room instantly. The local radio broadcast flashed "Germany has invaded Russia. Dive bombers are attacking Russian troops and parachute troops have been dropped in the rear." Within thirty-one minutes of the broadcast, ten heavily loaded planes full of lend-lease equipment headed south to Brazil. 
232
An hour into the flight across the South Atlantic, one of the ten aircraft had to turn back for the Brazilian coast after experiencing engine problems and losing control of the landing gear. On approach to the Natal field, Pan American pilots Jim Allison and Charlie Flanagan noticed all the landing lights had been turned out and no one was manning the flight-following radios. After several unanswered mayday calls and five unsuccessful attempts to land, the pilots finally landed using the illumination from inside the Air France hangar as a reference point. Upon inspection of the aircraft, the crew determined the Italians had loosened the spark plugs to finger tightness in one engine to cause a slow compression loss and ultimate engine failure in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean. Additionally, the hydraulic system was tampered with to cause the gear to prematurely drop, but not lock, making it impossible to land. The crew remedied the situation by conducting aerobatic maneuvers to lock the gear into place using gravitational force. The Brazilian airfield traffic control personnel were tricked into leaving their posts by Italian agents posing as Pan American officials and declaring "all is well," the indication that airfield services would no longer be needed. 
233
243
244
245
Concerned with malaria, Pan American-Africa had taken every precaution to protect its employees using preventative medicine and measures such as facility screens and individual mosquito nets at bases.  
77 Conn and Fairchild, 252.  78  
77 Conn and Fairchild, 252.  78  
Memo #755, Military attache to War Department, correspondence, folder #6, box #15, Richard K. Smith papers, Auburn University Special Collections.
Bender, 43.   
Bender, 216.  
Bender, 71. Also covered in greater detail in Wesley Phillips Newton,The Perilous Sky (Coral Gables Florida: University of Miami Press, 1978), 165-166.
Letter from Juan trippe toGeneral Arnold, dated 24 February 1939. Folder #16, box #93, PAA  Archives.   
Letter fromGeneral Arnold to Juan Trippe, dated 28 February 1939. Folder #18, box #93, PAA  Archives.   
Letter fromGeneral Arnold to Juan Trippe, dated 4 October 1941. Folder #17, box #93, PAA  Archives.   
Letter fromGeneral Arnold to Juan Trippe, dated 16 May 1942. Folder #17, box #93, PAA  Archives.   
Letter from Juan Trippe to General Arnold, dated 2 May 1942. Folder #16, box #93, PAA Archives.
Bender, 360.  
Stetson Conn and Byron Fairchild, U.S. Army in World War II, The Western Hemisphere: The Framework of Hemisphere Defense, 174.
Conn and Fairchild,[75][76] 
Intelligence report #2698 dated 1 May 1941. Folder #6, box #15, Richard K. Smith papers, Auburn University Special collections.
Conn and Fairchild, 75.   
Bender, 339.   
Bender, 145.   
Daley, 96.   
Daley, 224.   
Compilation, 3.   
Conn and Fairchild, 249.   
Lissitzyn, 352.   
Conn and Fairchild, 252.   
Conn and Fairchild, 250.   
Conn and Fairchild, 249.   
Conn and Fairchild, 250.   
Conn and Fairchild,[12][13] 
Mark Skinner Watson, U.S. Army in World War II, The War Department, Chief of Staff, Prewar Plans and Preparations, vol IV, Part I, 95-96.
Langer and Gleason, 751.   
Conn and Fairchild, 251.   
The Washington Post ,July 10, 1940.   
Business Week (Sept. 7, 1940), 39.   
Conn and Fairchild, 253.   
Conn and Fairchild, 249.   
Conn and Fairchild, 252, 257.   
Conn and Fairchild, 258.  
.Conn and Fairchild, 254.   
Conn and Fairchild, 250.   
Letter from Trippe to Sam Pryor, 2 August, 1941. Folder #12, box #56, PAA Archives.   
Bender,[320][321][322][323]. Bender describes at length Export airlines' attempt to break into Trippe's Latin American and European monopoly.
Corporate assessment of TACA airlines, January 1941. Folder #1, box #254, PAA Archives.
Daley, 306.   
Conn and Fairchild, 254.   
Air Development Program: General reports of all Brazilian bases. End of year report, 1940, page 17, folder #9, box #6, PAA Archives.
Conn and Fairchild, 255.   
G.F. Pelham report, director of airports and executive engineer, Airport Development Program. Page 10, Folder #11, box #78, PAA Archives.
Pelham report, 11.   
Pelham report, 12.   
Pelham report, 13.   
Pelham report, 13.   
Conn and Fairchild, 253.   
Conn and Fairchild, 251.   
Conn and Fairchild, 251.   
Bender, 333.   
Gilmore report, 15.   
Conn And Fairchild, 254.   
Samuel Eliot Morison, History of United States Naval Operations in World War II, The Battle of theAtlantic, September 1939-May 1943 (15 vols., 1947-1962), I, 379.   
Burden, 77.   
Pelham report, 35.   
Pelham report, 36.   
Pelham report, 37.   
Admiral Karl Doenitz, Memoirs, Ten Years and Twenty Days, translated by R.H. Stevens and  David Woodward (Cleveland, 1959), 251.   
Reginald Cleveland, Air Transport at War, (New York, 1946), 93.   
Cleveland, 199.   
Guerrant, 163.   
Letter from Pan American Airways, Captain Merten to the G-2 section of the War Department, box 00119954, Air Force Historical Research Agency (HRA).
Letters from War Department to MAJ Gillespie, A-2, 1939. Box 00119954, HRA.
.Pan American Airways, Inc.: Record of Wartime service. Page 46, folder #4, box #21, Richard K. Smith papers, Auburn University Special collections.
Pan American Airways, INC. History of the Transatlantic Air Services. Civil Aeronautics Board Docket No. 855. Folder #3.1, box #21, Richard K. Smith papers, Auburn University Special collections.
PAA record of wartime service, 31.
PAA record of wartime service, 22.
PAA record of wartime service, 23.
PAA record of wartime service, 23.
Gilmore report, 79.   
Gilmore report, 79.   
Pan American History: World War II: War time activities and experiences. Page 48, folder# 21, box #15, PAA Archives.
Oliver, La Farge, The Eagle in the Egg (Cambridge, Mass: Houghton Mifflin Comapny, 1949), 35.
Conn and Fairchild,[303][304] 
La Farge, 35.  
Conn and Fairchild, 304.   
Pelham, 53.   
Morison,[250][251] 
Conn and Fairchild, 254.   
Conn and Fairchild, 258.   
La Farge, 74.   
Samuel Pryor. Assessment: Wartime Airport Development Program, 1940
-1948
Pryor assessment, 65.   
Pryor assessment, 66.   
Pryor assessment, 66.   
Pryor assessment, 67.   
Transcript of testimony, Juan Trippe, Antitrust Subcommittee Hearings, undated. Page 2, folder #15, box #499, PAA Archives
Pelham report, 43.   
Donald Marquand Dozer, Are We Good Neighbors? Three Decades ofInter-American  Relations, 1930
-1960
Morison,[378][379] 
Guerrant, 186.   
Pryor assessment, 63.   
Pryor assessment, 61.   
La Farge, 35.   
Testimony of Juan Trippe, Antitrust Subcommittee Hearings, 1950-1951, PAA Archives.  
Edward Tomlinson, Look Southward  Uncle, A New Look at the Other 175,000,000 Americans,(New York, 1959), 219.  
The New York Times, August 19th, 1941.   
Gilmore report, 8.   
Annual Air Ministry report,17-18.   
Annual Air Ministry report, 26.
Route communications were still unsatisfactory as late as the spring of 1942, and the dependence of pilots upon dead reckoning navigation continued until early summer, 1942.
Gilmore report, 2.   
Annual Air Ministry report, 20.
Gilmore report, 2.   
Air Marshall Arthur Tedder, G.C.B., With Prejudice: The War memoirs of Marshal of the Royal Air Force (Boston, 1967), 36.
Pan American Air Ferries and Pan American, Africa, Ltd. history.Page 17, Folder #3, box  #22, PAA Archives.   
Though not officially recognized as such by law, PAA Africa and Air Ferries carried out traditional military functions in both neutral (Liberia) and belligerent (Egypt) countries, thus operating above the law as a pseudo-belligerent non-state actor.
Telegram, Harriman to Hopkins, Apr. 18, 1941. Hopkins file, State Department, European  War files, 1940-1943, National Archives.   
Harriman telegram.   
Plans for PAA service, June 28, 1941. Memorandum from General Clayton Bissell to General Arnold, , General H. "Hap" Arnold file, folder #13, box #27, PAA Archives.
Arnold memorandum.   
Arnold memorandum.   
Arnold memorandum.   
Edward R. Stettinius, Jr., Lend-Lease: Weapon for Victory, (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1944), 147.
Bender, 348.   
Bender, 348.   
Air Ferries History, 3.
The New York Times,
August 19, 1941.
Pan American Airways-General Information, 1930
-1940
Gledhill, Mr.  Vice President notes. Folder #4, box #97, PAA Archives. Mr. Gledhill kept extensive notes from his over 1000 hours logged while standing up PAA-Africa.
Gilmore report, 11.   
Gilmore, 21.   
Gilmore report, 6. SS Otho was sunk by German U-boats
Van Dusen letter.   
Contributions of American Industry in Tropical Medicine, vol 4, no. 6 (Franz, 1968), 2.
Walter Reed Institute of Research website.
Luther S. West, PhD. Medical Department, United States Army preventative medicine in World War II, volume VI, communicable diseases, Malaria, 133..
Letter from Secretary Stimson to Secretary Hull, 1942, Folder 00119954, Air Force Historical Research Agency (HRA).
Gilmore report,[12][13][14][15][16] 
Churchill, The Grand Alliance, 660.  
La Farge, 86.   
Guedella, 194.   
Guedella, 192.   
Civil Aeronautics Board docket no. 525, 13.   
Gilmore report, 36.  
William R Stanley, Air Transport in Liberia, "Journal of Transport History", University of South Carolina, 195.
Stanley, 195.   
Leslie R. Groves, Now It Can Be Told:  The Story of the Manhattan Project,(New York, 1962),  37, 179.   
Gilmore Report, 73.   
Gilmore report. 15.   
Gilmore report, 16.   
History: World War II, Africa Personnel. Page 36, folder #4, box #258, PAA Archives.
Gilmore Report, 73.  
History: World War II, Africa Personnel, 40.
.Cleveland, 180.   
Gilmore Report, 9.   
William Hardy McNeill, The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society since A.D. 1000, (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1982), 171.
Dissociative forces are disaggregating elements that, deliberately or otherwise, conspire to break apart unified materials, organizations, or efforts. Reverse salients are technological gaps in knowledge that prevent or threaten to prevent advances in technological innovation. Both concepts are found throughout The Social Construction of Technological Systems.
I would like to acknowledge several people without whose support and help I would have been helplessly flailing. Throughout this year I have had many fine teachers.
US Government, 
Department of Defense
United States Air Force
United States Army
Miami. He
following the war. 
187
The ADP was originally conceived as a defensive weapon for protection of the North and South American continents against German aggression. From the beginning, with the selection of Pan American Airways as an agent of the United States Government to build the bases, the program mushroomed into a primary vehicle for the conduct of the war. Defensively, the bases were of extraordinary value to the nations of the Western Hemisphere in defeating the submarine menace. In fact, it is doubtful whether this threat could have been neutralized without these bases. Protection of the vital link between the Atlantic and the Pacific in the Canal Zone was also secured by the creation and operation of the ADP bases.
Of similar importance was the use of the bases in ferrying vital war material and planes to crucial battle zones in Africa. When the lightning speed of Hitler's forces combined with the unpreparedness of the west, the result was Axis military penetration of key strategic areas, threatening the entire defensive structure of the allies. The bases permitted the "arsenal of democracy" to transport armaments to the areas where they were needed most, offering flexibility to the war plan.
Supply of North Africa, Burma, the South West Pacific, and even the supply line to Russia was enabled by the shuttling of military planes and material via the ADP bases. 
188
221
222
ambassador and special advisor to the British Prime Minister, W. Averell Harriman, implored Hopkins to speed the transport of material across the route with the same priority and urgency as military operations. 
223
224
225
226
253