# ID: abd0ce760ea749f2a81937b3efd41397
# Title: Moltke's Mission Command Philosophy in the Twenty-first Century: Fallacy or Verity?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
In the aftermath of World War II, many Western armies studied the German Blitzkrieg success. They concluded that the German mission command philosophy was a cornerstone to lead and command troops in fluid and uncertain combat situations. This resulted in the integration of mission command philosophy or Auftragstaktik in several Western armies' doctrine. Among those armies, the US Army defines mission command as a command philosophy and as a warfighting function, which integrates the other warfighting functions. Historically, Field Marshal Helmuth von Moltke, Chief of Staff of the Prussian Army between 1857 and 1888, was the first military leader to recognize that one commanding officer from a central position on the battlefield could no longer direct military formations. He understood that the operational environment, including new technologies, imposed a different command philosophy on strategic, operational and tactical level, based on a clear mission statement and intent. He adopted this command method successfully in his campaigns against Austria in 1866 and France in 1870-71. Consequently, the Prussian/German education model became a paradigm for most Western armies. Contemporary operations require the same adaptive and flexible leaders to face the circumstances of the current battle space and to achieve mission success. This thesis researches the historical circumstances that shaped the mission command philosophy and studies its validity in contemporary doctrine.
v ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to express my gratitude to several people in the writing of my thesis.
First, I would like to thank the members of my committee for their efforts to focus and clarify my writing, especially Dr. House, who acted in a mission command style during my work. He provided me trust and guidance during my search, and inspired me to finish my work. I also want to thank Mr. Cordes, my staff group advisor, with whom I had extensive discussions on mission command philosophy and who had to listen to my critical questioning. Mr. Riggins' Leadership classes provided me sufficient knowledge to frame mission command within the leadership philosophy of the US Army. Finally, many thanks go to my spouse Irena. Her love for me, the patience she demonstrated and the support to this undertaking provided me strength to continue. She ensures that I have a home to come to rest after an intensive work period.     
The components of war-mobilization of human resources, discipline, weapons, tactics, strategy, and much else, the issues they raise, and the problems they pose-are timeless. But the forms they take and the social context that does much to shape them are always changing.
- Armed Forces, British Forces and Israel Defense Forces, are also strong believers of this concept, but do not go as much into detail as US doctrinal publications.
Each of those armies approached the mission command concept differently, which resulted in various implementations and interpretations. Those differences probably relate to cultural differences, operational experience and divergent interpretations of historical events, literature and theorists. Moreover, those differences will be discussed in chapter 4 of this document. Nevertheless, the reference point for mission command of those armies remains Field Marshal Helmuth von Moltke, often referred to as Moltke the Elder. Moltke's innovative application of military theory influenced warfare for more than a century, and military leaders and theorists even today quote him frequently. Annex A of this study provides a more extensive biography of Moltke.
So, why do we still need to study mission command philosophy if so much information already exists? One of the first challenges is to provide a common definition of mission command and its principles. As mentioned, there exist different definitions and interpretations, and therefore, a historical overview of circumstances and principles can help to understand and frame the concept. Furthermore, literature that studies Moltke's Auftragstaktik or mission command principles and their validity within current operational environment remains limited.
In summary, current military commanders must ask themselves the following questions: Which were the basic command principles and premises established in the nineteenth century, and what is their validity in contemporary doctrine and operations?
Which factors influence mission command philosophy? Furthermore, if military leaders consider mission command so important when conducting military tasks in the current environment, why is mission command not always used? In other words, what are the conditions for successful mission command? Can we establish such principles in the current environment?
Before studying the philosophy and concept of mission command itself, this paragraph will analyze and define the elements composing mission command, namely mission and command. First, I define a mission as the action a commander expects from his subordinate commanders to execute in order to achieve certain result. Command, on the other hand, is the authority that a commander in the armed forces lawfully exercises over subordinates by virtue of rank or assignment. 
2
For clarity within this study, I will initially use the US doctrinal definition of the mission command philosophy and develop it through a historical perspective.
[Mission command is] the exercise of authority and direction by the commander using mission orders to enable disciplined initiative within the commander's intent to empower agile and adaptive leaders in the conduct of unified land operations. 
3
Several current and prominent leaders often opine that armed forces operate in complex circumstances. However this statement appears true, doesn't every era encounters its set of difficulties and multifaceted circumstances? Commanding the French Army at the beginning of the nineteenth century in a campaign through Europe, attacking the beaches of Normandy in 1944, or assaulting Iwo Jima in 1945 can hardly be called simple. Beyond that, the conditions under which war occurs, encompass a certain degree of complexity due to the nature of it. Sun Tsu recognized the complicated relationships that surround war. He argues that war is an act of man in which moral strength and intellectual talent are decisive, war has to be part of actions designed to win a higher strategy, and that national unity is an essential requirement. 
4
5
These three tendencies correspond to three groups in society: the people, the government and the military. 
6
Moreover, patriotism feeds itself on emotions, like love and passion to one's country, and is not created on rational arguments. In relation to this, the government sets the goals based upon their political agenda and the electorate they represent. The military constitute the more stable element in this triangular relationship, as it has to arrange the chaotic circumstances of war. The events that occurred during March 2004 in Madrid demonstrate this volatile interaction. Spain was actively involved in the Iraq mission as a loyal strategic partner to the US. The terrorist attacks on a commuter train resulting in 191 dead changed public opinion and policy drastically. The public was shocked and elected a new government that pulled Spanish troops from Iraq and denounced further support for the US action there. 
7
For military analysis and decisions, the trinity does not provide a useful tool, therefore military use a different method to study and analyze the operational environment. The seven variables as described in the operational process provide an instrument to analyze information, collect data and understand the current operational environment. The variables consist of the political, military, economic, social, information, infrastructure, physical environment and time. 
8
9
As for the military variable, the opponent in the last twenty years varied from conventional organized forces to insurgent groups. This threat is called a hybrid threat, and today's soldier of today must possess the capabilities to fight conventional warfare and insurgents, while integrating the civilian impact on its operations. 
10
The economical variable consists of integrating general economic categories such as energy, raw materials, labor, food distribution, consumption patterns, investments, etc.
Economic circumstances and availability of or access to resources provide incentives for stable and peaceful community region or country. Several African countries such as the Democratic Republic of Congo, Zimbabwe, Central African Republic, and Sudan illustrate that the lack of economic prosperity reduces the ability of the state to operate. The society's structure influences the area of operations in which military forces operate. People within a social structure share the same political authority, occupy a common territory, have a common culture and share a sense of identity. 
11
12
Today's infrastructure also influences the operational environment. Facilities enable a society to accomplish certain requirements, like energy provision, sewer system, water purification, road networks for economy, school and governmental buildings, hospitals, etc. According to the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, more than 50 percent of the world population lives in urban areas. 
13
All these elements influence the deployment and use of military formations and the decision making process to conduct missions. Thus military leaders must possess the capability to comprehend the situation and the ability to transmit clear orders to their subordinates.
Military commanders must operate within this complex environment and assure compliance to orders. The ability to respond and act within this environment requires commanders who understand the environment, show flexibility to changing circumstances, demonstrate adaptability in variable conditions, move with agility across the battle space, and provide innovative solutions in the changing circumstances. Yet, above all a commander must seize the initiative in order to retain a maximum control over the situation and pursue mission success. Though commanders do not control the operational parameters and there exists a continuous gap in information, three major factors contribute to commanders seizing the initiative.
First, commanders must receive sufficient trust to conduct the mission according to their analysis. This means that a commander allows his subordinate to execute a mission according to that subordinate's comprehension of the situation. An example from General Grant's orders to General Sherman during the American Civil War in 1864, illustrate the basic principles for practising mission command.
It is my design, if the enemy keeps quiet and allow me to take the initiative in the Spring Campaign to work all parts of the Army together, and, somewhat, toward a common center. . . . You I propose to move against Johnston's Army, to break it up and to get into the interior of the enemy's country as far as you can, inflicting all the damage you can against their War resources. I do not propose to lay down for you a plan of Campaign, but simply to lay down the work it is desirable to have done and leave you free to execute in your own way. Submit to me however as early as you can your plan of operation. 
14
That few are now all to act in a Common plan, Converging on a Common Center, looks like Enlightened War . . . I will not let side issues draw me off from your main plan in which I am to Knock Joe [Confederate General Joseph E.] Johnston, and do as much damage to the resources of the Enemy as possible . . . I would ever bear in mind that Johnston is at all times to be kept so busy that he cannot in any event send any part of his command against you or [Union Major General Nathaniel P.] Banks. 
15
Lieutenant General Courtney Hodges did not provide sufficient guidance, which was actually an objective more in depth, the Rhein dam. 
16
This study will not evaluate command systems, nor the ability to command troops. This study investigates the original circumstances and compares the application of mission command in today's doctrine and environment. Due to time limitations, it is not possible to examine all social factors and dynamics that influence armed forces as an organization and the individuals. Furthermore, this study is conducted without a survey among military leaders and subordinates. Such an investigation requires a detailed study of a specific audience, and is not the aim of this document.
Though some people will tie mission command philosophy to leadership, this study will only describe the relationship between the principles of mission command and a commander gives orders to his subordinates. Yet, during the course of this study, it will become clear that certain leadership aspects affect mission command and vice versa.
The French Revolution at the end of the eighteenth century shaped the prelude for significant changes in Europe. In the aftermath of the Revolution, Napoleon conducted wars that would change the face of Europe and alter Western society significantly.
Moreover, the revolutionary ideas of the French Revolution forced other monarchies to adopt more democratic policies like the introduction of suffrage, and to review their strategic military position. Indeed, to counter Napoleonic warfare, major European powers had to enlarge their armies significantly through the introduction of conscription, which in turn impacted society and civil-military relations meaningfully. Additionally, warfare had become unlimited in nature instead of limited. It required a whole nation to defeat an opponent's forces or protect own resources and interests.
These changes led to several theories on operational art and warfare, of which Jomini and Clausewitz remain the most famous of that period. Above that, technological progression impacted warfare and introduced a revolution in military affairs. The number of casualties on the battlefield increased considerably and the type of injuries changed as new weapon systems such as breech loaders emerged. Military organizations struggled with such innovations. However, those countries that showed adaptability to use those advances would become more powerful, and would shift the balance of power during the nineteenth century. New countries such as the Germany and the Japanese Empire would emerge as new major powers besides the British Imperium.
The Prussian army officer education model contributed significantly to the rise of the German Empire. The Prussian Army required from its officers independent, critical thinking to seize the initiative and demonstrate adaptability to changing circumstances with the aim of accomplishing the mission. Later this model became known as mission command or Auftragstaktik. This chapter studies the conditions in which such command philosophy could emerge.
Modern mission command philosophy finds it origins in Moltke's concept for organizing tactical formations on the battle field in the nineteenth century. Field Marshal Helmuth Karl Bernard Graf von Moltke, often referred to as Moltke the Elder, Chief of Staff of the Prussian Army from 1857 to 1888, redefined the waycommanders should lead and command their formations. His perception and experience on command and control resulted from the Prussian army education system and the social structure created at the beginning of the nineteenth century. In 1806, the Prussian army was defeated so badly at Jena that it led to profound changes within the military and society.
The technological and social dynamic after the French Revolution created foundations for military innovations in doctrine and commanding troops. Indeed, Napoleon not only conquered his enemy by an outstanding demonstration of tactical and operational skill, he completely annihilated the Prussian military in October 1806. The French levée en masse provided a new dynamic in warfare at the end of the eighteenth and continued in the nineteenth century. From that moment on, military formations no longer consisted of a mix of mercenaries and conscripts, but rather of homogenous troops based on mobilization of the state. People wanted to protect the interests of the state at all cost, and their relationship with the state differed thoroughly then the type of armies organized during the Frederick the Great era. State leaders could now mass the population to create large formations, which needed less time to train. The Prussian army, on the other hand, differentiated quite significantly from the new military organizational model, or as a British general observed in 1781 after the Seven Years campaign:
The Prussian army, being composed chiefly of strangers or different countries, manners, and religion, are united only by the strong chain of military discipline; this and a most rigid attention to keep up all the forms and discipline established, constitutes a vast and regular machine, which being animated by the vigorous and powerful genius of their leader, may be justly accounted on the most respectable armies in Europe; but should this spring, however, languish but for an instant only, the machine itself, would probably fall to pieces, and leave nothing but traces of its ancient glory behind. 
1
Napoleon' s attack on Jena resulted in chaos and the inability of Prussian generals to take the necessary initiative based on analysis of the environment. Moreover, due to a lack of training, Prussian commanders retained their troops in too tight columns, which resulted in 20,000 Prussian soldiers being exposed to French fire. 
2
3
Secondly, Scharnhorst opined to redefine the relationship between citizen and state in order to enable mass mobilization. Fortunately, the circumstances made such change possible. The occupation by Napoleon's forces laid the foundation for nationalism in Prussian and later German history. This rise of patriotism that would defy the French set the conditions to introduce a new, though limited standing army combined with a the possibility to mobilize a Landwehr, a militia type unit in Prussian society whose initial mission existed in protecting the cities. Applying a conscription concept as means to defend the state implemented a change in leading troops. The violently-inculcated "corpse-obedience" or Kadavergehorsam would no longer be tolerated by civilians.
Thirdly, Scharnhorst concluded that skirmishing required a specific kind of unit with independent fighting capabilities and empowered leadership. 
4
Conversely, the emergence of those staffs, the corps of engineers, medical services, military police, and supply units had social implications. From that point onward, aristocratic families no longer possessed a certain monopoly for occupying leadership positions or staff functions, people from all social classes were eligible for command or influential staff duties, which they now specifically requested. This reinforced Scharnhorst's guidance for better, more disciplined training and education of officers.
That education system would focus on generating a broad base of erudite officers. 
5
The successful transformation of the Prussian Army occurred in two significant components: implementation method and political environment. First of all, Scharnhorst and Gneisenau did not simply copy the French system, but tailored the reform to the specific circumstances of Prussia. The revolution in Prussian military affairs did not result from society itself, like it did with the French Revolution France. Instead, external circumstances shaped the changes in Prussian military, namely the occupation by France and the limitations imposed by the Treaty of Tilsit between the Prussian King, Friedrich Wilhelm III, and Napoleon in 1807. According to the treaty, Prussia was only allowed to form a standing army of 40,000 men, and a certain number of Prussia's territories were taken over by France. Consequently, to remain within the numbers, the Prussian Army retained the more brighter officers within their ranks.
Secondly, the political spectrum of Prussia differed considerably from France.
Aristocracy and antagonists to change remained very influential in Prussia. Though Frederick William promised modification, after Scharnhorst died, many of his followers were neutralized. Military conformists preferred teaching the Jomini inspired Theorie des grossen Krieges written by General von Willisen, as this provided very clear rules and principles. 
6
7
Today, the Prussian Army school model remains a paradigm for modern forces, even considering the changes society went through and the creation of modern Western armies based on an all-volunteer force. More importantly, Scharnhorst provided the opportunity for thinkers such as Clausewitz to emerge.
In 1823, Helmuth von Moltke studied at the Prussian Military Academy, where Clausewitz acted as director. The question whether Clausewitz directly influenced the thinking of von Moltke remains a hypothetical one, yet one can assume they at least shared a common understanding of the environment in which they lived and worked.
Clausewitz based his view on his personal experiences of participating in war, while Moltke's came from studying Prussian wars and Napoleon's legacy in the Kriegsakademie.
Marie von Clausewitz published On War in 1832, one year after Clausewitz' death. Probably a significant number of European military and political leaders, and academics read his work. In all probability, Moltke's ideas find their origin in Clausewitz' philosophy. Moreover, this book would lay the foundations for modern military strategic and operational thinking in many Western armies. Clausewitz described the true nature of war and the conduct of warfare. In his description of war, he recognized the inevitable uncertainty and chaos to which soldiers are subject in conflict, and called it "Friction in War." 
8
Although Clausewitz does not literally use words such as leadership, command and education, he refers to them collectively as "Military Genius." 
9
10
11
The first of those abilities are inherent to a person, and are the result of education combined with character. Physical appearance and combat skills can improve by means of training and, more importantly, by education. All these elements frame the warrior part of the leader and enable an individual to destroy or annihilate an enemy physically. Those skills will keep the soldier alive in the difficult circumstances of war, yet this does not assure complete success.
The second area requires more intellectual abilities. Someone who accepts responsibility must also possess the competences to provide guidance and determination to take a decision after judging circumstances. Within an uncertain environment like war, plans are based upon assumptions. Those assumptions need validation before or during combat. Consequently, a commander accepts that his subordinate executes the mission in another way than anticipated by the commander, based on circumstances and information only visible or known to that subordinate. This more comprehensive approach to guide and direct actions enables us to relate the elements of warfare and the terrain to decision making. Clausewitz actually defines what today is called situational awareness and understanding in order to make decisions based on what actually happens. 
12
13
14
Although this theory remains relevant, Clausewitz does not provide sufficient tools to create such officers. He only described the necessary requirements for officers and military leaders in wartime.
Nevertheless, this philosophy impacted the Prussian education and training system considerably. Leaders were now required to think about the mission, the variables they might encounter during execution and the overall objective or purpose. It forced them to think critically with improvisation and creativity. However, the organizational change in the Prussian Army did not result solely from this mental point of view. The introduction of needle-guns, the modernization of transport, and the invention of the telegraph were other major contributors to the success of the Prussian Army in 1866. Indeed, based on the pre-revolutionary invention of lightweight, eight-and twelve-pound cannons, he introduced the battery system that enabled French units to deploy faster on the battlefield and mass firepower in support of the infantry. Furthermore, universal conscription provided him the forces to create his Grand Armée and absorb the casualties of offensive battle. Napoleon's army consisted of large corps and division level formations that needed new columnar tactics. Skirmishing combined with shock columns broke the opponent's musket armed line infantry. The French emperor emphasized mass, speed and mobility. Austria, Russia, and to a certain extent Great-Britain would take over this doctrine of mobilization and shock tactics, where troops were led by a single, leadership or from a centralised headquarters. Prussia followed this doctrine until Moltke became Chief of Staff of the Prussian Army. 
15
16
On the other hand, France, Austria and Russia continued to threaten Prussia's existence. Moltke, Roon and Bismarck concluded two things. First, the Prussian army needed a system for quick mobilization of units to mitigate the threat, and secondly, it had to create an army that could launch attacks in enemy territory in a first strike, on the place of their choice. This would make "Germany the premier military state of Europe." 
17
Between 1840 and 1860, the range of weapons extended drastically. The infantryman received a weapon that enabled him to shoot up to 1,200 meters, and the average cannon range reached 7,000 meters. The introduction of the breach loading rifle from Dreyse made it possible to load in any posture -standing, kneeling, or lying downand the weapon had a higher rate of fire than muzzle-loaders. On the other hand, a higher fire frequency meant more logistic support, which was not feasible at the beginning of 1840. Thus, employing needle-rifles required better trained leadership who controlled the rate of fire better in order to possess sufficient munitions for the final assault or defensive line. Platoon and company leadership now had to think about mission accomplishment instead of assuring inaccurate volley fire. The artillery, still in centralized support of the infantry, was now placed at a larger distance, making it difficult for attacking infantry units to cross open terrain in a single line formation without being hit. In that period, commanders commanded their troops with verbal orders and motivated their soldiers from the back of the formation pushing their men forward. The position of the officers and non-commissioned officers within the formation had to change: they now had to lead from the front, and could no longer command from the rear of the formation. Now that commanders led in front across the field, once the fight started, commanders could no longer change direction. Crossing the gap meant that officers were forced to think more independently. So, Moltke concluded that it had become more difficult to maneuver a unit once in battle if units applied Napoleonic tactics. Besides this tactical improvement, he needed to command and control large formations across the country. He succeeded in increasing the size of the army to 300,000 men by 1860, three times larger than in 1850, and according to the new doctrinal approach those large formations needed rapid operational deployment over larger distances using the railroad system. Moreover, the telegraph made it possible to transmit orders on a longer distance and direct a campaign from a central position further away from the actual battle. 
18
19
20
Field Marshal Friedrich von Wrangel considered Moltke's fire-tactics "uncontrollable and dishonorable, for they dispersed troops in ragged lines and dealt deadly blows not face-to-face but from concealment and at a distance." 
21
Thirdly, this expansion of formations dictated the transfer of command from headquarters to officers at the front, and would prove to be very effective in 1866, during the Prussian-Austrian war.
Without studying the impact of the industrial revolution or the influence of philosophical streaming such as Kantianism or romanticism on society in the nineteenth century, this chapter concludes that command authority transferred from the highest level towards small units in the Prussian army between 1848 and 1871.
The Prussian army was a learning organization that was willing to adapt its 
In 1862, Moltke sent Justus Scheibert to the US to observe the American Civil War with the aim to collect data on the effects of artillery on earth, masonry and iron.
The engineer officer witnessed several battles and talked with prominent military leaders such as General Robert Lee and General Stonewall Jackson. His conclusions confirmed the initial Moltke analysis on the impact of technology on tactical and strategic level.
First of all, artillery had a significant impact on the battlefield and infantry had difficulties in storming a defended position. 
2
Bull Run taught at least one lesson. Even the most spirited mobs cannot fight a war. The lack of intermediate levels of command had made itself felt, too, drive itself home. The general found it next to impossible to direct nine brigades himself. Southern commanders did not pursue the enemy, they set to the task, the problem: organization. 
3
You have to realize how things stand with us. Recognize that my order then would do more harm than good. I rely on my division and brigade commanders. How terrible if I could not. I plan and work as hard as I can to bring the troops to the right place at the right time. I have done my duty with then. The moment I order them forward, I put the battle and the fate of the army in the hands of God. 
4
5
6
Thus, the Danish War became a confrontation between old and new styles of warfare on continental Europe in which the Prussian army initially struggled with its transformation. First of all, the commander in chief, Wrangel, ordered his troops verbally and rejected the use of documents, which Moltke had introduced. The communications between his commanders and him stayed very limited. 
7
8
9
10
12
The annexation of Schleswig-Holstein by Prussia induced a chain of events that inevitably led towards war with Austria and the sovereign duchies of Bavaria, Hanover, Saxony, Hesse-Cassel, Württemberg, Baden, Hesse-Darmstadt and Nassau. Prussia continued to improve and to build up its army, and by 1866 its armed forces comprised of nine army corps or 335,000 men under arms and an additional 265,000 men in the Landwehr. All soldiers were equipped with the needle-gun breech loader rifle and the artillery had received 6-pounder and 4-pounder steel breech loading guns. 
13
Larger armies and new operational thinking made centralized operational and strategic planning necessary. First of all, the Prussian Army had to mobilize more than 250,000 soldiers from the Landwehr. Those soldiers defended the Prussian fortresses and constituted the reserve forces, while the active component of the army conducted the campaign. 
14
His plan involved the formation of three mobile columns who had to overrun Saxony and the other Germanic states, penetrate Bohemia, and there envelop the Austrian force. 
15
16
Success depends entirely upon their [Prussian forces] immediate and unconditional employment." 
17
18
The prince often pursued other goals than the ones set by the Chief of Staff. As commander of the First Army, he believed that massing the Prussian force would provide decisive victory, yet he did not know the precise location of the Austrian force. By keeping a decentralized force, Moltke wanted to maintain the flexibility enabling him to mass or encircle his adversary on the moment of his choice instead of moving his 250,000 men army around the battlefield without proper direction. Moreover, decentralized armies had the ability to pursue and maintain pressure on the Austrian formations. 
19
On June 30, 1866, the army headquarters moved from Berlin to Bohemia and only on July 2, at the eve of the battle of Königgrätz, the telegraph connection between him and his armies became operational. In practice, the Prussian armies fought their battles independently within a centralized plan and showed sufficient initiative and audacity to achieve their objectives. 
20
Thus, he was forced to rely on his army commanders. On the other hand, he appeared on the battlefield with his staff at the decisive or critical moment of the battle. It is arguable whether his presence would have made any difference given the moment and the limited communications, yet he understood that his presence could become necessary to deal with unforeseen circumstances.
There are two other plausible hypotheses for his presence on the battlefield. First of all, he wanted to see with his own eyes whether his command method worked in the face of battle. Secondly, with his presence, he wanted to assure that his subordinates executed the orders as they were told to do. In this last option, he demonstrated that he controlled the fight to a certain extent. In contrast to Prince Frederick Charles, the commander of 7th Division, General Fransecky, demonstrated more tactical and operational comprehension of Moltke's plan.
He understood the importance of fixing the Austrians in the vicinity of Benatek until Second Army arrived over his left flank. 
24
25
26
The Austrian and Prussian Armies brought in total over half a million men on the battlefield around Königgrätz. Notwithstanding this number, the amount killed, wounded and missing soldiers remained fairly limited, totaling 27,656 or around five percent. One of the reasons for this low casualty rate probably resides in the limited number of frontal confrontations, the inaccuracy of artillery, and the fact that Benedek did not reorganize his army behind the Elbe to continue the fight from a new defensive position. 
28
The analysis of the campaign leads to three critical remarks. First of all, the artillery was not yet used to its full capabilities in supporting the infantry attack. Prior to this battle, military tactics focused their attention on the effective use of artillery in the defense, not in the offense. Although the Prussians did not use the smoothbore 12pounder in its full capacity, they continued the conversion of their artillery to the Krupp cast-steel cannon. 
29
To conclude, the Prussian Army's victory at Königgrätz resulted in a shift in strategic balance of power in Europe and showed the operational and tactical efficiency of the reformed Prussian Army. Indeed, Austria could no longer claim leadership of the German states, and Bismarck assured unification of the North German Confederation under Prussia's leadership. Prussia became Germany.
The main importance for this study, however, remains its operational and tactical implications. Indeed, during the battle, the needle-breech loading gun demonstrated on numerous occasions its superiority against the muskets. Furthermore, the tactical procedures of the Prussian officers exceeded those of their Austrian counterparts, even in those situations when technological superiority failed. Thanks to the efficient training and education program, Prussian leadership demonstrated far better skills in positioning their units and maneuvering across the battlefield. Commanders in front were able to take initiative to make those decentralized movements and actions possible. More importantly, superiors would verify whether the subordinate clearly understood the mission and the purpose of the operation. Shared experiences and trust amongst commanders became therefore essential. Moltke gave his most able and trustworthy commanders, such as the Crown Prince Frederick William, the most difficult or independent missions. J. F. C. Fuller criticized Moltke for not taking his responsibility. 
30
31
Prussian and international authorities decorated and honored him with distinguished titles, which ranked him high on the protocol order. He retained his position as Chief of Staff of the Prussian Army and assured an unimpeded integration of his new concepts in tactics and operational warfare. A strong nucleus of war-experienced officers emerged. I It became important to remember the lessons learned without falling into Jominian reasoning that seduces officers to think according to a single set of rules that deals with each situation in a similar way. 
32
33
Before starting this analysis, the reader must know that the damage to the German national archives, Reichsarchief, in World War II destroyed a number of the original transcripts. Additionally, the German Staff College probably edited some of Moltke's works after his death to honor his vision and to incorporate the Prussian officer corps' general view on tactics into Moltke's legacy. 
34
Moltke wrote and spoke on a diverse number of topics, which demonstrates his intellectual capabilities. To remain within the boundaries of this study, this paragraph will only investigate Moltke's vision on command, staff composition, the use of technology on the battlefield, and instructions for large unit commanders. He shaped his vision on two paradigms. First, Moltke had no faith in any fixed system or set of rules to provide the solution for a problem, and secondly, he accepted the existence of uncertainty when executing a plan. Despite these directives and guidelines, several commanders did not always comprehend the advantages of the new tactical and operational approach. Some just failed to obey the regulations by stubbornly conducting frontal attacks. Prince Frederick Charles, for example, would lose more men in the Franco-Prussian war of 1870 during the battle at Wörth than the entire Prussian force during the battle at Königgrätz. 
35
Above all, the role of a commander is to command his subordinates and to prevent things to follow their own course. 
36
37
Moltke provides two ways to command: through general directives or definite orders. General directives contain information to allow subordinate commanders to plan their mission independently. They enable commanders to organize their units for battle and to prepare the upcoming operation. Definite orders are more detailed instructions to direct future actions, concerning time, space, and coordination. Here, Moltke makes the distinction between operational level and tactical level. Below the level of corps, commanders distribute definite orders. However, in both systems he argues for simplicity, clarity, and confident orders without too many details. In his vision, detailed orders prevent flexibility during operations. Indeed, because Moltke accepts uncertainty, he wants to maintain the ability to react in that environment. Moreover, if during the course of action, too many details change or a commander intervenes too much, this would create confusion and demoralization. 
38
39
40
41
Because of the changing circumstances, Moltke claimed it was impossible to rely on a set of binding rules that lead to a solution. "In war everything is uncertain as soon as operations commence, except that which the commander-in-chief carries himself in will and energy." 
42
43
The role of a staff The staff's major role entails advising the commander with clear and a limited number of ideas. Indeed the more ideas that staff officers generate, the more it can confuse a commander and drive him away from the objective of the mission. Moltke resented staff officers who merely pointed out the problems of a course of action, instead of handing him a solution or helping him to solve the problem. He advocated Unternehmung, or undertaking, which actually refers to initiative, audacity or enterprising. 
44
As seen above, Moltke focused on information sharing between units and commanders. To enable this, the Prussian army created a system with specific staff officers whose job encompassed reporting to the higher headquarters. They named it the directed telescope. Specially selected, highly qualified, and trustworthy young officers became sensors for the commander on the battlefield. 
45
46
According to Moltke, the value of technology lies in its practical application. If the military cannot use technology appropriately, it has no place on the battlefield. 
47
The application method of technological inventions can determine the campaign outcome, in other words, people who know how to use technology most effectively can achieve victory. The Russian Major General Dragomirov, observer of the battle of Königgrätz, wrote the following to the Russian tsar: "It wasn't the needle gun by itself that won the victories of 1866, but the men who carried it." 
48
49
50
The problem now arises, how to prepare and train a unit for diverse circumstances and rapid change. First of all, discipline assures execution of the mission. 
51
52
53
If nothing is ordered, the order of battle is valid. If the chain of command is lost, it is everyone's duty to restore it, [and] especially is the duty of the leaders of small detachments, which, particularly in an engagement, are dissuaded by their subordinate units. Such leaders should not allow themselves to be searched after but should eagerly return to the struggle under the command of their nearest superior. 
54
Helmuth von Moltke's merits to German history, military theory, and application remain significant. The German Army changed its command structure successfully, adapted its education model to provide skilled officers, and proved its capabilty to integrate the technologcal innovations of the industrialization into its organization. As of then, commanders' and staff officers' role incorporated to understand the situation, to assess the conditions, and to provide accurate, timely decisions and directives to subordinates. Such capabilities required educated, independent thinking officers, who can adapt to situations and think critically on problems. Furthermore, mass fire and incorporating technological advantages in the decision process can provide victory. Moreover, it had become clear that larger armies would become necessary in war in order to achieve the strategic success and that wars enclose a succession of battles on small and larger unit level. Those larger armies required leaders who understood how to achieve mission success, the strategic environment in which they operated and the difficulties of communicating orders. Orders were based on clear vocabulary in which a commander designated a task to a subordinate, together with the aim of operation, without telling how to conduct the operation. Commanders accepted this responsibility fully. Small unit tactics and initiative on lowest level became more important and decisive in the overall campaign. Though Frederick the Great and Napoleon probably remain the founders for operational art, Moltke laid the foundations for modern campaign planning and staff work.
Helmuth von Moltke transformed the German Army to the most adaptable, innovative armed organization for more than 60 years, in which mission command philosophy played a key role.
After World War II, many Western military theorists and historians concluded that Blitzkrieg and Auftragstaktik constituted the main elements for success of Germany's military units at the outbreak of hostilities. Actually, the principles for modern combined warfare and command philosophy resulted mainly from an organization that learned from its experiences during the Great War. During the initial years of the war, the Germans adapted to the trench warfare by improving their defensive tactics. Ludendorff created the defense in depth, in which German frontline units traded terrain for maneuver space to allos units sufficient battle space for a counterattack. However, a successful counterattack not only relies on terrain, its succes depends heavily on timing and initiative. Therefore, the higher command reserved specific troops to conduct the counterattack in the sector of a subordinate unit.
The subordinate commander received those troops under command to repel an enemy assault in the way that he thought the battle conditions evolved. Ludendorff called it the "individualization of tactics." 
55
Yet, enveloping tactics had become virtually impossible on every level, so German leadership focused on penetration as a means to achieve victory or a way out of the operational impasse. The purpose of this new operation existed in achieving a strategic breakthrough by surprising the enemy with an enormous amount of artillery fire. Small unit attacks immediately following the artillery barrage had to penetrate the defensive positions, roll up the trenches in support of neighboring units and destroy enemy communication nodes in depth. These missions could only be entrusted to small unit leaders who possessed the skills and training to act independently. Indeed, the absence of adequate and reliable radio communication equipment made communications with those small units basically impossible. Moreover, they could not establish a wired telephone connection, as speed during execution remained crucial. 
56
The process of developing principles to obtain this objective [destroy the enemy force] was a collective and corporate effort. Individual talents and personalities were essential, but the doctrine emerged in an atmosphere where ideas were discovered and shared, not invented and arbitrarily imposed.  Ludendorff and Geyer, required movement and mobility, and above all the new doctrine accepted friction and uncertainty as characteristics of warfare. These factors required tactical leaders capable of making rapid battlefield assessments and issuing quickly an oral order to attack the enemy and destroy him or to seize initiative. 
58
59
Armies as well as lesser units demand leaders of good judgment, clear thinking and far seeing, leaders with independence and decisive resolution, leaders with perseverance and energy, leaders not emotionally moved by the varying fortunes of war, leaders with a high sense of responsibility. 
60
A German company commander would get the order to secure the village by 1600 hours, period. Before the attack he would ensure that even a Grenadier knew what was expected from him during the attack. If his platoon commander and sergeant fell, the enlisted man had to take over. 
2
Most organizations develop their own set of rules according to different parameters, such as their mission, history, culture, benchmarking, etc. Military organizations specifically show a certain tendency to base their doctrine on historical examples, learning from other successful armies, or simply different circumstances that forced them, like the former Soviet-Union states during the Cold War.
According to Eitan Shamir, three organizational elements determine and influence a successful implementation of new concepts. First of all, when a military organization recognizes a shortfall for which it does not have an existing appropriate solution of its own, it expresses the need to adopt a foreign or strange concept. Secondly, the organization needs to integrate that new concept. During this adaptation process, the organization adjusts the imported concept to its own specific culture. Finally, praxis involves the ability of the organization to implement the foreign concept in combat. This three-phased concept, adoption-adaption-praxis, creates a certain dynamic. People within the organization have to change their behavior. Therefore, Shamir argues that mission command is interpreted and practiced differently in different armies due to the impact of particular strategic settings and organizational culture. 
3
Internal factors include education, training and personnel policies. External factors consist of the changing face of war or the civil-military relationships. 
4
Though the application of mission command philosophy does not belong solely to a land force commander, this study will primarily refer to army documents, simply because most of the writings focus on land units. Undeniably, mission command is applicable across all levels and services within the military organization as soon as commanders provide orders, whether the leaders receiving those orders command divisions, fleets or air forces. The mission command concept resides mainly within army doctrinal publications, simply because the army particularly deals with this concept upon the lowest combat formation and a land army is mainly human driven. and circumstances became the focus point, instead of cookbook-like solutions to all problems. Secondly, the US Army, even with reduced budgets, had to close the technology gap with its opponent. 
5
6
According to the 2011 ADP 3-0, Mission Command belongs to the foundations of unified land operations, next to initiative, decisive action, and the army core competencies (combined arms maneuver and wide area security). The US Army believes that mission command "guides leaders in the execution of unified land operations." 7 ADP 3-0 describes the mission command as a philosophy as follows:
[Mission command philosophy is] the exercise of authority and direction by the commander using mission orders to enable disciplined initiative within the commander's intent to empower agile and adaptive leaders in the conduct of unified land operations. 
8
The mission command warfighting function develops and integrates those activities enabling a commander to balance the art of command and the science of control. This fundamental philosophy of command places people rather than technology or systems at the center. 
9
10
11
12
The British Army incorporated mission command officially since 1987, five years after the Falkland War with Argentina. 
13
Lieutenant-colonel H. Jones, commander of the 2nd Battalion of the Parachute Regiment, had an authoritarian command style and relied on rigid, centralized planning in which he wanted to control everything personally. As of the first contact with Argentinian forces, his plan to capture the village of Goose Green failed. Despite the detailed planning, firepower superiority and the absence of losses, the assault stopped because of his subordinates' inability to take initiative. Jones personally came up front, yet the enemy surrounded him. Though his subordinates urged him to change his plan, he refused bluntly by shouting: "Don't try to tell me how to fight my battle!" 
14
15
16
17
18
19
In 2010, the French army released a series of new doctrinal documents based on experiences from several peacekeeping operations in Southeast Europe and Africa, and from their involvement in counter-insurgency operations in Afghanistan. Though the French Army has a long history in counterinsurgency, including Indo-China in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and operations in Algeria from 1954 to 1962, it seems that the French army was not able to incorporate mission command until the integration of France as a full member of the NATO alliance in 2009.  
20
21
22
23
Backed up by historical examples, it is first and foremost intended to provide food for thought for our officers, in particular the youngest of them, but also for each and every commander who may one day be called upon to exercise command and control of operations. 
24
25
The second command style advocated in FT-05 is mission command or command by objective. The translation of Auftragstaktik into command by objective clearly incorporates the purpose or the goal of the action that is required from the subordinate.
Mission command is always based on a concept of operations clearly expressed by the commander and rests on the initiative granted to subordinates, their intellectual discipline and their responsiveness to reach the goals set by the higher echelon. 
26
27
According to Moltke, understanding the role a commander plays within the overall strategic-operational-tactical environment remains a key tenet that enables mission success. Above that, the French Army missed the opportunity to broaden the title of the doctrine, as it only refers to tactical commanders. As seen in chapters 2 and 3 above, mission command specifically relates to command functioning on the operational and strategic levels. Notwithstanding this critique, the French doctrinal concept follows a Moltke style, leaving much latitude to subordinate commanders.
After suspending conscription in 1992, the Belgian Armed forces went through a number of changes. The army had to redefine its mission and roles within society and the political, strategic environment after ending the Cold War. The Belgian Army struggled significantly with its new role due to a lack of clear political vision until 2003, and due to the traumatic events that happened during the Rwanda crisis in 1994. At the outbreak of the genocide in April 1994, fourteen Belgian paracommando soldiers, operating for the United Nations Peacekeeping Force UNAMIR, 
28
As a result, the political environment did no longer favor major deployments and combat actions. The paradigm mantra for the Belgian political environment, and to a certain extent a significant part of the public opinion, became a zero casualties concept.
The new type of operations that marked the start of the twentieth century, the interventions in Kosovo and Afghanistan, changed Belgian military and political strategy.
In 2003, the doctrinal impasse in the army faded out with a transformation plan that would prepare and change the Belgian army in order to face the current threat environment. Indeed, combat units of the army shifted from mechanized formations to a medium role, and the joint staff and maneuver school took time to review doctrinal publications. A country with a small army, restricted resources and limited experience tends to look towards its allies. Belgian officers consulted publications and documents from paradigm armies such as the US Army and British Army, but more importantly from the allied organization to which they belong, namely NATO.
Mission Command includes the decentralized execution of operations where the subordinates have the responsibility to take maximum initiative, taking into account the commander's intent, the commander's planning guidance and the end state. 
29
30
31
32
However, the main comment on their doctrine resides in the political-strategic situation of the Belgian Army. How can commanders perform actions in an uncertain environment, according to a mission command philosophy if the political world does not accept the risk for casualties inherent to military operations? Such an environment will restrain commanders in executing their mission.
The study of different doctrines reveals differences between countries' armies and interpreting mission command. Despite these variances, all Western armies suffer from external factors that affect the application of mission command. The following paragraphs study certain of those influences, categorized as follows: the civil-military relationship, the political-military relationship, the nature of contemporary operations, and technology.
The civil-military relationship One of the first significant influences on the military arises from its relationship with society. As derived from Clausewitz' trinity, changes in society will affect the military. Indeed, Western society changed significantly during the twentieth century, compared to Moltke's era. The nineteenth century officer was brought up according to specific military values such as: courage, honor, sacrifice, and skill at arms. Although those values still exist within the armies, like the US Army warrior ethos, societal changes challenge the core of that ethos. 33 Indeed, under the term "political correctness", the armies received specific directives to incorporate and embrace new behavior, such as sensitivity training comprising compassion, understanding and building friendship. Furthermore, the tendency for contracting inhibits unit cohesion as this goes against the esprit de corps or group cohesion philosophy. These factors have influenced the implementation of mission command during operations. It prevents commanders from undertaking daring missions in fear those missions do not correspond to certain standards or for fear of casualties among one'sown soldiers or the contracted personnel. Western society has become very sensitive about taking casualties. In a quickly evolving, economical and result based society, people expect that the military deliver low-cost and swift results. These factors put pressure on senior and junior military commanders, hence they lean towards toward risk aversion. 
34
35
36
Commanders should be aware of those pitfalls within society and maintain to embrace a culture of trust and understanding, combined with a belief in taking initiative and accepting that sometimes actions can go wrong as war is conducted in uncertain circumstances.
Remarkably, Shamir opines that both military and political leaders underestimate the public's resilience for taking casualties. He argues that if a conflict is perceived as just, the willingness for sacrifice remains similar to that in previous periods in history. 
37
The preceding discussion demonstrates the complex relationship between society and the military. The second relationship that affects the application of mission command comes from the relationship between political leaders and the military organization.
The suspension of conscription and the reducing number of reserve units in Western armies altered the understanding between political leaders, civil military advisors and military. Indeed, in many western armies, ministers of defense or their senior civilian advisors have not experienced the army from within and do not have Lieutenant General Halutz was a firm believer of the effects based approach to operations doctrine, which resulted in a strategy of precision bombing and limited ground operations. Halutz focused on "efforts to secure a consciousness of victory and to deliver to Hezbollah a cognitive perception of defeat." 
38
39
Thus military policy makers tend to retain control of their subordinates, rather than decentralizing authority. According to Shamir, a RAND study from 2007 confirmed that promotions are based on position availability rather than performance, and to acquire a promotion officers must have served in certain type of assignments. 
40
41
42
Finally, the actions of a soldier can have strategic impacts in the current operational environment. Indeed, the mistake made by US soldiers in Afghanistan when burning desecrated Korans had an impact on the whole mission and numerous spontaneous demonstrations and riots broke out. Senior military and political leadership, including President Obama had to intervene. In such situations, politicians will show a tendency to micromanage the military force, hence again prohibiting mission command.
The operational environment in which forces operate changed significantly since the end of the Cold War era. Where previously military forces prepared themselves for major combat based on maneuver warfare, they now found themselves in a more static environment. During maneuver warfare, higher commands focused on the mobility of the force, while deploying formations over wide distances and within constantly changing circumstances. Following Moltke's example, those commanders were forced to decentralize, as they did not had the ability to command from a single focal point.
Though the current operational environment became very fluid, can shift rapidly on tactical level, and requires small units to work in a very decentralized manner, on the operational level the environment hardly changes. Long term planning and the fact that few actions occur at the operational level result in higher commanders' micromanagement of their proper battle space.
The events that occurred in the Wanat Valley in the summer of 2008 demonstrate such detailed supervision. Colonel Ostlund, commander of the 2nd Battalion of the 503rd Airborne Infantry Regiment, wanted to move a combat outpost in order to improve situational awareness and control in his assigned area of responsibility. To do this, Ostlund had to seek approval two levels up, namely the commander of the Combined Joint Task Force-101. Moreover, prior to this, he had to brief his brigade commander on the details of the operation, including weather, fire support, engineer details, location of command posts, and risk assessment. 
43
Paradoxically, the current nature of operations and forces favorize decentralized operations. The facts that forces have become smaller, that the geographical dispersion of units has increased and that communication means have improved significantly push those commanders to decentralize more than they did during previous operations. Moltke considered similar elements to decentralize when he planned his operation against Austria.
Additionally, the opponent changed to an asymmetric threat, whose actions cannot be predicted. The enemy surprised Western forces on different occasions with new weapons systems, such as Improvised Explosive Devices or Explosively Formed Projectiles to inflict a maximum of casualties. An army can only react to this if it cultivates a climate in which the subordinate commander displays initiative and creativity to counter the attacks of the opponent. 
44
Proponents of technology will argue that technological developments improve command information management, increase situational awareness and reduce the fog of war. However, this increased situational awareness can have undesired side effects. Indeed, by reducing chance and friction on a higher level, commanders can no longer display mission command. They have such a degree of understanding that they can render junior officers to merely executers depending on the information from the higher command. Micromanagement can create a generation of officers who lack local initiative because their higher command permanently assisted and guided them. 
45
46
47
48
However, societies who above all embrace technology as the solution to problems will find it difficult to incorporate a philosophy based on human interaction.
This chapter tried to explain the different approaches towards mission command and factors that impact that concept. The study of command doctrine in different western armies shows that theoretically Moltke's principles remain valid. The Shamir model provides a visualization to understand the problems that occur when interpreting and applying a foreign military doctrine. The main issue within the studied armies remains the effective application of mission command. Such a study would require further in depth surveys and analysis of cultural and organizational factors.
Moreover, the divergent views and doctrinal descriptions of mission command must force commanders to think critically on their own command style. Every commander can learn from studying the different views on mission command.
Eventually, a commander assumes his responsibility and is accountable for the way he implements mission command. In a multinational environment, commanders should understand their audience, who might have a divergent view on mission command. During this study, it has become obvious that instituting a common definition for Auftragstaktik remains very difficult. Cultural and organizational differences between armies prevent a unified definition. Moreover, a unique set of words would only limit a philosophical approach. Within an international environment and a unified action context, commanders have to display the skills to explain mission command philosophy. Although this may require time, it prevents delays, misconception and confusion amongst partners.
Furthermore, commanders should understand the factors that affect mission command. The interplay of the civilian political environment with its military organization, as described by Clausewitz, influences mission command significantly, yet such an environment may not paralyze commanders from taking necessary action when facing a problem. On the contrary, the nature of current conflicts leads commanders towards adopting a decentralized command style. Though some will argue that technology prevents mission command by making centralized control too easy, it is up to commanders how they employ such new technological innovations. Technology may assist commanders in employing an effective mission command philosophy. Moltke's actions demonstrate that the method to employ a certain technology weighs more important than the technology itself. Notwithstanding this argument, a systems based approach might have a negative impact on mission command and may hinder commanders from demonstrating initiative.
To sum up, this study demonstrates that Moltke's command methodology associates with a more modern language and leadership framework. His command style relates to empowering subordinates. Indeed, empowerment includes the same elements as discussed in chapter 3 and the beginning of this paragraph. In the book Empowerment Takes More Than a Minute, the authors, Ken Blanchard, John P. Carlos, and Alan Randolph, argue that organizations need to develop three keys to improve the capabilities of their personnel, hence the organization as whole. First, share information with everyone, secondly, create autonomy through boundaries and finally, replace the old hierarchy with self-managed teams. 
1
Obviously, a large and diverse organization like an army struggle with the implementation of such seemingly simple principles, yet mission command provides the best solution for the current, complex operational environment. It will require time to implement and to create an organizational culture that embraces mission command and it will entail pragmatism to endure its application.
Now that the relevance of mission command has become clear, I would like to make certain recommendations to the military community.
First of all, effective and efficient employment of mission command demands leadership and units with sufficient training. Though all military commanders will acknowledge this, it remains valuable to repeat and emphasize this again. Trained formations in which all members understand each other will generate a true mission command environment more. Training creates trust amongst each other and comprehension about the strengths and shortfalls of commanders and the organization.
One of the reasons for the success of the Prussian Army resided in its effective training.
Officer training should focus on organizing staff rides that not only analyze the battles itself, but more importantly, also study the geo-political environment, the politicalmilitary strategic situation, the underlying socio-political relationship, the effects on long term and the leadership aspects of a commander. Additionally, military units should spend time on educating officers on wider topics than the purely military. Demanding that your officers discuss current political, social or cultural events during small seminars helps the development of organizational leaders.
Secondly, armies should invest in the education of all their officers to provide them the background for creative and critical thinking. Broad based education will ensure that an army has sufficient officers who understand the environment in which they operate, instead of depending on a limited number of elite officers. An erudite school system increases the level of thought of many officers. Moreover, education should not only focus on military science, but should also incorporate history, socio-economic themes, etc. Such an educational system enlarges the competences of officers to understand the environment in which they operate and enables them to perform the multiple tasks during stability operations.
Thirdly, mission command or decentralization cannot grow within the military without trust and a relationship grounded on an open dialogue. This is true for all levels of the organization, building a confident relationship between political and military leadership, establishing trust within the organization and fostering trust on team level.
Trust can only grow if the organization accepts mistakes and then learns from its mistakes. This relates to commanders who have to assume responsibility, who delegate clearly state what they expect or not from their subordinates within an international mission command framework. However, such relationship should be bidirectional. From a practical standpoint, commanders should preserve a period to request a back brief, during which the subordinate explains how he wants to achieve the objective of his higher commander or to explain how he interpreted the commander's end state.
Notwithstanding this brief, the senior commander should refrain from micromanaging.
initiative is the willingness to act in the absence of orders, when existing orders no longer fit the situation, or when unforeseen opportunities or threats arise. 8
Kadavergehorsam is blind obedience to an authority. This blind obedience is often accompanied with violence or under fear of receiving a fierce punishment.
Kriegsakademie is the name given to the German Staff College, currently located in Hamburg.
Landwehr is the name for the Prussian-German reserve forces who were activated in the event of crisis or wartime. They trained a number of days each year.
Leadership is the process of influencing people by providing purpose, direction, and motivation, while operating to accomplish the mission and improve the organization. 9
Levée en masse is a French term for the mobilization of an entire nation to protect the vital interests of nation or the defeat an imminent threat on a nation. This terminology got introduced during the French Revolution and the Napoleonic campaigns.
Medium forces are land tactical forces mounted in tracked or wheeled vehicles with two specific characteristics: battlefield mobility and operational agility. These forces form an intermediate step between armored and light forces. They have less protection and organic direct firepower than heavy forces but more protection and greater tactical and operational mobility than light forces in close terrain. 
10
Mission Orders are a technique for developing orders that emphasizes to subordinates the results to be attained, not how they are to achieve them. It provides maximum freedom of action in determining how to best accomplish assigned missions. 
12
Panzergruppe was the name the German Army gave to large armored formation during World War II. This formation consisted of several corps.
Responsibility is the obligation to carry forward an assigned task to a successful conclusion. With responsibility goes authority to direct and take the necessary action to ensure success. 
13
14
15
16
Warfighting function is a group of tasks and systems (people, organizations, information, and processes) united by a common purpose that commanders use to accomplish missions. 
17
Belgium Defense Forces, ACOT-TAM-MINFCIE-LSC-001, Het tactisch gebruik van de Medium Infanterie Compagnie and ACOT-TAM-TABECIE-LSC-001, Gids voor de tactische beoordeling op het niveau compagnie (Brussels: ACOS Operations and Training, Doctrine and Requirements,
2011).2  Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, JP 3-0, Joint Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, August 2011), xii.3  Department of the Army, ADP 3-0, Unified Land Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, October 2011), 6.
Helmuth von Moltke, Moltke's Military Correspondence 1870-1871, ed. by Spenser Wilkinson (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1923), 59.
Ibid., 63.
Ibid., 77.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
introduction of the needle gun, the breech loaded field gun, the telegraph and the railroad required critical and creative thinking officers. Moreover, larger and more dispersed battle formations required independent officers who could work in the direction of the overall objective.
To sum up, in order to achieve mission success and implement successfully mission command, the Prussian-German officer the situation had to demonstrate a thorough understanding of the mission and the environment, take initiative to achieve the objective and assume complete responsibility towards the mission he gave to his subordinates and towards his superiors in case he wanted to alter the method.
Such principles can only subsist in a command climate that embraces and cultivates critical and creative thinking officers and where leadership considered doctrine as a guideline and not a dogma. CHAPTER 
An army that adopts tactical doctrine that it cannot apply will greatly multiply its misfortune.
-Timothy T. Lupfer 
The following paragraphs examine how different armies describe mission command in their doctrine. This study will mainly focus on the result after adoption of mission command philosophy and the adaption of the concept to that specific organization's culture.
The US Army went through significant changes after the Vietnam War. Not only did the army suffer from low morale and disciplinary issues in which command authority on all levels was tested, it also endured significant low battle worthiness. The US Army 
Accountability is the requirement for commanders to answer to their superiors (and finally the American people) for mission accomplishment, for the lives and care of their Soldiers, and for effectively using Army resources. 1
Aufstragstaktik or mission oriented command system. A key component of the German command system was the wide latitude given to officers in executing a tactical mission. The senior commander would issue an oral mission order which clearly defined his intent and desired end state, while leaving the means of executing the mission to the junior leader.
Authority is the delegated power to judge, act, or command. 2
Blitzkrieg is the use of offensive tactics based on combined arms, mobility and penetration and was first used by the German units at the start of World War II.
Command is the authority that a commander in the armed forces lawfully exercises over subordinates by virtue of rank or assignment. Command includes the authority and responsibility for effectively using available resources and for planning the employment of, organizing, directing, coordinating, and controlling military forces for the accomplishment of assigned missions. It includes responsibility for unit readiness health, welfare, morale, and discipline of assigned personnel. 
3
4
5
Feldzeugmeister is the equivalent military rank to lieutenant general which was mainly used by German speaking armies between the 16th and the 19th century.
Hybrid threat is the diverse and dynamic combination of regular forces, irregular forces, terrorist forces, criminal elements, or a combination of these forces and elements all unified to achieve mutually benefitting effects. 6
Initiative is the willingness to act in the absence of orders, when existing orders no longer fit the situation, 139 or when unforeseen opportunities or threats arise. 
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
During that period he rose to colonel. 
7