# ID: abd0ce760ea749f2a81937b3efd41397
# Title: Moltke's Mission Command Philosophy in the Twenty-first Century: Fallacy or Verity?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
Nevertheless, this philosophy impacted the Prussian education and training system considerably.
Leaders were now required to think about the mission, the variables they might encounter during execution and the overall objective or purpose.
It forced them to think critically with improvisation and creativity.
However, the organizational change in the Prussian Army did not result solely from this mental point of view.
The introduction of needle-guns, the modernization of transport, and the invention of the telegraph were other major contributors to the success of the Prussian Army in 1866.
Indeed, based on the pre-revolutionary invention of lightweight, eight-and twelve-pound cannons, he introduced the battery system that enabled French units to deploy faster on the battlefield and mass firepower in support of the infantry.
Furthermore, universal conscription provided him the forces to create his Grand Armée and absorb the casualties of offensive battle.
Napoleon's army consisted of large corps and division level formations that needed new columnar tactics.
Skirmishing combined with shock columns broke the opponent's musket armed line infantry.
The French emperor emphasized mass, speed and mobility.
Austria, Russia, and to a certain extent Great-Britain would take over this doctrine of mobilization and shock tactics, where troops were led by a single, leadership or from a centralised headquarters.
Prussia followed this doctrine until Moltke became Chief of Staff of the Prussian Army.