# ID: ac9d57bd79654094a91af82ea796ce89
# Title: Reconstructing Ukraine Creating a Freer, More Prosperous, and Secure Future
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
The Ukrainian stamps shown on the front and back covers are from a block of stamps released by Ukrposhta, Ukraine's National Post, on February 15, 2023. Designed by Oleksandr Nikityuk, they are called "Warriors of light. Warriors of good" ("Воїни світла. Воїни добра"). They honor the workers who restore infrastructure in Ukraine after Russian missile attacks.
vi promise to introduce Western forces into Ukraine if Russia reattacks. Or they could bring Ukraine into NATO.
While stronger measures of deterrence might make renewed fighting less likely, they could also raise Russia's threat perceptions, potentially leading Moscow to take desperate measures. And, if deterrence fails, the resultant conflict would be less likely to be limited to Ukraine.
Arrangements for Ukraine's security might require new models. Europe's security architecture has long offered states a binary choice: A country is in NATO or it is not. Policymakers should evaluate alternatives for Ukraine, which has never quite fit into this model.
The United States played a leading role in Europe's 75-year post-war reconstruction. It also has often been central in response to large-scale natural disasters. Similar to war, these disasters feature significant destruction of physical infrastructure and socio-economic systems. Lessons for Ukraine's reconstruction can be drawn from the aftermaths of both wars and natural disasters.
Organizing Ukraine's reconstruction should be decided in advance. There are a few simple principles: Ukraine should set priorities. The United States should spearhead security, and the EU should spearhead economic recovery. But both the United States and the countries of Europe will need to be involved with security and economic recovery.
After the fall of the Berlin Wall and the freeing of Central and Eastern Europe, the U.S. Congress gave a single senior coordinator broad oversight powers. Replicating this for Ukraine will aid the U.S. reconstruction effort. The United States, Europe, and multilateral agencies should have senior officials on the ground in Kyiv in daily contact with Ukrainian authorities; periodic donor conferences are insufficient.
Ukraine reconstruction will need a strong, trusted inspector general to safeguard the integrity of assistance, especially given Kyiv's record of corruption since gaining independence in 1991. International donors should, in parallel, institute effective monitoring and be ready to halt funding if corruption emerges.
The sequencing and prioritizing of essential tasks-de-mining, rubble clearance, building shelter and schools, providing basic medical care-is needed to jump-start reconstruction and help people return. Aid conditionality is important, as are the prospects of EU membership and economic integration for trade and investment. Reconstruction efforts must solicit and address local priorities. The millions of internally displaced persons and refugees will not return organically, so policymakers will need to facilitate returns.
To pay for reform and reconstruction, international aid, private financing, and Ukraine's own resources are needed. Aid historically has provided a relatively small amount of the total but, importantly, attracts other funding and serves as risk capital when the private sector is reluctant. Russian assets, both official and private, could be significant parts of support to Ukraine, although using them will require strong legal justifications and could raise longer-term systemic risks both to the centrality of the U.S. financial system in global finance and to dollar dominance.
Ukraine's recovery could take decades. Enduring public support will be vital. In 1948, President Harry Truman's administration and congressional leaders embarked on a well-coordinated, bipartisan effort to gain public approval for the Marshall Plan, the archetypal post-war reconstruction effort. Although the Marshall Plan stands out, in retrospect, as a great success, its approval was not at all certain. The United States will need a similar public strategy for Ukraine.
Developing plans for, contributing to, and overseeing Ukraine's reconstruction will be a complex process; course corrections are certain as implementation starts and continues. But the United States has three priority actions even before the shooting in Russia's war on Ukraine stops.   
The conflict in Ukraine is ongoing, violent, and destructive. Yet it is not too early to begin planning for the country's post-war reform and reconstruction. This report is intended to help gauge the dimensions of Ukraine's reconstruction and suggest a strategy to ensure its success. In the case of Ukraine, this will include not only recovery and reconstruction from the war, but a reform effort in the wake of 40 years of economic and political underperformance.
It is worth recalling that the U.S. role in post-war reconstruction and nation-building was a justifiable source of national pride before it became the target of opprobrium. After World War II (WWII), Japan, Germany, and the rest of Western Europe were transformed with the aid of U.S. assistance, as was South Korea subsequently. 
1
2
Nor will Ukraine be emerging from a civil war, which comes with the risk of residual dissatisfied elements resisting and forming an insurgency. Ukraine will be emerging from an interstate conflict in which the enemy is exterior rather than interior. Therefore, the post-war reconstruction challenges in Ukraine are unlikely to resemble the challenges that Washington faced in Iraq and Afghanistan and continues to address globally in other fragile states that are vulnerable to intrastate violence. Rather, Ukraine's reconstruction is more likely to resemble the European experience with post-war reconstruction: the rebuilding of Europe after WWII, the post-Cold War transformation of the countries of Eastern Europe from communist dictatorships into free-market democracies, and reconstruction efforts in the Western Balkans after the wars that accompanied the breakup of Yugoslavia. Likewise, given the level of destruction in Ukraine, parallels can be drawn with post-disaster reconstruction.
The basic formula that gave success to the Marshall Plan has continued to yield positive results in the post-Cold War era; first, in the transformation of the states of Central and Eastern Europe from communist dictatorships into market democracies, and then in the enduring peace settlements that ended the Western Balkan wars. In all three instances, the United States was a major initiator of the changes and the largest single contributor, but Europe was the principal designer and eventually the largest funder of these transformations. This pattern was set from the beginning when the United States offered to provide initial funding for Europe's rebuilding, provided that European governments agreed among themselves on a common approach. 
3
European integration was the glue that held post-war reconstruction together, giving it purpose and long-term durability. The Marshall Plan gave a major impetus to the process of European integration, beginning with the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community (1951), the European Economic Community (1957, later renamed the European Com-munity), the European Union (EU) (1993), the European Monetary Union (involving adoption of the euro by a subset of EU members, 1999), and the entry of nine former Warsaw Pact and Soviet Union states. 
4
5
Ukraine will begin the next phase of its history with numerous disadvantages. It will have been the setting for the most destructive, mechanized land war since 1945, with attendant grievous loss of infrastructure, housing, and manpower; it will forever border Russia, the aggressor power in the war, still probably ruled by a repressive regime and still occupying or claiming Ukrainian territory; and a third or more of Ukraine's prewar population-disproportionately women and children-will begin the reconstruction period internally displaced or as refugees outside the country, mainly in other European countries. As a location for those allocating international assistance and in which private business would want to invest, Ukraine will also have to contend with its post-1991 record as the slowest-growing post-Soviet state with an unenviable record of corruption and state capture by oligarchs. 
6
7
The need to protect European states participating in the Marshall Plan and to enable them to take better advantage of it led to the creation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). 
8
9
Given that reconstruction is an effort intimately connected with stable and enduring post-war security arrangements, it is necessary to consider a variety of futures: how the war between Russia and Ukraine may end, the nature of such a settlement, and how such a settlement can be secured. Avril Haines, the U.S. Director of National Intelligence, speaking in late June 2022, laid out three scenarios for the future trajectory of the war:
• Russia ascendant. Russian's continuing progress in eastern Ukraine might break Ukrainians' will to fight and allow the Russian military to take over even more of the country. Russia refocuses attacks on Kharkiv in the northeast or Odesa in the southwest. • Stalemate. Russia dominates Ukraine's east but would not be able to go much farther. The conflict remains a grinding struggle in which Russia or Ukraine makes incremental gains but neither achieves a breakthrough. Russia secures Luhansk and much of Donetsk and consolidates its control in southern Ukraine. • Ukraine ascendant. Ukraine halts Russia's advance in the east and succeeds in launching counterattacks. Ukraine further rolls back the front line in the Donbas and begins to make smaller gains, likely in Kherson or elsewhere in southern Ukraine. 
10
10
11
To endure, even an interim settlement must appear to both sides as preferable to renewed conflict. The military and economic costs of renewed conflict must outweigh any further benefits for both sides. If any settlement were to appear to be merely an operational pause to allow forces to regroup and reconstitute before the resumption of conventional conflict, there will be diminished support among donors and investors to rebuild what seems destined to be knocked down again.
Interim agreements that postpone rather than resolve territorial or political disputes can prove remarkably durable as long as they continue to reflect the underlying balance of power. The provisional division of Germany at the end of WWII lasted 45 years. The armistice that ended the fighting in Korea in 1953-in which the two parties agreed to disengagement, arms limitations, and monitoring measures-remains in force as of spring 2023, although the two Koreas continue to regard themselves formally as still at war. A China divided between two claimants from the end of its civil war in 1949 remains so. And a United Nations (UN) peacekeeping force has been patrolling the cease fire lines between Turkish-and Greek-speaking populations in Cyprus since the Turkish incursion of 1974.
Division did not prevent West Germany, South Korea, or the People's Republic of China from fashioning three of the 20th century's most successful states, or Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, and Cyprus from becoming firmly established democracies. Ukraine's reconstruction offers an opportunity to set Ukraine on a similar trajectory, even if it unfolds under an interim settlement rather than a conclusive end to the war.
In this report, we examine past reconstruction events to draw lessons for the successful reconstruction of Ukraine. As of early 2023, much had already been written on this topic. 
12
Our findings are aimed first at informing U.S. policymakers who will need to determine U.S. interests and involvement in the reform and reconstruction of Ukraine. These findings also are intended to be useful to Ukrainians themselves as they create and revise their own reform and reconstruction plans and to Ukraine's European and other international partners, who will support its reform and reconstruction.
In Chapter 2, to draw lessons about what policies and actions might make for successful reconstruction, we review the record of post-war reconstruction efforts of developed societies emerging from conflict, beginning with those that occurred in Europe and Japan after WWII, the reform and recovery of former Warsaw Pact countries after the end of the Cold War, and the ongoing reform and recovery of the Western Balkan Six after the Yugoslav wars of the 1990s. 
13
The economic and social damage caused by Russia's war on Ukraine has been enormous. A World Bank assessment, authored jointly with the European Commission and the Government of Ukraine, estimated that as of the beginning of June 2022, direct damage had amounted to more than $97 billion, and losses of production and other economic activities had amounted to $252 billion; the authors estimated recovery and reconstruction needs at $349 billion. 
1
2
2021. 3
4
5
When WWII ended, Japan was a ruined economy. Gross national product in 1945 was only about 60 percent of the average from 1934 to 1936. 
6
strategic bombing campaign destroyed almost half of all structures in the 66 cities that it targeted, amounting to 2.2 million buildings. 
7
8
SCAP instituted three early reforms that aimed to demilitarize and democratize Japan but that also served to help restore its economy.
9
As part of its efforts to restore growth, Japan created a Priority Production System that financed certain industrial sectors through the issuance of government bonds but that effectively funded investment by printing money. 
10
1950. 11
The resulting stabilization plan had nine points, the first four of which were designed to counter inflation and included instructions to balance the budget, increase tax collection, cut back on lending, and stabilize wages (the other five points were not pursued). The balanced-budget provision became known as the Dodge Line. Results were dramatic: Black market prices fell, the household savings rate rose, and the government was better able to ease up on price controls. At the same time, economic activity slowed. 
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
The Marshall Plan to help Europe after WWII is probably the most heralded reconstruction plan in modern history. It laid the foundations for two decades of economic growth, twice as fast as in any 20-year period before or since. 
20
21
The Marshall Plan began in 1948, years after other efforts to reconstruct Europe were already underway. Established in November 1943 and lasting through March 1949, the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA) distributed large amounts of aid in kind and in cash to a recovering Europe. Backed by 52 governments as well as private orga- 
20 De Long and Eichengreen, 1991, pp. 50-51. 21
22
23
24
25
26
Organization, Vol. 3, No. 3, August 1949, p. 568. 23
24
25
27
The plan ran from April 1948 through June 1952, although nearly all the $13.2 billion dollars ($127.9 billion in 2018 dollars) had been made available by June 1951. 
28
29
The Marshall Plan had three goals: (1) expand European agriculture and industrial production; (2) restore currencies, budgets, and public finances; and (3) foster international trade. 
30
31
32
33
Second, conditionality required that policies allow market forces to operate, at least to some degree. This included realistic exchange rates, encouragement of exports, and European integration through the removal of quotas and trade controls to foster market competition. Finally, the Marshall Plan enabled labor peace while it operated, and this might have carried over into two decades of European growth during which the labor supply expanded to match labor demand and wages rose with productivity increases rather than above them. Among the four major economies of Germany, France, Italy, and the United Kingdom, the United States had the most influence on conditionalities in Germany, which grew the fastest, and the least in the United Kingdom, which grew the slowest. 34 32 
Tarnoff, 2018, pp. 3-4. 33 De Long and
Eichengreen, 1991, pp. 43-55.
NATO. 35
36
38
In some ways, the challenges faced by the countries of Central and Eastern Europe in 1989 and those of the former Soviet Union at the end of 1991 were very different from the challenges Ukraine faces in 2023. Along with many other problems, the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union had to shift from a communist command economy to a market economy. Ukraine was among those countries and made the shift, although not in a way that spurred rapid economic growth. 
40
Reforms in Eastern Europe started in 1989, when those countries broke free of the Soviet orbit. But they were beset with economic crises, including high or hyper-inflation, empty store shelves, high budget deficits, and severe output declines. In fact, system disintegration called for rapid reforms. 
41
42
43
Balcerowicz's stabilization plan provides one illustration of how reforms were carried out quickly and effectively. On January 1, 1990, price controls were ended, the exchange rate was devalued, and the Polish currency was made convertible. All of this was backstopped by balance of payments loans from the IMF to shore up Poland's foreign exchange reserves and by a $1 billion stabilization fund put together by the Group of Seven (G7) leading industrial countries. 
44
Aside from the stabilization, Poland passed new legislation to introduce market institutions. Notably, although the reforms were quick, they were not necessarily radical. Poland specifically did not want to create all new institutions. Rather, it wanted to model its institutions on those that already existed in Western Europe because those institutions had a proven record of working. 
45
43
Union, 2002
, pp. xvii-xviii. 44 Sachs, 1991;
Jeffrey Sachs and David Lipton, "Poland's Economic Reform," Foreign Affairs, Vol. 69, No. 3, Summer 1990
45
46
47
48
49
One other element was important to the reforms in Central and Eastern Europe. Just as greater levels of trade in post-WWII Europe (encouraged by the Marshall Plan) and increased exports by Japan (encouraged by the United States) helped those countries recover and grow, integration with Western Europe proved beneficial to post-communist Central and Eastern Europe. This was true not just economically but institutionally. A driving force behind this was the signing of formal European Association Agreements, which became better known as the Europe Agreements, between the EU and the newly freed countries. 
50
51
52
After years of isolation from the Western economic system, and after the distortions and deprivations of the communist system, most citizens just wanted to live in a normal country with a normal economy, and, given their history and geography, that vision was captured in the allure of reintegrating with Western Europe. The historic offer from the European Union to countries in the region provided a gravitational pull that helped policymakers justify and implement difficult reform steps. 53 50 Bartlomiej Kaminski, "The Europe Agreements and Transition: Unique Returns from Integrating into the European Union," in Sorin Antohi and Vladimir Tisaneaunu,  eds., Between Past and Future: The Revolutions of 1989 and Their Aftermath, Central  European University Press, 2000.   51 Anthony Teasdale and Timothy Bainbridge, "Europe Agreement," Penguin Companion to European Union, webpage, September 2012. 
52
53
54
The final chapter of the end of the Soviet empire occurred in Yugoslavia and the Western Balkans in the 1990s. A brief armed confrontation between Slovenia and Yugoslavia, which resulted in Slovenia's independence in 1991 (with Germany's crucial support), started the breakup of Yugoslavia, followed by war between Croatia and Serbia and then the independence war of Bosnia and Herzegovina, settled in the Dayton Accords of 1995. 
55
56
Reconstruction focused on the so-called Western Balkan Six: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Montenegro, North Macedonia, and Ser- 
54 Roaf et al., 2014
, p. 34. 55 Dobbins et al., 2003, pp. 87-88. 56
57
For most of the past 20 years, the EU has held primary responsibility for reconstruction. In some cases, action originated from within Europe. Italy took leadership in Albania under Operation Alba when that country nearly fell apart as a result of economic collapse from a series of pyramid schemes. 
58
-Former EU External Relations Commissioner Chris Patten  
MG-722-RC, 2008, pp. 7-8. 59
This was the first big test of our ability to run things competently, and we passed it-speeding up delivery by cutting corners where we could, setting up the European Agency for Reconstruction, and giving the excellent officials sent out to manage it delegated authority and political cover.
Nonetheless, Europe recognized that it would have primary responsibility for the reconstruction and integration of the region, and in June 1999 announced a Stability Pact. 
60
61
62
Each of the Western Balkan Six received assistance from the EU, the World Bank, the IMF, and the EBRD. The EU started the European Agency for Reconstruction in Kosovo in early 2000, and its work then spread to Serbia and Montenegro and to what is now known as North Macedonia. The EU's initial actions were more of an emergency nature, but then it engaged in repairing and building infrastructure, including connecting these countries to road networks, electricity grids, and gas systems. 
63
64
61 Zweers et al., 2022, p. 10. 62
63 Zink, 2006
, p. 43. 64 Dobbins et al., 2008, p. 139.
All told, the economic track record of the Western Balkan Six has not been bad. Growth has been above that of the EU and the world as a whole, although the Western Balkan Six are all small, poor countries and so would be expected to growth faster. More-valid comparison countries would be Slovenia and the Eastern Balkan countries of Bulgaria and Romania, and most Western Balkan countries have grown in line with these countries. 
65
66
Despite these problems, each of these reconstruction efforts in the Western Balkan Six succeeded in consolidating the peace, rebuilding the economies, and introducing or strengthening democratic governance within the recipient societies. Ukraine and those who are preparing to help it rebuild have a rich legacy to draw on and good reason to aim for a transformative result. 
65
66 Zweers et al., 2022
The United States, Europe, and the world have faced several major postwar reconstruction episodes that provide examples for how to proceed with Ukraine. Every situation will be different and demand its own tailored response. But several consistent patterns emerge that might be applicable to Ukraine's situation.
The initial post-conflict or transition period generally calls for humanitarian assistance because both the economy and government services are broken. Target countries have struggled for several years. Getting actual reconstruction or restructuring started can take time, sometimes years. Countries going through the post-conflict or transition period often face bouts of high inflation, and strong stabilization policies are needed and must be sequenced. Aid can help, but aid packages pale in comparison to actual investment expenditures. Rather, official assistance provides the opportunity to solve specific problems or create conditionalities that encourage good reconstruction policies. Furthermore, at least some financing needs to come from the country undergoing reconstruction-aid alone is likely to do little.
Reliance on market mechanisms has delivered success in multiple cases: These mechanisms are sometimes encouraged by aid packages. These market mechanisms are not just related to the domestic economy. Establishing international trade links, both through domestic economic reforms and the receptivity of trading partners-such as via trade agreements-proved essential in every case. Likewise, attracting foreign direct investment, again through domestic reforms and as a byproduct of international economic agreements, boosted reconstruction.
Finally, although reconstruction takes place in the socio-economic and governmental spheres, security provides a base on which all activity takes place. In every case, the strength of external security agreements has played a role in the strength of reconstruction, giving businesses and investors the confidence to take risks and make long-term economic commitments. We discuss security arrangements for Ukraine in Chapter 7.
Russia's invasion of Ukraine has led to the destruction of infrastructure, disruption of public services, and damage to the social fabric in ways that have some similarities to destruction caused by natural hazards, such as fires, earthquakes, tsunamis, or hurricanes. Similar to the damage inflicted by natural disasters, the damage in Ukraine has been done to a society by an external force: Russia's invasion and way of war in Ukraine have caused massive loss of life, damage to civilian infrastructure-in the areas of housing, transport, commerce, industry, and more-and widespread displacement of people from their homes. 
1
3
4
5
6
In the international context of Ukraine's reconstruction, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) will play an important role, as it did in Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union in the 1990s and in the Western Balkan Six after the Yugoslavia wars, although not the lead role. 7 In the U.S. context of disaster recovery and reconstruction, the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) play lead roles, and their practices and procedures provide a strong base of knowledge to apply to international post-war reconstruction. Accordingly, in discussing U.S. cases, this chapter draws on those FEMA and HUD practices.
There are insights and lessons from past disaster recovery and reconstruction experiences, including those in the United States and other national contexts, that might be useful to apply to Ukraine's reconstruction. This section will cover lessons in six thematic areas: setting priorities; funding; donor coordination; local roles and capacity; displaced populations and returns; and transparency, accountability, and data.
There are multiple frameworks and toolkits from disasters that may be helpful in prioritizing and funding steps in Ukraine. The disaster community, 
7
8
FEMA's Community Lifelines approach is a framework that can help prioritize tasks within this first crucial response phase. The framework recognizes that unless certain lifelines are stabilized within a community (safety; food, water, and shelter; health and medical; energy; communications; transportation; hazardous material), that community cannot begin to recover. 9 These lifelines represent the greatest area of priority and also can serve as indicators of whether a community has stabilized and whether longer-term reconstruction efforts can begin. For example, one of the biggest stumbling blocks to rebuilding Haiti in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake was removing the tons of rubble left after the earthquake. Whole neighborhoods in Haiti remained choked with debris. 
10
10
11
After the initial response, longer-term recovery can begin with longerterm actions to rebuild the country. Early on, a country's senior political leadership should establish a long-term vision for reconstruction to empower the effort. For example, the strategy for rebuilding after Hurricane Sandy, which struck the New York-New Jersey area as a post-tropical cyclone in October 21012, was widely viewed in the disaster community as a successful recovery. This recovery effort established four overarching principles to "build back smarter and better": recognizing the importance of local inputs, minimizing bureaucracy and maximizing accountability, ensuring a regionwide approach, and rebuilding with resiliency. 
12
13
14
15
In sum, the disaster community's deep experience with response and recovery has led to useful approaches and frameworks that can help to guide Ukraine's reconstruction. In particular, developing an overarching, wholeof-society plan that considers tradeoffs may help to prioritize and guide recovery.
The level of available funding might be a constraint for disaster-hit communities. In these cases, external funding is critical. One key challenge in mobilizing external funding is the disparity often seen between pledges and reality-in other words, the difficult task of turning pledges into cash for the reconstruction effort. Direct cash transfers have proven successful in some cases in the immediate humanitarian response to disasters, but donors may be reluctant to fund these devices because of concerns about perceptions of corruption and transparency, as seen in Haiti. Ukraine might face a similar challenge. Another mechanism often used to mobilize external funds after disasters is cost-sharing arrangements. However, experience shows that the recipient often cannot mobilize the required counterpart funding. For example, in Haiti's recovery from the 2010 earthquake, the Oasis Hotel project was meant to fund a major hotel in Port-au-Prince to attract investors, businesses, and donors who needed a safe hotel in which to stay during the recovery efforts. 
16
In other instances, disaster-hit communities may have sufficient funding for recovery but have difficulty spending the money quickly. For example, FEMA obligated $32.3 billion for recovery projects to the governments of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands in response to Hurricanes Irma and Maria, but only $7.7 billion had been spent as of August 2022. 
17
18
17
19
Past disaster recovery and reconstruction efforts highlight the importance of having a streamlined command structure to control "donor freelancing" and reduce the burden on the recipient government of interfacing separately with donors. 
20
21
19
In Haiti, the Haiti Reconstruction Fund was established as the major conduit for international assistance, but less than 8 percent of pledged aid during the 2010-2012 period was channeled through this fund. Donors instead channeled funding through nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and the private sector, which the Haiti Reconstruction Fund could not track or control. 
22
Stakeholders involved in Ukraine's reconstruction would also benefit from remaining vigilant about the amount of funding for disaster relief that tends to get stuck in bureaucratic passthroughs of international organizations. For example, one examination of humanitarian aid intended for Syrian refugees in Lebanon and Jordan found that the bulk of assistance, which was allocated to the UN system, was lost on the coordinating system itself (e.g., on staff time, passthroughs by multiple agencies taking a portion, high overhead rates). 
23
Recovery and reconstruction efforts should be organized to solicit and generate community involvement. Engaging local voices and ensuring that affected communities are intimately involved in the problem-solving and decisionmaking of a recovery and reconstruction effort is a post-disaster best practice. 
24
25
26
27
28
An important part of Ukraine's recovery from conflict will involve the fate of Ukrainian internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees who fled the conflict and are spread elsewhere in Ukraine and throughout Europe. The war has resulted in the largest refugee movements since WWII: There are approximately 5.4 million IDPs across Ukraine and 8 million Ukrainian the Solution to More Countries," press release, January 18, 2023. refugees across Europe. 
29
Both conflict and disasters lead to people fleeing. Research has shown that there are not many fruitful solutions or a successful track record in getting people to return to their homes in either situation. For example, in an examination of all conflicts since 1980, only about 30 percent of refugees on average return to their countries of origin one decade after a conflict ends. 
30
31
32
29
33
In short, unless policymakers plan and actively facilitate returns, they will not happen spontaneously at the scale needed to enable recovery. Actively facilitating return will include prioritizing essential tasks even as reconstruction gets going-shelter, schools, and basic medical care-to help people return and assist with IDPs.
Accurate data play a critical role throughout the entire life cycle of a recovery and reconstruction effort. At the start of reconstruction, rigorous postdamage assessments are critical to fostering a productive pull dynamic from assistance providers. For example, in the aftermath of the Haiti earthquake, assistance flooded the country, but national and local government actors did not feel empowered enough to say no to any expressions of support, even if the support was not fully in step with the country's under-defined, evolving priorities. 
34
35
36
37
35
Planning for Ukrainian reconstruction should extend beyond repairing the damage done by war to include measures to recover from the 30 years of crony capitalism that preceded it. Just conducting post-war reconstruction will be a challenge. Ukraine, a democratic and European country, will be burdened by memories of its poor economic record and halting efforts to reform its economic policies and strengthen the rule of law.
Ukraine's economic record since its independence in 1991 has been at or close to the worst of any country of the former Soviet Union or postcommunist Central and Southeastern Europe (Figure 
4
As of 2021, Ukraine was the poorest country in Europe (Figure 
4
4
Furthermore, Ukraine has suffered demographically. It is an aging country: In 1991, Ukraine's population was 51.7 million, of whom 12.6 percent were age 65 or older. In 2014, the year Russia seized Crimea, Ukraine's population was 44.9 million, of whom 15.5 percent were 65 or over. And in 2021, just before Russia's full-scale invasion, Ukraine's population totaled 1 9 9 3 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 7 1 9 9 9 2 0 0 1 2 0 0 3 2 0 0 5 2 0 0 7 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 3 2 0 1 5 2 0 1 7 2 0 1 9 2 0 2 1 Index, 1991 = 100 SOURCE: Data from World Bank, December 22, 2022.
1 9 9 1 1 9 9 3 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 7 1 9 9 9 2 0 0 1 2 0 0 3 2 0 0 5 2 0 0 7 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 3 2 0 1 5 2 0 1 7 2 0 1 9 2 0 2 1 43.7 million, of whom 17.4 percent were 65 or over. Notably, even though the proportion of the population between the ages of 0 and 14 declined following independence, it has recently started rising. In 1991, 21.1 percent were between the ages of 0 and 14. By 2014, this had fallen to 14.9 percent. But in 2021, 16.1 percent of Ukraine's population was between ages 0 and 14. Despite this endemic corruption, there have been efforts to reform the country. Then-Prime Minister Viktor Yushchenko instituted several important reforms related to government operations, the budget, energy, and land in late 1999 and 2000. This spurred Ukraine's first period of economic growth since independence. 
5
6
Ukraine has long been an object of competition between Europe and the West on the one hand and Russia on the other. 
7
8
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
This review of Ukraine's record since independence suggests three factors that will be important to reform and reconstruction efforts. First, given its past inability to reform and to lower the level of corruption and domination by oligarchs, Ukraine's credibility will be on the line when it comes to administering large-scale funding for reconstruction in the future. Supporting countries will expect concrete reforms. Second, Ukraine's security will prove important both for its own ability to progress and for international business to participate in reconstruction. Finally, Ukraine is facing not only the challenge of post-war reconstruction, but it is also facing the challenge and opportunity of reform to overcome 30 years of underperformance in both economic and political development. In Chapter 5, we turn to how that reform and reconstruction might be financed, and in Chapter 6, to how it might be organized. 
13
14
15
An important issue in planning for Ukraine's recovery, reform, and reconstruction is determining how to mobilize capital for the process. In the end, financing will come from a variety of sources, including official development assistance in the form of grants and loans, private-sector financing in the form of loans and investments, and internal financing mobilized by the Ukrainian government, Ukrainian banks, the Ukrainian business community, and private Ukrainian citizens. Given international precedents, UN General Assembly resolutions, and the moral case for restoring damages caused, compensation funding from Russia should play a role as well and could involve the use of now-frozen Russian international reserves. This chapter reviews several topics in financing reconstruction.
Although this report and this chapter focus on longer-term reform and reconstruction, it should be noted that as of spring 2023, Ukraine had dire immediate needs for assistance. 1 Ukraine has had substantial reserve losses, import compression, and high inflation. 2 Money issuance by the National 1 Maria Repko, "Financing Ukraine's Victory and Recovery: For the War and Beyond," Stockholm Centre for Eastern European Studies, blog post, November 17, 2022.
2 Robin Brooks[@RobinBrooksIIF], "Ukraine is bleeding official FX reserves (orange) since Russia invaded. Reserve losses are far bigger than they look, as war pushed Ukraine's economy into deep recession, which flipped the current account from deficit into surplus (black). Ukraine urgently needs western cash . . . " Twitter post, November 25, 2022a; Robin Brooks[@RobinBrooksIIF], "When Russia first invaded Ukraine and Russian troops were marching on Kiev, monthly losses in Ukraine's official FX reserves were more than -$4 bn. Putin's rocket attacks on Ukraine to kill its power infrastructure will take us back to that. Ukraine urgently needs western cash. . ." Twitter post, November 25, 2022b; Volodymyr Verbyany, "Ukrainian Inflation Tops 23% As Prices Surge for Seventh Month," Bloomberg, September 9, 2022.
Bank of Ukraine to support military and other government spending helps fuel inflation, and lack of ability to repair damaged infrastructure and structures means they are likely to deteriorate, ultimately raising costs of reconstruction.
Ukraine has developed a detailed recovery plan with supporting documents that outlines a transformation of the country through 2032. 
3
5
The international community appears to agree on the need and desirability of international assistance but has avoided large-scale commitments focused specifically on reconstruction thus far, although a great deal of other aid has been delivered. As of late November 2022, the United States had approved $68 billion in three aid packages: The money went toward military assistance, humanitarian assistance, budget support for the government of Ukraine, and U.S. government Ukraine-related operations and domestic costs. This has constituted about 62 percent of all published aid figures. 
4
5
6
7
It is clear that some form of financing should come as international assistance, either from international or plurilateral institutions, such as the IMF, World Bank, European Investment Bank, or EBRD, or from bilateral assistance and likely from all these sources.
As noted in Chapter 2, in Central and Eastern Europe's transition in the early 1990s, countries faced high levels of debt and adverse balance of payments deficits that limited their abilities to carry out some reforms. Financing from international partners, along with debt relief-including from commercial banks-eased the pressure and allowed countries to make more progress on recovery and restructuring. This was followed by assistance in privatization, especially of state-owned commercial banks, that helped mobilize greater financing from a variety of sources. 
8
7
8 Roaf et al., 2014, p. x.
10
11
International assistance can also be used to fund private-sector development by making equity investments directly in private businesses. One model that might apply to Ukraine reconstruction is an enterprise fund, as developed by the United States in the first wave of Central and Eastern European reforms in 1989. Originally authorized in 1989, the United States eventually set up ten enterprise funds-covering 19 countries and authorizing a total of $1.3 billion in capital-to be used in these countries for loans and equity investments in small and medium enterprises and techni-9 World 
Bank, 1996
, p. 137. 10 World Bank, 1996, p. 138. 11
12
In the end, investments by the funds proved profitable as the economies grew, and after a few years of growth, the U.S. funds generally were able to sell their equity stakes to private investors. Beyond the initial U.S. contributions, the funds reinvested $1.7 billion in net proceeds and raised $6.9 billion in outside capital in the form of debt, equity, and co-investment. 
13
Another potential source of funding would be compensation from Russia. Small amounts could be allocated in the near term for humanitarian purposes, with larger amounts allocated later for reconstruction. One prominent former policymaker has written that "the G-7 should declare that 
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
21 Zoellick, 2022b. 22
23 Garfield Reynolds, "Pozsar Says $300 Billion Russia Cash Pile Can Roil Money Markets," Bloomberg, February 24, 2022; Tracy Alloway and Joe Weisenthal, "Transcript: Zoltan Pozsar on Russia, Gold, and a Turning Point for the U.S. Dollar," Bloomberg, March 2, 2022. 
24
fair compensation to Ukraine. This amounts to using the frozen reserves as leverage in settlement negotiations.
Notably, in devising a plan for reparations, it will be useful to move beyond the idea that onerous reparations on Germany after World War I were an important reason for that country's turn toward National Socialism in the 1930s. 
25
26
Although there is a need for public financing, private investment likely will provide the bulk of reconstruction funding for Ukraine as it did in Japan and Europe after WWII, Central and Eastern Europe, and the Balkans. Ukraine signaled that it is open to foreign private investment and sees it as instrumental in the creation of a new Ukraine. In a September 2022 commentary in the Wall Street Journal, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy wrote, 
25
'Guilt,'" Christian Science Monitor, October 4, 2010. 26
27
In the reform of Central and Eastern Europe in the 1990s, most external capital came as private foreign direct investment (FDI) and commercial bank lending. 
28
29
30
Similarly, official funding agencies (such as the EBRD, the European Investment Bank, the World Bank, and the U.S. International Develop-ment Finance Corporation) can leverage their assistance and impact by cofinancing major infrastructure projects that are Ukrainian priorities, using the format of a managing partner and supporting institutions. That would spread risk and maximize use of agency expertise.
As with official assistance, those countries in Central and Eastern Europe that reformed the most and quickest tended to get a higher proportion of FDI relative to other flows. 
31
Although Ukraine's plans and much international discussion focus on international financing-either in the form of official grants and loans or in the form of private-sector participation-mobilizing Ukrainian capital will be important. Domestically sourced investment either from the private sector or the government was important to financing recovery and reconstruction after WWII and after the liberation of Central and Eastern Europe and the end of the Soviet Union.
Willingness to mobilize domestic finance could have the added benefit of building confidence among foreign financial sources. Furthermore, it would give Ukrainians more control and flexibility of the recovery, reconstruction, and redevelopment of their country. 
32
33
31 Roaf et al., 2014, p. 34. 32 Courtney, Holynska, and
Shatz, 2022.
sist of monetary base expansion-essentially printing money-could result in high or hyperinflation, as occurred in Japan after WWII and Central and Eastern Europe at the end of the 1980s. Accordingly, the government contribution likely will need to come from bond issuance; the bonds would be sold either to the Ukrainian public or international buyers.
Because of limits on the government's ability to finance reconstruction, the Ukrainian private sector will need to mobilize financing. It is likely that international donors will expect the Ukrainian private sector to do so as well. In this case, co-financing through equity investments or loans, such as by foreign enterprise funds or bilateral or multilateral institutions, could help support local investments.
In addition, although not strictly local, the large Ukrainian diaspora can play a role in funding reconstruction and business activity. One estimate from before Russia's 2022 invasion noted that the diaspora ranged from 7 million up to 20 million, and there were more than 1,000 Ukrainian diaspora organizations worldwide. Furthermore, these organizations already had been active in humanitarian response in Ukraine before 2022, suggesting that they have already established networks that can be used for reconstruction and investment. 
34
Successful reform and reconstruction of Ukraine will require the mobilization of unprecedented quantities of external and internal financial resources; a broadly shared vision for Ukraine's future (in the region and in the global community); and effective coordination of the interests and support domestically within Ukraine and with the EU and European countries more broadly, the United States, and other international partners with major stakes in the outcome (such as Japan, Australia, Turkey, and the Gulf countries). It will also require a secure environment, which we discuss in Chapter 7.
As examined earlier, in previous, ambitious joint international efforts at aiding post-conflict, post-disaster, and post-transition reconstruction, the international community experimented with various strategies to mobilize and channel help to affected regions, prevent waste and corruption, and steer reconstruction efforts to achieve optimal outcomes. Help for a postconflict Ukraine, while unique in some ways, should be designed in light of what the international community has learned from past experiences.
As the war rages, Ukraine and the international community are afforded the time-although perhaps not the policy focus-to consider and put in place principles and mechanisms to coordinate reconstruction efforts for the next phase of Ukraine's history. In this chapter, we lay out coordination principles and discuss how implementation might be organized, internationally and within the U.S. government, in light of prior reconstruction efforts.
Agreement on why and how to assist Ukraine should be a starting point for the international community, preceding deep engagement on specifics, quantities, and modalities for assistance, or on sectoral priorities. The following concepts can be organizing points for such first principles.
Ukraine sets the priorities. Fighting a challenging and brutal war while preserving its democratic system and institutions should earn Ukraine the right to set its priorities-and those of the international community-for rebuilding. In the security sphere, Ukraine will need to design durable defense structures against future Russian aggression, including air defense, cyber, and basing arrangements, and assess which Western weapons systems it will need. Ukraine's partners can advise and help forecast possible defense technology developments and will retain sovereign defense technology controls and decisions. But the Ukrainian defense forces' innovative and flexible conduct of the war should give Ukraine the lead role in conceptualizing and designing the way the country will build a credible layered defense against its northern neighbor in the future. As with Israel, Ukraine's international partners should give real deference to Ukraine's assessments of which Western weapons systems it will need. We provide additional detail on what such security arrangements might look like in Chapter 7.
In the economic and social policy realms, deference to Ukrainian priorities would include space to make and take responsibility for such sensitive economic choices as (1) how much to invest in Ukraine's heavy industry, (2) the economic basis for its infrastructure rebuilding (e.g., such questions as whether to use autoroute or bridge tolling, the designs for electricity and gas utility structures), or (3) methods for the restructuring of state-owned enterprises. As a prospective member of the EU, Ukraine will need to meet its accession criteria and abide by its constraints on state enterprises (among many other laws and rules). But despite temptations otherwise, European and U.S. advisers should let the Ukrainians debate and decide sensitive structural socio-economic policies.
The EU should be the lead international economic partner; the United States should be the lead security partner. Even if it is indisputable that Ukrainians set the priorities, among international partners, a practical division of labor would facilitate effective support for reconstruction. Because the EU is a major trading partner for Ukraine and Ukraine is aspiring to EU membership, it would make sense for the EU to take the lead in engaging and supporting the Ukrainian government, private sector, and civil society in the socio-economic sphere.
By the same token, the United States and the United Kingdom have been the leading suppliers of vital military equipment to the Ukrainian defense forces during the present conflict, as coordinated by U.S. European Command (EUCOM), the U.S. regional headquarters in Stuttgart. The United States accordingly should continue to lead in planning the support of Ukraine's defense in the post-war period. While it might be tempting to have NATO play this role, that would needlessly raise Russian paranoia levels, and, in any case, there will likely be participation by non-NATO members as well. Leadership of the effort to safeguard Ukraine's security does not necessarily prejudge the specific arrangement that the United States, its allies, and Ukraine formulate. We discuss these options in Chapter 7.
In each domain-the EU in economics, the United States in securitythis principle is about leadership, not participation. There should be effective involvement by the EU, other partners, and the United States in all aspects of the implementation and real contributions to benefit Ukraine's objectives in these fields. Even in the economic domain, however, timing also matters. In previous major multilateral efforts, such as support for Central and Eastern European democracy in the 1990s, the United States was able to make a major contribution by appropriating and obligating critical assistance quickly, which was followed up in the same sectors with larger, longer-term commitments from the EU and other partners.
In addition, the international financial institutions (such as the World Bank, IMF, EBRD, and the European Investment Bank) will need to provide billions in major project financing and their indisputable policy analysis experience. The international financial institutions and other assistanceproviding countries, such as Japan, the United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia, also should have seats at the economic assistance coordination table. It is even conceivable that China would want to take part, and if so, it should be welcomed (as long as its credit terms are concessionary and take on the same seniority as all other bilateral assistance) because China's participation would further isolate Russia. 
1
Although it is important for Ukraine and its international supporters to agree on principles for post-war reconstruction, the design (and use) of effective coordination mechanisms also is essential to ensure that these principles result in action. Previous international assistance efforts have modeled various means of bringing about such coordination and unfortunately, at times, modeled dysfunction and ways to dissipate international enthusiasm.
International experience (such as Poland's post-1989 record) would suggest that the Ukrainian government should place one senior minister in overall charge, with the mandate to establish priorities, direct national resources, engage with Ukraine's parliament, and interface with Ukraine's international partners, including making commitments consistent with 1 Even with the EU in the lead for reconstruction coordination, one option to ensure coordination of financing is to work through a World Bank trust fund. The World Bank runs a variety of trust funds and has the benefit of robust expertise regarding reconstruction and the ability to coordinate regional development banks and multiple donors. This would also avoid fragmentation that could result from bilaterally funded projects and help ensure accountability and payment safeguards. See World Bank, "Trust Funds  and Programs," webpage, 2023.  conditionality. A ministerial committee would not substitute for a single ministerial coordinator, but it could help in ensuring that the minister in charge can convey priorities to the wider government. At the same time, it will be important to strike a balance between centralized and decentralized decisionmaking in Ukraine. Decentralization reforms in Ukraine gave more responsibility for services to local authorities. 
2
For the partners, periodic donor conferences are not enough to effectively work with Ukraine: Empowered representatives of supporting institutions, including the international financial institutions, should be appointed and in daily contact with Ukrainian authorities. In addition to senior officials in capitals, donors and international financial institutions should appoint senior representatives to reside in Kyiv (for socio-economic reforms) or at EUCOM's Stuttgart headquarters (for defense and security reforms and rebuilding). Agreement among donors and lenders on conditionality, especially in relation to Ukraine's EU aspirations, is critical. In this, non-EU members should follow the EU's lead.
Ensuring the reconstruction process is not excessively burdened with corruption, waste, fraud, or abuse will be vital to maintain support domestically and internationally. Valid perceptions of corruption and a weak rule of law might seriously impede both aid flows and FDI. Ukraine should appoint a senior and independent inspector general with the authorities necessary to ensure that contracting is transparent and responsible, and this office should be supported by embedded international experts appointed and supported by Ukraine's donors. Furthermore, Ukraine's efforts should be public, robust, and transparent to overcome international skepticism. Given past corruption in the country, there are legitimate doubts about the extent to which this problem can be reduced, especially if the international com-munity is willing to overlook some amount of malfeasance for geostrategic goals. However, an independent institutional mechanism backed by strong international oversight has not previously existed. In addition, reconstruction will take years and comes with a high risk of donor fatigue, and a major corruption scandal could easily fracture donor support. 
3
For this purpose, and separate and apart from an inspector general function focused on waste, fraud, and abuse, reconstruction in Ukraine should include an internationally supported effort at monitoring and evaluation of project and program support activities. A monitoring and evaluation effort would be focused on whether the policy approaches are effective in achieving the outcomes sought. Many assistance agencies and development banks routinely conduct independent monitoring and evaluation studies, but by coordinating and sharing these analyses among Ukraine's ministries, assistance partners, and engaged NGOs, the monitoring and evaluation effort can foster transparency and learning from approaches that work (and those that do not).
Among the international partners for Ukraine, there should be a special council to foster cooperation with its key neighbors, especially Poland, Bulgaria, Moldova, Romania, and Turkey. As explained in Chapter 2, the Marshall Plan support for rebuilding of post-war Europe was conditioned on participation in regional cooperation entities, such as the European Iron and Steel Community. There is considerable scope for similar mutually beneficial initiatives (e.g., in transport, agriculture, energy, heavy industry) between Ukraine and its immediate neighbors.
To provide the Ukrainian government with economic policy expertise and support, the OECD should consider establishing a special standing committee of member-state policy officials to serve as a think tank and sounding board for Ukrainian ministries.
And finally, a coordination and discussion body should be established to open lines of communication and policy insights among the Ukrainian government ministries, supporting international donors and international financial institutions, and Ukrainian and international civil society, business and NGOs directly involved in reconstruction.
The U.S. government has capacity, funding, and expertise spread across dozens of departments and specialized agencies that will be helpful to Ukraine's reconstruction. Yet, as Washington policymaking veterans can attest, the U.S. government is so large that disagreements or priority mismatches among cabinet departments or between the executive and legislative branches can work against even the highest priority missions.
In 1989, the administration and the Congress worked together to enact the Support for East European Democracy (SEED) Act. 
4
5
Three years later, in 1992, Congress passed the Freedom for Russia and Emerging Eurasian Democracies and Open Markets (FREEDOM) Support Act. 
6
7
8
9
10
The selection of an official who is well and favorably known across Washington would also be important to achieving these goals. This was true of Paul Hoffman's leadership of the Marshall Plan's Economic Coordi-6 Public Law 102-511, FREEDOM Support Act, October 24, 1992.
7 Curt Tarnoff, The Former Soviet Union and U.S. Foreign Assistance in 1992: The Role of Congress, Congressional Research Service, RL32410, 
May 20, 2004
. 8 Congressional Research Service, "Summary: S.2532
-102nd Congress (1991
-1992)
9 Tarnoff, 2004, pp. 5, 17-18. 10
nation Administration and Eagleburger's coordinator role for the SEED and FREEDOM Support Acts. Ideally, such a coordinator would be a Senateconfirmed ambassador, who, while supported by the State Department, would also have direct White House access.
These same principles of leadership apply to the EU as much as they do to the United States. As with the United States, the EU likely would benefit from establishing a unique, time-limited coordinating entity that is not part of one of the European Commission's existing directorates-general, led by an official with similar freedoms to those accorded to the U.S. coordinator. The European Commission has done this in the past, most recently by appointing Michel Barnier as chief negotiator for the exit of the United Kingdom from the EU, with the rank of director-general and a direct reporting line to the president of the European Commission. 
11
12
13
Securing a Rebuilt Ukraine Most analysis of Ukraine's reconstruction revolves around economics and governance, often neglecting the security dimensions of reconstruction. But as our historical cases have shown, security is a basic prerequisite for the successful execution of reconstruction in Ukraine. In Japan, a new U.S.-Japan security treaty provided the necessary stability for economic takeoff. NATO provided security for transformative European reconstruction efforts after WWII, after the Cold War, and after the wars in the Western Balkans.
Without durable post-war security arrangements, economic recovery and political development in Ukraine could come under great strain. Reconstruction progress could be subject to military attack. Investors would be reluctant to accept the risks involved while the Ukrainian government gives priority to preparing for renewed conflict. Provisions for security are therefore an essential component of any reconstruction plan. In this chapter, we examine several alternative approaches to post-war security arrangements designed to facilitate longer-term reconstruction and secure a more peaceful and prosperous future for Ukraine.
Ukraine-a capable military power on Russia's border-has become and will remain an important factor in the European power balance. On the one hand, Russia's invasion of Ukraine seems likely to produce a security situation in Europe that is highly unfavorable to Moscow. Russia's military setbacks in the war, the Kremlin's isolation from the economically advanced countries, and tough economic sanctions degrade Russia's strategic posi-tion relative to the United States and Europe. 1 Unless it is utterly defeated, Ukraine's westward drift will remain firmly secured. If NATO allies deliver on their pledges to increase defense spending and capabilities, the conventional military balance in Europe will continue to shift to Russia's disadvantage. 2 Russia's own military faces constraints that will be difficult to overcome, stemming from troop and equipment losses sustained during the war and its cut-off from advanced technology from the West. 
3
4
At the time of this writing, Ukraine had achieved impressive battlefield success while Russia had significantly underperformed in the war. It is possible that Russia might be decisively defeated or decide to withdraw from Ukraine, its forces overwhelmed with little capacity to continue. It is also 1 Samuel Charap and Michael J. Mazarr, "The Wisdom of U.S. Restraint on Russia," Foreign Affairs, September 12, 2022.
2 Eugene Rumer and Richard Sokolsky, "Putin's War Against Ukraine and the Balance of Power in Europe," Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, April 11, 2022.   3 Dara Massicot, "Russia's Repeat Failures: Moscow's New Strategy in Ukraine Is Just as Bad as the Old One," Foreign Affairs, 
August 15, 2022. 4
5
Case studies of previous conflicts have shown that belligerents who have recently fought each other will remain intensely antagonistic and inclined to renew the conflict at some stage. 
6
Ukraine will have powerful positive incentives to keep the peace as it mounts a massive internationally assisted reconstruction effort and moves toward membership in the EU. Russia, under its existing leadership, will have no such opportunities. Moscow's adherence to any peace agreement will depend heavily on the additional level of deterrence and defense capability provided by the United States and its allies to support the maintenance of peace.
Deterrence aims to alter the perceived costs and benefits of going to war. The costs of renewed conflict-political, military, and economic-must outweigh expectations of any benefits to be gained by resuming fighting.
7
8
So how much deterrence will be sufficient to prevent renewed war in Ukraine? Among the courses of action open to them, the United States and its allies could:
1. commit to providing continued material support to Ukraine's defense 2. threaten to introduce Western forces into Ukraine in the event of renewed Russian aggression 3. bring Ukraine into NATO. These three courses of action are not mutually exclusive, and all three could be pursued. The first represents continuity with existing policy. The West can provide peacetime Ukraine with the aid it needs to quickly rebuild its forces and establish a robust defense against another potential attack from Russia. Recent analysis notes that to build a modern military capable of defending Ukraine in the long term, Kyiv needs a high-readiness force that can effectively and forcefully respond to a territorial breach, a training and joint maneuver program, advanced anti-access and area-denial sys-tems, access to the EU's capability funding, and a large self-defense territorial force. 
9
10
In addition to sustaining and perhaps expanding the existing military supply relationship, the United States and its allies could warn that renewed Russian aggression might lead to the entry of Western forces into Ukraine. This could be signaled both in declaratory policy and visible preparations for such a move. This approach may lack credibility, however, because Western leaders individually and NATO collectively have been clear that they will not take this step in response to Russia's 2022 invasion. Such promises from individual NATO member-states could jeopardize the cohesion of the alliance in supporting Ukraine and present openings for Russian interference to divide NATO politically.
Finally, Ukraine might be brought into NATO. This step offers the surest guarantee of effectual support in the event of another Russian attack. Moreover, by joining NATO, Ukraine-thanks to the modern, Western assistance that it has successfully absorbed and skillfully employed-would provide the alliance with one of the most capable armies in Europe. 
11
12
Deterrence can be strengthened by moving beyond the supply of materiel, advice, and financial support to the possible commitment of Western forces to Ukraine or a full NATO Article V guarantee for Ukraine. However, if deterrence fails, these steps make it less likely that the fighting would be confined to Ukraine. Moreover, even with deterrence, it might be possible to have too much of a good thing. The classic security dilemma posits that perfect security for one side can mean total insecurity for the other, causing the weaker party to undertake desperate measures to avoid that fate. 
13
12
13
This suggests that one must look beyond deterrence for additional measures to bolster the fragile peace likely to emerge from this conflict. For any post-war security arrangement to endure, it must contain provisions that both parties value over continued fighting.
14
One alternative that policymakers might consider is some form of multilateral security guarantee. Multilateral security guarantees typically involve a promise of mutual restraint toward a state: The recipient of the guarantee commits to some behavior, while the guarantors pledge to respect the sovereignty of the recipient if their rival does the same. One plausible permutation of a multilateral security guarantee could be one in which Ukraine commits to being a neutral country. In this case, the promise by the guarantors would not just be to respect Ukraine's neutrality but to help defend it, even against another guarantor. Individual countries could decide if they wanted to opt into the arrangement as guarantors. Ukraine's guarantors could either be a grouping of Western countries or include a broader set of countries that includes Russia. In either permutation, the intention would be clear: Ukraine would be defended if Russia violated its territorial integrity. In the event of an attack on Ukraine, the guarantor states would be committed to aid in its defense, perhaps in the same manner as the United States and its allies are in the present conflict. The advantage of this policy option is that Ukraine could be confident of Western assistance if attacked, while Russia could be confident of Ukrainian neutrality if Ukraine is not attacked, thus giving Russia a positive stake in keeping the peace.
These guarantees could be codified in a legally binding UN Security Council resolution (unlike the failed Budapest Memorandum, which was only a political document). 
15
16
Ukraine, of course, will have the leading role in conceptualizing and designing the most appropriate arrangements for its post-war security; the United States and the European countries will support Ukrainian priorities. It is not clear that such a multilateral security guarantee would have support among Ukraine's leadership or public. Earlier in the war (March 2022), when Ukraine's military prospects were less favorable, Russia and Ukraine held peace talks in Istanbul, during which Ukrainian diplomats introduced a framework under which Ukraine would remain neutral, with its security guaranteed by various Western partners and by Russia. 
17
18
15
16
17
18
19
20
Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, Ukraine's position has been recognized as unique because of its size, location, and history. However, the existing architecture for European security offers only a binary choice: join an alliance or you are on your own. Ukraine has never quite fit into this model. Now, in the wake of Russia's invasion, Ukraine and the Western powers aiding it have begun to carve out a third way, one in which a state victim of aggression can receive assistance without forming a permanent attachment. Can existing arrangements for supporting Ukrainian defense be developed into credible guarantees for its post-war security? Could this provide a long-term place for Ukraine in the European order? NATO membership might well be the most suitable choice to guarantee Ukraine's security and the security of Europe. But this conclusion is best tested by evaluating alternatives. 
19
20
Military posture and security architecture are two elements of a U.S. strategy to alter Russia's perceived costs and benefits of returning to war. Sanctions are another. Sanctions can and usually do have multiple aims, including compliance, subversion, deterrence, and symbolism. 
22
23
24
25
It follows that the West could then devise a way to agree a priori to snap back any lifted sanctions if Russia renews war in Ukraine. In addition to the snap back of current sanctions, more-severe economic measures-such as a complete trade embargo and a complete cutoff of the Russian financial sector-could be applied to increase the cost of any new Russian aggression. The United States, the EU, other G7 members, and other sanctioning countries might want to devise various hand-tying mechanisms that would commit them to reimposing sanctions under certain conditions. This could signal to Moscow the strength of the shared commitment. In the United States, for example, an independent commission created by Congress with members appointed by Congress and the President could publicly report on Russian compliance every six months to highlight compliance and the threat of snap back, thereby creating pressure. A statement from the G7 countries and NATO also could lay the groundwork for a snap back of sanctions. A Freer, More Prosperous, and Secure Future for Ukraine and Its Partners Military momentum had turned in favor of Ukraine by late 2022: By November, Ukraine's armed forces had taken back more than half the land that Russia had conquered earlier in the war. 1 On the other hand, the war might still be in its early stages, unpredictable events can happen, and the Russian armed forces may yet find advantages on the battlefield. 
2
1 Scott Reinhard, "Ukraine Has Reclaimed More Than Half the Territory Russia Has Taken This Year," New York Times, November 14, 2022.
But the prospects for such a result will depend on many factors, from Kremlin liberalization to the successful reform and reconstruction of Ukraine. And that, in turn, will involve a complex web of multiple countries and international institutions with an array of choices to make. 
3
Capital shortages appear to have been a key constraint always and everywhere. But post-war and post-disaster reconstruction events show that there are better and worse ways to mobilize capital, just as there are better and worse ways to organize reconstruction.
The post-WWII reconstruction of Europe and Japan and post-war reconstruction of the Balkans demonstrated the importance of security guarantees and even troop presence. In fact, there is evidence, at least in post-WWII Europe, that the absence of security guarantees in 1946-1947 led to stalled reconstruction. Durable security arrangements can give the private sector greater confidence to risk investment.
Given security, conditionality in the disbursement of financial assistance played an important role. This was notable in the Marshall Plan for post-WWII Europe and in the success of Central and Eastern Europe after 1989. In the former case, conditionality was sometimes applied selectively to ensure the success of the most important policy goals. In the latter case, EU conditionality and the desire of those countries to join provided a strong impetus to internal reforms. However, conditionality without a timetable, as in the case of the Western Balkans, weakens the power of conditionality to 3 One way to think about the many choices to make during the reconstruction process is to arrange them in four categories: (1) When and how fast? (2) Who directs? (3) Who, where, and what to focus on? (4) Who pays? For more on this, see Khrystyna Holynska, Jay Balagna, and Krystyna Marcinek, The Trade-Offs of Ukraine's Recovery: Fighting for the Future, RAND Corporation, RR-A2370-1, 2023. move reforms forward. In the case of Ukraine, donors might coordinate to adopt the same conditions on their assistance: Those conditions would be the EU membership criteria that Ukraine must meet.
The ability to trade internationally proved important in all cases. Marshall Plan conditionality encouraged greater intra-European trade. Japan's recovery was aided by production for the Korean War, and then at the end of the 1950s, by the opening of U.S. markets and finance. For the Central and Eastern European countries after 1989, the Europe Agreements were particularly important in providing industrial free trade with the EU, which proved critical for driving investment and incentivizing structural reform, such as the shutdown of inefficient heavy industry. Along with trade, crosscountry infrastructure connections, such as gas, roads, and electricity, promoted regional cooperation.
In the specific case of Ukraine, following Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014, the EU first liberalized trade through an association agreement, ratified in 2017, and through an additional three years of unilateral additional market access measures. Through the 2022 invasion by Russia, the EU had liberalized market access to Ukraine's trade but also tightened access in certain cases; however, on balance, the EU liberalized much more than it tightened. 
4
Just as access to international markets was necessary, so too were internal reforms, often resulting from conditionality. In almost all cases, internal stabilization was required-specifically, bringing down high inflation and rectifying problems with public finances, as in the case of Japan with the Dodge Line. But in all cases, more fundamental reforms were needed. Such reforms were exemplified by the Central European countries of Poland, Czech Republic, and Hungary, which undertook deep reforms following their exits from the Soviet orbit, thereby unleashing domestic private investment and attracting foreign direct investment.
The task of rebuilding Ukraine also can be compared to recovery from natural disasters, such as fires, earthquakes, tsunamis, and hurricanes. Similar to the conflict in Ukraine, disasters can leave in their wake enormous levels of infrastructure damage, damage to social and economic systems, and the widespread displacement of people from their homes. But destruction from natural disasters provides an opportunity for a country to re-envision its future: New infrastructure can be built, better and more-energy-efficient housing and offices can be built, and a variety of other improvements can be made that might be more difficult without the domestic urgency and international assistance that come with reconstruction.
Throughout disaster recovery episodes, sequencing of reforms proved important. In Haiti, for example, delays in tackling simple tasks, such as rubble removal, stalled recovery. In Ukraine, the immediate problem will be the removal of mines and unexploded ordnance. Funding structures for reconstruction also must be sufficient to the task: In some cases, the challenge will be mobilizing sufficient external funding and turning pledges into cash. In other cases, funding might be widely available, but disaster-hit communities will not be able to absorb the assistance, which can slow recovery. Past disaster recovery efforts also highlight the importance having a streamlined command structure to control donor freelancing and reduce the burden on the recipient government of interfacing separately with donors.
The most successful disaster recovery efforts address local priorities and ensure affected communities are intimately involved in the problemsolving and decisionmaking processes. But the importance of local involvement exists in tension with the reality that local governments might lack the capacity to manage reconstruction processes. Reconstruction in Ukraine will have to balance the competing imperatives of community involvement and the capacity of local communities to fulfill their reconstruction roles.
Ukraine also will have to contend with large numbers of IDPs and refugees who fled the conflict and are spread elsewhere in Ukraine and throughout Europe. Returns will not happen spontaneously at the scale needed to enable recovery unless policymakers plan and actively facilitate them. Doing so requires sequencing and prioritizing essential tasks as reconstruction gets underway-e.g., shelter, schools, basic medical care-to help people return.
Ukraine's financing needs will be quite large, perhaps multiples of its prewar GDP over the course of the decade following a settlement of the war. The open question is from where that financing will come. It will need to come from a variety of sources: bilateral and multilateral grants and loans, international private-sector investment and loans, Ukrainian domestic investment and savings, and Ukrainian national and local government finance. The amounts from each are uncertain, although it is worth remembering that Marshall Plan aid amounted to only 2.6 percent of the GDP of the 16 recipient countries, and official flows to Central and Eastern Europe from 1991 to 1993 amounted to about 2.7 percent of the GDP of recipient economies.
In 2021 dollars, Marshall Plan spending was about $128 billion, far less that some estimates for spending on Ukrainian reconstruction. There is a risk that Ukrainians might expect the monetary value of assistance to be a multiple of Marshall Plan aid and be disappointed if it does not materialize. Donor countries will also have their own domestic spending priorities, which could become more acute if the West were to slip into recession.
Regardless of the amounts of aid provided, a variety of steps can help unleash private-sector investment. For Ukraine, these include improved rule-of-law and anti-corruption measures and strong dispute settlement procedures, such as through the World Bank Group's International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes. From the realm of international assistance, these steps might involve (1) enhanced investment and risk insurance and (2) co-investment, as exemplified by the U.S. enterprise funds in the 1990s or the case of the Oasis Hotel project in Haiti after the 2010 earthquake there.
One other important medium-term decision will be whether to seize frozen Russian international reserves and private-sector assets prior to a post-war settlement. There are strong moral and practical arguments for using the roughly $300 billion in frozen reserves and a portion of some $1 trillion in private-sector assets to help Ukraine repair damages caused by Russian forces and start rebuilding. 
5
But seizure and use of the frozen assets-especially the official international reserves-would have downsides as well. In the United States, there is not a clear legal basis for seizure of official assets of a country with which the United States is not at war. Accordingly, new legislation authorizing the transfer of seized reserves to an international fund for Ukraine might be needed. Doing so could expose Western assets to retaliatory expropriation in the future and could be a further incentive for countries that have unstable relations with the United States to bypass the U.S.-led international financial system. 
6
Congressional pressure for forfeiture of Russian assets may be strong. The Consolidated Appropriations Act for federal fiscal year 2023 included an amendment that allows the attorney general to transfer to the secretary of state forfeited property controlled by a person subject to sanctions to provide assistance to Ukraine. 7 Accordingly, this will need to be settled as reconstruction planning proceeds. 
5
6 "Why the West Should Be Wary of Permanently Seizing Russian Assets," The Economist, June 19, 2022. See also Elizabeth Braw, "Freeze-Don't Seize-Russian Assets," Foreign Policy, 
January 13, 2023. 7
Reconstruction planning and implementation will require considerable coordination. Past post-war and post-disaster reconstruction events provide useful guidance.
There inevitably will be a multitude of interested parties, so clear leads and lines of reporting will be important. Ukraine should set the priorities. The Ukrainians have paid the most, in lives lost and disrupted, infrastructure destroyed, and economic damage. Beyond that, they will have the best understanding of their country's needs, what might be politically possible, and how best to implement policies within the Ukrainian system.
Internationally, the United States will need to take the lead on security, much as it did in Europe and Japan after WWII and in the Balkans in the 1990s. Likewise, the EU will need to take the lead on economic assistance and political reform, not least because Ukraine is now a candidate country for EU membership and will require EU assistance and support to succeed.
But this does not mean the major powers should work separately. It will be helpful for the United States to participate in economic restructuring (following the EU's lead) and for the European countries to participate in security provision (following the lead of the United States).
Furthermore, there will need to be an on-the-ground presence with considerable authority. For the United States, appointing a procurement coordinator with notwithstanding authority as with the SEED and FREE-DOM Support Acts, as described in Chapter 6, can remove bureaucratic roadblocks that stand in the way of implementing even a widely agreed-on policy. Furthermore, ongoing engagement with the U.S. Congress will be important for a U.S. coordinator, and ongoing engagement with the European Parliament is likely to be important for the EU lead.
Data, monitoring, and evaluation will prove essential to ensuring that reconstruction is proceeding as well as possible. However, the data, monitoring, and evaluation function should be kept separate from the policy development and implementation function. An independent inspectorgeneral system also will be necessary, both for preventing and exposing Related Agency, Section 1708, December 29, 2022. waste, fraud, and abuse and producing useful reports that build confidence in the reconstruction effort.
Ukraine's economy might not improve immediately following the end of the active conflict. The government of Ukraine has been receiving Western transfers for current operations of around $5 billion monthly. When reconstruction begins, the economy and the country's tax revenues will recover, but not immediately. Thus, there will still be a pressing requirement for fiscal transfers to support government operations that are essential to ensuring a smooth transition to the reconstruction phase.
Previous post-conflict reconstruction efforts-and even post-natural disaster efforts where domestic insecurity was present-show that security is an integral component of any reconstruction effort. Prior European reconstruction efforts were secured by NATO membership and NATO peacekeepers. Japan's strongest economic takeoff period came on the heels of a new security treaty with the United States.
Providing security to Ukraine in a post-war environment will be challenging because the outcome of the war is unlikely to fully satisfy either side. Both Russia and Ukraine might retain incentives to renew the fighting at some stage. Ukraine, for its part, will have an attractive alternative to renewed conflict in consolidating its Western orientation and moving toward EU membership. Russia, at least under its current leadership, will have no such prospects, and its adherence to any peace agreement will depend heavily on the level of deterrence provided by the United States and its allies.
In terms of deterrence, among the courses of action open to them, the United States and its allies could commit to providing continued material support to Ukraine's defense, threaten to introduce Western forces into Ukraine in the event of a renewed Russian aggression, or bring Ukraine into NATO. Higher levels of deterrence might make renewed fighting less likely, but if deterrence fails, the higher levels of deterrence that had been provided might also make the resultant conflict less likely to be limited to Ukraine. Moreover, these options can strengthen deterrence but also might decrease Russia's perception of its own security, perhaps leading it to take destabilizing measures in response. This suggests that U.S. policymakers should look beyond deterrence to additional measures to bolster the fragile peace likely to emerge from this conflict. Such measures might include a multilateral security arrangement in which Ukraine's security is guaranteed by a grouping of nations.
The existing architecture for European security-either in NATO or not in NATO-offers a binary choice. Ukraine and the Western powers aiding it have begun to carve out a third way. Whether that is sufficient to provide credible guarantees for Ukraine's post-war security cannot yet be determined and may depend on war termination.
Significant reform and major reconstruction might not be able to start in earnest until the war draws to an end or a stalemate, but there is much that can be done in the near term. Steps that should be taken soon include determining the organization of the international effort, including passing any necessary legislation; agreeing to methods of finance, including passing authorizing legislation for allocating financial assistance or establishing purpose-built institutions; and working with Ukraine to establish an agreed sequencing, especially under the assumption of constrained financing.
For Ukraine, important steps that should be taken, even during wartime, are reconsidering the enabling environment for financing and investment, strengthening anti-corruption efforts, and enhancing the rule of law. Even if Ukraine emerges victorious, potential bilateral donors already have multiple calls on their resources, not least investing in their own economies in the wake of difficult economic times related to COVID-19 pandemicrelated supply and demand disruptions and aggravated by the repercussions of Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Helping Ukraine reform and reconstruct will be in the interest of the United States and the West. Ukrainian reforms can increase the chances that the United States and the West will follow through on those interests and help Ukraine fulfill its own post-war vision.
21 Chris Currie,
32
SOURCE: Based on and modified from National Recovery Council, 2022, p. 12. a Damaged infrastructure. b Potentially financed via EU Structural Funds, based on Central European countries' benchmarks. c Nondamaged infrastructure assumed, banking system support. d Infrastructure needs, not covered by EU Structural Funds.
Derek W. Urwin, The Community of Europe: A History of European Integration Since
1945
  5  For convenience, in describing the reconstruction of Central and Eastern Europe after the Cold War, we use the term European Union or EU even for the period of 1989 to 1993
. 6 Helsinki Commission Staff, The Internal Enemy: A Helsinki Commission Staff Report on Corruption in Ukraine, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, October 2017.
The Western Balkan Six countries are Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Montenegro, North Macedonia, and Serbia.
World Bank, Government of Ukraine, and the European Commission, Ukraine: Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment, July 31,
2022, p. 11. 2 KSE Institute, Ministry of Community Development and Territories of Ukraine, Ministry of Infrastructure of Ukraine, and Ministry of Health of Ukraine, Assessment of Damages in Ukraine Due to Russia's Military Aggression as of September 1, 2022, September 2022, p. 3. 3 International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis, October 2022a, p. 42.4 U.S. GDP data is from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, "Current-Dollar and 'Real' Gross Domestic Product," spreadsheet, October 27, 2022a. The historical record on economic disasters can be found in Robert J. Barro, "Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century," Quarterly Journal ofEconomics, Vol. 121, No. 3, August   
We do not examine lessons from more-recent U.S.-supported reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan and Iraq for two reasons: (1) These countries were seeking to rebuild in the midst of ongoing civil wars and insurgencies (which Ukraine is not experiencing), and (2) unlike Iraq and Afghanistan, Ukraine, for all its challenges, is a semi-developed country in Europe with a long-established industrial base, educated populace, and internationally competitive farm sector.
Koichi Hamada and Munehisa Kasuya, "The Reconstruction and Stabilization of the Postwar Japanese Economy: Possible Lessons for Eastern Europe," Center Discussion Paper No. 672, Economic Growth Center, Yale University, 1992. National and global statistical authorities originally reported measures of national income in terms of gross national product, or GNP. Reporting eventually shifted to gross domestic product, or GDP. In the United States, this occurred in 1991 (Kelly Ramey, "The Changeover from
Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein, "Bombs, Bones, and Break Points: The Geography of Economic Activity," American EconomicReview, Vol. 92, No. 5, December 2002.  
8 Yoshio Suzuki, "Difficulties and Challenges: Japan's Post-War History of Economic Trends and Monetary Policy," Center on Japanese Economy and Business, Columbia Business School, Working Paper Series No. 360, August 2017
.9  This paragraph draws from
Hamada and Kasuya, 1992.
dollars, we followed U.S. Census Bureau methods and data as described in U.S. Census Bureau, "Current Versus Constant (or Real) Dollars," webpage, last revised September 12
, 2022.16  Haruhiko Fukui, "Economic Planning in Postwar Japan: A Case Study in PolicyMaking," Asian Survey, Vol. 12, No. 4, April 1972.   17  Japanese national income data are from UnitedNations, Statistical Yearbook 1956,  No. 8, Statistical  Office of the United Nations, Department ofEconomic and Social  Affairs, 1956, p. 470. The yearbook gives values in yen amounts, and we converted these at 360 yen to the dollar, the official rate that took effect April 25, 1949 ("Japanese Yen Pegged at Rate of 360 for $1," New York Times,
April 23, 1949)
18
19
Curt Tarnoff, The Marshall Plan: Design, Accomplishments, and Significance, Congressional Research Service, R45079, January 18, 2018.  
28 Benn Steil and Benjamin Della Rocca, "It Takes More Than Money to Make a Marshall Plan," Geo-Graphics blog, Council on Foreign Relations, April 9, 2018. This source provided the value in current dollars and 2018 dollars. To convert to 2021 dollars, we followed U.S. Census Bureau methods and data as described in U.S. Census Bureau, 2022. Note that the 2018 dollar value listed in the source was $135 billion, above our 2021 dollar value. Reasons for the discrepancy are not clear. We used the consumer price index to make the conversion, the same method used by the U.S. Census Bureau. We also used the GDP deflator and calculated a value of $116.7 billion in 2021 dollars (U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, "National Income and Product Accounts: Table1.1.9. Implicit Price Deflators for Gross Domestic Product," interactive data file, last revised on December 22,
2022b).29  For the 1.4 percent, Marshall Plan expenditures are from Tarnoff, 2018. U.S. GDP figures are from U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2022a. The 2.6 percent figure is from SALT, "Benn Steil: 'The Marshall Plan: Dawn of the Cold War,' SALT Talks 137," webpage, January
 11, 2021.30  Tarnoff
, 2018, p. 1.31  The OEEC later transformed itself in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) which continues as a leading organization in promoting economic growth and cooperation among developed and threshold countries.
Tarnoff, 2018, p. 5.   
James Roaf, Ruben Atoyan, Bikas Joshi, and Krzysztof Krogulsi, 25  Years of Transition: Post-Communist Europe and the IMF, International Monetary Fund, Regional Economic Issues Special Report, October 2014.
  47  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, "The History of the EBRD," webpage,
undated. 48 Martin A. Weiss, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), IF11419, Congressional Research Service, updated June 21, 2022.
United Nations, Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, Build Back Better: In Recovery, Rehabilitation, and Reconstruction (Consultative Version), 2017.
KSE Institute, Ministry of Community Development and Territories of Ukraine, Ministry of Infrastructure of Ukraine, and Ministry of Health of Ukraine, 2022.
National Centers for Environmental Information, "Costliest U.S. Tropical Cyclones," fact sheet, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 2022.
Cynthia Cook, "Rebuilding Ukraine After the War," Center for Strategic and International Studies, March 2, 2022.
Sergiy Karazy, "Almost One Third of Ukraine Needs to Be Cleared of Ordnance, Ministry Says," Reuters, August
12, 2022.   12  Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Task Force, Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Strategy: Strong Communities, A Resilient Region, August 2013, p. 14.13  Governor of Puerto Rico and Central Office of Recovery, Reconstruction, and Resiliency, Transformation and Innovation in the Wake of Recovery: An Economic and Recovery Plan for Puerto Rico, August 2018.14  One analogous mechanism for a whole-of-society effort is the multi-sector accountable body with which and through Millennium Challenge Corporation funding works.
15
Business Wire, "Clinton Bush Haiti Fund  Invests to Complete Construction of Haitian-Owned Hotel and Conference Center in Port au Prince," May 9, 2011.
Culbertson, Bordeaux et al., 2020.
Naomi Aoki, "Sequencing and Combining Participation in Urban Planning: The Case of Tsunami-Ravaged Onagawa Town, Japan," Cities, Vol. 72, Pt. B, February 2018;Moroney et al., 2020, p. 80.    
U.S. Agency for International Development, "A U.S.-Supported E-Government App Accelerated the Digital Transformation of Ukraine; Now Ukraine Is Working to Scale
Shelly Culbertson and Charles Ries, "Ukraine Invasion Could Spark a Massive Refugee Crisis," Newsweek, February 16, 2022.
N. Gregory Mankiw, "Ukraine: How Not to Run an Economy," Fortune,
June 12, 2000.
Anders Åslund, "The Maidan and Beyond: Oligarchs, Corruption, and European Integration," Journal of Democracy, Vol 25, No. 3, July 2014.
Transparency International, "Transparency International Releases the Year 2000 Corruption Perceptions Index. New Index Is Based on Multiple Surveys from 1998-2000," press release, September 12, 2000; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index 2010, September 30, 2010; Transparency International, Corruption Perceptions Index 2020, January 28, 2021. The countries ranked below Ukraine in 2020 included Kyrgyzstan, Azerbaijan, Russia, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan.
Anders Åslund, Why Has Ukraine Returned to Economic Growth? Working Paper No. 15, Institute for Economic Research and Policy Consulting, July 2002.
Samuel Charap and Timothy J. Colton, Everyone Loses: The Ukraine Crisis and the Ruinous Contest for Post-Soviet Eurasia, Routledge, 2017.
National Recovery Council, 2022.    
Mark F. Cancian, "Aid to Ukraine Explained in Six Charts," Center for Strategic and International Studies,
November 18, 2022.
Robert B. Zoellick, "How the G-7 Can Tip the Scales Toward Ukraine," Washington Post, June 26, 2022a.
"Iraq Makes Final Reparation Payment to Kuwait for 1990 Invasion," UN News, February 9, 2022.
16 Robert B. Zoellick, "Russian Cash Can Keep Ukraine Alive This Winter," Wall Street Journal, October 26, 2022b.
Volodymyr Zelensky, "Invest in the Future of Ukraine," Wall Street Journal, September 5, 2022.
  28 Roaf et al., 2014, p.  
34.29Roaf et al., 2014, p. 36.   
Diaspora Emergency Action and Coordination Platform, Diaspora Organizations and Their Humanitarian Response in Ukraine, U.S. Agency for International Development and Danish Refugee Council, June 2021.
Balázs Jarábik and Yulia Yesmukhanova, "Ukraine's Slow Struggle for Decentralization," Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, March 8, 2017; International Republican Institute, "Research from Four Cities in Ukraine Highlights Importance of Decentralization," November 8, 2019.
Joshua Rudolph and Norman L. Eisen, "Ukraine's Anti-Corruption Fight Can Overcome US Skeptics," Just Security,
November 10, 2022.
Enacted as Public Law 101-179, Support for Eastern European Democracy (SEED)Act of 1989
, November 28, 1989.
"Policy coordination of SEED Program: The President shall designate, within the Department of State, a SEED Program coordinator who shall be directly responsible for overseeing and coordinating all programs described in this Act and all other activities that the United States Government conducts in furtherance of the purposes of this Act" (Pub. L. 101-179).
A grand political settlement between Russia and Ukraine on the issues over which the war has been fought is very unlikely. See Clint Reach, "Obstacles to Lasting Peace Between Ukraine and Russia," Santa Monica Daily Press, July 7, 2022.
This was the case with Minsk II, a hastily drafted and bitterly disputed agreement, negotiated in 2015 to stop fighting in the Donbas (Duncan Allan, The Minsk Conundrum: Western Policy and Russia's War in Eastern Ukraine, Chatham House, May 2020; see also Virginia Page Fortna, "Scraps of Paper? Agreements and the Durability of Peace,"International Organization, Vol. 57, No. 2, 2003, p. 350).
As James Fearon explains, war is ex post inefficient. Unless fighting is preferred for its own sake, even enemies would prefer to settle their disputes without resorting to war (James D. Fearon, "Rationalist Explanations for War," International Organization,Vol. 49, No. 3, 1995).
Office of the President of Ukraine, "Andriy Yermak and Anders Fogh Rasmussen Jointly Present Recommendations on Security Guarantees of Ukraine," September 13, 2022.
Michael J. Mazarr, Understanding Deterrence, RAND Corporation, PE-295-RC, 2018, p. 2.
Steven Erlanger, "What Does It  Mean to Provide 'Security Guarantees' to Ukraine?" New York Times,
January 10, 2023.
Suzanne Werner, "The Precarious Nature of Peace: Resolving the Issues, Enforcing the Settlement, and Renegotiating the Terms," American Journal of PoliticalScience,  Vol. 43, No. 3, July 1999.   
David E. Johnson, "This Is What the Russians Do," Lawfire blog, Duke University, May
3, 2022.   
Simon Evenett, "Trade Policy and Deterring War:  The Case of Ukraine Since the Annexation of Crimea," Global Trade Alert, February 14, 2022.
We thank our formal reviewers, 
William Courtney
William Taylor
Shelly Culbertson
Gary Edson
Douglas Lute
Robert Zoellick
Lisa Saum-Manning
Matt Byrd
Rachel Ostrow
Rick Penn-Kraus
Sandy Petitjean
This research was conducted within the 
International Security and Defense Policy Program of the RAND National Security Research Division (NSRD)
RAND National Defense Research Institute (NDRI)
Office of the Secretary of Defense
Joint Staff
Unified Combatant Commands
Navy
Marine Corps
NDRI
NDRI
For more information on the 
RAND International Security and Defense Policy Program
v rebuilding effort in modern history.
www.rand.org