# ID: ac9d57bd79654094a91af82ea796ce89
# Title: Reconstructing Ukraine Creating a Freer, More Prosperous, and Secure Future
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2023.0
# Fulltext:
It follows that the West could then devise a way to agree a priori to snap back any lifted sanctions if Russia renews war in Ukraine.
In addition to the snap back of current sanctions, more-severe economic measures-such as a complete trade embargo and a complete cutoff of the Russian financial sector-could be applied to increase the cost of any new Russian aggression.
The United States, the EU, other G7 members, and other sanctioning countries might want to devise various hand-tying mechanisms that would commit them to reimposing sanctions under certain conditions.
This could signal to Moscow the strength of the shared commitment.
In the United States, for example, an independent commission created by Congress with members appointed by Congress and the President could publicly report on Russian compliance every six months to highlight compliance and the threat of snap back, thereby creating pressure.
A statement from the G7 countries and NATO also could lay the groundwork for a snap back of sanctions.
A Freer, More Prosperous, and Secure Future for Ukraine and Its Partners Military momentum had turned in favor of Ukraine by late 2022: By November, Ukraine's armed forces had taken back more than half the land that Russia had conquered earlier in the war.
1 On the other hand, the war might still be in its early stages, unpredictable events can happen, and the Russian armed forces may yet find advantages on the battlefield.