# ID: ad4047fabea84e56a1b9a81f550d232b
# Title: Centralized Control of Airpower in a Communications Black Hole
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
Since 2001, the United States has been continually engaged in combat operations against an enemy that is elusive and tactically lethal but utterly incapable of affecting operational-level communications. The same cannot be said about China or Russia. In modern joint air operations doctrine, the ATO enables centralized control and connects the operational and tactical levels of war through ATO dissemination. This study assesses whether the joint air operations team is prepared to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to execute centralized control. This study utilizes the lessons from ATO dissemination challenges during the Persian Gulf War and Operation Allied Force, combined with a thorough assessment of three decades of air operations doctrine and training. This study concludes that while JAOCs likely have an ATO dissemination PACE plan, tactical units are neither aware of the plan, nor do they train to it. Furthermore, this lack of preparedness cannot be overcome through problem-solving and innovation against an enemy capable of contesting every domain. Regular and realistic training that connects the operational and tactical levels of war in a highly contested environment is required.
The year is 2021. The 4th Expeditionary Fighter Squadron (EFS), the "Fighting Fuujins," is forward-deployed to an undisclosed forward operating base, approximately 100 nautical miles from Powidz AB, Poland. The 4th EFS-along with other joint and coalition tactical squadrons-deployed to the U.S. European Command's area of responsibility after military forces from the Russian Federation seized critical lines of communication within Lithuania to complete a land bridge to Russia's exclave, the Kaliningrad Oblast.
It is night three of the air campaign. Thus far, air efforts have been marginally successful at peeling back portions of Russia's anti-access, area-denial defensive systems.
The 4TH EFS Mission Planning Cell (MPC) Chief, Captain Henry Arnold, arrives at squadron operations at 1700L to take the night MPC shift. In the handover briefing, Capt Arnold's predecessor, First Lieutenant James Doolittle, informed him that he had not heard from the 4th EFS liaison officer (LNO) at the Combined Air Operations Center (CAOC) in the last 11 hours. Well before 1700L, Lt Doolittle should have received the draft Air Tasking Order along with the draft Master Air Attack Plan; however, he had received nothing. After several attempts to e-mail and call the LNO failed, Lt Doolittle assumed their LNO was extremely busy. Since these products also arrived late the preceding day, Lt Doolittle decided not to elevate the issue to his operations supervisor, as he assumed the LNO would send them once they were ready.
After the handover was complete, Capt Arnold attempted to contact his squadron's LNO himself, to no avail. The phone in the MPC would not connect to the LNOs phone number. Capt Arnold elevated his concern to the operations supervisor, who tried to call several contacts within the CAOC. The results were the same, no answer. By this time, it was 1830L, and the ATO production team was due to publish the final ATO by 1800L. Capt Arnold logged on to his Secure Internet Protocol Router (SIPR) computer and clicked on his "CAOC Portal" button on his favorites bar and a page loaded that said, "This site can't be reached. Server IP address could not be found." Capt Arnold tried several other computers with identical results. He then thought to see if he could get the ATO from his Wing's Operations Center (WOC) located at Powidz AB. He picked up his phone, dialed the number, and heard a busy signal. Multiple attempts on several different phone lines produced the same results. He and the operations supervisor were out of ideas.
Capt Arnold was a relatively new MPC chief but was not inexperienced as he had a United States Central Command (USCENTOM) deployment under his belt. In 2017 he deployed in the A-10C as a First Lieutenant with the 354th EFS, "Bulldogs," to Incirlik AB, Turkey, in support of Operation Inherent Resolve. In his epic deployment with the Bulldogs, Arnold sat MPC and received the ATO countless times from the CAOC at Al Udeid, Qatar. Following his deployment and transition course from the A-10C to the F-35A, he had not received any training nor had any discussion with the previous MPC chief on different methods to obtain the ATO. He only knew the process of acquiring the ATO from the CAOC Portal or through secure e-mail from the LNO.
The operations supervisor sent a runner to bring in the Squadron Commander, Lieutenant Colonel William Mitchell, and he was at a loss as well. In his three CENTCOM deployments in the F-16, he sometimes received the ATO exceptionally late but never had to use an alternate method to obtain the ATO. While his operations supervisor dug through the Special Instructions (SPINS) and Rules of Engagement looking for any procedure that would shed light on the situation, he read the last Air Operations Directive (AOD) and the Joint Air Operations Plan. Through the AOD and the Joint Air Operations Plan, Lt Col Mitchell was able to marginally ascertain the overall intent and broad plan for what would likely be on the ATO for their squadron.
He had a thought to launch his F-35s on a similar timeline and to the general location that their targets were in on the previous day's ATO. Some problems with such a course of action, however, were that he did not know the plan for his required aerial refueling tankers, or know what other assets would be part of his force package, or know what specific targets he should attack, to name a few. Although, his main problem was that no one in his squadron had ever trained to such a scenario. Even so, he was confident in his squadron's ability to solve this problem through their collective experience and innovative skills. In the last three hours, he had already received several ideas from members of his squadron on how they could regain connectivity or continue flying. By this time, however, it was 0200L, and the ATO day would begin in only four hours.
Reflecting on the magnitude of the situation, his squadron's lack of experience, and the level of risk he would assume in launching his pilots into an unknown threat environment, he decided to cancel the following day's flying. After announcing his decision to the squadron, his thoughts immediately turned to the other legacy assets that might have been relying on his squadron's suppression of enemy air defense capabilities.
Though, unbeknownst to him, similar decisions were being made throughout Europe and in the Baltic Sea following Russia's highly coordinated multi-domain attack on U.S. operational-level communications infrastructure. CHAPTER 1
Aerospace power is a critical-and decisive-element in protecting our nation and deterring aggression. It will only remain so if we, as professional airmen, study, evaluate, and debate our capabilities and the environment of the future.
-General Michael E. Ryan, Air Force Chief of Staff, quoted in Department of the Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Document 2
The prologue depicts a scenario in which the United States is in a large-scale combat operation with a highly capable Russian enemy. While one might debate the likelihood that Russia would launch such an overtly offensive action against a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) member, the depicted Russian capability and the lack of U.S. preparedness and training for such a scenario are genuine. Since 2001, the United States has been continually engaged in combat operations against an enemy that is adaptive, agile, elusive, and tactically lethal, but utterly incapable of affecting the operational level of war. Aside from the opening days of Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom, the United States (U.S.) has been stuck in a repetitive, uncontested joint air operations process that has inculcated the joint air operations team into a false sense of security.
Considering that "inter-state strategic competition, not terrorism, is now the primary concern in U.S. national security," the U.S. military, in many respects, is illprepared to face the likes of China or Russia.0 F 
1
F 2
operational-level communications network, which the joint force uses to connect the operational level to the tactical level of war.
In joint air operations, the mechanism that connects the operational level to the tactical level for tasking tactical units is the Air Tasking Order (ATO). It is the single source document in modern warfare that enables the Joint Force Air Component Commander (JFACC) to fulfill his responsibility to "task the joint air capabilities and forces made available" to him through centralized control, decentralized execution (CCDE).2 F 3 The ATO, however, cannot link the operational and tactical level without an operational-level communications medium to disseminate on. Thus, whichever medium the Joint Air Operations Center (JAOC) intends to disseminate the ATO on becomes a critical vulnerability. The logical approach one might take to protect such a vulnerability would be to establish redundant and alternate communications-such as a Primary, 2018), 1, accessed April 26, 2020, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/ pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf.
Alternate, Contingency, and Emergency (PACE) plan-and to prepare the joint air operations team in using it.
Thus, the purpose of this thesis is to assess the joint air operations team's preparedness to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units.
In fulfilling this purpose, this thesis seeks historical lessons from doctrine, training, and ATO dissemination challenges from the Persian Gulf War and Operation Allied Force (OAF). These past lessons, combined with an assessment of current doctrine and training, will serve as evidence in answering the primary research question and drawing associated conclusions and recommendations applicable to the existing joint air operations team.
Invariably, in writing such a thesis with analytical roots in current doctrine and training, one risks the entirety of the joint air operations team finding fault with the assessment, conclusions, or recommendations. Aside from the research purpose, this thesis intends to persuade senior leaders, staff officers, and tactical operators alike to question their confidence or renew their displeasure for the joint air operations team's lack of preparedness at linking the operational and tactical levels of war. To the extent that this thesis instills any further intellectual curiosity on the subject, it will have achieved its ends.
Joint doctrine effectively defines most terms used throughout this thesis. Some terms, however, are introduced to bring clarity or fill a void in joint doctrine.
Joint air operations team: the team that directs, plans, executes, and assesses joint air operations. This team includes the JFACC, members of the JAOC, and members of tactical units.
Tactical unit: This term refers to any joint air operations unit that operates at the tactical level of war. The term includes, but is not limited to, fighter, bomber, attack, cyber, space, and intelligence units.
Operational-level communications: This term refers to communication systems that bridge the gap between the operational level JAOC and the tactical unit.
Degrade, Disrupt, and Deny: These three terms are used extensively in joint doctrine but are not defined in current joint doctrine. The 2006 version of Joint Publication (JP) 3-13: Information Operations defines these terms as:
Degrade: To reduce the effectiveness or efficiency of adversary command and control or communications systems, and information collection efforts or means.
Disrupt: To break or interrupt the flow of information.
Deny: To prevent the adversary from accessing and using critical information, systems, and services.3 F 4 Assumptions 1. The joint air operations team will continue to use the tenet of CCDE as the preferred approach to command and control (C2).
2. U.S. adversaries possess the capability and will to degrade, disrupt, or deny operational-level communications.
These assumptions, if proven false, would render this thesis invalid. An important distinction on the first assumption is in order. In modern joint air operations doctrine, the centralized control portion of CCDE utilizes the ATO to task tactical units. As will be discussed in Chapter 4, current efforts are underway that could introduce a non-ATO method of centrally controlling taskings to tactical units-a combination of commander's intent, mission-type orders (MTO), and conditions-based authorities (CBA). Should the joint force adopt this method, either as a new method or emergency method, this thesis is still relevant as the focus is not on ATO dissemination but tasking tactical units using CCDE.
The first limitation of the effectiveness of this thesis is classification. With the U.S.' shift in focus to inter-state strategic competition in a Contested, Degraded, and Operationally Limited (CDO) environment, the joint force has focused its efforts on operating in such environments. The preponderance of these efforts is taking place on classified systems. Since this thesis is an unclassified product, the author has deliberately neglected researching classified information to avoid unintentional disclosure. While this limitation seems significant, there is ample unclassified literature to adequately assess the current doctrine and training related to the primary research question.
A second limitation of the effectiveness of this thesis is COVID-19 related impacts. This pandemic affected the second half of the research by limiting access to the Combined Arms Research Library and the Air University Library archivists.
To adequately scope the thesis, the author adopted several delimitations. First, of the seven elements of DOTMLP-F, this study will only consider two of them: doctrine and training. As discussed above, doctrine and training are unclassified topics that significantly contribute to answering the research question.
Second, the emerging highly contested and degraded operational environment will have significant effects on myriad aspects of airpower, including communications, advanced surface to air threats, non-kinetic effects, and electronic attack (EA) threats. This thesis, however, will only address the operational environment's effects on operational-level communications.
This subsection describes the design of the study, from a broad interpretive framework to narrow research question. The purpose of this study is to assess the joint air operations team's preparedness to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units. This research methodology supports that purpose.
This study is qualitative and uses social constructivism, which assumes that reality is constructed rather than discovered.4 F 5 This reality is formed "through historical and cultural norms that operate in individuals' lives."5 F 6 Said another way, an individual's 
5
6
Thus, this study's research utilizes multiple sources with varying points of view to answer the primary research question as thoroughly as possible.
How prepared is the joint air operations team in mitigating the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units?
The primary research question has five key components: (1) the joint air operations team; (2) operational-level communications; (3) degrade, disrupt, or deny; (4) centralized control; and (5) taskings to tactical units. While most of these terms were defined previously, each component warrants further discussion to describe which aspects of joint air operations are, and are not part of this research.
First, the entirety of the joint air operations team-from the JFACC at the operational level to the MPC chief at the tactical level-is included in this research.
Second, the only type of communications discussed in this thesis is operational-level communications. This study does not address tactical-level communications. Third, "degrade, disrupt, and deny" are not the same; they each mean something specific (see the Terms subsection, page 7), and the distinctions between the terms will be important in Chapter 5. Additionally, the source or cause of communications degradation, disruption, or denial is not pertinent; only the result is. Thus, this study treats interoperability issues and enemy actions, that have an identical effect, the same. Fourth, the words "centrally control" in the primary research questions refer to the JFACC's preferred philosophy for command and control, embodied in the keystone airpower tenet: CCDE. Finally, the "taskings to tactical units" portion of the primary research question is a paraphrased JFACC responsibility from JP 3-30: Joint Air Operations. "Allocate and task the joint air capabilities and forces made available by the Service components based on the Joint Force Commander (JFCs) air apportionment decision."6 F 7
Secondary Research Questions (SRQ) This subsection discusses the four SRQ, which will form the evidential basis to answer the primary research question. The 'preparedness of the joint air operations team' referenced in the primary research question is divided into two sections-doctrine and training-covered by the first two SRQs. These two SRQs apply to each case. The last two SRQs concern the historical ATO challenges and, therefore, only apply to the historical cases.
How has doctrine prepared the joint air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units? Doctrine can be categorized in many ways. The Air Force, in Volume I: Basic Doctrine, recognizes three types of doctrine: service, joint, and multinational.
Additionally, the Air Force acknowledges three levels of doctrine: basic, operational, and tactical. Within each level, broad topics further divide doctrine. To scope the vast amounts of available doctrine, this study will primarily focus on joint and Air Force doctrine written about command and control of joint air operations at the operational level. For historical cases, this study will assess the "current" doctrine from the period.
In analyzing the first SRQ, this study utilizes three doctrinal research questions to aid the author's subjective analysis. First, who does doctrine make responsible for the command and control of joint air operations? Second, is a primary ATO dissemination method, and associated communications requirements, adequately addressed in doctrine? Third, does doctrine adequately establish the requirement to have alternate, contingency, or emergency ATO dissemination methods?
How has training prepared the joint air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units?
In analyzing the second SRQ, this study will focus on training conducted by the entire joint air operations team within the operational level, tactical level, and training that connects the seam between the two. For the historical cases, this study will assess the training conducted within five years of the start of combat operations.
What attempts were made to mitigate the effects of communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units?
Were the attempts made to mitigate the effects of communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units effective?
This subsection now turns to the research design by discussing the theoretical and methodological frameworks.
This study will use the theoretical framework of Doctrine, Organization, Training,   Materiel, Leadership and Education, Personnel, Facilities, and Policy. Doctrine, training,   and materiel are the three components most pertinent to the primary research question.
However, to further narrow the theoretical framework, this study will only look through the lens of doctrine and training. Materiel certainly pertains to the joint air operations team's "preparedness" but is excluded due to classification challenges and materiel's highly technical nature. In some cases, a discussion on materiel will be necessary for context, but the analysis will not cover materiel.
For the methodological framework, this study utilizes a multiple case study analysis that includes the present-day case and at least one historical case.7 F 8 Each historical case was chosen purposely based on two criteria. First, the historical case must consist of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial that challenged the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units. Second, the 8 Robert K. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 5th ed. (Los  Angeles: SAGE, 2014); Merriam and Tisdell, Qualitative Research.  historical case must include attempts-either successful or unsuccessful-to mitigate such challenges. With these criteria in mind, two historical cases stand out: the Persian Gulf War and OAF. In each of these historical cases, the joint air operations team was challenged by various levels of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial caused by a lack of interoperability and made several attempts to remedy such challenges. This subsection now turns to this study's methods for collection.
This study utilizes two methods of collection: document analysis and interviews.
In document analysis, this study relies on both primary and secondary source documents that address doctrine, training, or historical accounts of the ATO dissemination challenges in the two historical cases. While the author found publications that address most of these topics, specific gaps in literature exist. One such gap is in training conducted before OAF. Another such gap is in literature that describes the ATO dissemination challenges during OAF in specific detail. The final gap is in any information, except for doctrine, on the present-day case. Thus, when possible, this study incorporates interviews to fill these literature gaps.
The author conducted over fifteen semi-structured interviews, either in-person, telephonically, or through e-mail. For the oral history interviews, the author sought to ascertain the facts that had transpired and, in some cases, asked the interviewee to provide his professional analysis on former doctrine and training and how it could be applied to present-day. The present-day case interviews combined both facts and personal assessments. In an interview that includes an educated personal opinion, certain ethical assurances are in order.
The author gave each interviewee an informed consent form that explained the purpose of the interview, the interviewee's rights, and ethical assurances from the author.
The author offered each interviewee anonymity in their assessments. If the interviewee chose to remain anonymous, the author did not disclose the source of the data nor the interviewee's associated unit or location in the thesis. Additionally, if the interviewee requested to remain anonymous, the author attributed their quote to an individual using a pseudonym which did not include rank. Furthermore, the author altered or omitted specific contextual details revealed in the interview to prevent deductive disclosure. In confidential interviews, the author recorded each interview using two digital recording devices, for redundancy, then transcribed the interviews. Once the author transcribed the interview and had the interviewee validate the transcription, the author destroyed the original recordings. Finally, the author stored the interview transcriptions on a passwordprotected digital storage drive. Considering the steps taken by the author to protect the identity of those that requested anonymity, the author assesses the overall risk to the subjects, the author, and the Command and General Staff College at a LOW rating.
The purpose of the study is fulfilled when the primary research question is answered for the present-day case. This study will also answer the primary research question for both historical cases. While not the primary purpose of this study, assessing the historical cases in this way will provide context and establish a trend, starting in 1990 and ending thirty years later in 2020. In the analysis, the author will strive to remove any personal bias, first by recognizing such bias.
The author is a member of the joint air operations team that has extensive operational experience with receiving the Air Tasking Order from the CAOC.
Additionally, the author has served in the CAOC as a tactical unit LNO. Thus, the author has experience at the operational level, but his bias favors the tactical level. To mitigate this bias, the author will utilize the four SRQs, three doctrinal research questions, and three training focus areas to objectively inform the author's subjective analysis.
This thesis is designed to assess the preparedness of the joint air operations team in mitigating the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units. Chapters two and three answers the primary research question for the two historical cases-the Persian Gulf War and OAF-by assessing the four SRQs. Additionally, chapter four answers the primary research question, for the present-day joint air operations team by assessing the first two SRQs. Finally, Chapter 5 presents several conclusions and recommendations based on the analysis of this study's three cases. The Persian Gulf War is assessed first.
President Ronald Reagan signed the Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense (DoD) Reorganization Act into law on October 1st, 1986.8 F 
9
Prior to the Persian Gulf War, the established command and control philosophy for joint air operations was effectively decentralized control. Throughout the Korean and Vietnam Wars, the Air Force consistently advocated for unity of command and unity of effort for air forces.1 1F
12
Thus, revolutionary joint air operations doctrine emerged. This subsection assesses joint and Air Force doctrine publications that were current at the start of the Persian Gulf War. The analysis in the subsection answers the first SRQ: how did doctrine prepare the joint air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units? Tactical Air Command Manual 2-1: Aerospace Operational Doctrine -Tactical Air Operations Tactical Air Command Manual (TACM) 2-1 was published in 1978. In his foreword to the manual, General Robert J. Dixon, the Tactical Air Command (TAC) commander, clearly articulates the changing nature of airpower and its effect on doctrine, "There is no magic in these pages-they say, in brief, what we believe-and what is-as of now. This is not 'the last word'-this is the way it is now-YOU must make it better . . . "1 3 F
14
The first doctrinal research question-concerning whom doctrine makes responsible for the command and control of joint air operations-is answered along service lines. The manual states that, "The Air Force Component Commander (AFCC)
exercises operational control of assigned forces through the Tactical Air Control System (TACS)."1 5 F 16 Additionally, it describes the common functions of the senior element of the TACS-the Tactical Air Control Center (TACC).1 6F 17 The first common function of the TACC is to "generate the daily air tasking order."1 7 F 18 This previous statement is the first doctrinal reference to the ATO as it emerged as an Air Force solution to meet the Army's AirLand Battle doctrine requirements.1 
8 F 19
9 F 20
18 Ibid., 3-8. Finally, while TACM 2-1 establishes the need to disseminate the ATO to tactical units, it does not address the third doctrinal research question, concerning whether doctrine adequately establishes the requirement to have alternate, contingency, or emergency ATO dissemination methods. There is a lengthy discussion on joint and service elements that are responsible for certain aspects of the communications network, but the discussion does not include backup systems. However, there is one statement in the manual that speaks to the requirement for redundant communications networks, "The degree of redundancy required must be assessed along with the need for secure communications."2 3F
24
JP 3-01.2, Joint Doctrine for Theater Counterair Operations JP 3-01.2 was published in April of 1986 as Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) Pub 26 and was subsequently renamed to JP 3-01.2 in 1988. This publication's aim "is to issue joint doctrine for the planning and employment of joint forces in theater counterair operations" and "addresses the integration and employment of all assets that can be used by the joint force commander in conducting counterair operations."2 
4 F 25
In answering the first doctrinal research question-concerning whom doctrine makes responsible for the command and control of joint air operations-JP 3-01.2 is the first doctrinal publication to introduce the term JFACC.
The joint force commander will normally designate a joint force air component commander. The joint force air component commander's responsibilities will be assigned by the joint force commander (normally these would include, but not be limited to, planning, coordination, allocation and tasking based on the joint force commander's apportionment decision).2 
5 F 26
The discussion in JP 3-01.2 on the second doctrinal research questionconcerning whether a primary ATO dissemination method and associated communications requirements are adequately addressed in doctrine-is not as clear.
While JCS Pub 3-01.2 establishes the point that the JFACC requires an increased capability to communicate to the joint force, it makes the point specifically to counterair operations and does not explicitly discuss disseminating the ATO. It does, however, broadly emphasize the importance of communications at the operational-level. For example, "communications systems . . . must be capable of providing secure near-realtime exchange of essential information between the joint force commander and subordinate commanders and forces."2 7 F 
28
In the final doctrinal research question-concerning whether doctrine adequately establishes the requirement to have alternate, contingency, or emergency ATO dissemination methods-JCS Pub 3-01.2 improves the discussion by adding specificity.
First, this publication emphasizes that C2 communications systems must be engineered with intended capacity in mind, a factor that would plague backup communications systems in the Persian Gulf War.2 8F 29 Additionally emphasized is the importance of creating survivable communications systems where echelons of command can exchange information even "when an intermediate level has been disabled."2 9F 30 Should these survivable communications systems fail, JCS Pub 3-01.2 also emphasizes that communications systems-particularly ones that utilize automatic data processing-"must have a backup capability and procedures to maintain continuity of operations."3 0 F 31
The period between Vietnam and the Persian Gulf War was marked with change, specifically for airpower development. After U.S. involvement in Vietnam concluded in January of 1973, each of the services took different lessons from the conduct of the piecemeal air campaign. Nine months later, in another area of operations, airpower was on display in the Arab-Israeli War of 1973. The lessons from that war served as a wakeup call to the United States Army, who developed their AirLand Battle doctrine, which called for combined arms-including airpower-to affect the enemy several echelons deep. In 1986, President Reagan signed the Goldwater-Nichols DoD Reorganization Act into law, which gave combatant commanders new authorities and emphasized joint operations. Finally, throughout this period, a new generation of aircraft came on-line, precision weapons were significantly improved, new airborne command and control platforms were introduced, and stealth technology debuted. These lessons from wars, operating concepts, and changes in technology gave service and joint doctrine writers the task of "keeping up with the times." Arguably, based on service disagreements, no 30 CJCS, JP 3-01.2, III-6. 
31
Joint and Air Force doctrine publications available before the onset of the Persian Gulf War contained two conflicting constructs for command and control of air operations: the AFCC and the JFACC. The AFCC-discussed in the Air Force's operational doctrine-is responsible for command and control of assigned tactical air forces, specifically "USAF tactical air forces."3 
1 F 32
33
Contained within the doctrinal shift from the AFCC to the JFACC is a shift from centralized control of USAF air operations to centralized control of joint operations for the counterair mission. With varying levels of specificity, both joint and Air Force doctrine publications stressed the importance of communications enabling centralized 32 Department of the Air Force, AFM 2-1, 2-3. control. Taken as a collective body of work, the doctrine available at the onset of the Persian Gulf War describes three essential ideas about communications. First, the operational-level command and control entity-in enabling centralized control for the AFCC or JFACC-must have a direct communications link with tactical units to, among other things, disseminate orders. Second, the communications link must be secure, survivable, and appropriately sized-considering variables such as sortie rates, type of mission anticipated, and other service involvement. Third, the communications link must have dedicated backups, especially for automated systems.
As a collective body, doctrine addressed the essential information pertinent to the three doctrinal research questions, which, when combined, form the following statement:
The JFACC executes centralized control through his operational-level command and control center-the TACC for the Air Force-by planning and disseminating the ATO to tactical units using an adequately sized, interoperable, survivable communications system that has dedicated backups. This statement would offer sage advice for a JFACC and his staff. Nonetheless, in answering the first SRQ, doctrine did not adequately prepare the joint air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units for two reasons.
First, while some publications describe requirements for command and control systems, no publication names a specific primary ATO dissemination system that each service should acquire to ensure interoperability. Establishing such a joint standard in 1986 could have provided the impetus for interoperable operational-level communications during the Persian Gulf War.
Second, the ideas contained in the previous combined statement were not consolidated; they were scattered within individual publications and spread out between joint and Air Force doctrine. While one might argue that the ideas were contained in doctrine nonetheless, extracting the essential ideas amongst the disparate, conflicting ideas to form the concise statement relied heavily upon hindsight of the Persian Gulf War-a luxury the JFACC and his staff did not have in 1990.
Therefore, from the doctrine perspective, the joint air operations team was not adequately prepared to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units. Doctrine, however, is not the only factor that determines overall preparedness-one must consider training as well.
It appears that what joint, high-level staff training was conducted did not force the Services to resolve such inter-service issues as the Fire Support Coordination Line and the Air Tasking Order.
- Blue Flag is focused on training at the operational-level; however, the operational and tactical levels must be linked for the command and control personnel to receive valuable training. The linkage between the two levels is constructive, enabled by the Air Warfare Simulation (AWSIM) and several exercise controllers that roleplay tactical units.
This linkage, however, benefits the personnel who monitor the execution of the daily ATO rather than the personnel responsible for ATO production and dissemination. Mr.
36 Tactical Air Command, TACM 2-1, 10-8.
37 Ibid.
38 John W. Drain, e-mail interview by author, April 20, 2020.
39 Tactical Air Command, TACM 2-1, 10-9; Drain interview.
John Drain, a current Blue Flag Senior Controller and 29-year veteran of Blue Flag, stated that prior to the Persian Gulf War, "ATO dissemination was not even considered to be an issue since there weren't many adversaries with any capability to prevent dissemination . . . since all the Blue Flags were home games, conducted at Hurlburt Field, the ATO Production team simply passed us a disc with the ATO, and we loaded it into AWSIM."3 9 F 40 Thus, while Blue Flag provided command and control personnel valuable training and experience, it did not bridge the gap between the operational and tactical levels through ATO dissemination.
Unlike the operational-level Blue Flag, Red Flag is a tactical-level exercise. Red focused on "large scale conventional strike versus a low EA, Soviet high-threat environment."4 
2 F 43
However, the ATO is given to the aircrew, rather than receiving it from the TACC via a Computer-Aided Force Management System (CAFMS) terminal.4 3 F 44 Thus, while Red Flag gives "Blue 4 and new mission commanders" valuable training, it does not bridge the gap between the operational and tactical levels.4 4F 45 In the context of this study, this represents a lost opportunity to train aircrew to quickly and effectively use CAFMS as well as to highlight potential downfalls with the system and discuss alternate options to receive the ATO. Yet, in the context of Red Flag's purpose, as described above, this omission is by design, to keep the focus of the exercise at the tactical level. 44 Cohen, Weapons, Tactics, & Training, 428, 431. 
45
46
Operation Solid Shield '87 and '89   Operation Solid Shield was a Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic Command joint exercise designed, among other things, to test and practice JFACC operations with Marine, Navy, and Air Force tactical units.4 6F 47 Communications between the JFACC and associated other service components were emphasized in the 1987 and 1989 iterations of the exercise. In Solid Shield '87, the Air Force held the JFACC role, and communications between the JFACC and the Navy were assessed "marginal at best."4 7 F 48 The primary means of communication between the two was the Automatic Digital Network System (AUTODIN). A significant lesson that came out of Solid Shield '87 was that narrative message traffic via AUTODIN took longer than expected and resulted in planning difficulties.4 8F 49 These lessons would be carried forward to Solid Shield '89.
In the next iteration of the exercise, Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic Command, assigned the JFACC role to the Navy, which assembled onboard the United States Ship 47 Gary E. Washburn, "Improving JFACC: Doctrine and Communications" (Thesis, Naval War College, Newport, RI, May 18, 1992), 9.
48 Ibid. 
49
(USS) Mount Whitney (Blue Ridge-class amphibious command ship).4 9F 50 Primary communications onboard the Mount Whitney were enabled by a unique Super High Frequency (SHF) radio-the WSC-6-and utilized the Worldwide Military Command and Control System (WWMCCS) as the primary means of communication for the JFACC.5 0F 51 The Mount Whitney already possessed this radio; however, the other participating Navy and Marine ships did not have this radio, nor did most of the Navy fleet.5 1 F 52 Despite initial complications with the Marine Component, the WWMCCS communications method was considered a success. Not because of the WWMCCS equipment, but because, with one exception, all component participants were connected with a high capacity communications link enabled by the SHF radio.5 2 F 53   On the margins, the Air Force and Navy components conducted an additional test during Solid Shield '89, which further demonstrated the importance of the SHF radio.
The Navy installed an Air Force CAFMS terminal onboard the Mount Whitney, supported by the pre-existing WSC-6 SHF radio. The test sent a 1,000 sortie ATO and more than 100 messages via the high capacity communications link established from the Mount Whitney, through the Norfolk Naval Ground Station, and to the 507 TACCS at 
50
51
52
53
Operation Solid Shield '87 and '89 produced two key findings. First, transmitting narrative messages over AUTODIN was prohibitively slow for joint air operations.
Second, a high capacity SHF radio link dramatically improves the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units. While Operation Solid Shield '87 and '89 were certainly successful in producing these two key findings, the Navy did not sufficiently prioritize the acquisition of the recommended radios, resulting in their absence during the war.5 4 F 
55
The "Desert Storm Six"-the USS Saratoga, USS Kennedy, USS Midway, USS Ranger, USS America, and USS Roosevelt-fall into two groups: "early deployers" and "late deployers."5 
5 F 56
54
55 Washburn,
"Improving JFACC,
" 11,
16;
Eliot A. Cohen,
Gulf War Air Power Survey,
vol. 5,
pt
Cohen,
Command and Control Report,
148. 63
64 Cohen,
Weapons,
Tactics,
& Training,
xv,
449.
1
The Defense Institute of Analysis, in their Unit Training in the Gulf War report to the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel and Readiness), found that while high-level component and joint staffs worked very hard, they conducted little actual training.6 5 F 66 The one exception to this was the ATO Generation Exercise. This "paper exercise" was conducted on 12 and 16 January 1991 and designed to exercise the full ATO cycle from "initial planning and target nomination in the Guidance, Apportionment, and Targeting (GAT) cell to the production and distribution of the D+2 ATO in the ATO Division."6 6F 67 One pertinent finding for this study was the difficulties the staff experienced 
65 Cohen,
Weapons,
Tactics,
& Training,
[412]
[413]
Unit
67 Cohen,
Weapons,
Tactics,
& Training,
[416]
[417]
During Desert Shield, the "Desert Storm Six" were split between two battle forces: Battle Force Zulu (or Persian Gulf Battle Force) and Battle Force Yankee (or Red Sea Battle Force).6 8F 
69
It was comprised of the Midway, Ranger, and Roosevelt CVBGs.7 
1 F 72
2
On 12 August 1990, Lt Gen Horner, in his role as USCinCCENT Forward, directed that all carrier air operations be placed on the ATO unless in "direct support of the carrier."7 3F 74 Lt Gen Horner did not define the term "direct support," but the Navy generally interpreted that to mean: any flights exclusively over water.7 4 F 75 This presented the Persian Gulf Battle Force with a choice: fly overland and succumb to the JFACC and ATO process or fly over water and deal only with the familiar Navy scheduling process.
The Persian Gulf Battle Force-mostly the Midway-"generally chose not to put its flights on JFACC's schedule . . ." and ". . . avoided them as much as possible . . . "7 
5 F 76
The Red Sea Battle Force, for most of Desert Shield, was comprised of the Kennedy and Saratoga CVBGs. Like the Midway, these early deployers had little JFACC and ATO experience before arriving in theater; however, they had four to five months of training to familiarize themselves with the process. Based on geography and training 
74
75
76
77
7 F 78
In the zone of overlap between the operational and tactical levels of war, both predeployment training and training during Desert Shield did not prepare the joint air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units.
Tactically speaking, the GWAPS was correct in their assessment that "aircrews did not come to the Arabian Peninsula during Desert Shield to train for a war; they came prepared to fight a war." Although operationally speaking, the opposite is true.
The joint air operations team arrived in theater, having not adequately trained to close the gap between the operational and tactical levels. Additionally, they required a five-month-long Desert Shield for the Navy to become familiar with the JFACC concept and ATO scheduling process. Those five months, however, would not have been necessary had the Air Force and Navy capitalized on the year that followed Operation Solid Shield '89. This exercise should have been a catalyst for further discussion and testing on implementing the JFACC concept and solving the identified interoperability issues with JFACC communications. Instead, equipment procurement recommendations were not adequately prioritized, and units continued to train to air operations in their 
78
79
While the Air Force will rightly point to this document [ATO] (and often has) as the playbook for the vastly successful Air Bowl, we in the surface navy, from our more parochial perspective, remember it simply as the 300-page, "Personal For," flash-precedence, randomly sorted message, rarely received before the middle of the day to which it applied . . .
-Lieutenant Commander Larry Di Rita, "Exocets, Air Traffic, & the Air Tasking Order"
The purpose of the JFACC is to bring unity of command in applying airpower to achieve unity of effort for the JFC. The JFACC accomplishes this through centralized control of all air assets made available to him, which is enabled by the ATO. In Lt Gen Horner's words, "without the ATO, you don't have the JFACC. With the ATO, you don't have anything but a JFACC."8 1F 
82
The GWAPS stated that this challenge was "arguably the most important task facing the quickly developing communications system in the theater." processor at the TACC in Riyadh and connected it up to eleven remote terminals located at WOC, Control and Reporting Centers, Air Support Operations Centers, and the Marine Corps Tactical Air Operations Center (AOC).9 0 F 91 By 20 August 1990-eight days after the first ATO-TACC began disseminating the ATO via CAMFS; however, as Desert Shield progressed, the demand for connectivity steadily increased, and eleven remote terminals were not sufficient.9 1 F 92 By December, the communications team had set up a total of three central processors, and associated terminals, with five more central processors on order.9 2F 93
In the meantime, while the CAFMS network expanded, deployed squadrons still required the ATO, and the CENTAF communications team created a solution: the mini-ATO distribution system (MADS).9 3F 94 MADS MADS developed out of a CENTCOM directive to establish a computer to Secure Telephone Unit (STU)-III system to securely exchange circuit channelization data.9 
4 F 95
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98 Cohen,
A Statistical Compendium,
234;
Cohen,
Command and Control Report,
17,
154.
Desert Shield ATO Dissemination -Navy None of these methods-CAFMS, MADS, or C-21 ferry flights-however, would work to disseminate the ATO to the Navy's "Desert Storm Six." When CAFMS made its operational debut on 20 August 1990, the Navy was less than enthusiastic. From the NAVCENT perspective, CAFMS represented a departure from the methodology suggested in the JP for air schedule, was "profligate in communications capacity," and was not universally accepted, even in the Air Force.9 9 F
100
The command post personnel had never worked with CAFMS before the deployment. The 507th personnel departed before the command post had an opportunity to get on the job training . . . we would be blessed with Sgt Anderson . . . [who] had worked extensively with CAFMS . . . Consequently, he corrected any CAFMS problems on base quickly and efficiently. OJT for the command post controllers came over time, and they learned to become selfsufficient without whining to the comm squadron each time the system burped.1 
01 F 102
At the onset of Desert Shield, the Navy established a method of ATO dissemination from the TACC to their carriers. This method, similar to MADS, involved a computer-to-computer electronic transfer secured by a STU-III telephone, from Navy liaisons in the TACC to the command ship-while in port and with access to land telephone lines.1 
03 F 104
Paper Tapes -Fleet Flash and AUTODIN/Computer Processing and Routing System (COMPARS) Shortly after CAFMS became operational, CAFMS division personnel in the TACC cut two paper tapes for the Navy. The first paper tape contained excerpts from the daily ATO-Navy taskings and all air refueling missions-and the SPINS in their 
102
103
104
04 F 105
Predictably, this tape took even longer than the first tape because of the size of the entire ATO. This lengthy transmission meant that the carriers did not receive the second paper tape until 1000L the day of execution-6 hours after the ATO was in effect.1 06F 107 Several iterative improvements in the paper tape process, combined with a reduction in time that the TACC took to publish the ATO, resulted in carriers receiving their specific taskings, tanker information, and SPINS-first paper tape-by 0001L ( 
5
105
106
107
108
ATO finally arrived, crews could simply confirm their specific information and make fine-tune adjustments as needed.
It is important to note that this paper tape method was used during Desert Shield, where the ATO averaged 825-sorties per day, compared to the 2,697-sortie average during Desert Storm.1 08 F 109 Anticipating the sortie surge, the Commander of NAVCENT, Vice Adm Stan Arthur, stated that "the ATO process would probably fall apart on the third day, and if that happened, they should be prepared to go back to the tried-and-true method of dividing up the area."1 09F 
110
109
110
111 Witt,
Air Force Tactical Communications in War,
31. 112
115
The Chief Attack Planner in the Black Hole, Lt Col Dave Deptula, recalled:
We were trying to achieve particular effects. So, at 1000L on Tuesday the 21st of January, I need to know whether the F-117s dropped on those priority targets, the chemical bunkers this morning at 0400L. I don't need a complete intelligence assessment as to how they did. What I need is whether they hit or not. If they hit, I can afford to wait for 24-48 hours to get the damage assessment. But if they didn't hit, that's what I really need to know because it is such a priority that I'll reschedule the MAP, and they'll get a visit from the F-117 tonight.1 
15 F 116
16 F 117
116
117
118
18 F 119
For the Air Force and Marines, CAFMS was the primary method of disseminating the ATO; however, the planning method as a whole, including CAFMS, had its faults and concerned Brig Gen Glosson, among others.
Soon after the end of the war, Glosson noted that the system should have supported between 1,500 and 2,000 sorties a day, with a maximum of 2,400 sorties. The maximum number of sorties run in an exercise was 2,400. The system was overloaded by the attempt to generate and transmit more sorties than appropriate to the number of terminals in theater.1 20 F 121   It is not definitively known why, but some units required the ATO to be disseminated using MADS. Evidence suggests that units experienced slow download times from CAFMS or experienced frequent system errors, likely associated with the overloaded system Brig Gen Glosson discusses above. However, as discussed previously, some of these problems with CAFMS might be due to a lack of CAFMS trained personnel at the WOC or communications squadrons.1 21F 122 Nevertheless, as of 1 February 1991, the TACC was disseminating the ATO using MADS to 27 units throughout the 
119 Cohen,
Command and Control Report,
[145]
[146]
[147]
121 Ibid., 221. 
122
1 2 2F 123
123
124
125 Cohen,
Command and Control Report,
154. 126
127
ATO changes was enabled by STU-III secure telephones and was the final backup method of ATO dissemination for the Air Force and Marines.1 
27 F 128
First, the paper tape system, as optimized by the end of Desert Shield, took six hours to send the first paper tape-which included Navy Specific ATO taskings, tanker information, and SPINS-over the Fleet Flash net.1 28F 
129
128
129
130
30 F 131
With the commencement of Operation Desert Storm and its strategic air campaign on 17 January, the amphibious task force's communications network was temporarily saturated by the sheer volume of CentAF's daily air tasking order. With no CAFMS terminals installed onboard its ships, the Navy was forced to retransmit the ATO over standard record message traffic means.1 3 2F 
133
The final method of ATO dissemination-and the method that became the primary method during Desert Storm-was hand-delivery. Each evening after the ATO 
131
34 F 135
While the Air Force will rightly point to this document [ATO] (and often has) as the playbook for the vastly successful Air Bowl, we in the surface navy, from our more parochial perspective, remember it simply as the 300-page, "Personal For," flash-precedence, randomly sorted message, rarely received before the middle of the day to which it applied . . . The people who published this tome probably never envisioned that a couple of junior enlisted air controllers on a three-week caffeine high in the back of a combat information center would 
134
135
136
137
138
Additionally, the Navy's carriers did not possess CAFMS and, despite NAVCENT and CENTAF's best efforts, CAFMS would not be installed for the entirety of the war. These two factors were the impetus for developing, testing, and validating additional ATO dissemination methods, which took the entirety of the five-month-long Desert Shield.
Ultimately, while no service explicitly published an ATO dissemination PACE plan, the joint air operations team effectively created two PACE plans-one for the Air Force and Marines and one for the Navy-that worked well enough for the Persian Gulf War.
In the end, the JFACC did not lose one sortie due to a unit not receiving the ATO; however, this was not due to sound doctrine or training but rather due to the innovation and problem-solving ability of the CENTAF and NAVCENT communications teams. CHAPTER 3 CASE STUDY 2: OAF Other classified communications required passing a hard copy of the information by hand, repeating one of the worst command and control deficiencies that had been exposed earlier in Desert Storm, when the ATO had to be flown every day to each of the Navy's six participating aircraft carriers because the latter were not equipped to receive it electronically.
-Benjamin S. Lambeth, NATO's AirWar for Kosovo: A Strategic and Operational Assessment
In the last decade of the 20th century, Serbian leadership persecuted the Kosovar ethnic Albanian majority, which led to over 1.5 million refugees by 1999. In the same year, Slobodan Miloevi-the President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslaviarejected several attempts to negotiate peace by the international community. NATO responded to the atrocities with OAF-an air campaign designed to end the regime's ethnic atrocities.
President Clinton, in his address to the nation, delivered simultaneously with the start of OAF, outlined the mission of NATO's actions:
Our mission is clear -to demonstrate the seriousness of NATO's purpose so that the Serbian leaders understand the imperative of reversing course, to deter an even bloodier offensive against innocent civilians in Kosovo and, if necessary, to seriously damage the Serbian military's capacity to harm the people of Kosovo. In short, if President Miloevi will not make peace, we will limit his ability to make war.1 41 F 142  General Wesley Clark-Supreme Allied Commander in Europe and Commander-in-chief United States European Command-held the responsibility to carry out this mission. General Clark's air component commander, Lieutenant General Michael Short, was responsible for the conduct of the air campaign. While Short, as the Combined Force Air Component Commander (CFACC) for Allied Forces Southern Europe, had the responsibility to develop "a joint air operations plan to best support joint force objectives," these two men had several disagreements on how the air campaign should be run.1 42F 143 Short went as far as to say that "he was less an architect of the campaign than its implementor."1 43 F 144   The 78-day air campaign ended on June 3, 1999, after Miloevi agreed to the terms of a peace plan based on a proposal from "the Group of Eight countries (the United States, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Canada, Russia, and Japan)."1 44 F 145 The peace proposal called for "the withdrawal of all Yugoslav forces from Kosovo; the deployment of an international peacekeeping force with NATO at its core; and international administration of Kosovo until elected interim institutions are set up, under which Kosovo will enjoy wide-ranging autonomy within Yugoslavia."
The discussion in JP 3-56.1 on the first doctrinal research question-concerning whom doctrine makes responsible for the command and control of joint air operationsexpands on the JFACC discussion from JP 3-01.2. The publication states that "the JFC will normally designate a JFACC" and that the JFC will choose the JFACC based on "the component commander having the preponderance of air assets and the capability to plan, task, and control joint air operations."1 48 F 
149
5
The second doctrinal research question-concerning whether a primary ATO dissemination method and associated communications requirements are adequately addressed in doctrine-is addressed as well. First, JP 3-56.1 makes the JFACC "responsible for planning and activating all validated joint air communications links that support the JFC's mission and allow the accomplishment of the JFC directives."1 53 F 154   Furthermore, this publication highlights the importance of such "reliable secure communications . . . to the successful integration of the joint air effort."1 54 F 155 Additionally, without naming the operation, JP 3-56.1 addresses the challenges with communications interoperability during the Persian Gulf War, "C4I data exchange requirements will be promulgated as early as possible to ensure that each component can meet unique interface requirements."1 55 F 
156
154 CJCS, JP 3-56.1, IV-12. 
155
156
157
War, JP 3-56.1 does not adequately answer the third doctrinal research questionconcerning whether doctrine establishes the requirement to have alternate, contingency, or emergency ATO dissemination methods. The closest the publication comes to discussing this is an unplanned shift in JFACC responsibilities from one JFACC to another during hostilities-an Air Force JFACC-ashore to a Navy JFACC-afloat for example. First, the publication lists several events that might trigger a shift in JFACC responsibilities. One such event, pertinent to this study, is when C4I capabilities "to support the current JFACC become unresponsive or unreliable."1 57 F 158 Additionally, it also acknowledges that:
During unplanned shifts of JFACC responsibility, as a possible result of battle damage or major command and control equipment failure, a smooth transition is unlikely. Therefore, the JFC should predesignate alternates (both inter-and intra-component) and establish preplanned responses/options to the temporary or permanent loss of JFACC capability.1 58 F 159   Moreover, as a JFACC transition consideration, it states that "all JFACC operations facilities should possess appropriate C4I capabilities to ensure shift of JFACC duties is as transparent to the components as possible (joint ATO dissemination and receipt should be unchanged)."
These three statements taken together assume that if the current JFACC's C4I capabilities become unreliable or suffer a significant command and control equipment failure (CTAPS, for example), then the new JFACC's C4I capabilities are operational.
158 CJCS, JP 3-56.1, IV-9.
159 Ibid.
Thus, joint ATO dissemination should be unchanged. However, it does not account for the scenario in which the communications failure affects both JFACCs. Furthermore, there is no discussion or stated requirement for alternate communication methods between the primary method (CTAPS) and the shift of JFACC responsibilities. Therefore, while the publication discusses the continuity of operations from one JFACC to another, it does so to shift a primary communication method (CTAPS) from one JFACC to another, rather than establishing the requirement to have alternate, contingency, or emergency communication methods. AFDD 2, Organization and Employment of Aerospace Power AFDD-2 was published in 1998 as an "entirely new document in our hierarchy of doctrine publications."1 59 F 
160
AFDD-2 makes it clear that the JFACC's Director of Operations and Plans (A-3/5) is responsible for coordinating "operational issues with the JFC and component staffs," such as "ATO and Airspace Control Order dissemination requirements."1 6 5F 166 Furthermore, the JFACC's Director of Communications and Information (A-6) is responsible for "establishing the theater communications and automated systems architecture to support operational and command requirement."1 66 F 167 The A-6's responsibilities, however, are not exclusive to servicing the JFACC and JAOC; he is also responsible to "extend required communications and information connectivity to subordinate U.S. Air Force units (to include reach back units) and other components."1 67 F 
168
The third doctrinal research question-concerning whether doctrine adequately establishes the requirement to have alternate, contingency, or emergency ATO dissemination methods-is not addressed in AFDD-2. The only mention of alternate communication paths comes in a discussion on targeting the enemy in parallel operations.
"Although parallel operations have been conducted in the past, it usually took considerable time for the effects to be felt. In the meantime, the enemy was often able to 
166
167
168
establish alternate transportation and communication links, slowing or even negating the effects of those operations."1 68F
169
Doctrine writers, in the eight years between the end of the Persian Gulf War and the beginning of OAF, made remarkable progress in evolving air operations doctrine. Doctrine writers incorporated many lessons from the Persian Gulf War, including standardizing JFACC implementation considerations, describing roles and responsibilities for the JFACC staff, and establishing CTAPS as the joint standard for ATO dissemination. These lessons, encapsulated in doctrine, helped the services in OAF eliminate the interoperability challenges in disseminating the ATO through the primary method-CTAPS. However, even though months were spent on establishing alternate, contingency, and emergency methods of ATO dissemination during Operation Desert Shield, these specific methods did not find their way into doctrine. Nor did the requirement to establish such backup methods make it into doctrine. Therefore, in the final analysis, the collective body of doctrine available before OAF did not prepare the combined air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the CFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units. This lack of preparedness is 
Before OAF, Blue Flag maintained its operational level focus, conducting 3-4 flags per year.1 69F 170 Not surprisingly, based on the interoperability issues and the lack of familiarity with the JFACC and ATO process, joint participation after the Persian Gulf War increased significantly. At the same time, where Blue Flag had conducted at least one exercise for a NATO AOC per year, the NATO exercise fell off the schedule in the 1990s for two reasons. First, U.S. and NATO AOCs were able to find joint and coalition exercises in Europe to fulfill their training requirements. Second, at the same time, Air Combat Command (ACC) "decided that their focus would only be on stateside NAFs."
Additionally, coalition participation in stateside Blue Flags also diminished.
Throughout the 1990s, Blue Flags increasingly began to run from home station AOCs rather than exclusively at Hurlburt Field, FL, as had been the standard in the past. When Blue Flags were at Hurlburt, exercise controllers maintained a local exercise networkseparate from real-world U.S. networks-for all participants to operate on. However, when Blue Flags ran from a home station AOC, such a network did not exist, and the lack of U.S. system access by coalition personnel hindered and eventually eliminated, coalition participation.1 
70F 171
172
Transfer Protocol the ATO back to Hurlburt Field. In 1993/94, CTAPS was transitioned into the AOCs, and that was the system used for dissemination."1 72F 173 Additionally, while the notion of "an adversary getting into our systems and stealing the ATO or preventing its dissemination" was not something that AOCs were concerned about, at times, necessity dictated the use of alternate methods for ATO dissemination.1 73F 174 "If there was ever a glitch in CTAPS, we would go to a backup method of ATO dissemination (e-mail via SIPR or File Transfer Protocol, for example)."1 74 F 175   Thus, the operational level trained to ATO dissemination, but they did so unrealistically with a constructive tactical level. Therefore, since Blue Flag did not contribute to training NATO AOCs and did not train across the operational and tactical levels, it was not effective at preparing the combined air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the CFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units.
Following the Persian Gulf War, Red Flag did not change significantly. It was still focused on "Blue 4 and new mission commanders," and the missions flown during Red Flag remained the same, large scale conventional strike missions, but with an increased emphasis on operating in an environment with enemy EA.1 75 F 176 With the increase 
173
174
175
176
76 F 177
Fundamentally, the training conducted at Blue Flag and Red Flag in the 1990s was unaffected by the Persian Gulf War. Indeed, exercise planners made evolutionary changes throughout this period, but fundamentally Blue flag remained focused at the operational level, and Red Flag remained focused at the tactical level. Furthermore, the minimal training that bridged the gap between the operational level and tactical level was simulated. While Blue Flag-following the location shift to home station AOCs-trained to disseminate the ATO using CTAPS and a few alternate methods, the ATO production team disseminated it to one exercise controller rather than the more realistic numerous tactical squadrons. Considering the time required and potential problems that might arise with numerous tactical squadrons, this distinction is significant. This is not to say that Blue Flag and Red Flag failed to train to a requirement. As seen in the doctrine subsection, no such requirement existed. Rather, it is to say that during this time, both exercises were appropriately focused at their respective levels of war, and a gap existed between the two. Clearly, we have learned a great many lessons in the years since, even as recently as Desert Storm. Things that were classic problems in that time, the air tasking order, for example, which could not be easily transported or transmitted between services and platforms, were not even an issue in this campaign within the U.S. network [emphasis added]. We had the ability to get that, not just to Navy platforms afloat, but to headquarters throughout the region and also into Task Force Hawk in Albania as well.1 77F
178
OAF had one of the most unique, and inefficient, command and control structures seen to date. Each of the following command and control challenges-chain of command, two daily ATOs, and information-sharing-contributed to the challenges NATO faced in disseminating the ATO to tactical units.1 78F
179
During the Persian Gulf War, the chain of command for air operations ran from the National Command Authorities to the CINC, General Schwarzkopf, to his JFACC, Lt Gen Horner; and finally to the tactical forces made available to the JFACC. This was not the case during Allied Force; in fact, General Short considered it "about as murky a command relationship as you could possibly get."1 79F
180
6
183
Before OAF, senior leaders envisaged assets such as the F-117, B-2, and Tomahawk Cruise missiles playing a vital role in the operation. Due to the sensitive nature of these assets, senior leaders wanted to keep them under U.S.-only control and to create a security "firewall against leaks from any allies who might compromise those operations."1 
83 F 184
Several NATO members-including Greece, France and Italy-retain close historical and cultural ties to Serbia, the main state in Yugoslavia. Greece is so cozy with Russia, another close partner to Belgrade, that some new NATO members who have histories of conflict with Moscow have openly lamented having to share security information with the government in Athens.
At NATO headquarters in Brussels, Belgium, last October, U.S. intelligence agents caught a French military officer named Pierre Henri Bunel passing top secret details of NATO airstrike plans against Yugoslavia to Jovan Milanovic, head of the Yugoslav diplomatic mission at the European Union. Bunel, facing espionage charges in France, has admitted to handing off the information.1 84F 185 Therefore, senior leaders decided to create a separate ATO for U.S.-only operations. This U.S.-only ATO included any "sorties to be flown by B-2 bombers and F-117 fighters, support elements for all strike packages, and U.S. Tomahawk and CALCM cruise missiles to strike selected targets."1 
85 F 186
184
185 Bob Deans, "Pentagon Mum about Air Mission," European Stars and Stripes,  April 27, 1999, 1, 4.   186 John E. Peters, Stuart Johnson, Nora Benshahel, Timothy Liston, and Traci  Williams, European Contributions to Operation Allied Force: Implications for  Transatlantic Cooperation (Santa Monica: RAND, 2001), 39.
187 Lt Gen Short recalled after OAF that the absence of U.S.-only missions on the NATO ATO often led to NATO Allied air chiefs questioning what the assets were doing, and his response would be "trust me." Additionally, Lt Gen Short said that the lack of knowledge of U.S.-only operations often led to confusion when "suddenly things showed up [on NATO Airborne Warning and Control System radar] where they didn't expect the "parallel but separate mechanisms for mission planning and air tasking" that the dual-ATO construct required.1 87F 188 Both ATOs were produced and disseminated from the CAOC in Vincenza, Italy, operated by NATO's 5th Allied Tactical Air Force (ATAF). The 5 ATAF performed the command and control functions for NATO and U.S.-only operations, although separate ATO production teams planned each operation.1 88 F 189 The process each ATO production team used was very similar to the process described in JP 3-56.1, Command and Control of Joint Air Operations. Figure 
7
8
188
189
Challenges with information-sharing affected virtually every step in the ATO process. Planners on the parallel teams faced "institutional roadblocks and delays" with freely exchanging classified information from any allied nation to NATO.1 
90 F 191
There are a several other command and control challenges left unmentioned in this subsection, such as the lack of a coherent strategy, the target nomination and approval process, the use of video teleconferencing, the initial dearth of CAOC staff members, and the eventual superfluity of CAOC staff members. A planner in the strategy cell at CAOC remarked that "operational effectiveness in Allied Force was probably achieved 'in spite of the . . . command structures and processes rather than as a direct result of them.'"1 9 3F 194 Indeed, one could write a separate thesis on the multiple command and control challenges during OAF; however, the three aforementioned command and control challenges-the chain of command, two daily ATOs, and information sharingdirectly contributed to the ATO dissemination challenges faced by NATO during OAF.
This subsection will examine the ATO production system, the eventual method of dissemination for the NATO ATO, and security implications for that method.
As discussed in the previous subsection, during OAF, there were two daily ATOs: the U.S.-only ATO and the NATO ATO. The associated parallel planning processes both used the Contingency Theater Air Planning System (CTAPS)-a force-level planning system that is the U.S. joint standard-for ATO production.1 94F 
195
97 F 198 195
196 Hura,
Interoperability,
46. 197 Ibid. 198
For the U.S.-only ATO, CTAPS was also used for ATO dissemination, enabling the ATO to be disseminated "not just to Navy platforms afloat, but to headquarters throughout the region and also into Task Force Hawk in Albania as well."1 98 F 199 NATO, however, could not use CTAPS to disseminate the ATO to European NATO allies.1 99F
200
The ATO was transferred via a 3.5-inch diskette from CTAPS to LOCE . . . problems [existed] due to the low bandwidth of the LOCE system, and it took some time for dissemination to the point that it sometimes failed. In addition, MISREPS were also sent using LOCE as well as Recce pictures, which took quite a while.2 
00 F 201
In the opening weeks of OAF, senior NATO officials suspected that some allies had leaked air tasking information to Yugoslav officials. While not expanding on details or implicating a particular ally, General Clark "said the security breach was 'as clear as the nose on your' face."2 03 F 204 In one suspected case of the air tasking order information ending up in enemy hands, "two empty Interior Ministry buildings in Belgrade were struck by cruise missiles at the end of the third week. Only 24 hours previously, those buildings had been full of employees, suggesting that the enemy knew the attack was coming and when."2 04 F 
205
207
209
210
211
While the physical method of ATO dissemination worked, albeit with speed and security problems, a backup digital ATO dissemination method was needed. In the first few months of the air campaign, communications were at their worst. One senior official, speaking as an anonymous source due to General Clark's gag order, stated in mid-April that "the ability to cooperate in a collation command-and-control net is also missing. communications and intelligence teams "worked through a myriad of restrictive SIPRNet policies to develop an acceptable 'community of interest network' to address [the ATO dissemination] issue. Essentially, this was a pipe within a pipe . . . "2 
13 F 214
213
14 F 215
In the end, while several OAF missions were canceled-due to weather, maintenance, or the perceived risk of causing collateral damage-there is no evidence indicating that any sortie was canceled due to a tactical unit not receiving the ATO, despite several ATO dissemination challenges.2 
16 F 217
9
The successful, 78-day air campaign generated numerous lessons, some of which were repeated from the Persian Gulf War nearly a decade in the past. The lessons of significance to this study are centered around ATO dissemination challenges within NATO. Specifically, this chapter answered the four SRQs by assessing the doctrine and training prior to OAF, examining the ATO challenges faced by NATO, and by analyzing the methods NATO used to prevent any lost sorties. This section briefly presents the conclusions from each SRQ and makes a final assessment of the primary research question for the OAF case.
Collectively, authors made noteworthy progress in evolving air operations doctrine following the Persian Gulf War. The most noteworthy change came in joint doctrine, where the joint staff J-6 named CTAPS as the joint standard for ATO production and dissemination. This change was a significant contributing factor in eliminating the interoperability issues with ATO dissemination experienced in the Persian Gulf War. Doctrine, however, failed to establish the requirement-which was made clear in the Persian Gulf War-for the joint air operations team to have an ATO dissemination PACE plan. Therefore, in the final analysis, the collective body of doctrine available before OAF did not prepare the combined air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the CFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units.
Exclusively considering the available information on training prior to OAF-Blue Flag and Red Flag-training was fundamentally unchanged following the Persian Gulf War and each of the exercises remained focused on their respective level of war, leaving a training gap between the two. During Blue Flags, while the ATO production team in the AOC now trained to ATO dissemination, they did not disseminate the ATO to actual tactical units, only to an exercise planner. Additionally, coalition participation in Blue Flag ended in the 1990s, leaving training for NATO AOCs to resident exercises available in Europe. Therefore, Red Flag and Blue Flag did not prepare the combined air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the CFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units.
Inadequate pre-conflict doctrine and training are evidenced by NATO's challenges with ATO dissemination during OAF. U.S. forces successfully utilized CTAPS for ATO production and dissemination; however, no available evidence exists indicating an ATO dissemination PACE plan was developed or used. European NATO forces only went into the conflict with a primary plan-LOCE-but the limited bandwidth of LOCE made this method ineffectual, forcing the hand-delivered method of dissemination until the SIPRNet Community of Interest Network was created. In the end, neither the U.S. nor NATO went into OAF with an established, published ATO dissemination PACE plan, yet two effective PACE plans emerged, nonetheless.
In conclusion, while the degree of success is a topic of debate to this day, OAF was a successful air campaign that ended with Miloevi accepting NATO's terms of peace. There were no sorties lost due to a tactical unit not receiving the ATO; however, This chapter answers the first and second SRQs by examining current doctrine and training as it relates to the JFACC's responsibility to task capabilities and forces made available to him using centralized control. Additionally, this chapter highlights the dissemination, and emphasizing the importance of cybersecurity to digital information exchange.
JP 3-30 significantly progresses the discussion on the third doctrinal research question-concerning whether doctrine establishes the requirement to have alternate, contingency, or emergency ATO dissemination methods. Initially introduced in 2014, JP 3-30 recognizes the degree of which centralized control relies on communications as well as their vulnerability in degraded environments:
Centralized control and decentralized execution requires a robust communications architecture. Planning should anticipate the need for communications in degraded environments at all levels and phases of operations and include considerations for alternate routing, redundant systems, use of other systems, protocols, and message standards. Impaired/inadequate information exchange capability should be anticipated and incorporated into risk management considerations during air operations planning.2 
26 F 227
JFC gives the JFACC the responsibility to task joint air operations, which he executes through his JAOC, CPD, and ATO production team.
The second doctrinal research question-concerning whether a primary ATO dissemination method and associated communications requirements are adequately addressed in doctrine-is not addressed in Annex 3-30. There is no mention of ATO dissemination, and the only mention of communications, as it could relate to ATO dissemination, comes in discussing the need for the AOC to "have secure and redundant communications with higher and lateral headquarters, as well as subordinate units."2 31F 
232
The third doctrinal research question-concerning whether doctrine establishes the requirement to have alternate, contingency, or emergency ATO dissemination methods-is substantively and boldly addressed in Annex 3-30, but not in the way one might expect. In two boxouts-"Control of Airpower in Contested Environments" and a quote from General Charles Q. Brown, Jr. Commander, Pacific Air Forces (PACAF)-Annex 3-30 describes a method to maintain air operations momentum even when tactical units are disconnected from the JAOC, due to actions taken by an adversary.2 3 2F 233 In this method, a standing integrated tasking order (ITO) is disseminated-presumably before the start of the conflict-to local, forward based subordinate commanders.2 33 F 234 In conjunction with the standing ITO, the JFACC's AOD gives "CBA"-procedures for predetermining delegation of authority in anticipation of degraded or lost communications-and the JFACC's intent.2 34F 235 Each of these empowers subordinate commanders at the "lowest capable and competent level" to maintain pressure on the enemy.2 35 F 236 Finally, while subordinate commanders are maintaining pressure on the enemy, subordinate units and the JAOC are independently "working toward moments of clear C2."2 36F 237 While Annex 3-30 does not explicitly state this much, this method could be applied as the "E"-the emergency method-of the ATO dissemination PACE plan.
Except, instead of the traditional methodology for executing a PACE plan where each step is attempted sequentially, the ATO dissemination team would disseminate this standing order before the start of hostilities; to be executed should the AOC be disconnected. Therefore, while Annex 3-30 does not articulate an entire PACE plan for dissemination, it describes a revolutionary method for control of joint air operations. This 233 LeMay Center for Doctrine, Annex 3-30, 3. 
234
235
236
237
The third doctrinal research question-concerning whether doctrine establishes the requirement to have alternate, contingency, or emergency ATO dissemination methods-is answered within both publications. First, the requirement is established in AFI 13-1 AOCV3 by giving the AOC commander the responsibility to "establish contingency plans and procedures for elements of the TACS that may be disabled or forced into performing autonomous operations."2 43 F 
244
243
244
245
246 Ibid., 2-14.
Architecture Planning Cell within the CPD.2 46F 247 While the specifics of this PACE plan are classified, the 3-3.AOC gives planners certain options to disseminate the ATO, see  
Since OAF, the joint air operations team has enjoyed a nearly two-decade-long low-intensity conflict to operationally test, evaluate, and continually refine C2 processes.
Most changes in doctrine during this period have reflected these evolutionary changes, although the recent emphasis on CDO environments against a near-peer adversary have 
247
Therefore, in the final analysis, the collective body of current doctrine has adequately prepared the joint air operations team to mitigate the effects of operationallevel communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units. This is not to say that there is not significant room for improvement. Indeed, there are several topics not addressed in current unclassified doctrine, including what circumstances each ATO dissemination option should be used or any considerations on how to implement the method to control airpower in contested environments, as described in Annex 3-30. Rather, this conclusion on current doctrine merely indicates that all three doctrinal research questions are addressed; however, doctrine is not the final say in preparedness. It is up to commanders to take the abundant considerations made available in doctrine and apply them to training their force. Without training to doctrine, one cannot articulate inadequacies in doctrine nor recommend changes.
Training and exercises programs should be structured to ensure Air Force commanders are equipped with the skills and knowledge to accomplish assigned or implied tasks in a degraded or contested environment.
-LeMay Center for Doctrine, Air Force Doctrine Annex 3-30
The Air Force, joint community, and coalition partners all have significant training requirements and separate training and exercise programs associated with them.
To scope this subsection and be consistent with the types of training reviewed in the previous chapters, this subsection will present evidence from Exercise Blue Flag, Exercise Red Flag, tactical unit training, and individual training in answering the second SRQ. Invariably, in reading the conclusions of this subsection, some readers will find the breadth of training exercises presented lacking and judge the conclusions not applicable to a certain exercise not assessed in this subsection. Indeed, the author has this same concern; however, the author cannot assess an exercise he has no knowledge of due to classification or infancy of the exercise. Blue Flag and Red Flag were chosen due to their wide-reaching training audiences-AF, joint, and coalition-and because each of them was active for the entirety of the period of relevance to this chapter, post-OAF. Thus, the author uses Blue Flag and Red Flag as representative exercises for the myriad training and exercise programs not assessed in this subsection. Finally, due to the recency of this case study, this subsection presents information obtained exclusively from interviews with individuals that have unique, expert knowledge that applies to this subsection.
In the two decades since OAF, the purpose of Blue Flag has remained constant. 249 Ibid.
250 The AOCs, for example, are so undermanned that "no AOC anywhere in the world can go to war without augmentation," so when the time comes for a Blue On the ATO process, the only CDO challenges injected into the training scenario is on "systems within the AOC that personnel use to create the ATO. We will inject some cyber activity into a specific set of workstations, forcing the use of backup TTPs. Then, after they show that they can work through the cyber problem, we give the primary systems back to them."2 
56 F 257
Aside from the two ATO dissemination methods not typically trained to during Blue Flag, Annex 3-30's method for control of airpower in contested environments (see page 109) is also not trained to. Although Blue Flag planners recognize the importance of training to this method, Mr. Drain states that Blue Flag is not the appropriate venue.2 58F 259
The use of this method is predicated on the AOC's disconnection from tactical units, and while they "have short-term outages where the AOC loses connectivity" they do not induce a "long-term loss of connectivity where the tactical units must pick up the ball and execute based on 'mission orders' or 'commander's intent.'"2 59 F 
260
257
Additionally, on an individual level, the person in a tactical unit that influences the planning interaction between the tactical and operational levels during deployed operations is the MPC chief. While deployed, the MPC chief is responsible for establishing mission planning procedures, starting with the receipt of the ATO. In the minimal training that MPC chiefs receive, they get a basic understanding of primary methods to receive the ATO; however, MPC chiefs do not receive training on alternate methods of receipt. One tactical aviator with firsthand knowledge of deployed operations stated that "while I was serving as the operations supervisor, if the MPC chief did not see the ATO posted at the normal times, he would approach me with concern that he would not get the ATO in time to complete his duties. He was only trained to get the draft from our liaison in the CAOC and the final ATO from the CAOC portal."2 71 F
272
Training over the last two decades has not focused on the seam between the operational level and the tactical level of war. Each organization, based on their assigned missions, focuses their training on building the requisite skill sets to accomplish those missions. As a representative operational-level training exercise, participants in Blue Flag train to the entirety of the operational level of war. From initiation of the Joint Planning Process for Air, through the joint air tasking cycle, and down to ATO production, planning is conducted entirely within the AOC. Aside from tactical unit liaison input, ATO dissemination is the first step in which the operational level and tactical level meet.
At Blue Flag, the seam is connected by the ATO production team disseminating the ATO to Blue Flag AWSIM operators, playing the role of a tactical unit. Thus, while the ATO production team gains valuable, yet unrealistic, training and experience using various methods on their ATO dissemination PACE plan, the tactical side of this step receives no training.
As a representative tactical-level training exercise-from ATO receipt, through tactical mission planning, execution, and debrief-participants in Red Flag train to the entirety of the tactical level of war. The operational and tactical level seam, however, is not connected at Red Flag. While the ATO initiates tactical mission planning, units are given the ATO by exercise planners. Thus, tactical units gain no training or experience retrieving the ATO using any method on the AOC's ATO dissemination PACE plan. ACE. And its really to be agile to not disperse to some airfield, but to disperse across the region in order to make it more complicated for our adversary.2 
78F 279
We must be prepared to execute in a degraded C2 environment where clearly delineated and forward thinking commander's intent will be a requirement. It is imperative senior leaders provide our commanders with CBA delegated to the lowest capable and competent level, and empower command by negation to accept the appropriate level of risk, all while working toward moments of clear C2.2 79F 280 Thus, in the moments of clear C2, the JFACC could still fulfill his JFC-given responsibility to task capabilities and forces made available to him through centralized control in the form of the AOC and the ATO.
Although, in the likely event where forces operate in a degraded C2 environment, the JFACC needs the ability to execute the same JFC-given responsibility to task capabilities and forces made available to him through centralized control in the form of commander's intent, MTO, and CBAs. While General Brown describes considerations from the PACAF perspective, other Air Force Major Commands (MAJCOM)-USAFE and ACC-have similar, yet different, ACE concepts. While each concept might solve the problem in a slightly different way-due to different operating environments-they all aim to solve the same problem of mitigating an adversary's ability to contest all domains and, if required, operate within a contested environment.2 
80 F 281
281
282
283
As wings identify issues such as these, ACC-as the force provider-is working to help solve their OT&E challenges. On training, General Holmes states that "in ACC our job is to help [PACAF and USAFE] distill [ACE] down to what we'd call the mission essential tasks, so we can train our teams that'll be ready to go to either place."2 83 F 284 Similarly, on organization, General Holmes states that "over the last 15 years, we've paired down a lot of things to focus on efficiency . . . now that we're going to places we haven't been
[recently], are we organized right at home to support operations downrange, or are we overdoing the efficiency at home station at the expense of effectiveness downrange?"2 84F
285
In conclusion, the Department of Defense and the United States Air Force recognize that future adversaries will contest all domains along with the ability to communicate within and between each domain. Additionally, to increase survivability and give the adversary a more complicated problem, the Air Force intends to disperse tactical units in their ACE concept. The combination of these two ideas-disrupted communications and dispersed tactical units-means that the JFACC will not be able to centrally control forces, as has been done since the Persian Gulf War, until the joint air operations team regains clear C2. Until that point, the JFACC will sacrifice some degree of centralized control for more decentralized execution, enabling subordinate units-based on commander's intent, MTOs, and CBAs-to operate within a contested environment while disconnected from the JAOC.
MAJCOMs and wings alike have their own concepts that have varying degrees of similarity; nonetheless, for a concept that is in the experimentation phase, such seemingly disparate efforts prevent groupthink and foster innovation. Therefore, while many ongoing efforts, mostly classified, are underway, much work and many challenges remain before the joint air operations team is properly organized, trained, and equipped to effectively operate the ACE concept as part of the joint force.
In 1991, as the Persian Gulf War wrapped up, RAND published a monograph titled "Command and Control of Joint Air Operations: Some Lessons Learned (LL) from Four Case Studies of an Enduring Issue." In this monograph, the authors come to several conclusions, one of which is that "Communications are the Achilles' heel of any joint operation, but particularly a joint air operation. No joint commander should ever be satisfied with his communications plan or the training of his forces in using it."2 85F 286 The same can be said about the current joint air operations team. This chapter answered secondary questions one and two by assessing present-day doctrine and training as it relates to centralized control and the JFACC's responsibility to task capabilities and forces made available to him. This section briefly presents the conclusions from each subsection.
Training over the last two decades has evolved to focus on new threats, new operating environments, and to incorporate modern technology. Despite these advances in training, the joint air operations team still does not effectively train to the seam between the operational and tactical levels of war. The ATO production team, during Blue Flag, trains to the various methods of ATO dissemination that are likely on their PACE plan. However, this training is unrealistic as they do not train to the fog and friction of war by disseminating to actual tactical units and their unique communication challenges. On the tactical side of the seam, units do not practice or train to alternate forms of ATO receipt, and no formal training exists for MPC chiefs on the subject.
Additionally, aside from units selected to participate in experiments with the Air Force's ACE concept, neither the operational level nor tactical level train to the method for control of joint air operations in contested environments, as described in Annex 3-30.
Therefore, considering the operational-level training conducted at Blue Flag and the tactical-level training conducted at Red Flag and home station, current training does not adequately prepare the joint air operations team to mitigate the effects of operationallevel communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units.
In conclusion, current commanders should not be satisfied with their communications plan or the training of their forces in using it. While the communications plan, as described in doctrine, contributes to the joint air operations preparedness, there is still room to improve. Additionally, while the operational level trains to ATO dissemination, the tactical level does not; and neither train to the control of joint air operations in a contested environment where the JAOC is disconnected from tactical units. Therefore, the current joint air operations team is not adequately prepared to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units. more than seven methods for ATO dissemination. Therefore, ATO dissemination during the Persian Gulf War was successful due to problem-solving and innovation.
Similarly, interoperability issues plagued ATO dissemination eight years later in OAF. Although, with CTAPS established as the joint standard for ATO production and dissemination, the Navy was fully interoperable; the European NATO allies, however, were not. Even though neither doctrine nor training fully applied the lessons from the Persian Gulf War, the NATO air campaign did not lose a single sortie due to a tactical unit not receiving the ATO from the CAOC in Vincenza, Italy. Initially, after the limited bandwidth of LOCE was overwhelmed, the CAOC resorted to delivering the ATO by hand to the European NATO allies. Due to the innovative solutions and problem-solving ability to work through numerous security policy challenges, the USAFE communications and intelligence teams enabled the CAOC to disseminate the ATO to European NATO allies using a community of interest network within SIPR. Therefore, ATO dissemination during OAF was successful due to problem-solving and innovation.
In both cases, the U.S. and NATO allies were able to solve their interoperability issues with impunity from the enemy. Saddam Hussein either had no capability to disrupt the United States' fragile operational-level communications network or chose not to act.2 86 F 287 Had he jammed the highly susceptible UHF satellite communications, Navy TACC liaisons would not have been able to pass along ATO information in advance of the S-3 Viking courier flight scheduled to arrive a mere three hours before ATO execution. Likewise, if Slobodan Miloevi attempted to disrupt NATO's operational-level communications, he was ineffectual in doing so. He did, however, take advantage of the NATO interoperability challenges by exploiting their unsecured information.
Looking forward to 2020, the "long-term strategic competitors" outlined in the 2018 NDS, China and Russia, each have the capability to degrade, disrupt, or deny U.S. The PLA [People's Liberation Army] considers electronic warfare (EW) an integral component of modern warfare. Its EW strategy emphasizes suppressing, degrading, disrupting, or deceiving enemy electronic equipment. Potential EW victims include adversary systems operating in radio, radar, microwave, infrared, and optical frequency ranges, as well as adversary computer and information systems . . . PLA EW units routinely train to conduct jamming and anti-jamming operations against multiple communication and radar systems or GPS satellite systems in force-on-force exercises.2 
87 F 288
In a future conflict with China or Russia, these nations will leverage advanced capabilities to degrade, disrupt, or deny U.S. operational-level communications. One of three scenarios will occur. In the first and most unlikely scenario, the enemy will be ineffectual in their attempts to degrade, disrupt, or deny U.S. operational-level communications; thus, the joint air operations process will continue as it has for the last three decades. In the second scenario, the enemy will be effective in degrading or disrupting operational-level communications, forcing an alternate or contingency method of ATO dissemination within the existing joint air operations process. Finally, in the third scenario, the enemy will be effective in denying operational-level communications, cutting off the JAOC from tactical units, and forcing the joint air operations team to operate based on commander's intent, MTO, and CBA.
The highly refined joint air operations process is well suited for scenario one, as it is the scenario the U.S. has operated within since the Persian Gulf War. Most ongoing efforts within the Air Force address scenario three, while there is still no viable solution for scenario two. This chapter addresses the challenges and recommendations for scenario two first.
The key factor in mitigating the degraded and disrupted operational-level communications in scenario two is an ATO dissemination PACE plan. In assessing the doctrine from the present-day case, the JAOC likely has an ATO dissemination PACE plan. The word likely is used because while joint and Air Force operational doctrine speaks of anticipating "the need for communications in a degraded environment," and that plans should include considerations for "alternate routing" and "redundant systems," it does not explicitly establish an ATO dissemination PACE plan as a requirement.
Likewise, Air Force tactical doctrine lists "ATO dissemination options" but does not prioritize one over the other and does not explicitly discuss an ATO dissemination PACE plan. Such details are likely, and appropriately, located in classified documents. Thus, while the author initially sought to assess the efficacy of the presumptive ATO dissemination PACE plan, due to classification, such an assessment cannot be made. Training on the PACE plan, however, can be assessed. In the analysis, the author determined that the operational level trains to several methods of ATO dissemination during Exercise Blue Flag; however, the training is not realistic for two reasons. First, the ATO production team disseminates the ATO to exercise controllers, not multiple tactical units. Second, while several ATO dissemination methods are utilized during Blue Flag, this is done for the sake of training rather than out of necessity, as Blue Flag typically does not disrupt dissemination with CDO injects. Additionally, the author determined that while tactical units are well adept at downloading the ATO from the JAOC portal or receiving it via secure e-mail, they are not aware of, nor trained to, "non-standard" ATO dissemination methods.2 91F 292 Therefore, the JAOC likely has an ATO dissemination PACE plan, but tactical units are not aware of it, and neither the operational level nor tactical level adequately trains to it. This conclusion drives four recommendations. 293 Ryan Allen, interview by author, February 13, 2020. The P-P-P-E plan stands for Primary-Primary-Primary-Emergency plan, emphasizing the fact that the alternate and contingency methods should not rely on the same communications architecture as the primary method. Once properly addressed in doctrine and, more importantly, properly trained to at the operational and tactical levels, the joint air operations team will be well prepared when faced with Scenario 2-operational-level communications degradation or disruption. If, however, the enemy is successful at operational-level communications denial-effectively cutting off the JAOC from tactical units-the joint air operations team faces a different challenge altogether.
The Air Force currently has no solution for scenario three-operational-level communications denial resulting in a JAOC disconnected from tactical units. Fortunately, the problem has been identified, and the ACE concept-currently in the experimentation phase-is designed to solve the problem. It is not the intent of this study to assess the efficacy of ACE; certainly, any conclusions drawn from this ongoing effort would prove premature. Rather, through the analysis of each of the three cases, the logical conclusion of this study supports the need for a concept such as ACE: the joint air operations team in it, and were far away from anyone who might have explained it."2 94 F 295 Thus, the paradigm shift from service-separated route packages to the JFACC and ATO demonstrates that revolutionary concepts that will affect joint and coalition partners should include adequate joint and coalition participation during concept development.
Applying this conclusion to today, the Air Force is developing the ACE concept, which utilizes commander's intent, MTO, and CBA to fulfill the JFACC's responsibility to task capabilities and forces made available to him. As the concept of operation and associated TTPs have not been released, no JAOC or tactical unit from any serviceaside from individuals participating in ACE experimentation-is familiar with or trained to execute such methodology for joint air operations. The command and control of joint air operations portion of the ACE concept represents a paradigm shift that will affect all members of the joint air operations team. Thus, this study recommends that once the ACE concept moves beyond the experimentation phase, further planning should include joint participation, future exercises should include joint involvement, and ultimately the concept should be codified in JP 3-30.
Finally, one conclusion underpins scenarios two and three, the joint air operations team does not adequately train to bridge the gap between the operational and tactical levels of war. As discussed in both scenarios, some form of centralized control connects the operational level and tactical levels. In scenario 2, the ATO, by way of the ATO dissemination PACE plan, connects the two levels of war. In scenario 3, commander's intent, MTO, and CBA connect the two levels of war. Neither scenario, however, is not through doctrine or training, have the joint air operations teams mitigated ATO dissemination challenges.
The problem-solving and innovation that the U.S. and NATO air operations teams used during the Persian Gulf War and OAF will not be sufficient in the future. With an enemy capable of degrading, disrupting, or denying U.S. operational-level communications, an ATO dissemination PACE plan is essential, and training to such a plan is a necessity. The author's initial hypothesis was that the joint air operations team did not have such a plan. Although classification has hindered a definitive conclusion, a thorough study of doctrine has proven this hypothesis likely incorrect. The joint air operations team likely has an ATO dissemination plan; however, that plan is not realistically trained to by the operational level. Furthermore, the tactical level is neither aware of this plan, nor do they train to it. Thus, the joint air operations team must regularly and realistically train to execute the ATO dissemination PACE plan to connect the seam between the operational and tactical levels of war. Failure to do so will risk isolating tactical units and force them to conduct decentralized execution to a scale that current Air Force doctrine has only recently introduced.
As a result of the U.S.' strategic refocus, multiple MAJCOMs and wings across the Air Force are focusing their efforts on developing the ACE concept. The command and control portion of this concept is revolutionary because, while the concept still utilizes centralized control-through commander's intent, MTO, and CBAdecentralized control is heavily relied upon when the JAOC is disconnected from tactical units. A significant lesson from the Persian Gulf War is that revolutionary concepts that affect the joint community must have adequate joint participation during concept development; otherwise, only the concept's service proponent will be prepared when the time comes. This was the case in the Persian Gulf War with the JFACC and ATO concept, and this will be the case with the ACE concept if the Air Force does not include adequate joint participation in concept design. As previously stated, problem-solving and innovation will not be enough.
With the interwar period that the U.S. is currently in, now is the time to reassess, test, promulgate, and regularly and realistically train to the ATO dissemination PACE plan across the operational and tactical levels of war. This will ensure the U.S. is postured and well prepared to adapt and respond to communications degradation and disruption in future, highly contested environments. Additionally, once the ACE concept leaves the experimentation phase, the concept must be incorporated into joint doctrine and regularly and realistically trained to by the joint air operations team. This will ensure that when faced with operational-level communications denial resulting in a disconnected JAOC, tactical units will be well prepared to maintain pressure and deliver overwhelming airpower to the enemy.
248  
248  
Office of the Secretary of Defense (SecDef), Summary of the
National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military's Competitive Edge (NDS) (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense, January 19,
Colin S. Gray, "The American Way of War," in Rethinking the Principles of War, by Anthony McIvor (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute, 2005), 29-30.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), Joint Publication (JP) 3-30, Joint Air Operations (Washington, DC: Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, July 25, 2019), II-3.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), Joint Publication (JP) 3-13, Information Operations (Washington, DC: Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, February 13, 2006), I-9.
CJCS, JP 3-30 (2019), II-3.
James A. Winnefeld and Dana J. Johnson, Command and Control of Joint Air Operations: Some Lessons Learned from Four Case Studies of an Enduring Issue (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1991), viii.
Ibid.   
Tactical Air Command, Tactical Air Command Manual (TACM) 2-1, Aerospace Doctrine: Tactical Air Operations (Langley AFB, VA: Tactical Air Command, April
15, 1978), Foreword.15  Ibid., i.16  Department of the Air Force, Air Force Manual (AFM) 2-1, Aerospace Doctrine: Tactical Air Operations--Counter Air, Close Air Support and Air Interdiction (Washington, DC: Department of the Air Force, May 2, 1969), 1-1; Tactical Air Command, TACM 2-1, 3-1.
Tactical Air Command, TACM 2-1, 3-5.
Ibid.,[3][4]
[5]
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), Joint Publication (JP) 3-01.2, Joint Doctrine for Theater Counterair Operations (Washington, DC: Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, April 1, 1986), I-1.
Ibid., 
Ibid.   
CJCS, JP 3-01.2, III-6.
Ibid.   
CJCS, 
CJCS, 
Horowitz et al., Unit Training in the Gulf War, 
Horowitz et al., Unit Training in the Gulf War, 
Ibid.   
Pokrant, Desert Shield at Sea, 69; Marvin Pokrant, Desert Storm at Sea: What the Navy Really Did (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1999), 273.
Cohen, Command and Control Report, 54.   
This time was not explicitly stated in any source; however, the author was able to come to this conclusion by correlating the time it took for the Navy to receive the entire ATO (12 hours) and the time they typically received the ATO from the paper tape method (0400L).
Cohen, Command and Control Report, 223.  Additionally, see pages 8-17 for a detailed description of the planning process during Operation Desert Shield.
Ibid.,[8]
[9]
Di Rita, "Exocets, Air Traffic, & the Air Tasking Order," 62.    
Cohen, Command and Control Report, 56.   
White House Television (WHTV), "President Clinton's Address to the Nation on Kosovo (1999)," Clinton Digital Library, accessed March 30, 2020, https://clinton.presidentiallibraries.us/items/show/15847.
As OAF was a NATO air campaign, this chapter utilizes the term "combined" rather than "joint" unless directly quoting U.S. doctrine or speaking specifically about U.S.-only operations (combined air operations team, CFACC, CAOC, etc . . . ).
Department of the Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Document (AFDD) 2, Organization and Employment of Aerospace Power (Washington, DC: Department of the Air Force, September 28, 1998), Foreword.
Ibid.   
Department of the Air Force, AFDD-2, 6.
Drain interview.   
Reese and Imonti interview.   
U.S. Congress, House, Hearing before the Armed Services Committee: U.S.Policy and NATO Military Operations in Kosovo, 106th Cong., 1st sess. (October 21,  1999), 410.
Lambeth, NATO's AirWar for Kosovo,[207][208][209][210][211][212][213][214][215][216][217][218] 
Ibid., 207.   
It is interesting to note that since the operation fell within the Southern region, the control of the operation should have fallen to Admiral Ellis as the CINCSOUTH with the air effort controlled by the COMAIRSOUTH, General Short. Instead, General Clark assumed personal control of OAF and the air effort, effectively taking Admiral Ellis out of the chain of command. See Lambeth, NATO's Air War for Kosovo, 210.
Michael R. Gordon, "Allied Air Chief Stresses Hitting Belgrade Sites," New York Times, May 13, 1999, sec. International, accessed April 7, 2020, https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/library/world/europe/051399kosovonato.html.
 183  Lambeth, NATO's AirWar forKosovo, 210.   
The right column of Figure7depicts a Joint AOC, as compared to the Combined AOC on the left of the figure. Of note, all operations were run out of a single CAOC in Vincenza, Italy. No separate JAOC existed for OAF.
Lambeth, NATO's AirWar for Kosovo, 213.   
Woehrel and Kim, Kosovo and U.S. Policy,[410][411] 
Stoye interview.    
Ibid.
Peters et al., European Contributions to Operation Allied Force, 56.    
Ibid.,[56][57] 
U.S.Congress, House, Lieutenant General Marvin R. Esmond Testimony.    
Lambeth, NATO's AirWar for Kosovo, 37, 140.   
Lambeth, NATO's AirWar for Kosovo, 167.   
SecDef, NDS,
1.
CJCS, JP 3-30 (2019), i.
CJCS, JP 3-30 (2019), II-26.It is interesting to note that the word "should," emphasized in the quote above, changed from the word "must" in the 2014 JP 3-30, reducing the overall effectiveness of the passage. In the comment resolution matrix for the 2019 JP 3-30, USCYBERCOM suggested this change in order to "remove policy language."
CJCS, JP 3-30 (2019), 
LeMay Center for Doctrine, Annex 3-30, 65.
Department of the Air Force, AFTTP 3-3.AOC, Draft, 4-72 -4-74; Significant portions of the discussion on ATO dissemination using TBMCS is Unclassified//FOUO and thus, this study omits specific details.
Drain interview.    
Elizabeth Casey and Mary Coleman, e-mail interview by author, April 17,  2020.   
Drain interview.   
CJCS, JP 3-30 (2019), II-3.
Reese and Imonti interview.    
LeMay Center for Doctrine, Annex 3-30, 3.
Reese and Imonti interview.   
Ryan Leavitt, Scott VanOort, Eric Joachim, John Widmer, and John Conway,  e-mail interview by author, April 22, 2020.    
Leavitt et al., interview; Colonel Michael R. Drowley, interview by author,  April 22, 2020; Colonel Daniel P. Walls, interview by author, April 21, 2020.   
LeMay Center for Doctrine, Annex 3-30, 3.
Brown, "PACAF's Brown on China, Distributed Operations, Innovative Warfighting Concepts, Air Defense."
LeMay Center for Doctrine, Annex 3-30, 2.
Holmes, "USAF's Holmes on Expeditionary Operations, Readiness, Improving Cyber Capabilities, Future Fighter."
Ibid.   
Winnefeld and Johnson, Command and Control of Joint Air Operations, xi.   
"U.S. Navy Seeks to Bolster Communications Weak Link," Signal (August 1991): 69.
Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2019 (Washington, DC: Office of the Secretary of Defense, May 2, 2019), 64.
Ibid., 49.    
Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations (Washington, DC: Defense Intelligence Agency, 2017), 42.
SecDef, NDS, 4.   
Mayo Spooner Charles Charamut, Ken Crain, David Hetzler, Michael  Steinkraus, and Eric Sheldon, Operational C2 Bulletin (January-March 2020): 3.
Pokrant, Desert Shield at Sea, 70.   
(S) 
AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other
Similar to the Persian Gulf War, there are numerous lessons available from OAF.
The more contentious issues-such as whether airpower was decisive in getting Miloevi to accept the peace proposal-have been adequately addressed in literature.
However, lessons such as the ATO dissemination challenges with coalition partners received minimal attention-even less than after the Persian Gulf War. This chapter examines the doctrine and training conducted before OAF. Additionally, this chapter highlights ATO dissemination challenges and analyzes the methods to overcome them.
Finally, in answering the primary research question for the OAF case, this chapter assesses the combined air operations team's preparedness in mitigating the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the CFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units.1 45F 146 Doctrine Just as technology, world threats, and opportunities change, so must our doctrine. We, each of us, must be articulate, knowledgeable, and unapologetic advocates of aerospace power.
-General Michael E. Ryan, Air Force Chief of Staff, quoted in Department of the Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Document 2
Following the Persian Gulf War, joint and Air Force air operations doctrine experienced a momentous change. The doctrinal evolution that occurred before OAF manifested itself in two publications: JP 3-56.1, Command and Control for Joint Air Operations, and Air Force Doctrine Document (AFDD) 2, Organization and Employment of Aerospace Power. This subsection assesses these two publications against the three doctrinal research questions then uses the answers as evidence to answer the first SRQ for the OAF case.
JP 3-56.1, Command and Control for Joint Air Operations JP 3-56.1 was published in November of 1994, and while it does not share the same publication number or title, it is the successor to JP 3-01.2, Joint Doctrine for Theater Counterair Operations. JP 3-56.1 is the first publication the reader might recognize as a modern JP. This assessment is not exclusive to the document's appearance; as will be seen in Chapter 4, the content mostly aligns with current airpower theory and application. While not explicitly stated, this publication is heavily influenced by the lessons of the Persian Gulf War. The intent of the publication is to provide "fundamental principles and doctrine for the command and control (C2) of joint air operations throughout the range of military operations in order to ensure unity of effort for the benefit of the joint force as a whole."1 46 F 147 It is organized in four chapters: (1)   introduction;
(2) general considerations for command and control of joint air operations;
(3) planning for joint air operations; and (4) targeting and tasking for joint air operations.1 
47 F 148
147 CJCS, JP 3-56.1, I-1.
148 Ibid., v.
The discussion in AFDD-2 on the first doctrinal research question-concerning whom doctrine makes responsible for the command and control of joint air operationsis nearly identical to the JFACC discussion in JP 3-56. The second doctrinal research question-concerning whether a primary ATO dissemination method and associated communications requirements are adequately addressed in doctrine-is addressed as well, albeit differently than in JP 3-56.1. First, 162 AFDD-2 also describes the Commander, Air Force Forces (COMAFFOR). The COMAFFOR is similar to the AFCC discussed in AFM 2-1 and TACM 2-1. He "normally exercises OPCON over all assigned and attached U.S. Air Force forces" and "will have complete ADCON of all assigned . . . and . . . attached U.S. Air Force forces." When the COMAFFOR is designated the JFACC by the JFC, his responsibilities mirror that of the JFACC discussed later in this subsection. 
163
164
165
- Compared to the first two cases, the present-day case benefits from the availability of doctrine and sources familiar with current doctrine. Thus, in addition to the successor publications to JP 3-56.1 and AFDD-2, this subsection will assess Air Force
Instruction 13-1AOC Volume 3 (AFI 13-1 AOCV3), Operational Procedures-AOC and Air Force Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (AFTTP) 3-3.AOC, Operational Employment -AOC. This subsection assesses these four publications against the three doctrinal research questions, then uses the answers as evidence to assess the first SRQ. describes the process used by the AOC weapon system during major contingency operations.2 37 F 238 The current AFTTP 3-3.AOC was published in 2018, although the 3-3.AOC authors made the current draft available for review, which is the subject of this subsection's analysis. Since the 3-3.AOC "expands on AFI 13-1 AOC, Volume 3, Operational Procedures-AOC," the answers to the three doctrinal research questions in each publication are nearly identical. Thus, this subsection will use both publications as evidence but will primarily refer to the 3-3.AOC due to the level of detail provided in the AFTTP.
The discussion in both publications on the first doctrinal research questionconcerning whom doctrine makes responsible for the command and control of joint air operations-focuses on the JAOC and the responsibilities given to it by the JFACC.
"Based on the tenet of centralized planning and control, and decentralized execution, the AOC enables the JFACC to exercise operational-level C2 of air and space forces," which 238 Department of the Air Force, Air Force Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (AFTTP) 3-3.AOC, Operational Employment-AOC, Draft (U//FOUO, Excerpts Unclassified) (Washington, DC: Department of the Air Force, Draft), 1-1; Department of the Air Force, Air Force Instruction (AFI) 13-1AOC Volume 3, Operational Procedures-Air Operations Center (AOC), Change 1 (Washington, DC: Department of the Air Force, May 18, 2012), 1. he charges the JAOC director "with effectively conducting joint air and space operations based on" the JFC's and his guidance.2 
38 F 239
The second doctrinal research question-concerning whether a primary ATO dissemination method and associated communications requirements are adequately addressed in doctrine-is addressed in both publications. First, since JP 3-30 establishes TBMCS as the joint standard for ATO production and dissemination, the 3-3.AOC gives extensive direction and guidance on disseminating the ATO using TBMCS.2 
41 F 242
239
240 Department of the Air Force, AFTTP 3-3.AOC, Draft, 4-8. 
241
50 F 251
By design, Blue Flag continues to focus at the operational level of war with links to the tactical level of war in the constructive environment-made possible through the Air Force's operational-level simulation of record, the Air Warfare Simulation (AWSIM). Some live-fly participation happens periodically, although Mr. Drain states that, "we try to avoid live-fly integration in BFs. Our simulation, AWSIM, is so flexible, we provide training at the AOC that is just as realistic as live play from a C2 perspective."2 52 F 
253
251
252
253
254
Consequently, should a situation arise during large scale combat operations where an alternate or contingency method of ATO dissemination is required, the ATO production team is trained for such an eventuality while the tactical level is not. Likewise, should a situation arise during large scale combat operations where no form of electronic ATO dissemination is viable, neither the operational level nor the tactical level is trained to execute an "air equivalent of mission command" to "maintain pressure on the enemy," as described in Annex 3-30.2 73F 274 Therefore, considering the operational-level training conducted at Blue Flag and the tactical level training conducted at Red Flag and home station, current training does not adequately prepare the joint air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units.
As a land-based force, we no longer can assume sanctuary in any of our bases. That we have to be agile. That we have to be expeditionary. That we have to accomplish the five key tasks of an Expeditionary Wing Commander: establish the base; defend the base; receive follow on forces; establish your command and control; and fight that base in an environment where you're likely to be taking losses, and you'll be cut off from higher headquarters based on network attacks [emphasis added]. So, our return to our expeditionary roots continues.
-General David Goldfein, Air Force Chief of Staff, 2019 Air, Space & Cyber Conference Introduction Following Secretary James Mattis' 2018 NDS, the Department of Defense has acknowledged that the future operating environments will be contested. "For decades, the execution. In other situations, less centralized control and more decentralized execution are required, such as operations in contested environments with limited communications.
In these situations, the JFACC exerts a minimal amount of centralized control by passing his overall intent and providing MTOs. He then conditionally delegates some of his authorities to subordinate commanders to "achieve effective span of control and to foster disciplined initiative and tactical flexibility,"-which is, by definition, "decentralized execution."2 76F 277 Therefore, as the primary research question involves the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units-be that via an ATO or via commander's intent, MTOs, and CBAs-the ongoing efforts contribute to the overall preparedness of the joint air operations team concerning the primary research question.
The Air Force's ACE concept was designed to present forces to Combatant Commanders that are organized, trained, and equipped to operate in the environments and against the adversaries outlined in the 2018 NDS.2 77F 278 General Charles Q. Brown, PACAF
Commander, states that:
The biggest thing I'm concerned about is missiles. Whether it be ballistic missiles, maneuvering missiles, cruise missiles. So, its really how do we defend ourselves against those, whether it be a system, or it is our tactics, and part of our tactic is 
277
278 General Michael Holmes, "USAF's Holmes on Expeditionary Operations, Readiness, Improving Cyber Capabilities, Future Fighter," interview by Vago Muradian, September 2019, accessed April 27, 2020, https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=flNcfNdnP7o; General Charles Q. Brown Jr., "PACAF's Brown on China, Distributed Operations, Innovative Warfighting Concepts, Air Defense," interview by Vago Muradian, September 2019, accessed April 27, 2020, https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=a22yE3cQj3M.
Over the past two decades, doctrine authors have continually refined the joint air operations process based on experiences and lessons from 19 years of Overseas Contingency Operations. Although these refinements have added clarity and specificity to communications considerations and ATO dissemination options, the process has fundamentally remained the same, until recently. In January 2020, with the update to Air Force Doctrine Annex 3-30, the Air Force introduced a revolutionary method for control of joint air operations in a contested environment. Thus, two methods of centralized control of joint air operations are present in current doctrine.
In the first and more traditional method, the JFACC fulfills his responsibility to task the capabilities and forces made available to him by relying heavily upon centralized control and the joint air tasking cycle. In this method, the JFACC's application of the tenet of CCDE favors centralized control.
In the second method, the JFACC fulfills the same responsibility by passing his commander's intent, a standing order, and conditionally delegating some of his authority to subordinate commanders to empower them to maintain pressure on the enemy while disconnected from the JAOC. In this method, the JFACC still utilizes centralized control, but his application of the tenet of CCDE favors decentralized execution. Despite the lack of specificity in doctrine for the second method, these two methods, taken together, give the joint air operations team options when facing a near-peer adversary. Therefore, in the final analysis, the current body of doctrine has adequately prepared the joint air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units.
This study has reviewed three cases, the Persian Gulf War, OAF, and the presentday case. In these three cases, this study has assessed doctrine and training to ascertain the joint air operations team's preparedness to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units. Additionally, in the two historical cases, this study has reviewed and assessed the actions taken to mitigate ATO dissemination challenges during the Persian Gulf War and OAF. Finally, in each case, this study has answered the primary research question: how prepared is (was) the joint air operations team to mitigate the effects of operational-level communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units? This chapter presents several final conclusions and recommendations based on the primary research question.
During the Persian Gulf War, the joint air operations team experienced significant interoperability challenges that plagued ATO dissemination throughout Desert Shield and the opening days of Desert Storm. Ultimately, no sorties were lost due to a tactical unit not receiving the ATO from the TACC, but not because doctrine or training prepared the team for such a situation. Air Force and Navy communications personnel worked diligently to solve the interoperability problems of four services and numerous coalition partners-each with their own interoperability challenges-and innovatively created requires a non-ATO option to maintain momentum while disconnected from the JAOC.
The resulting analysis from the present-day case study offers two reasons for such a conclusion. First-and already discussed in this chapter-China and Russia both possess the capability to deny U.S. operational-level communications. In this case, the only viable ATO dissemination option is hand-delivery through courier flights, as was accomplished in both the Persian Gulf War and OAF. Second, the other capabilities China and Russia bring-long-range precision fires, for example-drive the joint air operations team to disperse. No longer can multiple squadrons operate from long-standing, built-up bases.
Rather, subcomponents of tactical units (perhaps down to the flight echelon) will operate from many forward locations; thus, courier flights to every forward location are not feasible.
Since multiple MAJCOMs are already experimenting with the ACE concept and Annex 3-30 addresses preliminary considerations for air operations in a contested environment, one might find the previous conclusion painstakingly obvious. One critical word sets this conclusion apart: joint. The Persian Gulf War was the operational debut for two concepts that have formed the basis of our current joint air operations paradigm: the JFACC and the ATO. Before Desert Shield, however, the rest of the joint community was training and operating to the previous paradigm. Once Lt Gen Horner, in his role as USCinCCENT Forward, directed that all carrier air operations be placed on the ATO unless in "direct support of the carrier," the Navy was forcefully met with the new paradigm. Due to a lack of understanding and familiarity, the Navy officers were "illprepared to help [the] JFACC use naval aircraft as effectively as possible. They did not ignore [the] JFACC deliberately; they just did not know what it was, had not been trained trained to at any Air Force-level training exercise, including Blue Flag and Red Flag.
Thus, this study recommends that ACC direct realistic, operational to tactical level training that focuses on operating in a CDO environment across all echelons. This exercise would begin at the Joint Planning Process for Air and end at the tactical mission debrief. The depth and breadth of CDO would be scalable and tailorable to achieve particular training objectives. One iteration of the exercise might induce operational-level communications degradation, forcing the ATO production team to use an alternate electronic ATO dissemination method. Another iteration of the exercise might induce operational-level communications denial, forcing tactical units to operate off commander's intent, MTO, and CBA. Following the mission, the JFACC that authored these documents could conduct a face-to-face debrief with the subordinate commanders that executed his guidance. Such a debrief would be beneficial to the JFACC in writing future guidance and to subordinate commanders in seizing the initiative while considering risk.
Utilizing the lessons from the ATO dissemination challenges during the Persian Gulf War and OAF, combined with a thorough assessment of three decades of joint and Air Force air operations doctrine and training, this thesis has answered the primary research question. This thesis has shown that since the Persian Gulf War, the joint air operations team has not been adequately prepared to mitigate the effects of operationallevel communications degradation, disruption, or denial on the JFACC's ability to centrally control taskings to tactical units. Only through problem-solving and innovation,