# ID: ae0378c00da34b9db1772150b08b5298
# Title: American grand strategy and the future of US landpower
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
The U.S. Army has critical roles in two major U.S. objectives: (1) maintaining U.S. links to Eurasia and creating an overbalance of power; and, (2) securing the democratic transition in Eastern Europe and facilitating a similar transition in Eastern Asia.
To perform these functions, the Army will ultimately need on-shore facilities with access to Eastern Europe that are also close to East Asia.
If the U.S. Army is to use shaping strategies, where better than in the critical states of the West which will ultimately determine the fate of the world?
Ultimately Europe will have to become even larger.
This enlargement, however, will not be achieved through conquest.
One trend often preceding the spread of the EU is the spread of military cooperation through NATO.
Admission into NATO requires adherence to military standardization and compatible means of state governance.
Potential NATO member states begin the process of changing domestic institutions.
These domestic transitions frequently continue-states like Croatia, the newest addition to the EU, strive to meet the economic and political requirements of the EU.
Land bases provide security.
But, more importantly, these bases perpetuate a process of integration.
U.S. Army bases, however, except for the informal relationship with Poland based upon past requirements for missile defense, are not moving further east.
Aegis cruisers will patrol the Mediterranean, but new military bases are unlikely to be set up.
When expanding military influence, the United States must consider Russia-overt NATO expansion exacerbates tensions with Russia.
The Army must take a gradual and measured approach to the expansion of military cooperation.
Special Forces might test the political waters of military integration.
In a passive form of maneuver warfare, relatively less problematic states can be "exploited" by regionally aligned brigades.
U.S. Army units might collocate with host nation units, offsetting costs and furthering integration.
Incirlik, Turkey; Ramstein, Germany; and other bases (to say nothing of those in Kuwait) allow the United States to assist imperiled allies.
The careful introduction of military Landpower allows for the maintenance of an economic and political overbalance of power in the Euro-Mediterranean region.