# ID: ae1726218a7047bc8ea45a0e9ed8e02e
# Title: Striking a Balance: Sof's Role in Balancing Lethality With Other Instruments of National Power
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
Twenty years of constant conflict in multiple regions across the globe have created a problem for United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM): it has become over reliant on lethality to achieve its strategic goals. This overreliance on lethality and the lethality default culture that has taken hold in USSOCOM has begun to have second-and third-order effects as the United States moves into a renewed period of great power competition. While great power competition historically has included periods of conflict and peace, large-scale combat operations remain less prevalent. This research investigated how special operations forces (SOF) can find the optimal balance of lethality along with other elements of national power and determined that balancing lethality with other instruments of national power can help increase the effectiveness of SOF operations, while supporting a whole-of-government approach. This thesis also addressed how SOF engages with the civil domain and expands its engagements to elements outside of security across the physical domain. This study found that USSOCOM must balance how much lethality it uses in great power competition while holistically evaluating other instruments of national power, depending on the conditions prevalent in each region or country that SOF engages in. Ultimately, this research determined that lethality alone cannot achieve victory in most modern conflicts. continues to emphasize a return to lethal capabilities, asserting this will enable the U.S. to remain competitive in the competition phase. As the world grows increasingly complex, competitors of the United States continue to diversify the military capabilities available at their disposal to achieve their political objectives. Competitor approaches to competition include fusing civil and military capabilities, while leveraging multiple instruments of national power simultaneously, and growing their presence in the civil domain daily. This thesis researches how USSOCOM can enable the U.S. government to effectively compete in conflict and competition through an optimal balance of the elements of national power.
This research investigates five case studies and used the DIMEFIL (Diplomatic,   Information, Military, Economic, Financial, Law Enforcement)  xvi This research found that while no two cases are ever the same, themes emerged from each case study that may apply to future conflicts. DIMEFIL is a simple model that has its own limitations and should not be the singular strategic tool for USSOCOM to craft a campaign for competition or conflict. Additionally, any agency or force seeking to leverage multiple elements of national power should find an optimal balance of each element that can be adjusted for the conditions of the operating environment. To be competitive in great power competition, USSOCOM must become comfortable operating in, through and with the civil domain and respective elements. Military training which includes exercises will always be necessary, but as the U.S. competitors adapt their approaches over time, the lines between the civil and military domains will continue to become intertwined. As such, USSOCOM must now learn how to operate and leverage other elements of the operating environment beyond its traditional military and security force partners.
xvii
As they say, it takes a tribe to raise a human, and writing a thesis is no different. I want to acknowledge the many people in my life during this time who contributed to helping me complete this endeavor. First, my advisors, Shannon Houck and Sean Everton, who simply would ask "What do you need?" and make themselves readily available. The other extremely distinguished professors of the DA Department-Michael Freeman, Kalev Sepp, BJ Strawser, and Leo Blanken-all influenced my thinking in some way, shape or form. I would be remiss if I did not mention the brilliant John Arquilla: I am continually amazed at his depth of wisdom and his care for his students' works.
To my fellow SOFs who provided endless support in being a sounding board, keeping me on course, and giving me the motivation to finish this task until the end: Alex, Barb, Chris, Chris, Derek, Mike, Remy, Todd, Treat, and many others, thank you.
Many thanks to my family, who continually support me in what I do.
Finally, to those who have paid the ultimate sacrifice: May what we do daily honor you and may our efforts never be in vain.
Twenty years of constant conflict in multiple regions across the globe has created a problem for United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM): it has become over-reliant on lethality to achieve its strategic goals. This over-reliance on lethality, and the lethality default culture that has taken hold in USSOCOM has evolved into having second and third order effects as the United States moves into a renewed period of great power competition. Lethality enables USSOCOM to excel at responding to crises, and U.S.
Special Operations Forces (USSOF) is often the first U.S. element to engage emerging threats. However, looking at the future of great power competition and the current shift in global geopolitics where threats to American interests abroad continue to rise, the USSOCOM must adjust its investment strategy in its use of special operations forces (SOF)
if it wants to successfully address the many threats of the future. The future of conflict will require the USSOCOM to address the civil component in new ways where capabilities look more like a comprehensive social media marketing strategy rather than an antiquated leaflet drop.
This thesis seeks to answer two questions: How can SOF find parity in its investment strategy for great power competition across all instruments of national power? What role does the civil domain play in an investment strategy for great power competition? This thesis examines two hypotheses. First, no element of national power alone can create conditions for victory in a conflict or great power competition, and that the optimal balance between all elements must be found for SOF operations to be most effective. Second, leveraging the civil component of the operational environment helps SOF find the optimal balance of the instruments of national power, making SOF operations more effective.
Some research suggests elements of large-scale combat operations and lethality will be required in the future and that the probability of direct confrontation with near-peer threats such as China or Russia continues to increase. 
1
3
4
According to the Department of Defense, the total expenditure on the war in Afghanistan since October 2001 through September 2019 exceeded $778 billion. 
5
State Department and U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), only $44 billion was spent on development and reconstruction projects. The U.S. government (USG)
has the capability and the capacity to pursue a range of governmental and nongovernmental activities and policies, which is why it is imperative for strategic planners to consider other elements of influence besides just lethality and force. While the competing narratives around the future of conflict continue to create friction within the department, what is clear is that if the DOD fails to develop an investment strategy specifically for SOF for the future, the United States may lose several strategic advantages it has developed over decades.
Great power competition historically included periods of conflict and peace, with large scale combat operations remaining less prevalent. The civil domain of the contemporary operating environment presents the greatest opportunity for USSOCOM to position itself strategically, so it is poised to gain strategic advantages when opportunities are presented, and ready to tackle crises as they arise. One of those opportunities is USSOCOM's ability to develop resistance capabilities in partner nations across Europe and the Pacific. Often, resistance capabilities reside mostly within the capacity of the civil population or civil government, not the military. The civil domain also presents the greatest risks for USSOCOM, as adversaries of the U.S. currently operate extensively in this domain, blurring the line between civil and military capabilities. Bukkvoll discusses how
Russian SOF leveraged the civilian population in to impose more cost on the Ukrainian military Russia in the Donbas and Donetsk regions,. 
6
7
7 Department of Defense, Summary of Irregular Warfare Annex to the National Defense Strategy (Washington, D.C.: Department of Defense, 2020), https://media.defense.gov/2020/Oct/02/2002510472/-1/-1/0/Irregular-Warfare-Annex-to-the-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.PDF, 2. partners. 
8
Warfare in the future, whether in the space below armed conflict or above that threshold, could require not just military action, but a combination of other elements of national power, be it economic, political or other. USSOCOM is in a unique position, as its forces are currently deployed to 62 countries, coming off of a recent high of nearly 141 countries in 2019. 
9
A key model used throughout the research presented in this thesis is DIMEFIL, which model includes the diplomatic, information, military, economic, financial, and law enforcement elements of national power or statecraft. DIMEFIL will be used to evaluate how SOF integrates its operations into other elements of national power beyond the 8 Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Operations, Joint Publication 30 (Washington, D.C: Joint Chiefs of Staff,  2018), https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/jp3_0ch1.pdf JP 30 defines Unified Action as, "a comprehensive approach that focuses on coordination and cooperation of the U.S. military and other interorganizational participants toward common objectives, even if the interorganizational participants to refer collectively to USG departments and agencies (i.e., interagency partners); state, territorial, local, and tribal agencies; foreign military forces and government agencies (i.e., multinational partners); NGOs; and the private sector. Joint forces must be prepared to plan and execute operations with forces from partner nations (PNs) within the framework of an alliance or coalition under U.S. or other-than-US leadership. By law, the President retains command authority over U.S. forces. participants are not necessarily part of the same command or organization." x-xi. 9 Corey Dickstein, "Fewest number of special ops forces deployed since 2001," Stars and Stripes, March 25, 2021, https://www.stripes.com/news/us/fewest-number-of-special-ops-forces-deployed-since-2001-as-pentagon-reviews-decisions-to-draw-down-troops-1.667292 military element. DIMEFIL represents the various elements a nation has at its disposal to affect its grand strategy in the international system. 
10
12
13
The purpose of this thesis is to identify how USSOCOM can best find the optimal proportions between lethality and other elements of national power across the DIMEFIL spectrum at the ideal times. A secondary objective of this thesis is to identify how SOF can integrate all the elements of national power so that it can leverage the civil domain and gain strategic advantages for great power competition. This thesis will analyze the effectiveness of SOF operating in the civil domain and determine to what benefit or detriment those operations had on the overall outcome of the mission. It also seeks to show that the civil domain presents the greatest opportunities and greatest risks for USSOCOM due to the complex nature of the civil domain.
Currently, there is a lack of research that addresses how SOF leverages other elements of national power while operating in the civil domain. Additionally, past research has focused on how SOF operates with other agencies of the USG, yet it falls short because it assumes that only SOF can conduct military and security focused operations. No extensive research exists that accurately describes how SOF could find the optimal balance of instruments of national power by leveraging the civil domain. This thesis will not propose an enormous shift in foreign policy or a change in the budgeting and resource appropriations of various agencies. It will instead provide a new lens with which the USG can better understand the civil domain and how it relates to the instruments of national power.
Competing in the civil domain can provide a way to operationalize an entire population center not just in war time, but in any crisis. When a tactical commander moves into a contested space with the task of securing that area, two things come to mind: fire and maneuver. This is exactly how the military is trained to think. Our military is trained to rapidly identify and prosecute the most dangerous of threats to U.S. forces and their mission, while prioritizing the deadliest first. But what if the most dangerous course of action of our adversaries is not their direct and indirect fire capabilities? What if the most dangerous course of action for our adversaries is the mobilization and intentionality of their societal civil components, which is currently happening in the shadows? Take for example the use of Russian biker gangs that have been used by the Kremlin to advance political agendas by riding throughout the Baltics and Balkans of Europe, expanding the reach and influence of the Russian oligarchy. 
14
The functioning maritime militia is one of the ways the People Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) has extended its influence in the predominantly maritime domain of the Pacific. 
15
This thesis uses a series of case studies where SOF's involvement in the civil environment varied in affecting the trajectory of the conflict. 
In time of Great Power Competition in the Pacific theater, competitors of the United
States have increasingly begun fusing civil and military capabilities and strategies to achieve state political objectives as they leverage their elements of national power. USSOF must identify ways to compete in the civil domain if it wishes to influence the operating environment as the civil component makes up much of the environment. The USSOF engagement in the past focused primarily on engaging with partner forces focused in the realm of security. While this creates some short-and long-term gains in the security environment, opportunities for increased returns diminish as what happens in the civil environment affects the security environment.
The People's Republic of China (PRC) is expanding its sphere of influence with its rapidly adapting forces and desire for global hegemony in the face of the U.S. global establishment of power. 
16
18
21
22 Benjamin Lee, "China continues to exert damaging influence on Hollywood, report finds," The Guardian, August 5th, 2020, https://www.theguardian.com/film/2020/aug/05/china-hollywood-filmsdamaging-impact-report.
23 James Tager, Made in Hollywood, Censored by Beijing (Pen America, 2020), https://pen.org/wpcontent/uploads/2020/09/Made_in_Hollywood_Censored_by_Beiing_Report_FINAL.pdf. U.S. influence around the globe, and in its own backyard, the importance of finding creative approaches to incorporating non-military elements into military operations and objectives continues to grow in importance.
Russia's economic challenges following the end of the cold war forced Russia to seek asymmetric methods of warfare in areas such as the civil domain to continue to challenge U.S. hegemony. After the Cold War and the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia had several economic issues to rectify if it wished to grow its global position, while sorting through the Soviet era policies and culture that was left over from the Cold War. Yet Russia has found asymmetric ways to make what resources it does have go further. Russia has made significant investments in its special operations units such as its Spetsnaz units which make up Russia's unconventional warfare capability. This capability was highlighted throughout the Crimean campaign. 
24
25
26
According to "Russian Economic Policy and The Russian Economic System:
Stability Versus Growth" by Philip Hanson, to reach its full potential Russia has focused on nine main economic and political objectives:
24 Alexey Nikolsky, "Russian Special Operations Forces: Eight Years and Three Wars" Elite Warriors: Special Operations Forces from Around the Globe (East View Press, 2017).
25 Nikolsky, 31.  prove to be popular with the Russian people and increased Putin's popularity and approval rating. 
31
32
Both Russia and China seek to grow their economies and have no issue using military power and other elements of DIMEFIL to do so. Often, Chinese and Russian objectives are regional in nature, yet they contrast with partners and allies of the U.S.
leading to increased confrontation.  Zedong. On Protracted War (Foreign Language Press, Peking, 1967). discussed in detail in Unrestricted Warfare, in which People's Liberation Army of China Colonels Qiao Ling and Xiang describe an asymmetric strategy as a way to thwart the overwhelming U.S. lethality threat posed to China's military forces. 
38
Analyzing competitor policies and strategy allows the USSOF to find things to apply to a USSOF investment strategy while addressing and countering adversarial strategies. Both Russian and Chinese current and previous investment strategies in the civil domain can be identified through the use of the Arthur Lykke U.S. Army War College strategy model. 
40
But where did this appetite for lethality for USSOF come from? Scholars have described the evolution of stakeholders and how SOF over time took over various key positions in the Department of Defense that contributed to the increase in lethal capabilities over time, which could explain this drastic shift towards kinetic action. 
41
42
The U.S. can chart a course for the future and how it deals with the largest component of the operating environment, the civil domain, with the use of its resources from the DOD, State Department, and other agencies. Joint Publication 30 defines the operating environment as: physical areas of the air, land, maritime, and space domains; the information environment (which includes cyberspace); as well as the electromagnetic spectrum (EMS), and involve conventional, special operations, ballistic missile, electronic warfare (EW), information, strike, cyberspace, and space capabilities. Included within these are enemy, friendly, and neutral systems that are relevant to a specific joint operation.
43
44
The origin of the DIMEFIL model is not based on research. However, recent doctrine typically references the original version of DIMEFIL, DIME referring to the Diplomatic, Information, Military, and Economic instruments of national power. Other sources reference similar acronyms such as "MIDFIELD" adding the "D" for development at the end. One might consider DIMEFIL is a mental model --a heuristic. Given that the problem presented here is complex, due to its many working parts, and often it is unclear what mechanism is causing a specific effect or result in the system that exists in the civil domain of the problem set, a systems approach will be used to analyze the problem. One tendency would be for strategic planners and policy makers in the U.S. to fall victim to the thinking traps of oversimplification or mirror imaging. Oversimplification in this strategic context could occur if strategic planners or leaders equated the nuances of each respective security threat or competitor, and used similar policies to address each either based on past experiences from situations that had some related elements, and then apply a comparable strategy to reach a goal. 
45
46
Carson, Colorado has been aligned with the European theater for example, and deploys frequently throughout Europe. 
51
Military exercises have come a long way in developing synergy across the USG and enable the DOD to practice integrating with other agencies. Frazier and Hutto see multi-national military exercises (MME) as an opportunity to identify shortfalls in tactical military doctrine. 
52
53
54
55
56
One scholar details this new age American military that has tried and, according to her, failed at blending civil and military capabilities as it continues to grow in its scope, and the problems it deals with outside of its traditional mandate of all things defense. 57
Insights from historical cases help inform the future. For example, as described in Many have postulated on the role of SOF in great power competition and potentially large-scale combat operations. DeRosa et al. discuss the potential roles for SOF in great power competition in "SOF Paradigm in Great Power Competition"; however, the authors do not discuss how much lethality will be required for competition. 
59
60
61
62
63
Popular support is paramount in running an effective resistance movement. 
64
65
67
68
Plan Colombia has been an instrumental step for moving Colombia towards long term stability. News outlet Washington Post described the USG undertaking in Colombia 65 Janice Burton, "Colombia," Special Warfare Magaizne, July-September 2018, https://www.soc.mil/ SWCS/SWmag/archive/SW3103/Columbia.pdf, 54.
66 Dan Restrepo, "The United States and Colombia: From Security Partners to Global Partners in Peace," Center for American Progress, February 2nd, 2016. https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/ security/reports/2016/02/02/130251/the-united-states-and-colombia-from-security-partners-to-globalpartners-in-peace/ 67 Burton, "Colombia."
68 Kyle Rempfer, "Army SFAB Troops will be dispatched to Colombia Next Month," Army Times, May 28, 2020, https://www.armytimes.com/news/your-army/2020/05/28/army-sfab-troops-will-bedispatched-to-colombia-next-month/.
best, "After 16 years and $10 billion, the once-controversial security aid package is celebrated today by many Republicans and Democrats in Congress as one of the top U.S. foreign policy achievements of the 21st century." 
69
The U.S. has taken a diversified approach to not only improving its relations with
Colombia, but also helping stymie the development of the drug trade and increasing the capacity of Colombia to defend its sovereignty both internally and externally from a variety of threats. This consistent presence of USSOF over time accompanied with investments in other elements of DIMEFIL such as economic and law enforcement has created conditions for Colombia to progress with some stability into the 21st century. Recent U.S.
involvement in Colombia has primarily been focused on providing military assistance in the form of military training for its regular military units and its special operations units.
Colombia has undergone significant force structure changes that have allowed it to adapt to the ever-changing security environment it faces internally, such as its long history fighting the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), and externally, with the consistent threat of Venezuela on its eastern border.
Looking at this case study, the pre-determined evaluation criteria will be used to identify how the approach was crafted and what proportion was applied to each of the 69 Nick Miroff, "'Plan Colombia: How Washington learned to love Latin American intervention again," Washington Post, September 18, 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/the_americas/plancolombia-how-washington-learned-to-love-latin-american-intervention-again/2016/09/18/ddaeae1c-3199-4ea3-8d0f-69ee1cbda589_story.html. elements of DIMEFIL. Each element of national power will be evaluated and pointing out successes and failures of how SOF integrates capabilities across the DIMEFIL spectrum to engage the civil domain.
The United States has maintained a diplomatic presence in Colombia since 1822. 
70
71
72
73
One of those success stories was a 2008 pseudo-operation that was coordinated by elements from the U.S. Embassy in Bogota, USSOF, and members of the Colombian military to free fifteen hostages that had been taken by the FARC in Operation Jaque. A pseudo-operation is one in which government forces infiltrate insurgent controlled units by imitating of insurgent actors. 
74
75
76
State Department personnel worked side by side till mission completion. The operation highlighted the high functioning ability for multiple elements of both the USG, the Colombian government, military forces from both countries and even private organizations to work together across the DIMEFIL spectrum to achieve one objective: the release of hostages. 
77
Often, SOF work directly with both USG agencies and not just collaborate on operations but enable those agencies operations, as security is often a limiting factor in determining where they can execute operations. This ground up approach has created opportunities for SOF to directly impact remote areas of Colombia that have been prone to insurgent activity. For example, psychological operations teams have operated in Colombia for several years in concert with other USSOF forces. In previous years, psychological operations (PSYOPs) worked to support demobilization programs and counter FARC information campaigns that directly targeted children for recruitment. 
78
One of the key components that has set military operations apart in Colombia from other areas of responsibility in both Latin America and around the globe has been a significant engagement with civil society. Civil Affairs (CA) units have been persistently
engaged in Colombia since the 1990s. 
Economic aid from the United States to Colombia has continued to grow since 2016, reaching 187.3 million dollars in total economic and development support to the country. 
84
However, what has become clear and is an effective strategy in the case of Colombia has been the combining of effects, and employment of multiple elements to achieve security objectives, after the securing of a population.
Dollars can come in, go out, and their true effect may never be truly measured.
Foreign Direct Investment increased from 11.5 billion dollars to 14. Additionally, funding that supports lines of effort not just in the security realm seem to contribute overall long-term improvement to the security situation, as other problems begin to be resolved, such as two cases presented here of children being recruited, or demobilization efforts.
The impacts of financial components in the operational environment are certainly among the toughest to assess with regard to the overall contribution of efforts to effect change in the security situation, despite the USG's ability to track relevant financial data.
The FARC have long used coca production to fund revolutionary activities. However, using illicit goods as a source of funding creates financial challenges that the FARC solved by laundering a majority of its income it received from protecting coca farmers and enabling drug cartel operations. traffickers; and investments garner the best return when programs are linked across agencies.
Intelligence undoubtedly drives any military operation; but how can intelligence impact the civil society? In a complex environment like Colombia, interested parties are always competing for control of their area and looking to advance their agenda, which creates tough dilemmas for Colombian security forces and their USSOF advisors. One collaborative intelligence initiative was the establishment of an interagency intelligence fusion center at the U.S. Embassy in Bogota. 
89
Colombians often would cite some of their most valuable training and intelligence being one of them. 
91
Not only do SOF partner with Colombian military units, but they also step in to work closely with and develop the capabilities of police units. 
92
One key takeaway from U.S. involvement in Colombia was the use of Special
Operations Forces. USSOF have not only been able to advise and train Colombian forces, but because of the relationships they have with elements such as the embassy and USAID, they can rapidly leverage other elements of national power when needed as the situation changes. One could argue that more forces are required to cover a greater portion of the country, but SOF's limited involvement has proven this is not true. SOF's investment in Colombian civil affairs and psychological operations units has clearly been a good investment, as now these units can go out and engage with the Colombian population and civil society without having to rely on their U.S. counterparts. U.S. economic and financial aid has also made a significant difference in the trajectory of Colombia. It appears that financial aid, when coupled with the appropriate amount of military assistance can be effective in resolving stability issues in a country.
Colombia's intelligence capabilities have most likely continued to mature as the country's security forces grow in their ability to now export security outside of their own country. 94 92 Burton, Colombia.
93 Burton, Colombia.
94 Jon Eijking, "When the Technical is Political: Colombia's Export of Security Expertise," The Oxford University Politics Blog, December 2, 2019, https://blog.politics.ox.ac.uk/when-the-technical-ispolitical-colombias-export-of-security-expertise/.
This case has also shown that security does not always have to come from military forces, and police forces often have a significant role to play in improving conditions. While U.S.
forces have engaged with police forces on a large scale in the past, such as in the cases of Iraq and Afghanistan, it appears that for Colombia, limited engagement with the police has supported additional efforts to engage with military forces to improve the whole security situation.
While security will always need to be addressed, a balanced approach is key.
Colombia has consistently conducted high value targeting over the years to eliminate insurgent leaders, but this has proven to be ineffective when conducted alone according to 
Moyar et al. in Persistent engagement in Colombia. 95
• Integrated personnel at the U.S. Embassy from SOF and other agencies that could consistently collaborate and coordinate operations.
• A limited but purposeful U.S. military presence, with clear objectives.
• A robust economic package that complimented military efforts by bolstering the Colombian economy and providing alternatives to becoming involved with the FARC or other malign organizations.
• Using intelligence to support operations and not simply drive high value targeting of insurgent leadership.
• Leveraging competent police forces when available to contribute to security efforts.
This lends itself to believe that there must be another way to contribute to security, while improving conditions in stability with limited resources. In the current post-FARC 95 Moyar, Pagan, and Griego, Persistent engagement in Colombia, 59.  peace deal area, splinter groups and factions have rose to the top to continue the revolution against the Colombian government. 
96
Clearly, the USG has made consistent and consequential investments into the future of Colombia across the DIMEFIL spectrum. These investments have added up and allowed
Colombia to become a South American success story over the last decade, gaining much attention on the world stage after the culmination of peace talks between the Colombian government and the FARC. 
97
It is likely that the U.S. will continue to develop its relationship with Colombia well into the future, and only time will tell how much involvement from SOF will be required.
One thing Colombia has shown is how intricately linked the civil environment is to the security environment, and that both must be assessed and engaged with concertedly. engaging the Greek government, and coupled with U.S. military assistance, proved to be an effective whole-of-government approach. One of the key strategic mishaps of the Greek insurgents, who were backed by the Soviets, was transitioning from a guerrilla war to conventional war too early and attempting to fight a force that was well backed with conventional military assistance. This case shows that placing an emphasis on the population and engaging in the civil domain is not always necessary. Sometimes brute force, dollars, and guns is a winning strategy.
Understanding the changes in strategies and approaches in this key case could give insights to how USSOCOM can identify the correct approach at the ideal time. This case also helps identify how a primary conventional military assistance mission affected the outcome of this conflict, as the U.S. continues to grow its SFAB capability. Perhaps SOF are not always required, and possibly there is a cost trade off difference associated when going with a lower-cost footprint such as SOF vice versa a larger more robust footprint as conventional forces. This case shows a relatively small U.S. conventional footprint that accompanied military and economic funding assistance. The Greek Civil War was one of America's forays into irregular warfare in the 20th century and shaped the development of doctrine, training, and equipment following the resolution of the conflict. 
98
As World War II was winding down, and German forces had been entrenched in mission. 
104
106
Analysis for this case will focus on attempting to identify what key factors across the DIMEFIL spectrum led to the eventual defeat of the communist insurgents, principally 104 Cable, 14-15.
105 Cable, 15.
106 Cable, 15, 17-18.  from the viewpoint of American support and American investments. Additionally, analysis will focus on how and if any engagement within the civil domain occurred and to what extent it impacted the trajectory of the conflict. Perspectives will be given on how the insurgents conversely operated within the civil domain and assessments will be made to determine to what extent this helped or hurt their cause.
Once the Americans intervened, one of the challenges of a high level of financial military support was creating a sense of limitless support from the USG and American people due to the strategic geopolitical context of the American entrance into the civil war:
First is the issue of leverage. Since the announcement of the Truman Doctrine, the United States put the Greek Civil War in terms of being part of a greater East-West conflict. The Greeks perceived that the United States was fully committed to winning the war. Therefore, the Greeks believed that the U.S. would provide ever-increasing funds or would send American combat troops to Greece if the rebels appeared to be close to final victory. Greek soldiers, from the lowest to highest rank, did not feel the need to be aggressive. 
107
108
The information campaign that the Greek government pursued could be characterized as coercive, persuasive, and legalistic. The Greek government used psychological operations to put pressure on insurgents and erode its support from the public. Aircraft were used before ground operations to drop leaflets targeting Greek People's Liberation Army or DAS fighters to surrender. 109 These leaflets were followed up with offers of amnesty extended to the DAS. 
110
What makes this case different than other cases presented in this thesis is how heavily American investments in the GNA contributed to the defeat of the communist insurgent group. American investment came primarily in the form of military aid, material, and advising that shaped how the GNA organized and began fighting back against the insurgents.
JUSMAPG faced numerous challenges in advising the GNA which lacked established doctrine and force organization comparable to that of a modern force of that time. Cable describes the American experience in Greece in summation, "JUSMAPG saw the Greek Civil War to be simply a war and, like any war, amenable to simple direct military resolution." 
111
112
113
Airpower and artillery played a significant role as well in the evolution of the conflict and ultimate defeat of the DAS. Over time, the buildup of fires capabilities in the GNA enabled them to support ground forces with effective fire power to the point where the DAS simply could not overcome this advantage. As the conflict progressed, GNA units became more effective and systematic in the employment of their forces because of American advising, which created opportunities for successful operations penetrating deep into DAS controlled territory of the mountainous regions of Northern Greece. Successful sweeps of DAS strongholds forced the DAS to recoup and regenerate forces in their safe havens in bordering countries, which created the time and space for the Greek government to establish legitimate governance in previously DAS controlled areas.
The Greek Civil War provided an early opportunity for the U.S. to execute the Truman Doctrine, which pledged $300 -$400 million in economic and military support to Greece as they fought the ELAS in the civil war. 
114
115
116
Before evaluating the financial element of Greece, it is important to note that this case study took place before modern financial systems were developed. Financial intelligence was relatively low, albeit Greek government programs sought to decrease financial support for the resistance from populace sympathizers but tracking such support during these times would have been difficult. Had modern threat finance intelligence and other financial practices existed at the time, and if SOF were integrated into such 114 The amount of economic and military assistance varies by source as to the actual amount sent to Greece annually. Some sources such as Conflict of Myths list it as $300 million while other sources list the aid package at $400 million such as Public Law 8075 -Assistance to Greece and Turkey, Pub. L. No. 75,  volume 80, 1-4 (1947), https://www.trumanlibrary.gov/library/research-files/public-law-80-75-assistancegreece-and-turkey. What is important is that numbers were significant at that time.
115 Second Report to Congress on Assistance to Greece and Turkey, for the Period Ended December 31, 1947. Congressional Document, 8.
116 Second Report to Congress on Assistance to Greece and Turkey, 11.
operations, SOF could have helped identify financial information to help separate the populace from the insurgents, deny insurgent funding, and target suspected insurgent leaders through financial transactions.
Greece was in a tough spot financially following WWII as it entered the civil war.
From the previously referenced report to congress, it shows that financial assistance and advising focused on assisting the Greeks overcome high inflation and develop an internal budget. 
117
Also particular to this case was how it appears after research that military advisors primarily focused on advising their military counterparts, and economic and diplomatic assistance was primarily provided via the State department and the U.S. diplomatic mission to Greece. This shows a significant difference in how the U.S. and particularly SOF has acted in recent conflicts to attempt to work closely with other U.S. agencies to best allocate resources such as economic and development assistance to areas that most need it in developing countries.
Intelligence efforts of the U.S., the Greek government, and GNA were not made clear in this research. The insurgents were identified as having a significant and robust intelligence network of approximately 15,000 active and 750,00 passive supporters in the form of the Yiafka, the DAS intelligence and collection cells that were operating throughout the country. 
118
The Greek government made an effective use of its law and law enforcement capabilities to support the overall effort to defeat the DAS. Military assistance from the U.S. was very explicit and laid out through research, however it is unclear if any elements of the U.S. military or other agencies engaged with any Greek law enforcement. Suspected KKE would be arrested before GNA operations. 
120
121
The U.S. made consistent investments over time in the form of the military advisor and material assistance, and economic support that it provided to the Greek government.
The GNA was able to develop to the point where they could begin pushing north in sweeping operations to clear insurgent strongholds, thanks in part to JUSMAPG's advising efforts. Airpower and artillery support proved to be critical as GNA forces pushed further north in the later parts of the war. Timing also played a key role in the success of the GNA.
The communist leadership pushed heavily on Markos, commander of the DAS, to transition to a conventional fight and meet the GNA forces in open battle towards the end of the conflict that played right into the hand of the GNA and JUSMAPG. Had Markos chosen to maintain a guerrilla warfare strategy, as he assessed would be most effective 119 Brozenick, "Small Wars, Big Mistakes," 55. 120 Brozenick, 56.   121 Brozenick, 56.  until the Greek governments resolve was weak enough, this could have changed the course of the war.
Failures always exist in every conflict, as the nature of warfare is variable and never the same. JUSMAPG believed the solution to the conflict was developing the capabilities of the GNA, creating a modern conventional fighting force capable of waging an effective counterinsurgency campaign against the insurgents. The USG made a significant fiscal expenditure in supporting the Greek government, of nearly $1 Billion, of which a majority went to properly arming the GNA. The ultimate failure in this case for the Americans was learning that overwhelming firepower and a well-equipped and well-trained army can defeat an insurgency under any conditions and making an assumption that numerical superiority will always win. The U.S. would later find this assumption is not always accurate, as was the case in future conflicts such as Vietnam. Specifically, the Viet Cong, with the support of the North Vietnamese Army, effectively held out long enough for U.S.
support to leave, allowing them to achieve their political ends. Also, the Greek dependency on American economic aid and military support is evident. Without such support, one could see an alternate outcome where the communists would have overthrown the nationalist government and installed a pro-communist government that would have aligned with the USSR. The Greek government along with its U.S. advisors placed a high premium on military support which dismissed any concerns of the population and established a theory of victory that crushing the insurgency with overwhelming firepower was inevitable with time. While this approach is feasible for a short campaign such as this one, other cases such as Afghanistan has shown that overwhelming military capabilities cannot always win the conflict. The social, cultural, and political dynamics of a conflict must be understood holistically to determine the optimal blend of civil and military capabilities across the DIMEFIL spectrum for any theory of victory for conflicts of the future. While this case can be viewed from many perspectives, the assistance provided by the U.S. undoubtedly contributed to overall mission success. However, this case is the exception and not the rule, as the U.S. would later learn in Vietnam.
The most significant investment the U.S. made in this conflict was in the form of economic and military aid. The military advisor package was relatively small when compared to other conflicts, coming off the heels of WWII and prior to the significant contributions and sacrifices made in the Korean War. Given these investments, the U.S.
made good use of its advantages-financial support with its strong economy, the new resolve at home to prevent the spread of communism, and the employment of military advisors and material from its conventional arsenal that was still at its prime following WWII.
Assumptions could be made as to the overall effectiveness of the aid packages, but ultimately the communist insurgency was defeated, and America achieved its strategic political goal. What is not evident in this case is how the civil domain was engaged. It appears that in this case overwhelming military support, training, and fire power in the form of air support and artillery provided a significant advantage that overpowered the capabilities of the insurgents. The Greek government was able to leverage the growing military capabilities of its military force, while diminishing the intelligence capabilities of the Yiafka that provided significant support to the DAS, accompanied by legal capabilities to isolate insurgents from the populace. Along with economic and development assistance aimed at improving the economic situation, the Greek government along with its support from both the U.S. mission to Greece and JUSMAPG, were able to increase the legitimacy of the Greek government which in the long term enabled the defeat of the insurgents. In this case, outside support mattered. The Truman Doctrine provided a way to bolster the capacity of the Greek government militarily and economically, which far surpassed the limited support the insurgents received from neighboring countries and the USSR. What can be pulled from this case is that in certain instances, especially when the geopolitical situation includes a broader context for how the conflict is to be viewed on the global stage, that outside support can make the difference of success or failure of a government that is embroiled in a conflict. defense goals. 
135
Integration with the State department was critical to Joint Special Operations Task Force-Philippines's (JSOTF-P) success in the Philippines. On top of using the Interagency Conflict Assessment Framework (ICAF), USSOF helped develop the Mindanao working group which brought together all elements of the U.S. country team in the Philippines. This working group created the Mindanao Engagement Strategy which detailed JSOTF-P's support of State department initiatives. 
140
Upon reviewing the information instrument for the case of the Philippines, not a lot of detail was found as to actual operations and their effects. engagement in the Philippines. 
149
U.S. CA forces came in to provide medical or veterinary support and infrastructure projects such as health facilities and schools to the population in contested areas. This effort helped
Philippines forces begin to deny insurgents support from the population. These operations also fostered improved relationships between Philippine forces and the populace, making it easier for Philippine forces to pursue insurgent forces. 151 CMO is not always applicable to an operation but provides a useful engagement strategy that is best leveraged when other elements of DIMEFIL are incorporated to achieve synergistic effects.
Since 2001, economic aid has played a significant part in the U.S.'s balanced approach to the Philippines. These programs were eventually emulated throughout other areas of operations in the country. 
156
157
Terrorism and insurgencies alike require funding to enable operations and to impose cost on the government which insurgents or terrorists seek to attack. Banaloi asserts that the ASG is a, "hybrid violent group that arguably falls under the complex nexus of crime and terrorism."
158
connected assets, such as Jainal Antel Sali Jr., Radulan Sahiron, and Isnilon Totoni Hapilon in a 2005 sanction. 
159
160
161
Intelligence was identified as a significant weakness of the Philippine forces prior to U.S. involvement. 
162
163
164
165
Philippine intelligence turned the informant and were able to develop the current whereabouts of Abu Solaiman. After receiving the tip on his whereabouts, AFP mounted an assault resulting in the eventual death of Abu Solaiman and two other ASG members. 
166
167
Law enforcement represents one the greatest risks posed to security in the Philippines. Enforcement, and also recognizes the value of using the right tool for the right job: "We should continue to use all of the military, law enforcement, intelligence, diplomatic, and economic tools at our disposal, selecting in each case the particular tool that is most effective under the circumstances, consistent with our laws and values.". 
174
Overall, the Philippines has turned into a FID success story and may serve as a model for effective U.S. intervention through careful advisement of indigenous forces to help them solve their own internal security issues. Repeatedly, in each instance where operations significantly improved the situation in the Philippines, a multi-element use of the DIMEFIL approach was found to be evident. USSOF essentially built an operating concept that enabled access to insurgent support areas through effective CMO activities such as humanitarian assistance projects. Once access was built, PSYOPs and other elements of SOF were able to deliver pro-government and ani-insurgent messaging while alerting Philippine citizens of programs which could help lead to the capture of insurgent leaders through monetary rewards. These programs enabled Philippine forces to impose cost on insurgent groups as insurgent leadership targeted degraded insurgent operations.
As AFP slowly entered insurgent areas and their military operations became more effective over time, insurgents lost popular support and slowly became more fractionalized.
No approach to any security problem will ever be perfect. In light of these successes, there were a few failures. The PNP lacked the capacity and training to secure their own country effectively, which forced the AFP to deal with security issues. Often, threat groups had ties that created endemic security challenges, and some elements of USSOF believe that the security situation as a whole could have been dealt with more systematically.
175
176
177
The proxies in the separatist state and realizing that Ukraine was unwilling to make political concessions despite the growing challenges to its sovereignty in the Crimean Peninsula, Russian oligarchs recognized that direct action was necessary to achieve their political goals. 
179
This also presents an opportunity to refrain from mirror imaging, by identifying what methods the Russians implemented to achieve its political agenda.
By studying cases from a competitor's perspective, USSOCOM has an opportunity to learn relevant insights into not only how to compete with that state in a future contested environment by learning from their past actions, but can also identify new ways and methods to engage in the civil domain. Ukraine represents not only a case that showed Russia's true colors and its commitment to achieving political goals up to and beyond the use of force, but it also highlights the friction created when two great powers rub against each other in their periphery. Ukraine represents an economic, political, and geographic buffer that Russia wishes to maintain influence over as the strength and reach of NATO continues to expand in the west. In this case, not only will the Russian perspective be evaluated, but insights can also be gained from the limited involvement the U.S. has invested in the space. This case brings into question many themes brought up from previous cases: appropriate levels of troops, to include SOF; merging of civil and military capabilities; and creating leverage through other elements of the DIMEFIL model. All of these themes will be explored to assess what proved to be effective in the contested space of Crimea.
The case of Crimea presents opportunities to evaluate many manners of military action on part of both the Russians and the Ukrainians. However, discussion in this thesis is limited to Russian SOF's roles and actions that occurred in the civil domain that directly affected military operations and objectives. The 2017 RAND study, Lessons from Russian
Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine was primarily used to gain an understanding of what actually happened and identify relevant observations. 180 At the outset, it appeared that Russian forces were not numerically superior to the Ukrainian forces stationed in the Crimean Peninsula at the time, which best estimates put at 15-18k. 
181
184
The case of Russia's operations surrounding its annexation of Crimea can provide useful insights into how a state can leverage multiple elements of DIMEFIL in only a matter of months. Russia's use of elements of DIMEFIL had its fair share of risks and opportunities of which some paid off and some did not. Overall, from the Russian perspective, the case was a success as it supported its political goals of splintering Ukraine and created favorable conditions in Ukraine for follow on operations such as in Donbas and Donetesk. Russia gained a new port to expand its Anti-access/aerial denial (A2AD) bubble and project combat power in the Black Sea region. 
187
185 Kofman et al., Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, 10.
186 Kofman et al., 11.   187 Kakhaber Esebua, "Russian Build-up on the Black Sea and Recommendations for U.S.-NATO Counter-Strategy," (Master's Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 2017), https://calhoun.nps.edu/bitstream/ handle/10945/52978/17Mar_Esebua_Kakhaber.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
For Russia, popular support back home appeared to be important when deciding how and when to employ forces, and the eventual annexation of Crimea:
The annexation of Crimea, which sent Putin's approval ratings into the 80 percent range for a remarkable four years, may be why people say there is public approval for aggressive Russian foreign policy. The annexation created a "collective euphoria" that "led to an emotional outpouring of pride, hope and trust in Russia's leaders." 
188
189
Russia began its information campaign a day prior to Russian takeover of government buildings in 
Crimea. 190
191
Military action is often the easiest to characterize, with large troop deployments, observable naval fleet maneuvers, and even aircraft sorties. While Russia certainly employed conventional forces in a military action as a part of its campaign to annex Crimea, Russia also subtly employed and counted on its SOF to carry out some of its more brutal actions. A well-orchestrated Russian deception campaign, or Maskirovka, meaning mask or concealment, was key to all of Russian attempts in the seizing of Crimea which enabled Russia to confuse Ukrainian decision makers and delay the Ukrainian response. 
192
193
The economic approach Russia took towards Crimea is not apparent. No clear approaches were identified in research for how Russia used economic power to affect the outcome in Crimea. What has been evident in years past though, is how Russia continues to invest in Crimea to bolster its economy, with annual investments fluctuating between $1 and $2.7 billion. 
194
195
From the lens of finance, no clear actions were evident that occurred which gave Russia a more advantageous position as its forces infiltrated Crimea in the spring of 2014.
Since 2014 a variety of sanctions have been imposed on Russia, and Crimea since its annexation, that probably have affected the financial situation in Crimea, and impacting the people of Crimea. 196
Russia used the significant advantages it had as it enabled the annexation of Crimea.
As Russian intelligence operatives worked in Crimea, by sharing language and having similar cultures, this potentially enabled Russia to gain intelligence advantages and make incentivizing local citizens of Crimea to work for Russian intelligence more likely. 
197
198
Russia potentially recognized the importance of law enforcement activities and their ability to control the populace and took action to control policing activity throughout the annexation of Crimea. Russia developed local militias as previously mentioned, and had some troops wear local police uniforms to give the appearance Crimea was still under control by the local government. 
199
The second error occurred on February 24, when Igor Mosiichuk, a leader of Right Sector, a far-right political party and paramilitary group in Ukraine, publicly threatened to bring paramilitary fighters to Crimea. Russianlanguage media used Mosiichuk's statements to convey a sense of imminent danger for those living in Crimea. Crimean Berkut riot-police officers, reinforced with Kuban Cossacks, who reside in parts of Russia near the Black Sea, set up checkpoints under the guise of responding to a potential right-wing threat. Clashes between Crimean Tatars and Russian nationalists, protests for secession from Ukraine, and counter-protests for unity ensued, leading to a general state of chaos and disorganization, which facilitated Russia's take over. 
200
The third error occurred on February 25, when Ukraine's minister of interior disbanded the Crimean Berkut riot-police returning to Sevastopol after suppressing protests in Kyiv. Specifically, the central government first sent the unit back to Crimea and then disbanded it. This was a humiliation for the security forces, which believed they were carrying out their duties as ordered and forced them to search for new employment. Upon their return to Sevastopol, these units were greeted as heroes by the people and issued Russian passports by Moscow. They defected to the Russian side and provided auxiliary units in early operations, when Russia was short on manpower. 
201
Russia's successes in Crimea give insights into how USG and USSOCOM could potentially leverage civil and military capabilities in a combined manner to achieve political ends. Russia utilized its SOF to focus on setting conditions within the population and creating the ability to affect political change by taking charge of the police. Russia used its SOF to make it seem as if the Crimean people were asking for Russia to come in and restore order after Ukraine disbanded its police force and changed political regimes.
Russia focused on taking advantage of its shared culture and language with Crimeans to enable intelligence and military backed policing operations. Once conditions were set in Crimea, Russia entered with a sizeable force to gain control and deter further aggression from Ukraine to retake the peninsula. Overall, Russia executed the operation by taking advantage of opportunities it was poised to seize once Ukraine began military and political missteps, showing the detail of Russian contingency operation planning and synchronization of DIMEFIL efforts.
Russia made its fair share of mistakes in infiltrating Crimea. It remains unclear if
Russia ultimately planned to annex Crimea, or if they simply wanted to create political havoc for Ukraine due to its growing connection with the West. Pushing for annexation certainly came at a higher cost for Russia, forcing them to deploy troops and actively take control of the peninsula. The extent to which most Crimeans wanted Russia to reclaim Crimea is uncertain, but there were certainly documented sentiments among the population who aligned with a pro-Russia agenda. If pushed to occupy a region where they did not share language and cultural similarities with a pre-existing support base as the case here, it is uncertain if the same strategies and tactics Russia used would have been successful.
Russia assumed a significant operational vulnerability in the Ukrainian forces stationed in Ukraine and may have expected more defections from Ukrainian forces than how many occurred. 
202
203
Perhaps Russia's greatest investment in Crimea is its continued financial and economic support it provides yearly to Crimea; as it took control of the peninsula, it took responsibility for the economic conditions in the country. Central to the success of this campaign Russia orchestrated was its low cost in terms of violence and military assets.
Russia used a blend of intelligence, SOF, and conventional forces with support of a robust information warfare campaign to achieve its political agenda. Russia limited the number of troops it used to affect the annexation and instead focused on strategic positioning of its forces, the use of deception, and the blending of military and civilian operations into a cohesive campaign that resulted in no direct casualties and was accomplished in two months.
Russia's campaign to create political havoc for Ukraine and the ultimate annexation of Crimea provides lessons in combining elements of DIMEFIL to achieve a political end.
Russia maintains certain advantages over other more democratic states such as the U.S.
Russia possesses the ability to create a singular narrative that is propagated by the state and the oligarchy. It can simultaneously leverage its military and intelligence assets in a manner it sees fit with little oversight from concerned parties. Russia's use of deception was an integral part of this operation and most likely will continue to be a trend. This case brings up the question of how much deception is ideal and necessary when executing military operations within the civil domain. The use of deception in Crimea overall proved effective as Russia strategically positioned its forces in preparation for action in the peninsula.
In this final case study, I argue that an over reliance on the military instrument of national power in Afghanistan resulted in the U.S. failing to achieve victory. Whether it be the plethora of precision drone strikes, repeated SOF direct action raids, or simply the oversaturation of counter insurgent forces in the form of troops from NATO nations that make up the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), all of it was too much. The One of the more challenging aspects of Afghanistan for the U.S. is the difference in culture and structures throughout the operational environment. This makes both working with Afghans to help them secure their own country and achieving U.S. objectives a pressing challenge. 
206
207
When dealing with Pashtun tribes, American forces have had to grapple with the simple yet complex nature of their tribal law, known as Pashtunwali. 
208
209
Afghanistan also provides a comparison for other conflicts due to the high troop presence, surging to over 110,000 troops in 2011 before a tapering down to 8,600 troops in 2020. 
210
There is no shortage in literature available about the American approach to "win the war" in Afghanistan and successfully transition responsibility for the country over to a national government that was backed by the people of Afghanistan. Given the robust scholarship in this area, the scope of this analysis follows the format presented early on in this research. Specifically, this analysis focuses on identifying how SOF has engaged in the civil domain of Afghanistan while attempting to combine elements of DIMEFIL, and the degree to which this engagement did or did not contribute to U.S. progress in Afghanistan and its status today.
Diplomacy in a highly fractionalized and tribal country like Afghanistan with a weak central government is a tricky thing. It is not as simple as in other countries where the U.S. engages at the diplomatic level where discussing policy and partnerships creates meaningful progress, especially as history has shown "Strong centralization of power in Kabul creates a backlash against any government there, as it ignores the historic ability of the people to govern themselves." 214 Despite the challenges of using diplomacy in a place like Afghanistan, the State department has invested heavily there, and often SOF has been the tip of the spear to facilitate interagency coordination and collaboration to achieve multipolar objectives. This coordination and investment from the State department often occurred at the Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT), which was a whole-of-government concept and approach to solving problems in Afghanistan. 
215
216
217
Information operations in Afghanistan presented quite the challenge for American The cultural complexities of Afghanistan once again pose challenges to American efforts. In their chapter "Security and Peacebuilding" found in Integrated Peacebuilding:
Innovative Approaches to Transforming Conflict, Feigenbaum, Goldberg, and Vence-Cheng describe the challenge to security enhancing operations holistically:
For one, various armed groups including Al-Qaida, the Taliban, and the Hizb-i-Islami destabilize the Afghani government and undermine the SSR (Security Sector Reform) process. Similarly, the culture of warlordism resists regional government rule, and the pervasive narcotics trade exacerbates insecurity and instability (Sedra, 2004). Furthermore, the coalition's lack of cultural understanding cripples essential elements of SSR, including the creation of a strong and functioning national army and police force, and of accountable and transparent defense and judicial ministries. A cultural specificity the coalition ignored in the initial SSR strategy in Afghanistan was the attention to ethnic demographics within the army, police, and defense ministry. 
226
Operating in the civil domain inherently requires cultural intelligence and acuity, yet even where each tribe controls small chunks of the countryside, there is no national allegiance, and ethnic differences create competing agendas?
Assessing the economic impacts in a country that does not use modern economic and business practices creates issues with research. For example, indexes such as the Global Competitive Index used for previous case studies is not available for Afghanistan. FDI provides only one insight into how finances impact the overall economic growth of a country. In their 2020 study, Impact of FDI on economic growth, the authors Baiashvili and Gattini propose potential impacts, "FDI does not only provide needed financing for capital accumulation, but also supports the import of positive externalities in terms of new inputs and foreign technologies in the production function." 
233
231 Zimmerman, Egel, and Blum, 57.   232 The World Bank, "Foreign Direct Investment, net inflows (% of GDP) -Afghanistan," The World Bank, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ BX.KLT.DINV.WD.GD.ZS?end=2019&locations=AF&start=2001&view=chart.
233 Tamar Baiashvili, and Luca Gattini, Impact of FDI on economic growth: The role of country income levels and institutional strength (European Investment Bank, 2020), https://www.eib.org/ attachments/efs/economics_working_paper_2020_02_en.pdf, 17.
Despite the significant economic investments made by the U.S. in Afghanistan, they are drastically less than the amount of security assistance the U.S. invested in Afghanistan, including SOF. Financial investments make up one part of the operational environment, as it is critical to assess all elements. This brings us to the financial element of national power that will be assessed next.
Attempting to improve national governance and sovereignty in a country that by and large governs, creates issues in funding a large national government. Governance is tied to a budget and dollars are needed to fund a variety of initiatives, including security. infrastructure, and often ANSF were dependent on coalition units for intelligence. 
237
238
239
Intelligence traditionally enables military and law enforcement operations, however if most of the intelligence was generated from U.S. capabilities, Afghan intelligence capabilities simply do not have a chance to develop and improve. This lack of sustainability in Afghan initiatives has prolonged the U.S. involvement in Afghanistan.
The community-based approach to policing has been central to the village stability a more balanced approach of diverse activities across the DIMEFIL spectrum would have contributed to mission success. Cultural challenges have been highlighted through this analysis, evidenced through the USG's attempt at partner capacity building in a multiethnic and multi-tribal environment that makes up Afghanistan. SOF are expected to be the premier force capable of engaging with a wide variety of cultures and language, and yet Afghanistan seemed to be out of reach for this full cultural literacy concept for which SOF often assumes capability. SOF clearly has contributed in developing a significant SOF partner capability in Afghanistan, capable of standing on its own and executing its own security operations, but is it enough to engage with just security forces only? Could engagements within the civil domain such as the development of more local businesses and increasing local police capabilities have made a difference? Perhaps not, due to the daunting complexity of the Afghanistan environment.
As presented in this case study, the USG as a whole made a significant investment in the development of Afghanistan's capacity to become a legitimate and self-governing nation through large troop deployments, significant economic and development investments, and time, as Afghanistan is now America's longest standing war after nearly 20 years of conflict. What does the USG have to show for it? The case of U.S. involvement in Afghanistan shows that simply doubling down and increasing troop deployments and economic expenditure does not translate into achieving strategic objectives. SOF could potentially bridge the gap in helping prioritize high value areas for FDI with security resources to encourage FDI and enable long term economic growth. The U.S. experience in Afghanistan shows that U.S. and coalition intelligence alone cannot win the war or achieve strategic objectives, and that partner intelligence and synchronization is necessary, which has been significantly lacking in American trained Afghan units, even those developed by SOF such as ANASOF. 
243
To provide a holistic picture of how SOF integrates into the elements of DIMEFIL and engages with the civil domain, this section discusses the common themes and threads that emerge across each of the case studies examined in this thesis. Writing this thesis, I originally thought I was investigating how to use DIMEFIL to integrate SOF into all the instruments of national power. What I found repeatedly across the case studies presented here is that the DIMEFIL model is too simple of a model to try to apply to the matter of statecraft. The level at which SOF often finds itself operating has far reaching strategic effects from its operations. Often what I found is that practitioners attempted to parse out each of the letters of DIMEFIL and "check the box" to make sure their operations addressed each of the elements. This perspective has been shared increasingly in recent years as strategists embrace the increased rapidness of change and growing complexities of our modern world. John Meiser says it best, in his white paper, "Ends + Ways + Means = (Bad)
Strategy":
The concept of a comprehensive or whole-of-government approach to solving strategic problems fosters an overemphasis on simplistically applying resources-the means. By this logic, whatever the problem is, simply apply all the elements of national power-diplomatic, information, military, economic, financial, intelligence, and law enforcement (DIMEFIL)-and the problem is solved. Under this approach, the strategist simply fills in each box or, better yet, creates a diagram showing each element of national power as a line of effort directed at an enemy center of gravity or critical vulnerability. 
244
Two interesting cases that compare and contrast this point were Afghanistan and the Greek Civil War. Both cases saw lethality and military force as a contributing factor to the cases' success in the case of the Greek Civil War, or failure in the case of Afghanistan.
The DIMEFIL approach offers only one of the conditions that could be considered for each success and failure. There were many contributing factors in the case of Afghanistan that led to failure by USSOF and the USG beyond simply using too much force, such as preexisting societal and cultural structures that made national governance difficult. In the cases of Colombia and the Philippines, both saw success over a ten-plus year time horizon with limited U.S. military assistance in terms of number of personnel deployed to each country.
In both cases, USSOF found ways to tie in closely with U.S. country teams and coordinate operations and initiatives, instead of creating redundant or disparate efforts. In the case of the Crimean Annexation, Russia enjoyed several advantages considering the amount of power the oligarchy controls, that allowed it to effectively time its various approaches across DIMEFIL as it challenged Ukrainian sovereignty. I've demonstrated in this thesis that DIMEFIL can be used as a model to assess a country's approach to competition or conflict when attempting to identify how much lethality is necessary to achieve a political objective, but it alone does not give a planner or practitioner of warfare or statecraft the full picture. Other factors play into the overall assessment of a security situation, and one would not be prudent in deferring to the use of only one model or another when developing strategy for effective statecraft.
All research comes with certain limitations, and this thesis is no different. For this research, only five case studies were selected that highlighted the use of various elements of DIMEFIL and their application in a slightly different way. Additional case studies could have uncovered additional insights, but a mass synthesis of every potentially relevant case study is beyond the scope of this thesis. Rather, the selected cases were chosen because they represent varying experiences of conflict. Each of the five case studies were selected for specific reasons. Colombia shows a conflict where the U.S. invested over a long term horizon, balanced its use of DIMEFIL, and enabled its partner, the Colombians, to begin exporting security. The Greek Civil War showed a much shorter time period of investment from the U.S. where lethality and economic assistance stopped the spread of communism in northern Greece. The Philippines shows a complex operating environment in the Pacific area of operations that required USSOCOM to advise their Philippine partners on defeating multiple insurgent groups simultaneously. The Russian annexation of Crimea looks at this research question from a Russian perspective and addresses how the Russians sought to use elements of DIMEFIL in their operations while leveraging other population bases.
Afghanistan was selected because it still has not reached resolution for U.S. interests after 20 years of conflict, and shows how overwhelming use of force does not necessarily translate into victory.
To improve this research, a case study from the Chinese perspective and how they would have potentially incorporated elements of DIMEFIL in their operations might have been beneficial; which is a great prospect for future research. Several of the case studies in this thesis highlight internal security issues, such as dealing with terrorism or an insurgency. This approach was intentional, as case studies were chosen based on the use of DIMEFIL in USG operations, and not necessarily whether the host state faced an internal or external security issue. Future research should examine case studies that provide opportunities to discuss external security issues. Moreover, this research does not examine cases across each major geographic region of the U.S. military's combatant commands.
This limitation presents another opportunity for future research to explore by investigating cases relevant to Pacific Command (PACOM) and elsewhere (e.g., Africa).
One of the most significant limitations uncovered in this research was the simplicity and redundancy of the DIMEFIL model. DIMEFIL certainly presents an excellent starting point when discussing the elements of national power that could potentially affect a strategic campaign in a country during great power competition. Yet it has challenges. One of those challenges in using DIMEFIL was the similarity and unclear distinction between the "economic" and "financial" elements of DIMEFIL. My conclusion after performing the research suggests that the DIMEFIL model was originally intended to be applied to a counter insurgent or terrorist centric conflict where the main aggressor is a non-state actor.
In such instances, it was assumed that the economic instrument of power had more to do with the economic state of a country, region, or area, and that financial had more to do with the financial transactions funding a non-state actor. In cases such as the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, where this non-state actor acted in a similar fashion to a state, it can be easy to differentiate between economic and financial. Yet, when moving to the state and international system level, I found it increasingly difficult to distinguish between economic activity and financial transactions as the two typically go hand in hand. Meiser would share my sentiments in difficulty of applying the DIMEFIL model to complex problems found in conflict:
But, starting with the notion of seven and only seven forms of national power and all of them should always be utilized to implement a whole-ofgovernment solution is infantile. In fact, General Dempsey recently seems to have added another element of national power to the list: energy. So now we have DIMEFIL? The point is there is no set number of tools a government can use to solve a problem, to think otherwise is foolhardy. 
245
Each of the case studies in this research looks at slightly different conditions, but generally the same problem, with the challenge being to find the correct application of lethality and military force. One of the challenges of research was identifying case studies which could potentially reflect future conditions of competition and conflict in which the U.S. may find itself. The case studies of Colombia, Philippines, Afghanistan, and the Greek Civil war all deal with sub-state conflicts. The Greek Civil War, and Crimea each deal with conflicts that transcended the state level, whose effects were felt on the global stage by great powers. It was important for case study selection to find case studies that had ample data and previous research that could describe the nature of the conflict, and depict U.S., or in the case of Crimea-Russian, intervention. Some approaches in the cases of internal state conflict may still provide only context and insights at the state and sub-state levels.
However, I believe the overall assessment of how SOF enabled or did not enable a balanced approach to using elements of DIMEFIL remains invaluable and will apply throughout the next era of competition or conflict.
There are many topics that could be further explored in this area of research. While some methods were uncovered that could be implemented by USSOCOM, more research could identify specific actions in the civil environment which may produce the most effects across the instruments of national power. Research focused on identification of how influence is developed in the civil domain could illuminate which types of organizations and individuals would be most helpful to SOF conducting operations in a civil environment.
The DIMEFIL model was chosen for this thesis due to its simplicity and ability to capture most of the instruments of national power that contribute to strategy making. While Further research should explore how increasing allocations to one instrument of power, for example increasing the budget of the Department of Defense, either improves or detracts the strength of other instruments. I recommend using a form of systems modeling to investigate this topic. further, as it was an original avenue intended to pursue, but was eventually disregarded to scope this research. (do you need the 2nd half of the foregoing sentence?)
Finally, the future of conflict always remains vague to the practitioner and scholar alike. Hopefully this thesis uncovered a small glimpse at the future of warfare where civil components will take a more active role in the outcome of competition or conflict. Warfare in the future may look less like conventional 'force on force' large-scale combat operations.
In that eventuality the ability to influence and control a population in the civil domain becomes increasingly strategic and more valuable.
conflict. Most recently FM 324 was developed to deal with the insurgencies that had destabilized Iraq and Afghanistan. 247 FM 324 evolved thoughts on new age counterinsurgency doctrine because both the U.S. Marine Corps and the U.S. Army adopted it, two distinct land forces. Just as the USG developed joint doctrine for counterinsurgency (COIN), interagency competition doctrine needs to address a whole of USG approach.
Several documents present the current operating environment, and how adversaries use hybrid warfare against the United States. However, no doctrine appears to focus solely on coordinating multi-agency strategy and tactics to counter hybrid challenges. TC 7-100 defines hybrid threats for training environments, but fails to address strategic implications. 
248
249
250
An ICS defines the USG's goals for diplomacy, development and defense for a given country, but fail to describe how and when agencies work together, share resources, and maximize opportunities to face hybrid challenges. 
251
A The other part is irregular warfare, and the investment that needs to be made during training like at CTCs and other joint and combined exercises. These types of investments must focus on other elements of DIMEFIL beyond the military realm, specifically SOF's ability to leverage the information and intelligence. This investment will pay significant dividends, as shown earlier how adversaries are seeking to leverage military capabilities to dominate in places such as the information domain. Each of the strategies presented could also be tested and refined in a simulated mission environment such as at CTCs.
Lethality will always be necessary to deter adversaries and prevent capability overmatch in conflicts. However, lethality is not always the solution to solving conflicts no matter the scale. Future competition and conflict will require USSOCOM to use the appropriate amounts of force at ideal times, along with other elements of national power.
Case studies presented in this thesis showed that each operating environment is condition dependent, and that for the USG to be successful in achieving its political objectives, it must apply the appropriate amounts of each element of national power at ideal times.
Conflicts are dynamic, and therefore require strategic planners and decision-makers to constantly assess current investments of each element of national power and ensure those proportions will create future outcomes consistent with U.S. goals.
In the case of the Greek Civil War, and to some extent Colombia and the Philippines, an optimal amount of lethality seemed to be reached as the U.S. adapted its approach to each of those conflicts. For the Greek Civil War, U.S. military assistance in the form of advisors and material to include firepower such as artillery and air support assets enabled the GNA to overpower the DAS in a short time horizon of nearly five years.
Economic assistance played another significant role in helping the Greek government establish legitimacy with its own people as the reach and influence of the DAS slowly diminished due to combat operations. In Colombia, the U.S. took a more protracted approach, keeping force levels low, but seeking alternative methods in the use of national power to achieve synergy across the instruments of DIMEFIL and across U.S. agencies.
Coordination at the U.S. Embassy in Bogota was critical to this effort, and undoubtedly, the low amount of USSOF in Colombia enabled U.S. operations to remain focused on supporting overarching U.S. strategic political objectives. As the number of forces in a given area grows, the ability for U.S. military planners to synchronize operations and align with other government agencies diminish as illustrated by the Afghanistan case study. This begs the question whether the nearly 110,000 troops deployed to Afghanistan were truly necessary, or simply were viewed as a silver bullet by policy makers hoping to end an already unusually long war that had seen no end in sight. It is important to contrast the time horizons of each of these case studies.
Strategic thinkers and planners should employ multidisciplinary solutions as problems continue to grow in complexity. SOF needs to continue to integrate with the interagency and private sector, even at the tactical level when the situation dictates.
Military commanders need to see the operating environment as a complex world, where solutions will no longer be as simple as choosing to use force or not to use force.
The civil domain is the next battlefield of the future and will not look like it has in the past, with M1A1 Abrams tanks moving across a desert expanse sighting in T-90s.
Instead, the battlefield of the future will be fought within and among components of civil society. Integrating non-lethal effects such as influence in the information and cyber domains, with lethality when relevant, and combining those with other elements of national power such as diplomacy, economic and even law enforcement will create solutions closer to the strategic political end-states the USG often seeks.
As warfare becomes more complex and multi-polar, leveraging multiple elements of national power is critical to success in competition, conflict, and beyond. USSOCOM The civil domain presents an opportunity for the Department of Defense and specifically USSOCOM. The civil domain is also vast, it is essentially the world as we know it, and as we don't know it. But if the DOD stays focused on the military components of the operating environment, it is opening itself up to additional risk in the form of adversaries who seek to operate in the gap between civil and military capabilities. The United States has the advantage of its innovative American economy supporting its adaptive military forces, so change is possible, and fueling the collaboration between the public and private sector is essential to drive U.S. foreign policy forward.
a modern irregular warfare force, conventional forces took on the role of finding the appropriate proportions of DIMEFIL to defeat a budding communist insurgency. This case study raises the question of when do lethality investments need to be increased significantly when compared to other elements of national power. Case Study #3: The Philippines 2001-2020, this thesis offers up another success story where USSOF played a significant role in reducing the spread and effectiveness of violent extremist organizations such as Abu Sayyaf and Islamic State of Iraq and Syria -Philippines (ISIS-Philippines). Case Study #4:
a modern irregular warfare force, conventional forces took on the role of finding the appropriate proportions of DIMEFIL to defeat a budding communist insurgency. This case study raises the question of when do lethality investments need to be increased significantly when compared to other elements of national power. Case Study #3: The Philippines 2001-2020, this thesis offers up another success story where USSOF played a significant role in reducing the spread and effectiveness of violent extremist organizations such as Abu Sayyaf and Islamic State of Iraq and Syria -Philippines (ISIS-Philippines). Case Study #4:
22  
22  
USSOF, to include U.S. Army Civil Affairs and PSYOPs, helped develop a civil affairs and PSYOPs capability within the Colombian army itself so it can engage with and support its own people in the conduct of counter-narcotics operations or when battling the FARC.
USSOF, to include U.S. Army Civil Affairs and PSYOPs, helped develop a civil affairs and PSYOPs capability within the Colombian army itself so it can engage with and support its own people in the conduct of counter-narcotics operations or when battling the FARC.
5 billion dollars from 2019 to 2020, albeit mostly into extractive industries such as oil and mining. 85 This foreign direct investment, when measured with other investments specifically from the U.S. Government totaling 418.1 million dollars in 2019, shows that dollars matter and using incentives and making investments with finances can shape the outcome of policy in a country. For example, one of those programs supported by U.S. financial funding includes the Colombian Government's Agency for Reintegration. This U.S. funded and Colombian 85 United Nations, World Investment Report 2020: International Production Beyond the Pandemic,
100  
100  
117 Second Report to
117 Second Report to
other elements of USG. SOF's principal information action arms operating in the Philippines during this time were PSYOPs teams. PSYOPs are a tactical level unit that focuses on direct messaging the population via a variety of media and mediums. PSYOPs teams (formerly known as MIST or military information support teams), worked in a variety of manners to compliment interagency efforts, as well as support Philippine government governance: "Military information support teams (MISTs) provided a range of services aimed at improving the target population's perceptions of the GRP's legitimacy and building support for the rule of law."
other elements of USG. SOF's principal information action arms operating in the Philippines during this time were PSYOPs teams. PSYOPs are a tactical level unit that focuses on direct messaging the population via a variety of media and mediums. PSYOPs teams (formerly known as MIST or military information support teams), worked in a variety of manners to compliment interagency efforts, as well as support Philippine government governance: "Military information support teams (MISTs) provided a range of services aimed at improving the target population's perceptions of the GRP's legitimacy and building support for the rule of law."
The economic challenges faced by the Philippines have been complex. While fighting an insurgency over the last two decades, the Philippines has contended with natural disasters such as typhoons, and in 2020, COVID-19. These additional challenges placed economic strain on the Philippines, that if not addressed, could have pushed more of the population towards the growing insurgency, even as they attempt to establish legitimacy through populace support. USAID has historically provided more
The economic challenges faced by the Philippines have been complex. While fighting an insurgency over the last two decades, the Philippines has contended with natural disasters such as typhoons, and in 2020, COVID-19. These additional challenges placed economic strain on the Philippines, that if not addressed, could have pushed more of the population towards the growing insurgency, even as they attempt to establish legitimacy through populace support. USAID has historically provided more
and whole-of-government operations to defeat ASG and other groups in, "Law Enforcement as a Counter-Terrorism Tool".
and whole-of-government operations to defeat ASG and other groups in, "Law Enforcement as a Counter-Terrorism Tool".
230  
Peleschuk, Dan. "Hardcore Russian Biker Gang About to Invade Poland," GlobalPost. https://www.pri.org/stories/hardcore-russian-biker-gang-about-invade-poland
Jonathan Pyke, "The risks of China's ambitions in the South Pacific" The Brookings Last Modified July 20, 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-risks-of-chinas-ambitions-in-the-south-pacific/
Tor Bukkvoll, "Russia and the use of force in the new Cold War -The Military Dimension," Presentation at Naval Postgraduate School, 24 October 2018.
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
Linda Robinson, Austin Long, Kimberly Jackson, and  Rebeca Orrie, Improving the Understanding of Special Operations: A Case History Analysis, RR2026 (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2018. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2026.html.
Robinson et al.,
[89]
[91]
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Operations, 17.
United States Joint Staff Joint Force Development (J7), "Cross-Domain Synergy in Joint Operations," January 14, 2016. https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/concepts/ cross_domain_planning_guide.pdf?ver=2017-12-28-161956-230.
Paul Tompkins and Robert R. Leonhard. "The Science of Resistance," Small Wars Journal, 24 February 2017, https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/the-science-of-resistance.
Larry Cable, Conflict of Myths : the Development of American Counterinsurgency Doctrine and the Vietnam War (New York University Press, 1986).
Robinson et al., xiv.   
CNN, "Timeline: Hostage Crisis in the Philippines," CNN, August 25, 2002, https://edition.cnn.com/2002/WORLD/asiapcf/southeast/06/07/phil.timeline.hostage/.
Robinson et al., U.S. Special Operations Forces in the Philippines, 2001-2014,14.    
Robinson et al., 14.   
Robinson et al., 55.   
U.S. Agency for International Aid, "U.S. Foreign Aid by Country," USAID, https://explorer.usaid.gov/cd/PHL?fiscal_year=2020&implementing_agency_id=1&measure=Obligations
The World Bank, "Global Competitive Index," The World Bank, https://govdata360.worldbank.org/indicators/ h93b3b7a4?country=PHL&indicator=631&viz=line_chart&years=2007,2017.
The World Bank, "Global Competitive Index," The World Bank, https://govdata360.worldbank.org/indicators/ h93b3b7a4?country=PHL&indicator=631&viz=line_chart&years=2007, 2017 World Economic Forum, "Competitiveness Rankings," World Economic Forum, http://reports.weforum.org/global-competitivenessreport-2015-2016/competitiveness-rankings/
  155 Robinson et al., U.S. Special Operations Forces in the Philippines, 2001-2014, 88-
89.    156Robinson et  
al.,89.    157Robinson et al.,
91.
Rommel C. Banlaoi, "Duterte's Challenges: Terror, Crime and the Abu Sayyaf," Rappler, May 13, 2016, https://www.rappler.com/voices/thought-leaders/duterte-challenges-terror-crime-abu-sayyaf.
Department of Treasury, "Abu Sayyaf Senior Leaders Designated," Department of Treasury Press Center, November 30, 2005, https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/ 2005113013165523877.aspx
Department of Treasury.
Robinson et al., U.S. Special Operations Forces in the Philippines, 2001
-2014.
Robinson et al., 26.    
Robinson et al., xvi.    
Robinson et al., 26.   
The Government of the Philippines, "The Philippine National Police," Official Gazette, https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/featured/about-the-pnp/.
Robinson et al., U.S. Special Operations Forces in the Philippines, 2001-2014, 67.   
Robinson et al., 130.   
Ben Werner, "Philippines Freezes U.S. Pull-out From Visiting U.S. Forces Agreement," USNI News, June 8th, 2020, https://news.usni.org/2020/06/08/philippines-freezes-pull-out-from-visiting-u-sforces-agreement
Kofman et al., Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.   
Timothy Frey, "Russians supported Putin's moves in Crimea in 20114. Here's what's different this time," Washington Post, April 12, 2021, ProQuest.
Kofman et al., Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, 27.    
Kofman et al., 13.    
Kofman et al., 27.   
Michael Kofman et al., Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, 23.    
Kofman et al., 24.    
Barclay Ballard, "Crimea doesn't pay: assessing the economic impact of Russia's annexation," World Finance: The Voice of the Market, October 28, 2019, https://www.worldfinance.com/special-reports/ crimea-doesnt-pay-assessing-the-economic-impact-of-russias-annexation.
Ballard, "Crimea doesn't pay: assessing the economic impact of Russia's annexation."
Michael Kofman et al., Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, 10.    
Michael Kofman et al., 21.   
Kofman et al., 21.   
Kofman et al., 26.    
Kofman et al., 27.   
NATO, "Provincial Reconstruction Teams in Afghanistan-how they arrived and where they are going," NATO Review (Autumn 2007), https://www.nato.int/docu/review/2007/issue3/english/ art2.html#:~:text=How%20many%20are%20there%3F,Which%20countries%20lead%20them%3F
NATO, "Provincial Reconstruction Teams in Afghanistan-how they arrived and where they are going."
Blum, David M., and Conway, J. Edward, eds.  Counterterrorism and Threat Finance Analysis during Wartime (Blue Ridge Summit: Lexington Books, 2015), ProQuest.
Jeremy Weinstein, Inside Rebellion: The Politics of Insurgent Violence (New York NY: Cambridge University Press) Kindle edition, p. 173 in Blum and Conway, Counterterrorism and Threat Finance Analysis during Wartime, 45-46.
Austin Long et al., Building Special Operations Partnerships in Afghanistan and Beyond, page x.   
Jeffrey W. Meiser, "Ends + Ways + Means = (Bad) Strategy," Parameters (46(4) Winter 2016-17, 82, 2017) https://ssrn.com/abstract=376222182.
Meiser, "Ends + Ways + Means = (Bad) Strategy," 85.
Young Mie Kim, "New Evidence Shows how Russian Election Interference has Gotten More Brazen," Brennan Center, March 5th, 2020, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/ new-evidence-shows-how-russias-election-interference-has-gotten-more.
A.
However, deception use long term can have unintended consequences and can sow distrust with civil partners in an operating environment. Russia assumed that risk and mitigated it by employing forces that shared cultural and language similarities as the region it was occupying. The U.S. will most likely not find itself in a similar position in the future. It may be useful to consider how deception can be used in limited instances to confuse and delay adversarial decision making, especially if that deception occurs in the civil domain where the U.S. has historically engaged on a limited basis in past operations as this thesis has attempted to establish. Looking back at the American experience, the next case, American intervention in "Afghanistan," will highlight how an over dependence on lethality can complicate the overall strategic situation in conflict.
A.
contrast to all of the U.S. military's presence. 
211
213 Olga Oliker, Building Afghanistan's Security Forces in Wartime: The Soviet Experience (Santa Monica, CA; Arlington, VA; Pittsburgh, PA: RAND Corporation, 2011) http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 10.7249/mg1078a.9.
Another key challenge to information dominance in Afghanistan is the competing agendas of information functions across SOF, conventional forces, and each of the different government agencies operating in the country. In previous cases, information operations across U.S. agencies were often synchronized and supported one another. However, in Afghanistan, due to either the increased troop presence, or complex nature of the country, information operations were often disparate. Once again, this is a significant drawback of a large presence and high troop numbers. Due to the scale of the operation and commitment of resources from both SOF, conventional forces and the State department each stakeholder is presenting their narrative that their information officer or psychological operations operator is recommending to that commander or director. In the information environment, there are numerous specialties and capabilities that form the information arm of any unit: Information Operations, Psychological Operations, Civil Affairs and Public Affairs, not to mention every soldier from every other military occupational specialty that may be operating in a given area and engaging with someone from the operational environment on any given day.
What potentially exacerbates this problem of multiple sources of information with an unclear overall information strategy is the tribal nature of Afghanistan. In his report, Munoz also found that IO officers working in Afghanistan repeatedly commented on the necessity to ensure IO messaging reflected the target audience, and was not simply a mirror image of U.S. perceptions of the Afghan people. 
223
224
Numbers for SOF deployed to Afghanistan were not available for this research, but assumptions can be made that SOF presence in Afghanistan was significantly less than the 223 Munoz, 19-20.   224 Munoz, xix-xx.
Going through each of these case studies brought several proverbial 'elephants in the room' to the forefront of the strategic thoughts of this paper. One challenge is how the DOD conceptualizes the problem set and the contemporary operating environment. One of those elements is the challenge of synchronizing efforts across not just USSOCOM and the DOD, but the whole of government. This is challenged by a clear lack of doctrine or system for the established collaboration and coordination among agencies to achieve mutually supporting agendas. The second challenge is how SOF trains. Most units will conduct some sort of pre-mission training prior to deployment, most likely spending time at one of the combat training centers. This presents an opportunity for SOF to train more extensively on understanding and operating in the civil domain.
Competitors of the United States often appear to fuse their civil and military effects and engagements, which combines elements of their elements of national power into one approach so they can synchronize resources and objectives to support their national security objectives. While the U.S. has a multitude of agencies capable of engaging other elements outside of the realm of security, such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
or Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), Department of Commerce and Agriculture, USAID, and State Department, no one is more uniquely positioned, nor has the capability and resources to do this at scale other than USSOCOM. These facts do not diminish the need for increased communications, coordination, and collaboration across agencies, it only makes it more necessary. However, DOD, and specifically USSOCOM must engage with the civil environment, potentially through a DIMEFIL framework that synchronizes all elements of national power, to deter and counter competitor attempts at gaining traction in contested spaces.
While the U.S. military developed new doctrine to face emerging threats, all USG agencies need to develop and continually update their strategy for future competition and