# ID: afbb2b895a834e3095aeaec94305b2ed
# Title: Japanese Naval Military Culture in the Pacific War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
The U.S. Marine Corps established in 2005 the Center for Advanced Operational Culture Learning in Quantico, Virginia. The intent was to retain lessons from military operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. However, although the importance of culture is obvious during tactical interactions between soldiers and the civilian populous, the importance of culture in planning operations is not clear. This monograph analyzes how Japanese military cultural norms interfered with the tactical, operational and strategic military decisions that ultimately decided the outcome of the war. Imperial Japan was selected because Japanese culture during World War II was dramatically different from American culture and, therefore, the influence of culture on planning would likely be more pronounced and easier to observe. To avoid the cultural generalizations and to narrow the scope of study, the research was limited to the military culture of the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) during the Pacific War and considers two major decisions for study, the plans to attack Pearl Harbor and Midway. Because cultures have a large number of attributes, social, philosophical, and historical, the research investigated only the historical aspect of cultural norms. Beginning with the 1905 Russo-Japanese War the research examined the evolution of the Imperial Japanese Navy's culture until the outbreak of the Pacific War. The Russo-Japanese War was selected as the starting point because Japanese naval leaders focused on the lessons of 1905 when planning for war against the United States. The study shows that Japan's decision to attack Pearl Harbor was planned to achieve a specific set of operational goals similar to the attack on Port Arthur in 1904. The plan was heavily influenced by the Imperial Navy's culture. Similarly, the Battle of Midway became a pivotal point in the Pacific War because the Japanese sought a quick, decisive victory despite the fact that changes in operational factors meant the Japanese could no longer reasonably expect to achieve such a victory. The Midway example shows that the Japanese navy's emphasis on a decisive, first strike was no longer a winning concept but Japanese planners and commanders adhered to the norms of the naval culture, ignoring or overlooking tactical and operational factors. The evidence shows that military culture had a decisive impact on Japanese tactical and operational level decisions but strategically culture had little to no effect on the war's outcome.
The study shows that Japan's decision to attack Pearl Harbor was planned to achieve a specific set of operational goals similar to the attack on Port Arthur in 1904. The plan was heavily influenced by the Imperial Navy's culture.
Similarly, the Battle of Midway became a pivotal point in the Pacific War because the Japanese sought a quick, decisive victory despite the fact that changes in operational factors meant the Japanese could no longer reasonably expect to achieve such a victory. The Midway example shows that the Japanese navy's emphasis on a decisive, first strike was no longer a winning concept but Japanese planners and commanders adhered to the norms of the naval culture, ignoring or overlooking tactical and operational factors. The evidence shows that military culture had a decisive impact on Japanese tactical and operational level decisions but strategically culture had little to no effect on the war's outcome.
Over the last twelve years, the United States military has conducted sustained combat operations in both Iraq and Afghanistan. Those operations have provided a wealth of knowledge regarding future combat operations. Operations IRAQI FREEDOM and ENDURING FREEDOM recognized that superior firepower and technology, while important and valuable, were not guarantees for success. A greater emphasis needed to be placed on understanding the enemy, particularly his language, culture and history. As a result, the United States Army and Marine   Corps have built new educational centers and doctrine that have attempted to incorporate culture better in operational design and the planning process. The goal of these educational centers is to deliver soldiers and Marines back to the operating forces that appreciate different cultures and consider those differences when developing plans and conducting military operations. This appreciation of culture is not a new development. Several notable military historians and social scientists such as Victor Hansen have assessed that culture and war are inseparable. Assessments such as Hansen's are the foundation in this monograph; specifically assessments of military culture with regards to operational planning and warfighting.
Whether recognized, appreciated or even considered in the planning process, it is not always easy to assess the relationship between a military culture and combat operations.
However, a review of history may provide standards by which to assess the relevance of cultural factors in successful military operations. In particular, the conduct of World War II in the Pacific by Imperial Japan presents a useful case to study the role of military culture in operational planning and design. The study of Japan and its Pacific opponent is particularly useful because of the extreme religious, political, historical, geographic and social differences. It is easy to compare Japan and the United States using cultural generalizations but more difficult to assess whether these differences really mattered to decision-making, policy choices and a general approach to war fighting. The study of military history and its impact on modern warfare can often become broad generalizations that devolve to racial stereotypes without any emphasis on how historical interpretations influenced doctrine, planning or integration.
To avoid the cultural generalizations and to narrow the scope of study, the research was limited to the military culture of the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) during the Pacific War.
Unfortunately, military cultures like civil cultures have a number of dimensions such as social norms, a specialized language, and an interpretation of history, both national and organizational.
Because the intent was to analyze the impact of military culture on operational planning, it was important to further limit the research to understanding how Japanese military leaders interpreted historical events and the impact those interpretations had on doctrine and modernization.
Although many historians have asserted that issues such as racism or industrial power had the most influence on the conduct of the war in the Pacific, the evidence will show that Japanese military cultural norms interfered with technical and tactical military decisions that ultimately decided the strategic outcome of the war.
The initial section of the paper examines the military culture of the Imperial Japanese Navy. The study pays greater attention to the Navy because both the operations against Pearl Harbor and Midway were almost entirely naval engagements. Although a good portion of the Imperial Japanese Army's military culture was shaped by events in China, those events did not greatly influence Japanese naval leaders and, hence, lies outside the scope of this research. The section analyzes naval leaders across the IJN and shows how history influenced their view of the war and their subsequent decisions. In particular, the section discusses how their view of war influenced doctrine and modernization. The review sheds light on the impact of culture on both the service and Japanese decisions made throughout the war. The discussion argues that failures in prosecution were not only attributable to luck, personalities and doctrine but also that culture directly contributed to the Japanese operational planning and their implementation of war plans. Particular focus will be paid to the development of IJN military culture from the 1905 Russo-Japanese War until the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941. At the conclusion of the Russo-Japanese War and World War I, the Japanese understood well what was needed to become a dominant military power operationally but they were not always able to overcome their resource constraints and political and cultural factors to achieve their strategic aspirations. The development of the Japanese navy's culture was also shaped by the events during this period and by how naval officers interpreted those events in terms of doctrine, training, and equipment. The discussion begins with the Russo-Japanese War because the formative experiences of the Japanese navy in the 19 th Century have only a small effect on the navy after 1905. Other events as early as the Japanese invasion of Korea in 1592 or as late as the Second Sino-Japanese War of 1937 all contributed to the development of Japanese military culture. The Russo-Japanese War was selected because Japanese naval leaders focused on the lessons of 1905 when planning for war against the United States.
In Battle: A History of Combat and Culture military historian John Lynn defines military culture as the way in which armies think of themselves. He further states that military culture includes conceptions of war and combat within a military.
1
While each is intertwined to some degree, Lynn specifies military culture as that which is most relevant in analyzing the "conceptual factors in determining military history." 2 Drawing from examples from as far back as the Pacific War up to Operation DESERT STORM, modern strategists often pointed to technology as the most important factor determining combat success.
Lynn does not necessarily abandon that notion because there have been technological advancements that have had a profound impact on the battlefield. However, technology is only a tool employed by those who are influenced by a distinct military culture. Lynn uses his definition to demonstrate that the prosecution of war is not just a decision about which side has the most resources or the best technology or the best-trained army. His definition shows that military culture influences everything about warthe decisions, the interpretations of events, the human dynamic, and the decision making cycle.
As Lynn stated, how one thinks of themselves is vital to the discussion of military culture. The Japanese people were and are a proud people with a long military tradition.
Commonly referred to examples of the Japanese warrior traditions include the samurai and the samurai code of bushido. Up to the Pacific War, Japan's ascendance as a military power had been by deliberate design, based upon long standing traditions. The Meiji Restoration was the result of Japanese elites attempting to reform their social and political structure in response to the colonial threat posed by Western powers. After Commodore Matthew C. Perry's intrusion into the Japanese island in 1853, Japan recognized they had neither the military power nor the political legitimacy to prevent incursions by a foreign colonial power. They responded by changing the Tokagawa Shoganate and by adopting a dual strategy of industrial development and governmental modernization. The Japanese elites felt that by modernizing they could limit any advance into the sovereign territory by western colonial powers. The arrival of Western naval vessels in Japanese waters had produced a deep sense of military inferiority and shame because they knew they could not repel the foreign intruders. Thus, the Japanese had sought to redefine themselves. The Western colonial powers had exposed a weakness in Japan and they were determined to regain their respect as the Yamato race. A newer feudal sense of obligation was enforced and moral authority came from the elites and established Meiji Emperor. 
3
The war with Russia provided outsiders an opportunity to see where the Japanese stood as a potential military and political power and to observe Japan's use of western technology and tactics. Analysts, military historians and observers, such as Sir Ian Hamilton who personally observed the war between Japan and Russia, begrudgingly admired how the Japanese deceived the Russians about their intentions and they suggested that there might be lessons to be learned from by studying Japanese deception operations. 
4
5
The last section recognizes the Battle of Midway as a pivotal point in the Pacific War.
Midway opens a period during which the Japanese could no longer reasonably expect to achieve a quick, decisive victory. Midway changed the course of the war for both the US and Japanese. Up to that point in the war, the Japanese war machine had enjoyed success after success. After Midway, the IJN could no longer influence the war to achieve a favorable outcome. In comparison to the decisions regarding Pearl Harbor, the section shows the IJN's cultural fixation with Mahanian naval concepts and its reliance on Japanese technological advantages such as the torpedo and large battleship guns. By Midway, these advantages were increasingly tactically irrelevant. This section shows that the Japanese navy's emphasis on a decisive, first strike was no longer a winning concept. These operational decisions were deliberately and consciously made but were heavily influenced by Japan's past and its navy's culture.
Alfred Thayer Mahan served as a major contributor to the Imperial Japanese Navy's culture that existed in the Pacific War. Along with the lessons learned from the Russo-Japanese War, his theories influenced much of the development of how Japanese naval leaders interpreted what role the Japanese Navy would play in foreign policy and national security concerns. Two such naval leaders and veterans of the Russo-Japanese War, Vice Admiral Akiyama Saneyuki and Vice Admiral Sato Tetsutaro played a significant role in codifying these influences that would serve as a foundation in the establishment of the Japanese naval culture that existed in the Pacific War.
Known as the father of modern Japanese naval strategy, Saneyuki was a disciple of Mahan. In 1898, as an observer of the American fleet during the Spanish American War Saneyuki obtained some unique insights to US naval capabilities based off the Mahanian concepts. He also served as a senior staff officer for Admiral Togo's Combined Fleet during the Russo-Japanese War, which won accolades for its performance against the Russians. While he did not necessarily agree with all Mahan's views, he considered Mahan a "meticulous nervous strategist who combines a philosophical brain with a logical mind." He further considered Mahan a spiritualist, which the Japanese generally saw as an integral part of the military culture in both the navy and army. 
6
7
Tetsutaro was chosen by Naval Minister Yamamoto Gombei to be the leading theorist and propagandist for a navy first policy. "Traditionally, the navy had been clearly subordinate to the army. In 1898 [Gombei], engaged in a bureaucratic battle with Army Minister Katsura Taro, in an attempt to change the priority for defense spending, from the army to the navy." 8 Tetsutaro continued Gombei's efforts and warned that no nation could maintain a first class navy and firstclass army at the same time. He saw the navy as Japan's first line of defense. Therefore, he thought the navy should be assigned the first priority, "even to the point of suggesting the withdrawal of troops from Korea and Manchuria." 9 He originally saw the United States as a formidable national power, posing the greatest potential threat to Japan. However, he also thought it unwise to try to maintain a fleet on par with the US. Tetsutaro originally insisted that the best course of action was friendly relations with the US. However, five years later, when Japan was knee deep in Manchuria and the US was openly critical of Japanese efforts in the region, he changed his position, a change that pointed toward an eventual conflict between the two nations. 
10
9
10 Ibid., 37.
Tetsutaro and Saneyuki had significantly influenced the establishment of a Mahanian dominated culture within the Navy. However, their advocacy was not the only influence. The Russo-Japanese War also significantly altered the IJN's thinking on doctrine and strategy. Four significant concepts came out of the Japanese naval engagements with Russia. The first was the concept of the decisive fleet engagement determined by the big guns. The second was the validity of a strategy of attrition against a numerically superior enemy. Third, the Japanese read into the lessons of the Russo-Japanese War a preference for quality over quantity in naval weaponry.
Lastly, the Japanese Navy concluded from their experiences that nighttime torpedo attacks had a significant role to play in achieving the attrition. 
11
12
14
13
overwhelming pride of service that perpetuated the navy's continuing and destructive rivalry with the army." 
15
16
Additionally, the war in China provided new tactics, techniques and procedures as well as a cadre of pilots that became the most experienced of any military force that existed in the early 1940s.
Unfortunately, the Japanese navy failed to comprehend the full potential of naval aviation in its operational planning. Aviation never fit comfortably into the Japanese interpretation of Mahan's definition of a suitable fleet.
Like naval aviation, Japanese aircraft carriers did not ever assume a dominant role in Japanese naval culture despite the preeminence the carrier came to have during the war. While operational doctrine on the employment of aircraft carriers developed quickly over a relatively short period, the carrier was never more than a raiding platform or a supporting ship for battleships and land forces. Despite this secondary role, aviation planners and carrier advocates worked diligently to ensure that the carrier would be effective when called upon. Once such tactic was the development of the box formation, which allowed for the massing of aircraft on a target.
The box formation also allowed for a limited dispersal of the ships but ensured the fleet's antiaircraft fire from the carriers could also be brought to bear against enemy aircraft. The ability to command and control this new formation required some reorganization of the Combined Fleet. In 1941, Admiral Yamamoto, in conjunction with Rear Admiral Jisaburo Ozawa, formed the First Air Fleet. While this new grouping was conceivably the most powerful conglomeration of naval forces, it could not conduct independent operations since it lacked "an accompanying supply force or any significant surface escort," a problem the US fleet did not face. 
17
Tetsutaro and Saneyuki set conditions for what the Japanese Navy would deem important to be a pre-eminent naval power. As Lynn suggested, it was how Japanese naval officers saw themselves. The Japanese placed a great faith in the principles of Mahan when they built their navy and those tenets placed them at great odds with the fiscal constraints imposed upon them by the economic situation of the times and by their inferior status. Mahan had prescribed that ideally battleships would strike quickly and decisively to achieve victory. Unfortunately, a dominant fleet of that description was not within Japanese capabilities and, subsequently, put the Navy at odds with members of its own ranks, the army and the Japanese government. Unfortunately, for the theorists like Tetsutaro and Saneyuki, lessons learned from the Russo-Japanese War and World War I confirmed what they thought to be true. Technological advances and operational enhancements such as air power and the aircraft carrier did not fit into the established naval culture. The First Air Fleet successfully attacked Pearl Harbor but did not achieve the successes that would lead to achievement of the Japan's overall strategic goals. Author and former Imperial Navy staff officer Masataka Chihaya discussed the Imperial Navy's predilection with the decisive battle concept. He said that the Japanese navy became slaves of the one big battle idea and that this emphasis never went beyond the blue print stage. Based off this idea, he suggests that the IJN was never ever able to conceive of a possibility that actions beyond the decisive battle would be required. 
18
The attack on Pearl Harbor provides the first demonstration of the decisive battle concept in action. In hindsight, Pearl Harbor is generally seen as an operational success because it crippled the US battleship fleet. However, it also influenced the strategic outcome by changing 
18
In order to establish Japan as a legitimate power, the Japanese leadership needed to develop a military capable of meeting Japan's long-term goals of national security and economic independence. To build that military, Japan relied heavily on outside assistance for advice, material support and doctrinal development. Germany was one of the major powers Japan relied upon. However, Germany's subsequent defeat in World War I signaled a need for the Japanese to conduct a complete review of their own strengths and weaknesses. It made sense if Germany could be defeated using the same tactics and technology provided to the Japanese, the Japanese could suffer the same consequences. According to historian Michael A. Barnhart, the Japanese concluded that Germany lost because they lacked the economic resources required to wage war in the presence of a naval blockade. It was clear to Japanese leaders that Japan had to be economically viable and independent in addition to being a great military power if it expected to succeed in long-term goals. Economic independence required gaining access to overseas resources, such as oil and iron and development of an industrial base that could produce needed war materials. The debate became how to achieve autarky but still have the financial wherewithal to build a capable military force. Capable military forces cost significant amounts of money to build and more importantly, to maintain.
From the point of view of the army, one solution was to take over Manchuria and establish a puppet government willing to meet Japan's economic and resource needs. However, the creation of Manchukuo in 1932 did not solve Japan's economic problems and created the potential for armed conflict with Russia and China. The tensions within the government over how to address each threat came to a head once full combat operations were initiated between China and Japan in July 1937. The Second Sino-Japanese War all but assured Japan would not be able to become economically self sufficient, especially as the country mobilized industry and capacity to conduct full-scale war production. "During the frenzied debates of mid-1937, most army officers maintained that operations in China would amount to no more than a short-term affair requiring relatively small forces." 
19
20
21
22
21
22 Saki Dockrill, "Introduction: One Step Forward -A Reappraisal of the 'Pacific War,'" in From Pearl Harbor to Hiroshima: The Second World War in Asia and the Pacific, 1941-45, ed. Saki Dockrill  (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1997), 4.  both services continued to plan for their own version of the Southward Advance. 
23
The IJA felt the most important portion of the compromise was the alliance with Germany. The Navy still maintained some concerns based upon its assumption that any Southward Advance would ultimately result in conflict with the US. The Navy Minister, Zengo Yoshida and Commander of the Combined Fleet, Isoroku Yamamoto contended that such a confrontation was then beyond Japan's capabilities. Neither was certain Japan could win a war with the United States. Any chance one did have would require a quick strike with definitive objectives that was conducted over a limited period. The longer any conflict went on, the poorer the chances for victory. Ongoing actions in China proved how uncertain that promise could be.
Ironically as the architect of the attack on Pearl Harbor, Admiral Yamamoto declared to the Emperor several months prior to the attack, "We can give you a wild show for six months to a year, but if the war drags on to two and three years, I cannot be confident of the outcome." 
24
23
24
25
Once again, service rivalry interfered with a solution. Now it was the Navy who began to hedge their bets as doubt began to creep in with regards to whether they could actually defeat the US Navy. The Army felt betrayed and became enraged by this turn of events. This time the Prime Minister could not resolve the drama and resigned. Army Minister Hideki Tojo succeeded him and immediately put the Imperial Navy on notice. If the vaunted Navy that had received all this material support could not defeat the US, what was the point of having a fleet? The Navy, in order to save face, concurred but with a caveat. Any conflict with the US must be conducted within one to two years in order to achieve success. Anything longer would exceed available resources. Despite these dire conditions, the US was elevated to the number one threat to Japanese interests in the region. 
26
The Russo-Japanese War was a precedent for attacking first; an example consistent with Mahan's principles and offering a quick, decisive victory. A surprise attack against the United States was also consistent with lessons learned from Japan's war with Russia and Japan's national temperament. 
27
26
27
followed by a submarine blockade. He had the paper sent to the Naval Minister and which Rear Admiral Takijiro Onishi, a noted unconventional naval planner, also reviewed. 
28
29
The discussion of the events leading up to the final decision, capped with Oi's observation about the Nagano method of staff work shows a military culture that was inherently dysfunctional. Nagano had lost the confidence of many in the Naval General Staff as well as the confidence of the Emperor and was unable to control Yamamoto or the belligerent middle echelon officers. Additionally, the concept of mission command or commander's intent was completely foreign to Japanese staff planning. It allowed the staffs to insert their own biases and influences into the plan without regard to the commander's input. Equally, the commander was often subject to the staff interaction and infighting but unable to do anything about it. Supervisors were removed from the detailed planning process and unable to mitigate conflicts, answer questions or clarify intent. Military culture also prevented those with decision-making authority from making reasonable objections. Commanders recognized the fractures that existed within the military and the power militants could generate. They remembered the assassinations and the coup attempts of the 1930s that resulted from the restlessness of the masses. Any lack of legitimacy in maintaining the interests of those power elites might result in their removal by force or by influence. Sadao Asada mentions in his book From Mahan to Pearl Harbor what he calls the Navy's drift into Pearl Harbor. He says that to pinpoint the exact time when the drift occurred is difficult but his emphasis is clear that the staffs of the Naval General Staff, the Navy Ministry and the operational commanders were all on their own timelines. Asada highlights that the "middle echelon officers came to the determination before ranking officers did and that the Naval General Staff reached the decision before the Navy Ministry." 
30
Despite the internal disagreements, Pearl Harbor was deemed a success by the Japanese leadership. Yamamoto was seen as a naval genius and an unparalleled strategist. By March 1942, most military historians and even reports submitted by the military at that time indicated that Japan held the advantage. Japan physically controlled British Malaya, Singapore, the Dutch East Indies, including the oil rich islands of Borneo, Java and Sumatra. The Philippines was almost controlled by the Japanese, except for Bataan and Corregidor. Bataan would eventually fall on 9
April. Thailand failed to put up any fight whatsoever and the British were chased out of Burma back into India. Not a single Imperial Japanese Navy capital ship had been sunk and only a few destroyers, submarines and transports had been lost to Allied forces to this point. Yamamoto's Pearl Harbor plan, despite its failure to destroy the US carrier fleet, seemed initially to support Japanese strategic war aims. Up until Midway, Japan was the supreme force in the Western Pacific and in a position to secure its new territory. The Japanese held the initiative everywhere. 
31
The Midway plan faced significant challenges to its implementation. It was received with even less enthusiasm than the Pearl Harbor plan and there the overall goals appeared to be inconsistent. Authors Jon Parshall and Anthony Tully describe a staff on the eve of Midway that seemed to harbor significant doubts about the success of the plan and remained apathetic during the planning phase. Some were outright hostile and others felt that the mission's operational planning left much to be desired.
32
During the planning for operations in the Pacific, inter-service rivalry continued to be thorn in the side of the operational planners. The Navy remained subordinate to the Army so any time army units were required to support naval missions there was friction and disagreement. By 1942, the fragmented Japanese military culture split the Navy and the Army over almost every issue. The Army saw the war as a protracted struggle while the Navy maintained its Mahanian focus on the decisive battle. To the Japanese Navy, both the Russo-Japanese War and events from post World War I only confirmed their vision of future naval warfare. Additionally, the Mahanian methodology, the "one great battle at sea [as] the essence of naval war [that] would achieve command of the sea and even decide the outcome of the war," greatly influenced their naval culture to point of conviction. 
33
34
To Yamamoto and to those who supported his thinking, "the first four months of the Pacific conflict had confirmed certain aspects of this Japanese self image." 
35
Just as Yamamoto failed to understand how the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor would ignite the wrath of a nation against him, he also failed to understand the US' willingness to engage the Japanese force at Midway. Yamamoto further complicated the plan by making concessions to those who wanted to secure the Aleutians to prevent raids on the home islands. The Aleutian campaign divided the available fleet resources and dissipated combat power in a secondary effort.
Isoroku Yamamoto had always been an influential figure in the Imperial Navy whose background seemed at odds with the mainstream of the majority of naval officers. In reality, his personality and character did not necessarily match his mythic Pearl Harbor reputation. Authors Jon Parshall and Anthony Tully describe Yamamoto as one who was born to humble origins and who combined intelligence with an intense drive to better himself. He also possessed several questionable characteristics such as being an avid gambler and an ambivalent family man although those personality flaws did not seem to be discordant with the social norms of the naval 
34
35
36
The challenge for Admiral Yamamoto was to convince his superiors in the Imperial government and his challengers within the Imperial Japanese Army that an attack on Midway was both fundamentally sound in the overall war plan but also would capitalize on the success achieved thus far. The Japanese had never understood their goal to be the conquest of the United States. Rather they felt if they could conclude the war on terms favorable to the Japanese by wearing the United States down to such an extent that the United States would seek terms for ending the war. Additionally, they wanted to forcibly demonstrate to the United States that any invasion of the Japanese mainland would be prohibitive in both lives and material lost.
Midway as a piece of territory in of itself was rather unremarkable. The United States had held this territory since the Spanish-American War and had worked hard to make it a logistical hub in the vast Pacific Ocean. A runway and refueling station had been built to accommodate civilian air traffic and it was placed in such an area, that military transport and bombers could use it to attack the Japanese homeland. Located 1,185 nautical miles from Pearl Harbor and 1,135 from Wake Island, it presented some challenges to planning an attack and subsequently defending the island. 
37
Another challenge would be overcoming the logistical advantage that rested with the United States Navy in this regard. Nevertheless, the plan on the surface was bold but manageable.
Japan still enjoyed an advantage in fleet assets across the Pacific. The Japanese were riding a wave of multiple successes. To surrender this advantage, to lose face at such a critical junction would have been demoralizing. Yamamoto could not wait until the US shifted additional assets to the Pacific, such as the carriers USS Wasp and Ranger, or wait for ships that had been damaged to be repaired and returned to action, such as the USS Saratoga. Nor could they simply wait for the full force of the American industrial power to reach its apex. The time to attack was now. 
38
Most of the Japanese Midway participants were veterans of the previous six months of naval war and as such, they had yet to suffer a defeat or a significant setback. While the plan lacked the cohesiveness of Pearl Harbor plan and as stated earlier, some officers harbored concerns about the planning, others seemed casually disinclined to worry about possible defects in the plan; if there were defects, they could take care of it when it came along. This dismissive attitude due to established norms was revealed again later when Yamamoto asked his strategic aviation genius, Captain Genda, about what would happen if American carriers showed up in an unexpected place as the Japanese force was engaged in operations against Midway Island. Genda replied, "Gaishu Isshoku" which literally means, "One touch of the armored gauntlet" or idiomatically, "Easy victory." Genda's overconfidence demonstrates that it was not Yamamoto who needed to worry about the details; the staff would ensure success of the plan. Yamamoto did not follow up on questioning Genda or the staff on the details. His lack of attentiveness shows how committed Yamamoto was to the spirit of the plan, regardless of the challenges in tactical and technical requirements that would ensure success. The irony is that two years earlier, Yamamoto had been quoted as saying, and "It is a mistake to regard the Americans as luxury loving and weak I can tell you Americans are full of the spirit of justice, fight and adventure."
Yamamoto had forgotten his own advice and therefore failed to consider the concerns of some of his staff. 
39
40
On another occasion and during the Midway war games, the Japanese officer commanding the Red (American) Force sent out his carriers early and positioned them on the flank of the approaching Japanese force. A prudent move, his action was ruled invalid by Admiral Matome Ugaki, Chief of Staff of the Combined Fleet because he did believe the Americans had "the kind of fighting spirit necessary to attempt such a bold maneuver." 
41
42
Yamamoto had many detractors, especially those that reviewed the battle after the fact.
Many deride him for splitting the fleet between the Aleutian and Midway operations, thereby, reducing his combat power at Midway. One myth is that Aleutians were designed to be a diversion for the main thrust at Midway. The intent was to help lure the US fleet out of Pearl in order to meet them head on. According to Parshall and Tully's research in Shattered Sword, this was not the case. Both operations were conducted exclusive of one another and more a result of cultural and political concerns, rather than operational. Parshall and Tully draw upon numerous documents, to include Admiral Nagumo's official report, that discuss the operations as simultaneous operations, neither which mentions the one as a diversionary effort for the other. As Parshall and Tully also point out, the operational sense of the simultaneous operation does not make sense if they were to work in concert with one another. If the attack on the Aleutians Island was intended to draw the US fleet away from Pearl Harbor and into the open, the Japanese attack on the Aleutians should have been conducted prior to Midway, not in conjunction with it. The reality is that the Aleutian plan was a concession by Yamamoto to the Naval Staff in order to get what he wanted which was Midway. 
43
Other challenges that arose due to personalities and differing perceptions on what the end state should be revealed themselves in the planning process for Midway. Yamamoto's own staff was not coordinated and its officers often worked against each other, reflecting the widening cultural gulf between the young and old or zealots and moderates. Midway was significant in that it signified a shift in the Pacific War. The Japanese were never able to respond effectively to this loss. The industrial capacity to replace four carriers and hundreds of planes did not exist, especially in the middle of a war. The manpower loss in certified, trained and experienced pilots was an even bigger blow and sorely needed as the US fleet approached mainland Japan. 
44
Rather, what appears is a complex, comprehensive web of failures stretching across every level of the battlestrategic, operational and tactical. They were the end products of an organization that failed to learn correctly from its past, failed to plan correctly for its future and then failed to adapt correctly to circumstances once those plans were shown to be flawed." 
45
Alfred Thayer Mahan's influence on the development of the Japanese naval culture has been well documented by numerous historians and political scientists. Japanese naval theorists who adopted Mahan's ideas did not foresee how Mahan's ideas would ossify Japanese naval thinking. The focus on employing a big gun battleship navy in order to achieve the decisive, quick victory required Japan to build a fleet capable of sustaining itself against its potential adversaries. Japan's limited industrial and natural resources could not build such a fleet.
Additionally those such as Vice Admiral Saneyuki and his colleagues who doggedly supported a battleship-based fleet, could not adjust to the advent of carrier-based warfare and advances in naval aviation, Once the war began, the Japanese were wedded to the Mahanian construct and unable to adjust to the changing nature of the operational battlefield.
Japanese naval culture was also held hostage by its history and how it interpreted that history, specifically from 1905 onward. The lessons learned from the Russo-Japanese War and the outcomes of World War I shaped the IJN's decisions that would ultimately spell its defeat.
Ultimately, it became an institution that developed a military culture that prevented naval commanders from cohesively and decisively coming to terms with the changing nature of the Pacific War. Along with the ongoing interservice rivalry with the IJA, the Navy also suffered internal divisions between the old and the new, those that subscribed to the Mahanian influence and those that saw the relevance of new technologies like the carrier and naval aviation. It could also not resolve the internal division between militant junior officers and those commanders who stressed moderation in light of an overwhelming and capable US Navy. The Japanese Navy became fixated on the lessons of 1905: reliance on the torpedo, the decisive first strike, and the emphasis of the spirit over material capacity. Those concepts fit nicely into the concept of what it meant to Japanese but did not lead an overall war plan that could adapt to the technological might of the US Navy.
In a strange case of irony, the war was initiated by the Japanese need for resources and territory. Japan knew from watching Germany during World War I that it needed to be economically viable before initiating conflict. However, to gain that viability, the Japanese would envitably need to confront the United States. The established military culture did not block the naval commander's recognition of the futileness of its cause in going to war with the US but that same culture prevented those commanders from deviating from that course in order to achieve its goals. Vice Admiral Kato Kanji voiced an opinion at the Washington Conference that the "cardinal lesson of the world war . . . was the vital importance of effecting a decisive fleet engagement early in the war before the United States could mobilize its formidable industrial potential." 46 He determined that Japan would be at the disadvantage in a protracted war. "At the outset of the 1920s, the estimated ratio of American to Japanese capital ship construction capacity was three or four to one. Therefore, it was clearly in the interest of Japan for any future conflict to be as brief as possible before the margin of superior American firepower became overwhelming." 47 Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto wrote a letter to the Chief of the Naval Staff, Admiral Osami Nagano, as late as September 29, 1941 that it was obvious the coming war with the United States would be a protracted one. He stated that the US would never stop fighting as long as Japan remained in what he called a favorable position. He continued to say, "as a consequence, the war would continue for several years, our supplies would be exhausted, our ships and arms would be damaged and ultimately we would not be able to escape defeat. Not only that, as a result of the war, people of this nation would be reduced to abject poverty."
48
46
47
Ironically, the Washington Conference may have contributed to the Japanese in thinking they could successfully mitigate the fiscal challenges associated with building a fleet on par with the Americans. The 1923 Tokyo earthquake and the declining economy and worldwide economic depression limited what the Navy could expect to receive. Because the Washington Conference established limited capital ship construction, the IJN took great pains to ensure that the ships it did build possessed a qualitative advantage. The naval commanders also placed faith in the fighting spirit of its sailors to overcome a shortfall in numbers. "Indeed, all the measures of the Japanese navy that aimed to counter the quantitative superiority of the US Fleet can be subsumed under the Japanese principle of ka o motte shu o sei-su (using a few to conquer many), which had been invoked in both the Sino and Russo-Japanese Wars."
49
The conclusion is that Japanese planners saw the events at Pearl Harbor as a confirmation of what they saw to be true based off lessons learned from the Russo-Japanese War and World War I. Utilizing the same tenants learned from the experiences the Japanese felt assured that Midway would provide the same results. Unfortunately for the Japanese, this blueprint for success could not be replicated. Japanese naval culture contributed to their defeat at Midway.
John A. Lynn, Battle: A History of Combat and Culture (Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
2003), xx. 2 Ibid., xvii.
Robert B. Edgerton, Warriors of the Rising Sun (New York: W.W.Norton & Company, Inc.,  1997), 306-309.   
Patrick Porter, "Military  Orientalism? British Observers of the Japanese Way ofWay, 1904- 1910," War & Society (May 2007): 11.   
5 Ibid.
Sadao Asada, From Mahan to Pearl Harbor:  The Imperial Japanese Navy and the United States (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2006), 30.
Ibid., 31.    
Ibid., 33.   
David C. Evans and Mark R. Peattie, Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics and Technology in the Imperial JapaneseNavy, 1887
-1941
12 Ibid.,
Evans and
Evans and
Ibid., 340.   
Evans and Peattie, Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics and Technology in the Imperial Japanese Navy,   
1887-1941, 349.   
Michael A. Barnhart, "Japan's Economic Security and the Origins of the Pacific War," Journal of Strategic Studies 4, no. 2 (June 1981), 112.
Ibid., 114.   
John Prados, Combined Fleet Decoded:  The Secret History of American Intelligence and the Japanese Navy in World War II(New York: Random House, 1995), 112.   
Prados, Combined Fleet Decoded:  The Secret History of American Intelligence and the Japanese Navy in World War II, 131.
Ibid., 138.   
Asada, From Mahan to Pearl Harbor:  The Imperial Japanese Navy and the United States, 261.
Jonathon B. Parshall and Anthony P. Tully, Shattered Sword: The Untold Story of the Battle of Midway (Washington, DC: Potomac Books, 2005), 19-22.
Parshall and Tully, Shattered Sword:  The Untold Story of the Battle of Midway, 19.
Evans and
James P. Levy, "Was There Something Unique to the Japanese that Lost Them the Battle of Midway?," Naval War College Review 67 (Winter 2014): 120-121.
Prados, Combined Fleet Decoded:  The Secret History of American Intelligence and the Japanese Navy in World War II, 128.
Symonds, Pivotal Moments in American History: Battle of Midway, 177.   
Symonds, Pivotal Moments in American History: Battle of Midway,[177][178] 
Prados, Combined Fleet Decoded:  The Secret History of American Intelligence and the Japanese Navy in World War II, 314.
Parshall and Tully, Shattered Sword:  The Untold Story of the Battle of Midway, 36.
Symonds, Pivotal Moments in American History: Battle of Midway, 360.   
Colin E. Babb, "Explaining the 'Miracle' at Midway," Naval Aviation News 94 (Spring 2012): 36.
Prados, Combined Fleet Decoded:  The Secret History of American Intelligence and the Japanese Navy in World WarII, 114.   
Evans and