# ID: b05b67f097dc4c06b4528711bec3a00f
# Title: The Triangle Offense: Using Social Movement Theory to Analyze Russia's Gray Zone Strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Social Movement Theory (SMT), which came into being during the 1960s, is a compact model for analyzing organizations pursuing political objectives. Using the tripartite structure of ideological framing, resource mobilization, and political opportunity, academics and practitioners use SMT to analyze everything from civil rights groups to religious insurgencies. However, there is no existing SMT application to the "gray zone," which represents one of the greatest challenges facing the United States today. This thesis reviews the current literature on both the gray zone and SMT, creates an SMT analytical model, and then applies the model to case studies on Russia and Ukraine. Under proper analysis, SMT can identify existing sources of tension in a gray zone adversary, likely vulnerabilities in a target region, and potential countermeasures for senior strategists and commanders.
The concept of a "gray zone" in warfare is not new. In 1955, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger used the term, "Gray Areas," to describe countries along the Sino-Soviet periphery where the US could employ limited means, instead of nuclear weapons, to resist and exhaust communist efforts. 
1
[Adversaries are] increasingly using agents, paramilitaries, deception, infiltration, and persistent denial to make those avenues of approach very hard to detect, operating in what some people have called 'The Gray Zone.' Now, that's the zone in which our ground forces have not traditionally had to operate, but one in which they must now become more proficient. 
2
Countries that use gray zone strategies against the United States, hereafter known as "adversaries," have several common characteristics. First, they exert political control over a clear geographic area, which distinguishes adversaries from terrorist and criminal organizations. Adversaries have important national interests that may conflict with international norms and standards. An adversary may possess regional strength, but is 1 Henry A. Kissinger, "Military Policy and Defense of the "Grey Areas"," Foreign Affairs 33, no. 3 (April  1955) unwilling or unable to challenge the United States and her allies directly. To achieve their interests in a specific geographic area, adversaries will use a variety of diplomatic, information, military, and economic (DIME) methods below levels that would trigger a hostile political-military response. Over time, these methods can neutralize America's strengths and exhaust its political will.
The gray zone is a topic full of valid questions. Who is writing about the gray zone today? What are the current themes and schools of thought on gray zone analysis? How does a planner or decision maker identify and counter an adversary? Finally, does a reasonable solution exist for the gray zone problem? Social Movement Theory (SMT), an increasingly popular concept for analyzing insurgencies, can help illuminate an adversary's strategic objectives and vulnerabilities.
SMT's tripartite approach of ideological framing, resource mobilization, and political opportunity is a useful method for a combatant command to understand an adversary's motivations, tendencies, and vulnerabilities. This paper demonstrates how SMT can identify existing sources of tension in an adversary, likely vulnerabilities in a target region, and potential countermeasures for senior strategists and commanders.
This study consists of four chapters. Chapter 1 reviews existing gray zone authors and literature, as well as introduce the Gray Zone SMT model of analysis. Chapter 2 discusses Russia, which the United States currently considers its most active and dangerous adversary. Chapter 3 delves in Russian involvement in Ukraine. Finally, Chapter 4 concludes the paper with policy and authority recommendations for senior U.S. strategists and leaders.
Practitioners form the second set of writers. These authors, while hailing from across the armed services, have a sizable presence in the special operations community.
Senior commanders and staff officers dominate the practical side of gray zone analysis, but younger officers contribute as well. While practitioners focus on finding effective tactical and strategic responses to adversarial actions, they also reflect on the human aspects of modern warfare. Practitioners, especially special operators, are on the front lines of the gray zone, and use those experiences to enhance the field of study.
Unfortunately, operational requirements limit practitioner input to articles in newspapers and professional journals. 
2
3
Gray zone authors take several approaches to understanding the topic. The largest body of work focuses on finding strategic and tactical solutions to specific crises.
Practitioners often explore the conditions that lead to the emergence of both gray zone areas and adversarial gray zone strategies. Practitioners also look internally at their own talent management systems to address the complex problem of the gray zone. Finally, a small number of authors use coercion and deterrence theory to explain gray zone problems.
Strategy and tactics writers emphasize plans either to solve existing specific gray zone challenges, or to address an emerging adversary. Military and civilian experts split the work on strategic analysis, with a near-perfect reversal on emphasis: civilians believe that the military should lead the effort, while military personnel promote a more wholeof-government approach. 
4
5
Practitioners, who pursue solutions to gray zone problems, place special emphasis on talent management and the human domain. Talent management maximizes a unit's capability by finding, training, and employing the right person, to the right mission, at the right time. 
6
7
Talent management and the Human Domain present an interesting gray zone focus.
While talent management is a universal concept, few U.S. government agencies apply it to addressing gray zone problems. Within Special Operations, talent management 6 The Special Operations Community places exceptional emphasis on talent management. General Votel, in Unconventional Warfare in the Gray Zone, describes how the WWII era Jedburgh teams required language and cultural proficiency, as well as high levels of maturity, to keeps the partisans focused on the Germans and not each other. Admiral (Retired) William McRaven's book, Spec Ops, emphasized the importance of proper talent in the conduct of special operations missions. Admiral Olsen's article title: "The New U.S. Military Recruit: 'A Ph.D Who could win a Bar Fight,'" speaks for itself. 7 General Votel, in "Operating in the Gray Zone," states that understanding the grievances that are driving instability, identifying and understanding the relevant actors and behaviors, and determining ways to affect change are the three aspects of the Human Domain. In "Back to Basics on Hybrid Warfare in Europe," Dr. Lamb explained how, despite intense political and cultural opposition, the Bosnian Train and Equip (T&E) program trained over 5,000 Bosniak Soldiers in two years and changed the calculus of the Balkans conflict. manifests itself organically through rigorous assessment, selection, and training programs. Other interagency organizations should apply these concepts to their own recruiting, retention, and training efforts to tackle gray zone problems. As for the human domain, better interagency coordination and communication will help to draw a more concise picture of the operating environment. In particular, Dr. Lamb's case study provides a useful long-term perspective on the human domain in a successful gray zone campaign.
The persistent nature of uncertain conflict attracts some writers to the foundational causes and conditions behind gray zone conflicts. A principal observation is that an adversary will maintain focus on its domestic interests, with little concern for international norms and standards. 
8
Unfortunately, there is a small amount of contemporary academic material on the domestic conditions within gray zone conflict areas. There are few in-depth works from academics, and general articles merely skim the surface for policy makers. Fortunately, the United States maintains a wealth of information in its 307 embassies, consulates, and diplomatic missions around the world. 11 Additionally, allied countries have diplomatic archives and cables that are available for analysis and study, which can be especially valuable for countries where the U.S. lacks a diplomatic presence. 
12
Finally, a small number of researchers see the gray zone challenge as part of a greater national-level deterrence and coercion strategy. Once a critical aspect of Cold War politics, adversaries now use deterrence as a more subtle means of settling disputes. 
13
14
Of the four major themes, coercion and deterrence appears to have the fewest number of committed authors. However, deterrence and coercion have real promise of explaining gray zone problems. Considering the richness of the theoretical material, and the ability to apply theory to existing and former gray zone crises, this concept demands more research and study by both academics and practitioners.
Gray zone authorship is a vibrant and growing field. United by a common concern over America's strategic shortfalls, academics and practitioners are aggressively tackling the different aspects of gray zone research. An aspiring researcher on the gray zone will find a wealth of information and knowledge as a starting point.
Across the academic spectrum, three common themes emerged with respect to how the United States should address gray zone problems: national power, partnerships, and historical perspective. Recognizing this commonality better frames the gray zone problem and leads to better analysis.
The first, and most common theme, is that that all instruments of national power are necessary for success. Adversaries are militarily weaker than the United States, so they cannot afford a direct military confrontation. Instead, adept adversaries use information, economics, diplomacy, and legal avenues to achieve their objectives. The United States, within its legal and moral traditions, must reply in kind.
The second common theme is that the United States cannot win gray zone conflicts by using only one department or agency of government. Joint, Interagency, Intergovernmental, and Multinational (JIIM) is the ideal construct for fighting adversaries. Each department, service, and partner nation has unique skills and abilities.
None of the agencies can defeat a determined adversary alone. However, when JIIM partners are working in concert, there is a much greater chance for success.
Finally, the various authors proved that the gray zone is not ahistorical. Kissinger discussed the gray zone in 1955. Kapusta identified 54 separate gray zone activities since 1900. 
15
16
The existing body of work concludes that an adversary desires political control over a target population and will use multiple methods to achieve that goal. More importantly, gray zone methods refrain from overt violence to avoid negative reactions from the international community. Ideally, a successful adversary will achieve its goal through voluntary support of the target population. With voluntary popular support as a principle objective, it is interesting that no one has applied social movement theory towards understanding gray zone conflicts.
Social Movement Theory (SMT) emerged in the 1960s, as American and European governments tried to understand the massive changes emerging in their societies. After
Marxism and political repression theory failed to explain the rise of these new 11 movements, theorists landed on the social movement approach to understand the American Civil Rights movement, the Vietnam protest movement, and other forms of political protest. 17
There are several variants of SMT, but the strongest example uses a tripartite structure: ideological framing, resource mobilization, and political opportunity.   This case study uses SMT's tripartite structure to understand the Russian political state and domestic population. Russian leaders, using the West as a comparison, depend on strong foreign policy actions to maintain internal political support. This ideological framing of "Russia vs. Outsiders" greatly affects domestic actions. Resource mobilization in modern Russia rotates around natural resources (economics), secure borders (military), an aggressive diplomatic effort (diplomacy), and a near-monopoly on the information environment (information). Finally, the West failed to recognize the political opportunity to influence Russian political behavior in the 1990s, thus reopening the door for authoritarian rule in 1999.
History forms the first ideological frame for how the Russian people perceive their government. Russian history is distinctive for its lack of popular rule: from the Kievan Rus Empire in the 9 th Century AD through the Soviet Union in 1991, only monarchs and dictators have ruled from the Kremlin. 
3
4
Russia's international standing is important because it is directly proportional to the government's domestic support. As the country has a long history of authoritarian control, there is little precedent for either earning or maintaining a social contract. This missing social contract contributes to Russia's "legal nihilism," or disrespect for the law, by the common citizen. 
5
Russia's use of bilateral relationships not only helped it to dominate partners, but also weakened international resolve. 12 During a crisis, countries had to choose between the potential benefits of allying the West or the tangible economic lifeline from Russia. This emphasis on bilateral relationships also reinforced Russian strength in geographic areas that the West neglected, such as Eastern Europe and Central Asia. 
Russian leadership began to show signs of weakness in the late 1980s, during the era of Mikhail Gorbachev's perestroika, or restructuring of Soviet society. While Russia had the outward appearances of economic, military, and political strength, Gorbachev recognized that the state lacked a just social contract with the people. In a later interview, Gorbachev said, "our society, our people, the most educated, the most intellectual, rejected (the Soviet model) because it does not respect the man, oppresses him spiritually and politically." 
23
Communist empire that started in 1989 in Berlin. 
24
25
26
27
28
What does the SMT model reveal in analyzing Russia as an adversary? Russia's authoritarian history shapes its ideological framework. Centuries of czarist rule, followed by almost 80 years of communist dominance, left a legacy of autocratic rule. Russian history repeatedly shows that the people respect strong leaders, while viewing weak leaders as a significant threat. With no viable social contract between the government and the people, the Russian political system requires strong leadership to maintain domestic stability.
In an autocratic environment, a strong leader requires an adversary or competitor.
For much of Russia's history, Western European powers served as the model for comparison. After World War II, the United States ably filled this role, and Russia's international prestige grew during the Cold War. This gave Russian leaders the strength and authority they needed to run the country despite significant domestic concerns.
Ideology and competition are not enough; strong leaders need resources to maintain power. Russia's power flows from its vast oil and natural gas reserves, which it exports to countries across Europe and Central Asia. To maximize their energy advantage, Russian diplomats emphasize bilateral trade relationships, where Russia can maintain an asymmetric advantage over a weaker neighbor. Russia also possesses the strongest military in Eastern Europe, and can easily dominate any of its neighbors.
Finally, the Russian government controls the media environment, ensuring that the majority of the domestic population will only receive information that supports the regime. Human rights violations like silencing dissenters, imprisoning political rivals, and assassinating journalists and critics fail to arouse the population because those actions never make the evening news broadcasts. Moving forward, the most likely method of exploiting Russia's vulnerabilities as an adversary depend on eroding confidence in its leaders. This will be an exceptionally difficult challenge, especially in Russia's hostile information environment. Diplomatic and economic efforts appear less likely to work, as neither have a direct impact on the average Russian citizen. Militarily, Russia remains a tier below NATO and the United States, and is incapable of invading Western Europe. However, Russia has the largest nuclear arsenal in the world, and enough conventional military power to deter Western forces.
The major advantage the West has against Russia is time. Russia remains in a demographic spiral, with an overall life expectancy lower than Bangladesh, Eritrea, and Yemen. 
30
31
Finally, the expanding information environment, especially in social media, makes Soviet-style repression tactics impossible to conceal from the international community.
Standing firm on vital interests, while remaining alert to indirect approaches, appears to be the best way to contain this wily adversary.
In 2014, Russia executed a series of overtly aggressive actions against Ukraine.
In February, Russian forces seized political and military centers of power in the Crimean peninsula. After a "peoples' referendum," Moscow annexed Crimea into greater Russia. SMT analysis helps to answer several important questions with respect to Russia and Ukraine. What are the natural linkages between the two countries? How does Russia perceive its national interests with respect to Ukraine, the European Union, and the United States? What strategic tools did Russia use to impose its will on Ukraine without alerting the West to its aggression? Russia used historical ties to maintain a unified Russian-Ukrainian image, which also served to keep NATO at arm's length. Utilizing a combination of economic, diplomatic, and military power, Russia forced Ukraine to accept an asymmetric bilateral relationship. When the Maidan uprising in the winter of 2013-2014 overthrew Ukrainian president Victor Yanukovich, Russia took advantage of the political opportunity to seize Crimea and sow general chaos in eastern Ukraine.
The relationship between Russia and Ukraine reaches back to the 9 th Century AD, during the founding of the empire of Kievan Rus. Russian schoolchildren grow up knowing that Kiev is the "mother of Russian cities," while Kievan Rus is the common ancestor of Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus. 
1
economics. Throughout the Soviet period, Ukraine depended on Russian oil and natural gas to run its factories and heat its homes. In 2000, after the CIS failed to establish an integrated market among the former Soviet states, Russia formed the Eurasian Economic Community (EurAsEc). Originally consisting of Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyzstan, the purpose of the organization was to create a common political platform and economic union to counter the EU. 7 Russia used the economic alliance in an effort to bring Ukraine under its control, promising positive economic results if Ukraine joined EurAsEc. 
8
Viktor Yushchenko and the Orange Revolutionaries changed that equation in 2004. After Yushchenko became president in 2005, he explicitly turned the country westward towards Europe. 
9
10
For Russia, the energy weapon achieved its effect in 2010, when Victor Yanukovich, a pro-Russian politician, defeated Yulia Tymoshenko, an Orange Revolutionary, and became president.
During the same time period, Europe and the United States began to lose interest in Ukraine's democratic efforts. In 2005, a year after Ukraine's Orange Revolution, both the EU and US provided significant financial resources to Kiev to support domestic political changes. 11 However, by 2011, both entities shifted support away from democratization to "good governance" goals like, "justice, integrated border management, and disarmament." 
12
13
14
15
In the autumn of 2013, Victor Yanukovich made a crucial decision that changed the course of Ukraine's history: he rejected further NATO discussions and stated that the country would consider joining the Russian-backed EurAsEc. 
16
In this paper, the author used the SMT Gray Zone model to evaluate two Russian case studies. However, the intent is to apply the model to different gray zone adversary scenarios. In general, Russia's gray zone strategy was effective, but the outcome was neither inevitable nor irresistible. This section highlights several findings from the Russia case studies for consideration in facing a future adversary. The section also includes several recommendations for combatant commanders to consider for deterring and defeating their adversaries.
Finding #1: Ideological framing is a long-term process, and requires a long-term policy response.
The Russian case study illustrated that ideological framing is not a short-term process. A number of factors, to include cultural similarities, religious affiliation, or a common enemy can accelerate the process. However, there is no such thing as an immediately successful ideological frame.
Russian efforts are one of many examples of successful ideological framing. Iran, in its support of Lebanese Hezbollah, successfully united the Lebanese Shia against their common enemy, Israel, during the Lebanese civil war of the 1980s. Syed Qtub, who many consider the father of modern Islamism, mobilized his followers after decades of resisting the Arabization efforts of President Gamal Abdel Nasser. In China, Mao
Zedong mobilized Western China against Imperial Japan and, later, General Chiang Kai-shek over twenty years. Regardless of the situation, ideological framing takes time and patience to convert an audience from passive listening to active support.
Recommendation #1: Establish long-term information campaigns, with diplomatic and economic support to counter adversary ideological framing.
Russian ideological framing relied on a historical perspective of the Russian-Ukrainian relationship. Spanning nearly a millennium, this reference frame relied on a shared history, common religion, and similar experiences in war and peace. It is fantastical to think that a foreign information campaign from the West could counter, or even dent, such an ingrained mindset.
However, this does not mean that western forces should surrender the information battlefield. Instead, establishing realistic objectives are critical. For example, the EU and the United States could have persisted in their democratization efforts, insisting that Ukraine make concrete efforts to root out corruption and economic mismanagement. In return, the West could have delivered significant economic aid to help the country during its transition -especially after Russia threatened to cut oil and gas supplies.
More importantly, combatant commands must prepare information campaigns for the long haul. As the case study showed, Russian efforts lasted for years, and reinforced economic and diplomatic efforts before the use of military force. It is unwise to expect an information campaign to have concrete results in a 6-12 month period -especially if diplomatic and economic measures are absent. At a minimum, a full effort will challenge the gray zone strategist on the information battlefield. Otherwise, information control are planning to integrate their natural gas markets by 2020.
2
Recommendation #3: Help partner nations to increase their military capabilities, especially in foreign internal defense.
In would alleviate the unpredictable nature of annual appropriations, and allow USSOCOM to conduct long-term planning against gray zone adversaries.
The gray zone, or the span of conflict below the level of war, is neither new nor temporary. The United States and her allies will continue to face adversaries that will use all aspects of national power to establish and maintain an asymmetrical advantage.
Addressing these complex problems with conventional military solutions will only lead to the loss of blood, treasure, and political prestige. The United States requires new and innovative solutions to this seemingly intractable problem.
This paper proposed using social movement theory's tripartite approach of ideological framing, resource mobilization, and political opportunity to analyze gray zone adversaries. The two case studies demonstrated that historical roots shape perceptions, economic and diplomatic ties entangle target areas, military strengths can freeze opponents, and that time-sensitive political opportunities can permanently change the environment.
Successful counter-adversary operations require a significant resource commitment, intensive interagency coordination, and authorities that allow maximum freedom of movement at the lowest level. USSOCOM, with its service-like authorities and funding, is an ideal match for this complex mission. With the proper authorities and funding, other combatant commands or departments can address gray zone problems as well.
The greatest requirements for confronting, restraining, and defeating a gray zone adversary are willpower and patience. Adversaries depend on political impatience and exhaustion to succeed. It is essential that the United States and her allies maintain a consistent focus and steady resolve in confronting an adversary. This is the true path to victory in the gray zone.
23
While Dr. Hafez is one of the most prominent authors on SMT and Islamist insurgencies, he was not the first scholar to make this connection. Dr. David Snow and Dr. Susan Marshall illustrated how Islam had a "latent mobilization structure" that could be "tapped or activated for revolt." 21 Dr. Quintan Wiktorowicz described how Islamists use their social interactions to provide for the population, recruit followers, and propagate their ideology.
While Dr. Hafez is one of the most prominent authors on SMT and Islamist insurgencies, he was not the first scholar to make this connection. Dr. David Snow and Dr. Susan Marshall illustrated how Islam had a "latent mobilization structure" that could be "tapped or activated for revolt." 21 Dr. Quintan Wiktorowicz described how Islamists use their social interactions to provide for the population, recruit followers, and propagate their ideology.
8
8
War, the government required an adversary, and the "democratic peace" movement from Europe and the US provided the perfect scapegoat. The sharp rise of democratization, followed by aggressive NATO expansion in the Baltics and Eastern Europe, appeared to be a direct threat to Russian security.
War, the government required an adversary, and the "democratic peace" movement from Europe and the US provided the perfect scapegoat. The sharp rise of democratization, followed by aggressive NATO expansion in the Baltics and Eastern Europe, appeared to be a direct threat to Russian security.
while
The two most popular websites for gray zone discussion are "War on the Rocks" (http://www.warontherock.com) and "Small Wars Journal" (https://www.smallwarsjournal.com). The U.S. Army John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School (USAJFKSWCS) sponsors the "Project Gray" website (http://www.projectgray.org). Both "Project Gray" and "Small Wars Journal" publish academic papers on the topic.
Dr. Echevarria, in Operating in the Gray Zone, states a whole-of-government approach is necessary, but the military, with its experience with practical planning, should be the planners, leaders, and executors. Dr. Freier, in Outplayed, states DoD should "lead up" in the interagency and develop strategic approaches to gray zone adversaries and challenges. CAPT Phillip Kapusta, in "The Gray Zone," counters that America follows a predictable and overly militarized strategy, thus making it easy for gray zone adversary to counter. Dr. Christopher Lamb, in "Back to Basics on Hybrid Warfare," uses a Bosnia case study to demonstrate how an interagency approach can lead to long-term success against a gray adversary.
General Votel, in "Unconventional War in the Gray Zone," proposes that unconventional warfare (UW) and foreign internal defense (FID) are the best ways to counter a gray zone adversary because they strengthen allies and weaken enemies over a long period. Lieutenant General (Retired) Cleveland, in "The Emerging Land Commons and Gray Zone Conflict," states that success in the gray zone depends on partnerships with the indigenous population.
Kapusta, The Gray Zone, 24.   
Echevarria, Operating in the Gray Zone: An Alternative Paradigm for U.S. Military Strategy, 6.
This method of population analysis stems from the Target Audience Analysis (TAA) process within Psychological Operations. While specific TTPs behind PSYOP TAA are classified, the basic concepts are common to marketing, business, and communications strategies.
Robert B. Strassler and Richard Crawley eds., The Landmark Thucydides: A Comprehensive Guide to the Peloponnesian War(New York: Free Press, 2008), 352.   
White House, National Security Strategy of the United States (February
2015), 10. 2 Robert P. Hager, "History and Culture in Russia and Ukraine: How to Complicate a Crisis of European Security," Democracy & Security 12, no. 3 (Jul, 2016), 212, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17419166.2016.1205335 (accessed December 6, 2016).
Hager, 214.   
William Kelleher Storey, in The First World War, describes how Czar Nicholas II weak leadership abilities led to his fall from power during World War I. Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow, in Essence of Decision, described how domestic considerations drove Premier Nikita Khruschev's decisions prior to the Cuban Missile Crisis. He would be out of power within two years for "losing" that crisis.
Dmitry Shlapentokh, "Russia Enters the New Century," Contemporary Review 276, no. 1610
(March 2000)
Aron, 70.   
"Vladimir Unbound; Putin's Popularity." The Economist, Jan
30, 2016
Nicholas Eberstadt, The Dying Bear: Russia's Demographic Disaster: Council on Foreign Relations, Inc, 2011), https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/russia-fsu/2011-11-01/dying-bear (accessed March 18, 2017).
Rebekah Kebade, "Oil tops $145 ahead of U.S. holiday," Reuters UK, July 3, 2008, http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-markets-oil-idUKMOL27139920080703 (accessed March 31, 2017).
Hager,  
2 Ibid.
Dragneva and Wolczuk, 681.   
Ibid.   
Delcour and Wolczuk, 460.   
Roy Allison, "Russian 'Deniable' Intervention in Ukraine: How and Why Russia Broke the Rules," International Affairs 90, no. 6 (November 2014), 1290.
Saivetz, 406.   
Dragneva and Wolczuk, 688.   
Ibid., 689.   
Ibid.
Delcour and Wolczuk, 460.   
Interfax, "Gas Companies in Baltic States Begin Creating Integrated Gas Market," Russia & CIS Energy Newswire (01/25, 2017), 1, https://nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=bwh&A N=120943730&site=eds-live&scope=site (accessed February 18, 2017).
Unified combatant command for special operations forces, Public Law 114-38, U.S. Code 10 (2015), ยง167.
Rand Study, page 17.
JP 3-07, Stability, page E-8.
United 
States Special Operations Command MacDill Air Force Base 7701 Tampa Point Blvd Tampa
FL 33621 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Army War College or National Defense University
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
The diplomatic corps also maximized its influence through Russia's permanent seat on the UN Security Council. Throughout the 1990s, Russian diplomats successfully protected the country's interests by isolating foreign policy from domestic turmoil. 
14
15
16
A major reason that the West tacitly accepted Russia's "sphere of influence" was its military power. While the post-Cold-War Russian military fell from the world's second largest to fifth, it was still the most powerful force in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. 17 Russia's conventional military consists of elite and regular forces numbering role as the country's breadbasket highlighted its vital importance to the Soviet Union, and made it a strategic objective during World War II. In 1942, German forces overran the region on the way to the city of Stalingrad. Two years later, the Soviet Red Army would retake Ukraine during its march to Berlin. A rebuilt Ukraine would remain part of the USSR until 1991. This historical background of over a millennium is fundamental to the ideological frame of reference between Russia and Ukraine. To Russian citizens, Ukraine is a sister country with a shared history and shared values forged through war and struggle. Thus, the two countries should always have common goals and objectives. Ukraine also sees Russia as a close neighbor and economic partner. However, unlike Russia, Ukraine recognizes its junior role in the relationship. Additionally, Ukraine's split focus between east and west remains a vulnerable rift within the country.
Ukraine's bifurcated nature came into play after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
After centuries of authoritarian rule, Ukraine did not adjust well to democracy and endured years of endemic corruption. To remain economically solvent, Ukraine maintained close ties to the newly formed Russian Federation, establishing mutual relationships in labor migration, government financing, and most significantly, energy supplies. 
3
How does SMT's tripartite structure explain the Russia-Ukraine crisis? Russia, as the principal adversary in the Ukrainian crisis, holds significant advantages. However, of the three SMT factors, Russia appears most vulnerable to diplomatic and economic pressure during resource mobilization. The EU and United
States hold significant economic and diplomatic power, and applying steady pressure over time could change Russia's behavior. In particular, highlighting Russia's aggressive behavior to the international community can create openings for diplomatic and economic sanctions. Weakening Russia's international image through broadcasting its aggressive activities in Ukraine, while avoiding a military confrontation, appears to be the best way for the West to force a change in Russia's political behavior.
will go to the gray zone strategist, with negative consequences for American and Western interests.
Finding #2: Adversaries use their relative military power to strengthen their diplomatic and economic methods.
The Russian case study displayed how the effective use of diplomacy and economics to create an asymmetric relationship between a weak and strong country.
Russia's military, while not the primary strategic weapon, also influenced the situation.
This allowed Russia to use its soft power to great advantage against Ukraine and other former CIS states without incurring a negative response from the West.
Russia successfully intervened in both Crimea and the Donbas because the Ukrainian military lacked a significant presence in both regions. Additionally, there were no allies willing or able to intercede on Ukraine's behalf. Thus, Ukraine's military was in react mode, surrendering the initiative and the offensive to their Russian adversaries.
Recommendation #2: Use economic and diplomatic tools to challenge an adversary's control over the target country. 