# ID: b082fc5f83f6436786ac530c71d695cf
# Title: War in the Information Age: The Message is the Mission
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The confluence of advancements in information technology and postmodernist philosophies that thrive on confusion have created conditions where contests of narrative are, by far, the dominant method of achieving political and military aims. More operationally and strategically significant actions in future conflict will occur in the "information environment" than elsewhere. Events in the physical domains will become increasingly tactical in nature, and the portrayal of these events in the form of narrative will become a dominant form of operational art. Current conceptions of Multi-Domain Operations (MDO) and Large-Scale Combat Operations (LSCO) overemphasize the intrinsically tactical aspects of future warfare and do not address the contemporarily dominant form of operational art, which exploits information technology and postmodernism through the power of narrative. The US military must recognize the significance of the social change wrought by the internet and social media, and its effects on the character of war. Just as the Enlightenment brought "Levée en masse," and the Industrial Revolution brought "Industrial warfare," this new "Information Revolution" is shifting the character of war and placing information warfare at the forefront. In contemporary war, information is not simply a capabilityit is the essence of strategy and operational art. As a result, Commanders and planners must view "the message" itself as the mission, and not just an enabler to tactical and operational-level missions.
Truth in itself is rarely sufficient to make men act…The most powerful springs of action in men lie in his emotions.
-Carl Von Clausewitz, On War   Reactive Discourse and Fundamental Surprise Since the well-publicized Russian influence operations during the 2016 US election, the national security community has undertaken a discourse on information warfare. Unfortunately, too much discussion centers around the shock of the seminal event in 2016, as opposed to the proximate causes and trends associated with the broader issue of information warfare. For example, the transcript of the 2018 US Senate Intelligence Community Hearing on "Foreign Influence Operations' Use of Social Media Platforms," lists the word "Russia" thirty-two times more than "information," and "IRA," Russia's Internet Research Agency, eight more times than "influence," despite influence being in the hearing's title.0 F
1
In Zvi Lanir's "Fundamental Surprises," the author explores surprise and identifies two key types: situational and fundamental. Situational surprises are generally isolated to a single incident, and come about primarily because of a lack of data to warn decision-makers of the event. Conversely, fundamental surprises reveal more systemic issues, where sufficient information for warning was available, but malfunctions in mindset prevent proper action to avoid the surprise.1 F 2 Based on myriad media reports of malign Russian activity in the run-up to the 2016 election and the residual confusion surrounding the event, one can classify this event as a fundamental surprise that has yet to produce fundamental learning, or a cognitive reframe -a change of understanding.2 F 3
Recent events of similar magnitude and strategy, including China's use of misinformation to sow panic regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, indicate a more holistic review of information warfare is necessary.3 F 4 For multiple reasons, the efficacy of information warfare is increasing at a significant rate. With that in mind, how does the US adopt a broader perspective to learn from these events and identify better strategies for the "information environment" (IE)?
As a result of the fundamental surprise, the US must think differently about contemporary information warfare. Lanir describes this as "fundamental thinking," where one must "remove oneself from the time and place of the specific event that triggered the thinking process."4 F 5 A significant barrier to change is the lack of consensus in terminology associated with information, and some refuse to adopt the term "information warfare."5 F 6 Despite internal disagreements, current practitioners informally define information warfare as, "a strategy for the use and management of information to pursue a competitive advantage, including both offensive and defensive operations."6 F 7 While this definition is useful, it does not capture the contemporary essence of information. This monograph defines information warfare as the use of words and/or actions to exploit symbols, stories, myths, and/or identities to alter attitudes and behaviors in a direction favorable to prescribed objectives.
When thinking fundamentally, one must examine a wide range of topics to understand the true nature of the emerging phenomenon, and derive sustainable conceptions of contemporary information warfare. While this monograph will offer general recommendations, the primary purpose of this paper is to frame the problem in a way that encourages fundamental thinking about the nature of information. This paper will examine emergent trends that explain the efficacy of contemporary information warfare, particularly when employed against western societies.
Objective Reality, Polarization, and Social Media Throughout history, societies and their governments have generally formed around shared values and beliefs, with shared constructions of reality serving as the basis for social organization. Individuals become socialized into these structures through education and social interactions, enabling the collective inculcation of the shared reality. The way societies function depends heavily upon the production, transmission, and consumption of information about the world around them. In The Social Construction of Reality, Peter Berger and Thomas Luckman explain this phenomenon through the concepts of objective reality and socialization.
Interpretations of the external world become objective reality, or accepted truth, when recognized institutions embrace these interpretations.7 F
8
9
10
11
12
The internet and social media have significantly affected society, and its affects are likely to expand.1 2F 
13
14
A common theme of academic works on social media's effects on society is the difficulty of distinguishing fact from fiction, and postmodern strategies seize upon this phenomenon.
Although postmodern thought emerged prior to the advent of the internet, much of its early work envisioned a future marred by confusion and disagreement over objective reality.1 4F 
15
The confluence of advancements in information technology and postmodernist philosophies that thrive on confusion have created conditions where contests of narrative are, by far, the dominant method of achieving political and military aims. More operationally and strategically significant actions in future conflict will occur in the "information environment" than elsewhere. Events in the physical domains will become increasingly tactical in nature, and the portrayal of these events in the form of narrative will become a dominant form of operational art. Current conceptions of Multi-Domain Operations (MDO) and Large-Scale Combat Operations (LSCO) overemphasize the intrinsically tactical aspects of future warfare and do not address the contemporarily dominant form of operational art, which exploits information technology and postmodernism through the power of narrative. The US military must recognize the significance of the social change wrought by the internet and social media, and its effects on the character of war. Just as the Enlightenment brought levée en masse, and the Industrial Revolution brought "Industrial warfare," the Information Revolution is revolutionizing the character of war and placing information warfare at the forefront. In contemporary war, information is not simply a capability -it is the essence of strategy and operational art. Therefore, Commanders and planners must view "the message" itself as the mission, and not just an enabler to tactical and operational-level missions.
In the information environment, status quo powers seeking to operate from a "moral high ground" must be consistent and transparent in applying their principles. If not, belligerents can easily point to any inconsistency, real or perceived, as a sign of hypocrisy and unworthiness of global leadership. Because there are multiple interpretations on any action and/or message, they will never obey the ideal of a single trajectory. Therefore, the US is at a strategic disadvantage in the information environment, as it is rhetorically easier to criticize global leadership than it is to actually exercise and tout one's own global leadership. For example, the "Black Lives Matter" movement spurred worldwide protests, whereas public outcry over the genocide of Uighur Muslims in China has been scanty at best.1 5F 
16
This monograph will rely on psychology, sociology, political science, philosophy, information technology, and military history, theory, and doctrine to answer the research question. Section one will examine the philosophies of modernism and postmodernism to explain contemporary difficulties in basic communication, and techniques by which postmodernists exploit linguistic ambiguities. Section two will review the human propensity to value narratives in lieu of hard data, and how that presents vulnerabilities in the information age. Section three will examine how the internet and social media has changed society and enhanced the efficacy of information warfare. The monograph will conclude by explaining the military utility of this work by applying all previous theories and concepts into existing military thought, and explain how the US military's conceptions of LSCO and MDO do not account for the efficacy of contemporary information warfare and what the military can do to improve.
It is conceivable that the nation-states will one day fight for control of information, just as they battled in the past for control over territory...
-Jean-Francois Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge
For centuries, the west has invested in an education system that emphasizes processes based on the scientific method, reason, and logic as the keys to human progress, development, and the identification of objective truth. The pursuit of universal truth served as the philosophical underpinning to western education. Modernism embraces the existence of universal truths and the pursuit of said truths for the betterment of humanity. Modernist ideas refined in the enlightenment led to the American and French revolutions of the 18 th century and perceived successes of those movements propelled modernism's appeal throughout the west.1 6F 
17
18
19
The modernist metanarrative of human progress rests upon objectivist ontology, which asserts that "an external reality whose existence is independent of our knowledge of it; the world exists as an independent object waiting to be discovered."1 9F 20 This assertion reveals the modernists' view on the relationship between ontology and epistemology, where existence consists of an "unshakable reality," which human knowledge is perpetually pursuing.2 0F 
21
22
The modernist tendency to view information as neatly categorized into narrow topic areas and clearly measurable as true or false presents a vulnerability in the information environment which calls for holistic thought.2 2F 
23
Simplifying to the extreme, I define postmodern as incredulity toward metanarratives.
-Jean-Francois Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge 
20 Hatch,
Organization Theory: Modern,
Symbolic,
and Postmodern Perspectives,
18. 21 Ibid.,
14. 22
24
25
26
27
28
29
Regardless of the breadth of one's vocabulary, words are finite in nature and cannot fully capture the essence of the messenger's idea, and this contributes to pervasive misunderstanding in human communication. In Philosophical Investigations, Ludwig Wittgenstein explores the problem of imprecision in language and his work serves as a foundational text for postmodernism.3 0F 
31
32
33
If one adopts the postmodern assumption that "nothing exists separately from its renderings" then there are little prospects for purity in knowledge.3 3F 
34
35
5F 36
34 Hatch,
Organization Theory: Modern,
Symbolic,
and Postmodern Perspectives,
18. 35
16-18. 36
41
In Pure Strategy, Dolman describes the concept of power as related to freedom of choice.
"When one can make a choice, one has power. When one has no choice, he or she is powerless and succumbs to fatalism."4 1F 
42
"Incredulity towards metanarratives" as Lyotard puts it, comes from the notion that these metanarratives existed solely to maintain modernist power structures.4 2F 
43
40
41
42 Dolman,
Pure Strategy,
42. 43
44
45
46
47
In Philosophical Investigations, Ludwig Wittgenstein explores the problem of linguistic imprecision and conceptualizes the notion of "language games." He describes language games as rules that guide conversational behavior depending on their context.4 7F 
48
49
45
46
47
48
49
50
This line of thinking gives postmodernists freedom of maneuver in the information environment, as they feel unconstrained by socially constructed rules of language and can assert any wild claim and retroactively justify it through the ambiguity of interpretation. Just as postmodernists use this theory to opportunistically justify any claim, they can also use it to discredit any assertion as well.
If one analogizes postmodernist communication to warfare, offensive operations would center upon language games and the rule-following paradox. In turn, defensive operations would use similar principles to neutralize undesirable claims prior to initiating a counter-offensive. This manifests through the concept of deconstruction, where one dissects texts by their multiplicity of interpretations with the goal of undermining their authority.5 1F 52 Jacques Derrida championed deconstruction and différance, which again emphasize the imprecision of language. Derrida explains différance as the idea that the meaning of words relies upon the usage of other words with their own elusive meanings.5 2F 
53
The popular film series The Matrix examines difficulties in ascertaining reality from simulation, where the main character becomes aware that the "normal life" he was leading was a mere illusion. The works of postmodernist scholar Jean Baudrillard, particularly Simulacra and Simulation, inspired much of the screenwriters' work on the films.5 3F 
54
52
53
54
56
57
Additionally, he argues that pervasive media coverage of the conflict became a simulacrum that did not represent the totality of the circumstances.5 8F 
59
The burgeoning philosophy of postmodernism presents a serious challenge in the information environment. Postmodernism is as much of a "condition" (per Lyotard's title) as a worldview. It can develop in a person over time, as they become confused in the contemporary information environment. Many can have postmodern tendencies without being an outright 
55
56
57
58 Jean Baudrillard, The Gulf War Did Not Take Place (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1995), 24-25. 
59
60
60
The world is not run by those who are right. It is run by those who can convince others they are right.
-Jamshid Gharajedaghi, Systems Thinking
Operational art, the process of "linking strategy and tactics through the arrangement of tactical actions in time, space, and purpose to achieve a strategic goal" manifests in information warfare through narrative construction.6 0F 
61
65
Abbott defines stories as actual events, narratives as the events' representation, and narrative discourse as the methods used in conveying stories, through familiar plot structures.6 5F 
66
67
68
Narrative is a form of operational art because it bridges specific tactics of language games with strategic objectives via the representation of events.6 8F 
69
70
Making Sense of the World A child's need for stories is as fundamental as his need for food.
-Paul Auster, The Invention of Solitude Multiple studies have shown the educational and developmental benefits of reading "bedtime stories" to children. Along with enhancing vocabulary, one study found that consistent bedtime stories improved children's narrative ability, or their "retelling the sequence of goaldirected actions."7 1F 
72
Klaus Krippendorf refers to sensemaking as a circular process that "may start with some initially incomprehensible sensation, which then proceeds to imagining hypothetical contexts for it and goes around a hermeneutic circle…and meanings are constructed until this process has converged to a sufficiently coherent understanding."7 2F 
73
74
75
73
As people attempt to understand the world, they must examine multiple occurrences across space and time. Narratives provide the best means of drawing connections between disparate events. In The Landscape of History, Gaddis explains that historical narratives enable rich understanding of events because of their simultaneity, or their ability to span time and/or space, describe distant occurrences, and adapt them into a broader theme.7 5F 76 Additionally, Abbot explains that "narrative is the principal way in which our species organizes its understanding of time."7 6F 
77
78
All narratives are not created equal. For specific and sometimes elusive reasons, people consider certain narratives more compelling than others. Abbott refers to this as narrativity, or "the set of qualities marking a narrative."7 8F 
79
80
76
77
78
79
80
81
Because of linguistic imprecision, and the fact that an observer cannot personally experience all aspects of an event, tangible evidence alone cannot constitute a narrative. In Tropics of Discourse, White explains that "the facts do not speak for themselves, but that the historian speaks for them, speaks on their behalf, and fashions the fragments of the past into a whole whose integrity is -in its representation."8 1F 
82
Narrative is the most efficient and most stimulating method of simplifying otherwise complex phenomena, as it provides a way of filtering and organizing uncontextualized data into a compelling plot. Some data is required for narrative construction, but the operational artist need not have "all" the data to complete their plotlines. Gaddis explains that historians achieve this by using "macro-generalizations to bridge such gaps in the evidence and to move the narrative forward."8 2F 
83
84
81
82
83
84
When constructing a narrative, one must decide how much emphasis to place on certain events, preferably based on how much detail is available concerning the event, and how much the event jives with the underlying message. Abbott explains this through the concept of constituent and supplementary events. Constituent events "are necessary for the story to be the story it is," while supplementary events "are not necessary for the story."8 4F 
85
86
87
Largely because of the western education system's emphasis on the scientific method, westerners tend look for tangible causal links to explain phenomena, even when they may not clearly exist.8 7F 
88
89
85
86
87
88
89 Niv Elis, "Dow Breaks 30,000 for First Time as Biden Transition Ramps Up," The Hill, November 24, 2020, accessed 25 November 2020, https://thehill.com/policy/finance/527350-dow-breaks-30000-for-first-time-as-biden-transition-ramps-up. be encouraged to think causally."8 9F 90 Our desire to identify causation drives us toward perceptions of normalcy because a world with unambiguous and linear causality is more appealing than a chaotic and nonlinear world.
"Understanding is a process of rendering the unfamiliar, or the "uncanny" in Freud's sense of that term, familiar."9 0F 
91
92
93
In The Seven Pillars of Wisdom, T.E. Lawrence describes his efforts to lead an Arab revolt against the Ottoman empire during World War I. He reaches a turning point in the fight when he recognizes the Arabs fought as a human-centered force, while the Ottoman Turks fought as a tech-centric force. This enabled Lawrence to formulate a narrative that galvanized his Arab counterparts, and served as the foundation for his successful "war of detachment" strategy.9 4F 
95
90
91
92
93
94
95
In Cilliers' explanation of discourse battles, he refers to the boundaries between discourses as the "stakes in the game."9 7F 
98
96
98
99
100
101 Audreye Wong, "COVID-19 and China's Information Diplomacy in Southeast Asia," The Brookings Institute, September 3, 2020, accessed 3 December 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/orderfrom-chaos/2020/09/03/covid-19-and-chinas-information-diplomacy-in-southeast-asia/.
attempting to convince those audiences to prefer pro-CCP narratives versus pro-Western narratives. Another complex factor of narrative contests, depending on one's leverage in the information environment, sowing doubt in an opponent's narrative can be as effective as persuading others toward your own. In March 2018, Russian agents attempted to poison a former Russian spy in the United Kingdom. The operation failed and British officials immediately began collecting evidence of Russia's malfeasance. Before the Brits could publish a coherent narrative, Russia used social media to spread dozens of dubious alternative explanations for the poisoning to obfuscate the issue and confuse the west long enough to deter an effective response.1 01F
102
103
106
When it was proclaimed that the Library contained all books, the first impression was one of extravagant happiness. All men felt themselves to be the masters of an intact and secret treasure. There was no personal or world problem whose elegant solution did not exist in some hexagon. The universe was justified, the universe suddenly usurped the unlimited dimensions of hope…As was natural, this inordinate hope was followed by an excessive depression. The certitude that some shelf in some hexagon held precious books and that these precious books were inaccessible, seemed almost intolerable.
-Jorge Luis Borges, The Library of Babel
In Jorge Luis Borges' short story, The Library of Babel, he describes a near infinite library that contains all possible books with all possible combinations of a 22-character language within a given length. When the citizens gained awareness of this library, they experienced overwhelming happiness because they knew that this library contained the answers to all of life's toughest questions and all they had to do was find the books. This happiness slowly gave way to confusion, then depression, when the citizens found the vast majority of the books were indecipherable nonsense and despite years of searching, they faced considerably low odds of finding any useful information.1 06F
107
The internet and social media significantly increase the efficacy of contemporary information warfare not only because information can be distributed faster and wider, but also because it incentivizes individuals to make snap-judgements, creates states of "information overload," and enables people to self-organize into information "echo-chambers." As an increasing share of our lives take place online, it is likely that an increasing share of warfare will occur, or be influenced by the internet.1 07F 108 Throughout history, new information technologies have contributed to significant socio-political changes. However, the internet is unique in the sense that it simultaneously allows global point-to-point communication and global "point-to-many" communication.1 08F 109 The internet's expanding influence on western life is significantly affecting mental habits, empowering individuals to shape the information environment, and enabling the formulation of interest groups, irrespective of geography, that polarize against one another and rapidly spread information that only support group preferences.
How Information Technology Changed the World It would not have been possible for us to take power or to use it in the ways we have without the radio.
Prior to the advent of the written word, stories and parables were the primary vehicle for sharing information. There is strong evidence suggesting the authors of epics, including Iliad and Odyssey did not initially write them down, but musically composed them to enable memorization, allowing redistribution through singing.1 09F 110 However, the invention of the alphabet and written word enabled information to accurately transcend time and space without relying upon human memory.1 10 F 
111
112
One of the key factors considered in one's identity is their national origin. Nation-states are relatively new political entities, yet they are a dominant factor in shaping culture. In Imagined Communities, Benedict Anderson examines the origins of national identity. Anderson argues that the advent of the printing press and the subsequent monetization of books and newspapers led to the formulation of national identities.1 12F 
113
114
When everything is handed to you, it's only worth as much as the time put in.
-Miranda Lambert, Automatic Amid his scholarly work, renowned philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche fell severely ill, to the point where he could not focus on a page and write with his hand. During this time in the 1880s, typewriters were moving into the mainstream, so Nietzsche opted to purchase one so he could continue publishing his works. He experienced immediate results and was back to writing with minimal issue.1 15F 116 After reading some of his typewriter-based works, a close friend of his noticed his writing style had changed, becoming "tighter, more telegraphic."1 16F 117 In response, Nietzsche concluded, "our writing equipment takes part in the forming of our thoughts."1 17F 118 If a typewriter, simple compared to contemporary technology, could induce a noticeable change in Nietzsche's mind, it is fair to assess the internet can do the same.
In The Shallows, Nicholas Carr examines the psychological impacts of the internet. He begins by discussing Marshall McLuhan's famous quote, "the medium is the message."
According to Carr, the introduction of any new information medium has spurred on debates over the content shared on the media, with one side praising the "democratization" of information and the other concerned over the "dumbing down" of society.1 18F 119 This debate is playing out in present day, where those concerned about social media censorship have migrated to alternative platforms, while others deride the move as encouraging "echo chambers."1 19F 
120
121
Prior to the internet, most information came via print, television, or radio. These media share similar characteristics of consumption, where one generally focuses on one topic at a time.
Mediums "supply the stuff of thought, but they also shape the process of thought," says Carr.1 21F 122 habits, it also creates conditions where individuals possess more power.
In July 2020, malicious actors hacked a series of twitter accounts from high profile personalities, including Barack Obama, Bill Gates, Elon Musk, and Kanye West, and posted misleading tweets to scam people out of money.1 30F 
131
132
One of the more curious facts about business in contemporary times is that some people get paid exorbitant amounts of money for promoting products on social media. These "Social Media Influencers" essentially act as freelance information age advertisers and monetize their large followings by simply endorsing a product, with some netting over $100,000 for each post.1 32F 
133
130
137
134
135
136
137 Ibid., 1-2. manipulate their feed to ensure they only get information favorable to pre-existing beliefs. Social media algorithms enhance self-insulation, by collecting data on user behavior, amplifying content users prefer, and hiding content they dislike.1 37F 
138
With this advancement in information technology comes a shift in group identity. As identified by Benedict Anderson, the growth of information sharing fosters people's desire to "relate themselves to others."1 38F 139 Just as Anderson identified the printing press' role in shaping national identity, the internet appears to be shaping political group identity. Human's natural tendency to identify their "in-group" and "out-group" appears to be manifesting along partisan lines.1 39F 
140
138
139
140 Dominic Tierney, "Does America Need an Enemy?," The National Interest, November 2016, 53. 
141
142 US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-13.4, Army Support to Military Deception logical fallacy, the social nature of online information sharing disincentivizes going against the group, as people often "go along with the crowd in order to maintain the good opinion of others."1 47F 148 Thus, Sunstein concludes that social factors including groupthink and need for "ingroup" approval play a significant role in the cascading of information, or "going viral."1 48F 149 This social approval manifests on social media by way of "likes," "retweets," or other forms of digital endorsement. Operational artists must understand the social factors that drive the spread of information, particularly when that information is false.
A team of researchers examined a data set of information cascades on twitter and they found that, on average, false stories traveled six times faster than truthful stories.1 49F 
150
Among the first malign actors to fully exploit information cascades was the "Islamic State," or ISIS. In LikeWar, the authors describe ISIS' realization of how to spread narratives, "why shoulder all the hard work of spreading your message when you could count on others to do it for you?"1 52F 
153
148
154
In "The Value of Science is in the Foresight," Russian General Staff Chief Valery Gerasimov speaks of "blurring the lines between the states of war and peace" and how "longdistance, contactless actions against the enemy are becoming the main means of achieving combat and operational goals."1 62F 
163
164
166
In contrast to Russia, China has been less aggressive militarily in pursuit of their political objectives. Nevertheless, China holds views like Russia regarding the magnitude in which information warfare and other non-kinetic means can enable the achievement of strategic aims. states of war and peace."1 73F 174 This theory of contemporary conflict implies avoidance of conventional military conflict, and a prioritization of competition across the spectrum of conflict. Despite this, the US Army has opted to prioritize conventional military concepts, including LSCO and MDO.
In 2004, Antulio Echavarria published an article titled "Toward an American Way of War." In it, he argues that the US lacks a "way of war," because the American obsession with crushing military victory being a prerequisite for success does not comply with the Clausewitzian view of military actions supporting diplomatic bargaining and clearly defined political aims. He instead asserts the façade of the American "way of war" is but a "way of battle."1 74F 
175
176
1
The expanding prevalence of postmodernist philosophies, combined with the influence of social media, have created conditions where contests of narrative are the dominant method of achieving political aims. The formation of narratives explaining events in the physical domains will be a critical form of operational art. Current conceptions of MDO and LSCO perpetuate the American "way of battle" and do not address the significant social changes wrought by information technology and postmodernism.
"Open Hearing on Foreign Influence Operations' Use of Social Media Platforms," § US Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (2018), accessed
October 2020, https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/hearings/open-hearing-foreign-influence-operations%E2%80%99-usesocial-media-platforms-third-party-expert#.
Congressional Research Service, "Defense Primer: Information Operations," December 15, 2020.
Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann, The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge (New York: Doubleday, 1966), 60.
Ibid., 131.   
John Ehrenreich, "Why Are Conservatives More Susceptible to Believing Lies," Slate, November 9, 2017, accessed 22 October 2020, https://slate.com/technology/2017/11/why-conservativesare-more-susceptible-to-believing-in-lies.html.; Scott Barry Kaufman, "Liberals and Conservatives Are Both Susceptible to Fake News, but for Different Reasons," Scientific American, February 14, 2019, accessed 22 October 2020, https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/beautiful-minds/liberals-and-conservativesare-both-susceptible-to-fake-news-but-for-different-reasons/
.11  In this piece, the author frames the issue from a partisan political perspective. This monograph seeks to avoid assigning partisan blame, and instead explore the philosophical role postmodernism plays in the rejection of truth. Notwithstanding the author's partisan framing, his insights into postmodernism are valuable: Bob Brecher, "Is the Left Responsible For Post-Truth Politics?," Open Democracy, September 8, 2020, accessed 22 October 2020, https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/transformation/left-responsible-posttruth-
politics/.12 Recent works, including Cass Sunstein's #Republic: Divided Democracy in the Age of Social Media, InfoTopia: How Many Minds Produce Knowledge, and Andrew Shapiro's The Control Revolution discuss how the internet enables individuals to decide which information they consume, and the implications of
that phenomenon.13  Works including, P.W. Singer and Emerson Brookings' LikeWar: The Weaponization of Social Media, and Nicholas Carr's The Shallows: What the Internet is Doing to Our Brains examine the internet and social media's impact on society.
This monograph will thoroughly examine the works from Sunstein, Carr, and Singer/Brooking, among others, which explore the internet's impact of society.
Foundational postmodern philosophical works, including Ludwig Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations, Jean-Francois Lyotard's The Postmodern Condition, and Jean Baudrillard's Simulacra and Simulation, each explore the difficulties of depicting reality through language and images.
William Bristow, "Enlightenment," in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Stanford  University, n.d.), accessed 26 October 2020, https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2017/entries/enlightenment/.
Everett Dolman, Pure Strategy: Power and Principle in the Space and Information Age (London; New York: Frank Cass, 2005), 95.
Mary Jo Hatch, Organization Theory: Modern, Symbolic, and Postmodern Perspectives, 4th ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2018), 34.
Christopher Butler, Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 13.
Ibid.,
16.
Ibid.,
16.
This section will later describe how power can come from, and be maintained by access to and control of the dominant narrative.
In Lyotard's  The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, the author does not outright advocate for pure postmodernist ideals but instead contends with implications of the "computerization of society."
Ning Wang, "The Mapping of Chinese Postmodernity," Duke University Press (1997).
In works by postmodern scholar Michel Focault, including Power/Knowledge, and The History of Sexuality, he discusses how discourse in and of itself generates power.; The concept of deconstruction,
Ludwig Wittgenstien, Philosophical Investigations (New York: The Macmillan Company,  1953).
Hatch, Organization Theory: Modern, Symbolic, and Postmodern Perspectives,
16.
Ibid.,
16.
White,  The Content of the Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical Representation, 1.
Joby Warrick and Anton Troianovski, "Agents of Doubt: How a Powerful Russian Propaganda Machine Chips Away at Western Notions of Truth," The Washington Post, December 10, 2018, accessed 3 December 2020, https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2018/world/national-security/russianpropaganda-skripal-salisbury/.
  103  Abbott, The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative,
182.104  Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on
Knowledge, 20.105  Abbott, The Cambridge Introduction toNarrative, 40.   
Abbott, The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative, 12.   
Jorge Luis Borges, "The Library of Babel," in Labyrinths: SelectedStories and Other Writings  (New York: New Directions Publishing, 1962), 54-55.    
Gary Henderson, "How  Much Time Does the Average Person Spend on Social Media?," Digital Marketing, August 24, 2020, accessed 15 December 2020, https://www.digitalmarketing.org/blog/how-much-time-does-the-average-person-spend-on-social-media.
Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of  Nationalism, 2nd ed. (London: Verso, 1991), 35-37.    
Ibid., 36.    
Ibid., 39.   
Singer, & Brooking, LikeWar: The Weaponization of Social Media, 153.   
John Boyd, "Discourse on Winning and Losing" (Marine Corps University, Quantico, VA, May 1989), 43.
William Hammond, "The Tet Offensive and the News Media: Some Thoughts on the Effects of News Reporting," Army History 70 (2009): 7.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ:  Princeton University Press, 1984), 184.   
Clausewitz, On War, 112.   
First and foremost, I want to thank my wife 
Krystyna
Dr. Alice Butler-Smith
LtCol Jacob Robinson
" perspective. Maj "Blue" Morse admirably served as my
Seth Pearson
MAJ Casey Wolfe, MAJ Ryan McGraw, MAJ Jamie Holm, MAJ John Luckie, LTC Rob Kellum
The Message is the Mission Approved by: _______//signed/ 6 
MAR 21/ABS//_____Q
21/BAP// _______
School of Advanced Military Studies Brian A. Payne, COL
The information space opens wide asymmetrical possibilities for reducing the fighting potential of the enemy.
-Valery Gerasimov, Chief of the General Staff, Russian Armed Forces When discussing the outcome of the Vietnam War, many emphasize US tactical victories, and conclusive strategic defeat. This discourse is quick to point towards the US' inability to link tactical actions with strategic ends, but is lacking in reasons why.1 54F 
155
156
As Clausewitz says, "Moral elements are among the most important in war. They constitute the spirit that permeates war as a whole."1 57F 158 If a society exists in a state of confusion, it 
155
will surely affect their ability to generate combat power. Clausewitz certainly envisioned this when he described his "paradoxical trinity," consisting of the people, the army, and the government. Clausewitz deftly recognized the need to balance the enmity of the people, the role of chance and risk in military operations, and government policy.1 58F 
159
160
Information warfare is the use of words and/or actions to exploit symbols, stories, myths, and/or identities to alter attitudes and behaviors in a direction favorable to prescribed objectives.
Postmodernist techniques of language games and deconstruction enable exploitation of perceived friction between cultural artifacts, narratives provide the bridge between the prescribed objectives and the artifact's exploitation, and the internet is the primary medium. Based on observations from the conflict in Iraq/Syria, some defense officials are advocating for an approach branded as "weaponized truth."1 60F 
161
159
160 Sun Tzu, The Art of War (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2002), 49.
161 Mark Pomerleau, "'Weaponized Truth:' How the US Military Plans to Compete in the Crowded Information Space," C4ISRNET, October 16, 2020, accessed 3 January 2021, https://www.c4isrnet.com/show-reporter/ausa/2020/10/16/weaponized-truth-how-the-us-military-plans-tocompete-in-the-crowded-information-space/.