# ID: b16e9f6efe0743baa1a7bbe67c872baf
# Title: Russian Military
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
The Future of the Russian Military gross domestic product (GDP), due to low growth in oil and gas export revenue, poor prospects for domestic reform, and low investment, although higher and lower growth scenarios are possible. Russia's military budget has increased substantially due to larger acquisition expenditures, although we expect future military budgets to level out and grow proportionate to GDP. While Russia is not expected to enjoy major population growth, its demographic situation is not by any measure crippling. Russia also has built a relatively stable mixed conscript and contract manning system for the military.
In aggregate, we expect these factors to facilitate continued incremental modernization of Russia's military but not major discontinuous improvements or collapse.
To analyze Russia's developing ground combat capabilities, we look at eight key areas: maneuver ground forces; indirect fire (<100 km range); long-range strike; rapidly deployable forces; command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR); air defense, electronic warfare (EW); and internal security forces. For each of these areas, we systematically analyze recent trends in doctrine, spending, personnel, and recent operations, and extract the near-term outlook from these trends.
We identify three general modes of development that characterize the changes we observe in the key capability areas: retain-and-adapt, in which Russia draws on sometimes-modernized Soviet-era systems or concepts; emulate-and-adapt, in which Russia draws on foreign models or concepts; and asymmetrically countering foreign threats.
Russia's maneuver ground forces are the prime example of the retain-and-adapt approach. The ground forces have received a small proportion of resources for procurement and modernization. Modernized Soviet-era platforms, such as the T-72B3, can be made almost as effective as new platforms with the addition of new components (such as fire control or active protection systems) at a fraction of the cost. Russia has maintained a massed and area-effects threat by retaining a 1
Understanding how Russian military capabilities will develop over the next 20 years is critical to future Western defense planning. Perfectly predicting the future is not possible, but one can gain insights for the future of key Russian ground capabilities by analyzing the critical political, economic, demographic, and societal factors underlying Russian military power.
A relatively coherent and consistent view of Russia's security policy goals currently exists, and these have been translated into a political-military strategy for the armed forces that involves five key tasks: strategic deterrence (to prevent aggression on the Russian homeland); regional dominance, including responding to instability, terrorism, or conflict in the near abroad (meaning the non-Baltic former Soviet Union); expeditionary operations; preparedness in case of a major ground war; and domestic stability. While changes are possible, we expect continuity in this strategy. Other economic, demographic, and societal factors underlying Russian military power over the last decade have undergone significant change, but they also show signs of remaining stable over the medium term (ten years). Public attitudes show support for Russia's government, foreign policies, and the military. Russia is projected to experience relatively stagnant economic growth of 1 percent to 2 percent of large volume of indirect fire launchers and munitions from the Soviet Union with less significant modernization. Russia's rapidly deployed forces-including the Airborne and GRU Spetsnaz-also build on Soviet-era formations, but represent new and dramatically reformed forces, with novel C4ISR systems and other state-of-the-art equipment. Russia's internal security forces, which play an important role in the defense of Russia, have been built from pieces of Soviet-era structures within newly created or reorganized institutions.
Russia also retained-and-adapted Soviet designs in its acquisition of long-range strike systems (i.e., systems that are used at the theater level, generally with >100 km range) while emulating-and-adapting U.S. operating concepts in its doctrine and approach. Russia has developed the ground-launched Iskander-M from the Oka intermediate-range ballistic missile, and the sea-launched Kalibr from the RK-55 Relief ground-launched cruise missile. Russia has long sought to emulate aspects of the U.S. use of long-range strike systems, as in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. However, Russia needed the additional resources that became available after 2008 to begin deploying additional air-, sea-, and ground-launched long-range strike systems. Russia's C4ISR also represents a combination of legacy Soviet systems and the emulationand-adaptation of concepts and approaches such as net-centric warfare. Russia's highly advanced air defense systems build on the extensive Soviet-era investment in air defenses, while its EW offers a primary example of where Russia has invested in capabilities that can asymmetrically counter perceived U.S. advantages.
We also examine how the Russian government has funded or subsidized the defense industry. We identify different patterns of investment and state support that shed light on priorities and future developments. In some areas, particularly long-range strike and C4ISR, the Kremlin has invested significant resources in recapitalizing particular enterprises, indicating its prioritization of the systems they produce. In other areas, such as air defense and EW, Russia has engaged in long-standing support of companies producing systems that are strategically significant. A third pattern reflects the collapse and incorporation of troubled enterprises into state-owned holding companies. This has been the fate of Russia's main producers of tanks and infantry fighting vehicles, in part because of weak demand and undercapitalization. A fourth approach is investment in more speculative technologies through means such as venture capital, but these efforts are quite modest. The overall outlook for Russian development in these key capabilities is continuity in terms of overall approach and with respect to the characteristics of the military industrial complex.
Looking back, Russia's development of its ground capabilities reflects the strategy we identified for the armed forces, within the constraints of Russia's economic performance, defense budget, demographics, and military personnel system. Russia improved its long-range strike, C4ISR, and air defense capabilities to strengthen strategic deterrence. Changes in military personnel policy, among other reforms, enabled the professionalization, increased reliability, and greater readiness of Russia's rapidly deployable forces. In turn, these forces strengthened Russian military capabilities for the task of regional dominance, as shown by its operations in Ukraine. Russia's investment in rapidly deployable forces and long-range strike also improved its expeditionary capabilities, as shown by Russia's operations in Syria. Still, Russia retained the ability to fight a major ground war with the West or China through the capability of its maneuver ground forces, indirect fires, and long-range strike, its rescue of firms producing ground vehicles, and the retention of conscription.
The same underlying factors that shaped Russia's military development in the past will also likely shape Russian capabilities in the future. While there may be continued incremental developments in the future, we view the most likely future as one of continuity in the strategy for the armed forces and social stability, small growth in the economy and defense budget, and a small demographic decline. Russia will continue to focus on achieving dominance in its near abroad, with an emphasis on readiness and professionalization of a small component of the force. Some expansion and incremental improvements will occur in long-range strike, rapidly deployable forces, C4ISR, and air defense, while relative stagnation will occur in the maneuver ground forces and indirect fires.
While we see continuity as most likely, we recognize that change is possible. Energy prices could increase or decrease, which could, in turn, affect growth in the economy and Russia's defense budget and military capabilities. Another possibility is that changes in Russia's economic growth and security strategy could occur because of shifts in relations with the West or China. Such changes could give Russia incentives to shift priorities within its strategy for the armed forces and pursue different ground capabilities, but in general we continue to expect a prioritization of capabilities associated with strategic deterrence, regional dominance, and internal security.
To achieve U.S. interests, the U.S. military will need to provide forces that can compete with Russia across a range of different types of interactions, from cooperation to conflict. Given Russia's extensive conventional and nuclear strategic deterrent capabilities, the key challenge will be how to develop U.S. capabilities that can achieve U.S. interests at any intensity of competition without escalation. The United States will also need to consider how to minimize cost, given the limited risk of Russian actions threatening U.S. core interests and competing budgetary priorities. Using the framework of our identified Russian strategy for the armed forces, we describe the policy implications for the United States of our analysis of Russia's future interests, capabilities, and priorities, with a focus on the U.S. Army.
The first and last elements of Russia's security strategy, strategic deterrence, and internal security, are inherently defensive, although strategic deterrent forces could threaten the United States and its allies. Russia clearly sees threats from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) enlargement and the enhancement of U.S./NATO military capabilities on its borders, and the possibility exists that Russia's view of the threat could increase or a crisis could develop that could lead to unintended military escalation. U.S. policymakers need to be attuned to Russian perceptions of the threat posed by U.S. force deployments in Europe.
Regional dominance, the second element of Russia's strategy for the armed forces, poses a more immediate threat to U.S. interests, given that Russia's primary desired sphere of influence includes former Soviet republics such as Ukraine and Georgia, who aspire to join Euro-Atlantic institutions. Given Russia's growing capabilities and greater interests, U.S. support has not been, and does not appear likely to be, able to significantly undermine Russia's regional dominance; however, the U.S. military can explore options to bolster partners' security forces by improving the quality and capacity of niche areas such as foreign area officers, units focused on providing security-force assistance, information operations, and military medical units.
Russia's expeditionary operations and capabilities, the third element in Russia's strategy for the armed forces, pose a complex challenge that will require both flexibility and preparedness for high-intensity conflict with well-armed adversaries. While Russia has invested in special forces, long-range strike, and air defense, the Russian military is not configured to be a global expeditionary military, especially given its gaps in expeditionary logistics and standing basing arrangements. Nevertheless, Russia may support proxies who may undermine U.S. interests. The U.S. Army should investigate options to prepare for the challenge of Russian expeditionary capabilities, such as ensuring that its forces deployed in areas where a conflict with Russia is conceivable have the necessary training and equipment and are prepared to take action while avoiding escalation.
Perhaps the most dangerous possibility is a large-scale ground war with Russia. We see it as unlikely that Russia is preparing to initiate such a war given its security goals and strategy, past decisions to develop key capabilities, and the constraints posed by its economy, demography, and personnel policy. Nevertheless, beyond Russia's advantage in the size of ground forces in Europe, existing research shows various ways that Russia's current and projected near-term capabilities pose a threat to the U.S. Army in Europe.
To address these developments in Russian capabilities, our analysis offers insight across the range of capability areas outlined. For the maneuver ground forces, the Army should prepare for challenges from the overall size of the Russian forces and modernized Soviet-era platforms. To address the challenge posed by Russia's indirect fire and long-range strike capabilities to U.S. forces at all echelons of the battlefield, the U.S. Army should investigate options to attrite Russian systems; to pursue dispersal, denial, and deception; and to improve EW and air and missile defenses. Improving U.S. cyber and EW capability at the tactical and operational level could help address Russia's growing parity in C4ISR, although this may require investment in command, control, and planning, as well as possible changes in authorities to use cyber. The U.S. military should also continue to pursue options to bolster communications, positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT), and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) against Russia's EW, and Multi-Domain Battle and related concepts to address Russia's anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) capabilities.
In addition to filling U.S. Army capability gaps, a joint U.S. military and combined alliance response will be required. For allies who border Russian territory, including Poland and the Baltic states, finding ways to better compete with Russian military forces in possible collaboration with U.S. forces could be invaluable for deterring both Russian subversion short of war and high intensity conflict.
While Russia's ground capabilities will continue to develop, they will be constrained and directed by political, demographic, economic, and social factors within Russia, which will likely change slowly over the next five to ten years. Studying Russia's priorities and its constraints helps shed light on how the U.S. military can best develop its full range of capabilities to better compete with Russia and achieve U.S. interests, while minimizing financial cost and the risk of war.
Given conflicting interests between Russia and the West and uncertainty about Russia's future intentions, the development of the Russian military poses real challenges to the United States and its allies. Russia's military appears to have improved significantly since the war in Georgia in 2008, as demonstrated by Russia's successful seizure of Crimea in February 2014, its ability to support separatist forces in eastern Ukraine, and Russia's military action to shore up Bashir al-Assad's government in Syria. While perfectly predicting the future is, of course, impossible, understanding the potential range of the development of Russian military forces is critical for Western defense planning. If Russia were able to dramatically modernize its forces to achieve parity with the West and could use its military strength to pursue more aggressive policies in Europe, a significant shift in Western military policy could be necessary. If, by contrast, Russia's military collapsed under the weight of economic and demographic pressures or if there were no likelihood that Russia would use military force against the West, Russia might no longer need to be viewed as a major potential adversary. This report analyzes the development of Russia's military capabilities over the next 20 years, with a focus on ground combat and the implications for U.S.-Russian competition.
While building on the extensive literature on the Russian military, our report focuses on addressing two key gaps. First, the literature focuses on Russia's current military potential by noting specific military actions that Russia is taking or could take that would be harmful to U.S. or allied interests. While these current or hypothetical threats are important, it is also critical to prepare for future military challenges by studying the broader political, social, and economic context of Russia's military development.
Second, the study of Russian military capabilities focuses largely on specific military hardware or systems, without necessarily studying how these systems fit into Russia's overall force structure, doctrine, training, and strategy, or investigating the military industrial, political, or economic constraints on the development or employment of future systems. We show how the development of Russia's ground combat capabilities are constrained and motivated by political priorities and economic constraints, and, as far as possible, show the linkages between the factors underlying Russian military power and the specific capabilities it develops.
The future is inherently uncertain, and so our forecasts about the future of Russian military capabilities are necessarily speculative. Nevertheless, past experience offers some guide to the future development of Russia's military forces. We designed a two-part theoretical framework to analyze the development of Russia's military forces relevant to ground combat: 1) we identify and make forecasts about the political, economic, demographic, and societal factors underlying Russian military power, and 2) we analyze the likely future development of key military capability areas. This framework is designed to provide a transparent, flexible, and systematic approach for making forecasts about the future over the short term (the next five years), medium term (five to ten years), and long term (ten to twenty years).
In Chapter 2, we analyze six factors within Russia that underlie military power: Russian strategy for what the armed forces should do; societal support for the regime, foreign policy, and the military; Russia's overall economy; the defense budget; demographics; and military personnel policy. Along with other elements, such as bureaucratic iner-tia, the military industrial complex, and beliefs about the future of warfare, these factors influence and constrain Russia's efforts to shape and develop the military. Each factor does have some observable direct impact on specific military forces, especially the strategy for what the military should do. To a greater degree, however, the precise effect of the factors is difficult to disentangle because they interact and together shape the overarching development of Russia's military. By understanding the recent history of these factors and making forecasts about their trajectory over the next 20 years, we gain insight into the potential different paths Russia's military could take.
After analyzing these factors, in Chapter 3, we turn to eight specific key military capability areas that are most important for ground combat. We selected the main systems and forces involved in ground combat and the key enablers that support them, and seek to understand how these forces have developed in the past and the outlook for the future. In particular, we examine: 1) ground vehicles, 2) indirect fires, 3) long-range strike, 4) air defense, 5) high-readiness light infantry, 6) internal security forces, 7) electronic warfare (EW), and 8) C4ISR (command, control, communication, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance). By indirect fires, we mean systems with less than 100 km range, while long-range strike refers to longer-range systems with theater-level effects. While the internal security forces, including the National Guard (Rosgvardiya) or Federal Security Service (Federal'naya sluzhba bezopasnosti, FSB), are not technically military organizations, they play an important role in Russia's approach to internal security and they may be deployed abroad. Their development also shapes Russia's overall military potential. The future development of these key capability areas together describes the future of Russia's ground combat capability.
The factors identified in Chapter 2, and especially the strategy for the armed forces, offer significant insight into the development of each key capability area. Based on these observations, in Chapter 4 we consider possible future changes in the factors, for example, fluctuating oil prices or shifts in relations with the West and China, and the implications for the key ground combat capability areas.
The final chapter in our report draws from our analysis to identify policy implications for the U.S. Army, and Western policymakers more broadly.
The main body of our report, Chapters 1 through 5, is built on and summarizes the core findings of the 12 appendixes. The appendixes contain the bulk of our research and analysis, including analyzing the factors that shape the future of the Russian military and the key capability areas for ground combat. For two factors (Russia's politicalmilitary strategy and its economic performance), we draw on the welldeveloped literature. No appendix is provided for that analysis, but we do offer additional analysis of the likely future outlook in these areas. For the four other factors-societal support, defense spending, demographics, and military personnel-in the relevant appendix we offer a general causal framework describing what we believe explains the development of this factor over time. We describe the recent historical trend of each factor (e.g., the size of the past defense budget) based on available evidence. We hypothesize explanatory variables that explain these trends (e.g., in the case of the military budget, GDP growth and the size of the acquisition budget). We then extrapolate forward, using projections of the identified explanatory variables to make a range of probable forecasts. The factor appendixes are meant to provide a suggestive framework for analysis of the future rather than conclusively demonstrate causation. Our methodology provides transparent and flexible forecasts by mapping out the explanatory variables and basing forecasts on stated alternative projections of these variables. While the factor appendixes generally follow a similar structure, there is some variation based on the specific content and data available, and some go into more detail about the outlook and implications for other factors.
The next eight appendixes analyze the key capability areas for ground combat. For each capability area, we examine the recent history of doctrine and operating concepts, systems, level of resources spent, the defense industry, personnel and training, and operations. We then use our analysis of the past, and other available information, to assess the likely future outlook. This framework draws from common analytic tools such as the Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel and Education, Personnel, and Facilities (DOTMLPF) framework while adding a focus on military industrial considerations that play a major role in the future development of Russian military capabilities. Because of the diversity of the key capability areas and data available, there is some variation in the structure of the capability appendixes.
This report does not attempt to offer a comprehensive treatment of the overall Russian military and, instead, focuses on the potential future development of capabilities related to ground combat. While we do touch on some naval, air force, or other capabilities related to ground combat, we do not offer a detailed analysis of these forces. Nor, aside from our analysis of ground-related capabilities, do we detail the overall structure of Russian military, command and control, the military industrial complex, or other related organizations. This information is covered in detail in other works. 
1
Any country's ability to generate and sustain military forces depends on many factors, but some of the most important are their security priorities, societal support, economic performance, defense spending, demographics, and the quantity and quality of military personnel. We appreciate that these factors are interrelated and that developments in one will affect others. Demographics influence economic performance and the size and structure of the military. Russian security priorities and economic performance directly influence defense spending. Societal support affects the Russian government's policies and military budget.
This chapter analyzes these factors in Russia, considering their recent past and potential future development (see also Appendixes A through D). Our goal is to understand what underlies Russian military power and the outlook for the long-term U.S.-Russian competition.
The Russian elite's view of the country's security priorities is, perhaps, the most directly influential factor shaping the development of its ground combat capabilities. The elite's security policy goals and threat perceptions shape the development of a strategy for the armed forces that answers the basic question of "what is the military for?" 
1
A relatively coherent and consistent understanding of Russia's security policy goals currently exists, unlike in the 1990s and even the 2000s when views within the establishment diverged sharply. The consensus has been called the "hard realist" school. 
3
1
2
The top security policy goal is stability, a concept in Russia that is far broader than in the West. It entails a broad sense of predictability and minimization of uncertainty about the future. Stability implies, first and foremost, domestic political stability; in other words, avoidance of any popular unrest, separatism, terrorism, or other threats to the current political order. Economic stability-avoidance of sharp downturns-is a means to the end of political stability and, thus, a goal in and of itself. 
4
5
6
Beyond its own neighborhood, the security policy goal of stability involves thwarting perceived U.S. attempts at regime change globally, and particularly vis-à-vis Russia, supporting like-minded sitting (mostly, but not exclusively, authoritarian) governments and deterring the United States from taking steps to undermine Russia's domestic stability. A second consensus security policy goal is retaining and increasing Russia's influence in its "near abroad"; that is, to be the political, economic, and security center of gravity in the region that consists of the 11 other non-Baltic former Soviet republics (the Baltic states, having joined North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] and the European Union [EU], seem to be viewed in the same, more "foreign" category as the east and central European countries).
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Russian elites broadly share similar threat perceptions, although their prioritization of these threats varies. Many Russian strategists consider domestic stability to be the country's top security priority and, thus, domestic instability to be the number one threat. 
16
13 
Karaganov et al., 2016
, p. 19. 14 Timofeev, 2017, pp. 18-21. 15
16
18
19
20
21
18 "I count 30 color revolutions since 2003," said the former senior official, who saw no reason why one could not happen in Russia as well. He also alleged that there was an attempt at such a revolution in 2011-2012, a reference to the mass protests in major cities following a deeply flawed election cycle. Interview with former senior official, Moscow, July 2017. 
19
20
Islamic extremism and terrorism represents a third source of threats to Russia, given its past extremist terrorist attacks and greater risk of terrorism at home due to ties between Muslim communities in Russia and Central Asia and extremist groups in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. 
22
The West, and more specifically the United States, represents a fourth category of threat. 
23
24
25
China is a final and far more distant threat for Russia, given Russian confidence in its strategic partnership with China. However, things could change for the worse in the future, for example, through a nationalist takeover in Beijing.
27
The Russian leadership appears to have developed a political-military strategy for the armed forces based on its security policy goals and threat perceptions. This strategy involves the military carrying out five key tasks: strategic deterrence; regional dominance within Russia's near abroad (the non-Baltic former Soviet Union [FSU]); expeditionary operations; preparedness in case of major war; and domestic stability. This strategy emerged, in part, out of Russia's reconsideration of its military priorities following a disappointing performance in Georgia and the related military reform effort that focused on shrinking the size of Russia's military forces and increasing their readiness. 
28
29
Strategic deterrence is critical to this strategy and dates from Soviet times. It has gained new salience as Russia has developed more acute threat perceptions regarding Western intentions and fielded its own new weapons classes. Strategic deterrence calls for nuclear weapons, nonnuclear strategic weapons, and air defense to prevent any aggression on the Russian homeland first and foremost. However, strategic deterrence is broadly defined and is intended to deter and coerce potential adversaries across the range of potential conflicts. 
30
The second critical element of Russia's strategy is regional dominance: to be able to respond rapidly to any form of instability, terrorism, or conflict that may emerge within its near abroad and to have escalation dominance over both regional actors and other external powers. Russia's military response within its region would not only ensure a flexible and variable response to dominate any potential adversary within the region but also deter outside powers by establishing dominance immediately at the beginning of a conflict.
Third, Russia aims to be able to engage in out-of-area expeditionary operations to respond to terrorism, instabilities, and humanitarian disasters and, thus, bolster Russia's role as a great power. It is important to note that Russia's ambition for expeditionary operations is quite limited, especially in comparison to the United States, which is part of the reason Russia seeks collaboration for future expeditionary operations. Russia lacks a strong network of bases and allies to support expeditionary operations, it has a very small expeditionary logistics capacity, 31 and there is little in Russia's strategic documents to suggest that expeditionary operations are a priority. Nevertheless, Russia's engagement in Syria, its efforts to cultivate its expeditionary capabilities through the development of a merchant marine, and other procurement priorities indicate that Russia does seek to develop the potential to use its military overseas in the future. While these activities are expected to be largely in the MENA region, they may also occur on the Korean peninsula if there were instability in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) or, potentially, other regions. 
32
33
34
Russia's security policy goals reflect longstanding and, by all indications, deeply held views among elites. Despite some variation reflecting recent events, there is also broad consensus on the threats facing 
32
33
Support from Russian society is a second key factor in shaping Russia's military, including by influencing the stability of the regime, Russia's foreign policy, and its ability to generate and sustain Russian military force. Current polling shows substantial, and likely continuing, public support in each of these areas. 
35
36
37
39
40
41
42
39 "Prezident 2018" ["President 2018"], Levada Center, May 7, 2017.
40 Douglas Rutzen, "Civil Society under Assault," Journal of Democracy, Vol. 26, No. 4,  2015, pp. 28-39; Daria Skibo, "Five Years of Russia's Foreign Agents Law," Open Democracy, August 14, 2017; See also "Lyudi Privykayut K Nasiliyu" ["People Are Getting used to Violence"], Levada Center, January 18, 2017.
41 Denis Volkov, "Chto Osobennogo v Novoy Volne Protestov v Rossii" ["What Is Special About the New Wave of Protests in Russia?"], Moscow Carnegie Center, April 6, 2017; Denis Volkov, "Ottsy i Deti: Problema, s Kotoroy Stolknulsya Naval'nyy 12 Iyunya" ["Fathers and Sons: The Problem Navalny Faced on June 12"], RBC, June 13, 2017.
election. 
43
There is also strong public support for Russia's foreign policy, with more than 40 percent of the public seeing foreign policy as a main accomplishment of the government. 
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
Russia's economic performance, measured by its gross domestic product (GDP), is a third key factor in shaping Russia's ability to generate and sustain Russian military forces. 
55
Since the end of the Soviet Union, Russia has experienced major economic fluctuations (see Figure 
2
The export of oil and gas has historically appeared to play a strong role in explaining both Russia's dynamic growth and periods of recession. In a 2016 RAND report analyzing Russia's medium-term economic prospects, Keith Crane and coauthors estimated that the 54 "Ekono Mika I Oborona" ["Economy and Defense"], Levada Center, July 21, 2015; "V Rosii Vyroslo Chislo Tekh, Kto Predpochitayet Lichnoye Blagopoluchiye Velichiyu Strany" ["The Number of Those Who Prioritize Personal Well Being to the Country's Status Has Grown in Russia"], RBC, December 12, 2016.
55 While Russia sees itself as a great power, its economy lags significantly behind the United States, and its nominal GDP is approximately the same size as Italy, although taking into account purchasing power, Russia's economy is larger. See World Bank data. GDP growth has generally correlated with the price of oil rather than with oil and gas production, although there has been some gradual increase in production and associated revenue over the last 25 years. However, Russian economic growth over the last two decades has been influenced by trends in several other factors. On the growth side, Russia benefited from an increase in labor productivity in the early 2000s, which some analysts attribute to growth in the private sector and the adoption of Western management practices and technology.
56 Keith Crane, et al., Russia's Medium-Term Economic Prospects, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1468-RC, 2016; Alexey Kudrin and Evsey Gurvich, "A New Growth Model for the Russian Economy," Russian Journal of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 1,  March 2015, p. 47, p. 5; World Bank, 2017, and Kudrin and Gurvich, 2015, p. 10, estimate that approximately half of the 6.9 percent annual growth from 2000 to 2008 can be explained due to revenues from oil and gas.
New businesses were created in the service sector, and domestic consumption steadily increased, which over time appears to have decreased the importance of oil rents in GDP (see Figure 2.3). The effect of oil and gas revenues on the economy was also stabilized by the creation of a reserve fund and by government expenditures. For the future, Russia has the advantage of a continuing high level of education, and a substantial reserve of Russian capital and skilled labor exists abroad, which could return to Russia and encourage growth if economic conditions appeared more favorable.   At the same time, the Russian economy faces several longstanding constraints on growth. First, Russia has quite low investment levels. Foreign direct investment (FDI) levels have declined since 2009, which became more severe after Western economic sanctions were imposed; FDI dropped from 3.1 percent of GDP in 2013 to 0.49 percent in 2015. 
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
67
62
64
68
69
70
71
69
70
continue to have stabilizing effects on the economy, although there could be short-term impacts on consumers in the midst of crises.
Long-term predictions of Russia's energy exports are uncertain. While future forecasts of oil prices are notoriously imprecise, oil prices are expected to slowly rise, from about $81 in 2020 to $152 in 2035. 
72
73
74
A potential source of economic growth is structural reform, including reforms that would diminish corruption, improve the Rus-72 U.S. Energy Information Administration, "Annual Energy Outlook 2017: Table : Total Energy Supply, Disposition, and Price Summary." 
73
Federation, 2016, pp. 162, 167, 172. 74
75
76
While the Russia economy is not on the brink of collapse, it will likely be constrained in the future by low investment, political and economic institutions that discourage growth, high corruption, and a small demographic decline. In line with a consensus among economists studying the Russian economy, for the foreseeable future we expect Russia to 
75
78
79
80
One of the main ways Russia's economic performance influences Russia's ability to generate and sustain Russian military force is through enabling defense spending. Indeed, Russia's economic performance in early to mid-2000s enabled a substantial increase in the country's military expenditures beginning in the late 2000s. As shown in Figure 
2
81
Russia's defense expenditures represent a significant portion of its overall budget, varying between 12 percent and 23 percent of the Russian federal budget and 2.6 percent and 4.4 percent of GDP. 82 81 Michael Kofman, "The Russian Defense Budget and You," Russian Military Analysis, March 17, 2017; Julian Cooper, "Prospects for Military Spending in Russia in 2017 and Beyond," March 23, 2017a. 
82
84
85
86
2
83
84 Brian Taylor, "Kudrin's Complaint: Does Russia Face a Guns vs. Butter Dilemma?" PONARS Eurasia, policy memo 254, June 2013; Susanne Oxenstierna, "Russian Military Expenditure," in 
Persson, 2016, p. 142. 85
86
87
88
89
2
90
2
Although military expenditures will not be slashed drastically in the near or medium term, they will decrease from prior levels. The general parameters of the fiscally conservative 2017-2019 budget indicate that defense spending (as defined by the "National Defense" budget category) will remain around 3 percent of GDP and 17 percent of the budget. 
91
SOURCE: RAND Arroyo Center analysis. NOTE: The defense budget for 2016 includes a 700 to 800 billion-ruble one-time debt repayment (Kofman, 2017a).
4,000 meaning that defense spending will rise at roughly the same pace as GDP, about 1 percent to 2 percent per year. In the future, a significant increase in GDP or a rise in perceived threat could similarly lead to an increase in defense spending, while an increased need for social spending would put pressure on the defense budget. Nevertheless, as shown from the steady growth in the defense budget from 2008-2017 even with variable GDP growth, Russia has maintained high defense spending even in the face of political and economic troubles, so a steady or potentially somewhat higher spending seems likely in the future.
Future Russian defense expenditures will depend largely on the costs of future procurement. Support to the military industrial complex is expected to decline, as Russian officials have made clear to defense firms that leaner times are ahead. 
92
93
Demographics are a key factor in shaping Russia's ability to generate and sustain Russian military forces, both because of the need to recruit 92 See, for example, Alexander Zudin, "Putin Tells Russia's Defence Industry to Diversify," Jane's Defence Weekly, September 9, 2016. 
93
After the fall of the Soviet Union, the birthrate in Russia dropped substantially, with total fertility per female dropping to 1.15 in 1999. As a result of this decline and rising mortality rates among men, Russia's population declined by approximately 4.15 million from 1991 to 2015, leaving a total population in 2015 of 144 million (see Figure 
2
2
2
In the future, given these changing trends, Russia's population is generally expected to decline, although estimates widely differ based on assumptions, as shown in Figure 
2
Even in the most optimistic case, Russia is projected to face an aging population and decline in the labor force that will stress Russia's SOURCE: Rosstat, 2017c. NOTES: In this chart, we analyze migration from the FSU as defined as the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries plus Georgia, and does not include the Baltics. In 2015, the net migration from Uzbekistan became negative, reaching a net outflow of 20,000 people. Net migration is computed as the difference between the number of people that arrived from a country and the number of people that left to that country in a given year. social support system and yield fewer conscription-age males. Under Rosstat's medium forecast, the working age population is projected to decline from about 82.3 million in 2018 to 78.7 million in 2036 at the same time the above working age population increases from 37.5 million to 42.6 million. Military-age males will also decline through 2024, as shown in Figure 
2
Overall, Russia will continue to face demographic challenges that put pressure on the economy and on military recruitment due to the lower birth rates of the 1990s. Its demographic trend is stabilizing, however, due to rising birth rates and greater in-migration. Russia may face labor shortages, higher social spending due to a lower working age population, and greater competition for personnel to recruit into the military. It seems unlikely that it will face an absolute lack of personnel for internal security or military service, as discussed in more detail later, since recruiting requirements have shrunk over the last decade due to the rise of contract service and decline in annual draft requirements.
Russia's military personnel policies are a key factor in shaping Russia's ability to generate and sustain Russian military forces. Russia has developed a mixed military manning system of contract and conscript personnel. While the military is authorized approximately one million active duty personnel, current personnel numbers as of 2017 are approximately 993,000, of which about a fifth are officers, a bit more than a third are professional enlisted, and a little less than one third are conscripts who serve a one-year term. Russia's reserve mobilization system has largely been neglected since 2010. While there are approximately 900,000 personnel who recently served and who can be recalled as reservists, Russia's plan to develop a more active and professional reserve system has not been well funded. Russia's recent attention to territorial defense and integrating civilian and military organizations during a crisis is anticipated to address some lingering mobilization issues.
The post-1991 system was largely built on the Soviet system of conscription and a cadre system of units that were intended to be fully staffed through mobilization in times of war. In the 1990s, service conditions and readiness in the Russian military deteriorated due to low spending, increasing demographic challenges, entrenched corruption, and widespread hazing of conscripts (dedovshchina). By 2008, only 13 percent of units were considered "permanently ready"-the highest state of readiness. 
95
96
98
99
97
98
99
Over the last decade, the key factors in shaping Russia's ability to generate and sustain Russian military forces have undergone significant change, but these factors show signs of remaining stable over the medium term.
A consensus exists within the Russian elite on its strategic priorities in terms of security policy goals and threat perceptions. No indication suggests that the perspective of Russia's ruling coalition will change. Russia appears to have developed a coherent strategy for the armed forces: a combination of strategic deterrence, rapid response, and dominance in the near abroad; expeditionary operations; preparation in case of major war; and building up its internal security forces. Public attitudes show support for Russia's government, foreign policies, and the military.
Russia is projected to experience relatively low economic growth of 1 percent to 2 percent of GDP, with a small increase in its military budget proportionate to this growth. Russia's military budget has increased substantially due to increasing acquisition expenditures, although we expect future military budgets to level out and grow proportionately to GDP. While Russia will not enjoy major population growth, its demographic situation is not by any measure crippling. Russia has also built a relatively stable mixed conscript and contract manning system for the military, enabling it to address the challenges that undermined the military in the late 1990s and early 2000s.
Conceptually, we identify five distinct arenas for ground combat, and within those we identify eight key capabilities areas for our analysis (italicized). Our typology of ground combat differs from the organization of units or combat arms in the U.S. or Russian military but offers a useful categorization of broadly delineated tasks and capabilities for ground combat. The forces that are relevant for these areas are focused within the Russian Ground Forces but also draw from across the Russian military, including, for example, Navy ships equipped with sealaunched missiles or Air Force bombers that carry air-launched weapons. By considering forces that lie outside of the Ground Forces but play a role in ground combat, we intend to provide a more complete picture of Russian ground combat capabilities. We identify Russia's prioritization and approach within these ground capabilities while recognizing that Russia's priorities within the set of ground capabilities may be different from its overall military procurement priorities (which include, for example, the strategic nuclear forces).
The first arena is combined arms ground combat, which involves forces employed in large-scale, high-intensity ground warfare and consists of two key capability areas, maneuver ground forces and indirect fire. Maneuver ground forces include units that operate tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, and armored personnel carriers, as well as integrated air defense, EW, and other supporting roles. Indirect fire includes artillery and rocket systems with less than 100 km range that directly support maneuver ground forces at the tactical level. Russia's approach to combined arms ground combat and employment draws from the Soviet legacy, especially from World War II, although many changes have occurred in the last decade. 
1
The third arena is rapidly deployable forces, or elite ground units that are employed in conflicts short of conventional war, including the Airborne Troops (VDV), GRU Spetsnaz, and the small Special Operations Command (KSO). These rapidly deployable forces are among the highest readiness units in the Russian military and are available on short notice to respond to regional conflicts or perform an expeditionary role. Indeed, these forces have been extensively used in Ukraine and Syria, and their activities in these conflicts-including special reconnaissance, covert and direct-action missions, unconventional warfare, 
1
2
3
4
The final arena is internal security forces, a somewhat different category from the military capabilities already described. Understanding the future development of the internal security forces is important for several reasons: they represent one major way Russia seeks to defend itself from foreign aggression. Russia's investment of money and personnel in internal security forces may leave fewer resources available for other military forces, and Russian internal security forces may be deployable abroad to support military operations.
5
Using a common framework, we look back in time to understand Russia's general approach to the development of each key capability area to describe the likely outlook. We describe what weapons Russia has procured and modernized. We consider the trends in the defense industry by identifying the major companies that produce relevant systems and understanding their current financial status, technological development, and political situation. We conclude with a general outlook for developments and forces in each of the capability areas. Table 
3
The developments highlighted in Table 
3
6
Russia's indirect fires are also a case of retaining Soviet capabilities, with less significant modernization and adaptation. Russia's current indirect fire capabilities are the direct legacy of massive volumes of launchers and munitions produced by the Soviet Union. To date, while Russia has imagined new revisions, it has not funded major upgrades. The only new indirect fire systems that have been fielded since 1990 are direct successors that look very similar to the legacy system, including Tornado-G and Tornado-S (see Appendix F). More substantial improvements, such as the Uragan-1M or Koalitsiia, have been repeatedly pushed back. Furthermore, while Russia recognizes the potential benefit of precision weapons employed by the West and has developed new systems for upgrades, it has not pursued upgrades to precision indirect fires for its own forces. Russia's approach appears consistent with the belief that slightly upgraded massed and area-effects artillery can be as, if not more, effective than precision weaponry, especially when supported by new C4ISR systems such as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Analysts highlight that Russia's ground force continue to believe in "muscle and effort" and "streetfighting" rather than fully supplanting old practices with new technology. 
7
8
Russia's rapidly deployed forces also build on Soviet-era formations but represent new and reformed forces. The VDV, historically intended to act as an air-mobile strategic reserve, was rapidly professionalized after 2008 and became more of an elite mobile infantry rather than a parachute force. The GRU Spetsnaz, historically intended to conduct reconnaissance, subversion behind enemy lines, and attacks on weapons of mass destruction (WMD), evolved to continue to provide reconnaissance forces, as well as developing a capability for unconventional warfare. While capabilities were built upon Soviet-era considerations, many elements are new and unique to Russia. Still, it appears that the U.S. Special Operations Command (SOCOM) and other models of special operations forces influenced Russia when it created the 500-operator strong KSO units. 
9
Russia's C4ISR represents a combination of legacy Soviet systems and the emulation and adaptation of concepts and approaches, such as net-centric warfare. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia was left with hundreds of stove-piped command and control (C2) systems and did not invest significantly in modernization of these systems through the 1990s and early 2000s. During this period Russia studied Western C4ISR and hoped eventually to adapt modern C4ISR developments as well. With the increase in defense resources after 2008, Russia began modernizing its C4ISR infrastructure in earnest. Through the creation of the National Defense Management Center (NDMC) and continued integration with civilian agencies, local and regional governments, military, and internal security services, Russia has laid the foundations for a C4ISR infrastructure more complicated and interconnected than the U.S. interagency, with both the potential risks and benefits of greater centralization. Russia is in the process of developing and implementing a modern, whole-of-government C4ISR infrastructure that will enable Russia to pursue its vision of net-centric or "noncontact warfare." For example, in 2014 Russia established the NDMC, pursuing the integration of existing communications systems within a single network, as well as the development of UAVs, space-based intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), and other sensors. Still, Russia's ability to develop and integrate high-technology C4ISR will continue to be limited by Russia's poorly developed domestic electronics industry, Western sanctions, and high costs (see Appendix I for details).
Russia has a highly advanced air defense system within multiple services, building on and modernizing the extensive Soviet-era investment in air defenses. Indeed, ground units have potent integrated air defenses to complement the strategic air defenses within the Aerospace Forces (VKS), although the ground force systems are somewhat less modern. Russia is expected to produce additional systems, with increased range and detection capabilities. To date, Russia has prioritized its strategic systems but appears to be fulfilling its needs and likely shifting toward acquiring new tactical systems over the next ten years (see Appendix J).
To develop its internal security forces, Russia has incorporated pieces of Soviet-era structures within newly created or reorganized institutions (see Appendix L, Figure L.1). In particular, responsibility for ensuring internal security lies with Rosgvardiya, which was created in 2016 and took responsibility for several of the militarized internal security organizations, including the internal troops and various riot police organizations, which operated a range of armored personnel vehicles and helicopters. The creation of a militarized internal security force is not unique. But it is new for Russia; since the Soviet collapse, Russian leadership has tended to empower the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), largely a law-enforcement body, with domestic policing functions. As one interlocutor explained, by creating Rosgvardiya, any debate about the need for militarized internal security forces had been resolved. 
10
11
Russia's ability to field new military systems is determined by the capacity of its defense industry. Russian strategic documents highlight the role of what they term the "defense-industrial complex" and its technological development as integral contributors to the country's national security.
12
Our analysis of Russia's military industrial complex focused on the enterprises producing the major systems, their corporate performance, and what type of resources they receive. All the major enterprises are funded or subsidized by the state in some way, and in the end the MOD is their primary customer. But the ways through which the Russian state supports these companies illuminates its priorities and has major implications for the development of Russian capabilities. The extent to which defense enterprises succeed in terms of their domestic and export sales are also opportunities for or constraints on the development of Russia's overall military potential.
Four general patterns of investment emerge from our analysis of Russia's defense-industrial complex. First, in some areas, particularly long-range strike and C4ISR, the Kremlin has invested significant resources, recapitalizing particular enterprises, including the use of specific State Targeted Programs to facilitate the production of new high-technology systems. The Iskander program, for example, was expected in 2012 to receive 40 billion rubles in capital investment before 2020, 60 percent from the state budget with the balance from production enterprises' own resources (see Appendix G). With regard to C4ISR, Russia has sought to counter its dependency on foreign components by investing in domestic electronics companies under Rostec, including Sozvezdiye, the producer of the Yesu-TZ tactical C2 system (see Appendix I). These investments illustrate how the Russian state prioritizes particular enterprises producing systems that Russian leaders consider to be of particular importance.
A second approach is the longer-term support of companies producing systems that are strategically significant, such as in the case of air defense and EW. A few Russian defense enterprises are successful enough that they require relatively few direct state subsidies. For instance, Almaz-Antey, a state-owned holding company manufacturing air defense systems and one of the Russia's largest defense firms, enjoyed steady revenue growth from 2010-2015 thanks both to strong sales from the Russian government and to robust demand from foreign customers. Almaz-Antey benefits from the fact that it manufactures some of the world's most advanced air defense systems and that these systems are competitively priced on the world market, particularly after the post-2014 collapse in the value of the ruble (see Appendix J). Unfortunately, Almaz-Antey is an outlier among Russia's defense enterprises, many of which are poorly managed, undercapitalized, and struggling to attract demand for their military and civilian output.
These troubles lead to the third observed trend within the military industrial complex, the collapse and incorporation of troubled enterprises into state-owned holding companies. In recent years, this fate has afflicted several of Russia's remaining large independent defense enterprises, both state and privately owned. Ironically, the relatively high diversification of some of these firms made them vulnerable to exogenous shocks unrelated to demand for their military products. Uralvagonzavod (UVZ), Russia's main tank producer, nearly went bankrupt in 2016, apparently due to the collapse of its civilian railcar business, which resulted from the falling price of natural resources. In other cases, chronic weak demand and undercapitalization left defense enterprises so weakened they could not weather a sudden downturn like that experienced in 2014. The major producer of infantry fighting vehicles, Kurganmashzavod (KMZ), which had been one of Russia's few large private defense enterprises, went bankrupt. The Russian government responded similarly in both cases, by incorporating UVZ and KMZ into Rostec. This step not only gave the firms access to greater financing, it subordinated them to Rostec's management, which is relatively professional by Russian standards (see Appendix E). Time will tell if these enterprises will fare better under Rostec's purview than they did as independent companies.
A fourth approach is investment in more speculative technologies through means such as venture capital. The Russian state first attempted to channel venture capital toward the defense sector over ten years ago, but these efforts remain quite modest in absolute terms, with only a few tens of millions of dollars invested. 
13
14
The overall outlook for Russian development in these key capabilities for ground combat is continuity, in terms of the overall approach and 13 Yuriy Emelin, "Venchurnye investitsii prikhodit v OPK " ["Venture Investors Are Coming to the Industrial-Military Complex"], Voenno-promyshlennyi Kuryer, April 7, 2004; Denis Legezo, "V Rossii sozdan venchurnyi fond dlia oboronnykh predpriatii" ["Russia Created a Venture Fund for Defense Enterprises"], CNews, May 29, 2017.
with respect to the characteristics of the military industrial complex. We expect continued upgrades in maneuver forces and indirect fires and very slow development of the next generation of platforms. Production will continue of cruise and ballistic missiles with support for their firms, but uncertainties do exist as to potential limits under the INF Treaty. There will be continued investment in rapidly deployable forces and their effectiveness will improve with the introduction of new technology. Advanced C4ISR will be pursued, with likely progress in UAVs and other systems, but the gap between Russia and the West will persist. Russia will continue to be a leader in air defense and seek EW systems to counter the West's systems. Finally, Russia's internal security forces will continue to receive funding and political support.
Chapter 3 described the development of eight key capability areas over the last ten years. The factors described in Chapter 2 explain much of their development, although beliefs about the future of warfare, technological limitations, the characteristics of Russia's military industrial complex, bureaucratic politics, and inertia also play a role. Indeed, Russia's decisions to develop ground capabilities reflect the strategy for the armed forces, within the constraints of its economic performance, defense budget, demographics, and military personnel system. See Table 
4
First, Russia improved long-range conventional strike, C4ISR, and air defense to strengthen strategic deterrence. Drawing from its observation of Western military actions in the Balkans, Libya, and Syria, long-range strike offered a lower-cost means of degrading Western military capabilities and holding at risk high-value targets. The nonnuclear deterrent capacity provided by these capabilities complemented Russia's increased spending on its nuclear forces, which ensured that a peer adversary, such as the West or China, would face a grave cost in aggression directly against Russia. 
1
2
2 Ramm, 2017, pp. 2-11
3
4
5
6
Kofman et al., 2017, pp. 33-45. 6
7
8
7
9
10
11
Several details of Russia's development of its force structure, personnel policy, and industrial policy indicate that it is not preparing to initiate a large-scale ground war. Russia has paid little attention to developing an effective and sizable active reserve system that might be immediately required in the event of a major war (see Appendix D). Its current active reserve force of 4,000 to 5,000 and the small size of its territorial reserve force (two battalions and a regiment) are more consistent with reserve forces for regional contingencies than largescale war with the West. 12 Further, while Russia has reestablished some ground divisions, it retains an approach to ground readiness in which ground brigades should be able to produce one battalion tactical group of highly-ready professional soldiers. 
13
14
L
2012-2013, likely, in 12
Monaghan, 2017, pp. 77-78. 13
part, as a response to the Bolotnaya protests, and it appears unlikely that Russia will be easily able to reduce the size of or its spending on security forces. Continuing social support for the regime and lack of opposition to Rosgvardiya likely indicates the sustainability of Russia's approach to internal security (see Appendix A).
Just as the five factors shaped the development of the Russian military over the last decade, the trajectory of these factors is likely to shape Russian capabilities in the future. As described in Chapter 2, while there may be continued incremental developments in the future, there will not be major changes in the factors. We view the most likely future as one of overall continuity.
Russia's military forces will generally meet its security goals within its available resources. Russia will likely face higher costs for military recruitment due to declining military-age males through 2024 but should be able to find and recruit sufficient personnel to maintain the current size of its military forces. Russia will continue to focus on achieving regional dominance in its near abroad, with an emphasis on readiness and professionalization of a small component of the force. Some expansion and incremental improvements will occur in longrange strike, rapidly deployable forces, C4ISR, and air defense, while relative stagnation will occur in the maneuver ground forces and indirect fires. Russia will pursue continued collaboration with the West in activities such as counterterrorism in the Middle East while attempting to pivot east toward closer relations with India and China.
At the same time, the future is not known, and we see two areas where changes in the factors are possible and consequential for the development of Russian military capabilities. One is fluctuating energy prices, which could affect growth in the economy and, in turn, Russia's defense budget and military capabilities. The second area is changes in Russia's economic growth and security strategy due to shifts in relations with the West or China. See Table 
4
Russia's economic prospects could improve if energy prices increase.
In this case, with the increase in GDP, Russia could choose to increase the defense budget and military expenditures and use these additional resources to improve the maneuver ground forces, C4ISR, long-range strike, air defense, and rapidly deployable forces. Russia could also undertake a faster pace of modernization of its legacy systems (such as T-72s, T-80s, or T-90s; BMP-2s; and BTR-80/82s) as well as move to serial production of the next generation of ground vehicles. More unlikely, but possible, energy prices could drop, leading to a Russian economic crisis, especially if economic reform had not occurred. In this case, social stability could decline, which would add pressure to Russia's internal security situation. What Russia would do in this situation is uncertain, although at a minimum Russia would likely bolster its internal security forces and prioritize strategic deterrence, possibly by bolstering its legacy strategic nuclear forces instead of committing to more costly improvements to C4ISR and long-range strike. It might also strengthen its maneuver ground forces to bolster its internal security and deterrence against the West and potential domestic interference.
Russia's relations with the West in the future could improve or worsen. In the case of improving relations and a diminished threat from the West, the Russian strategy for the armed forces would likely focus less on Western incursion into the near abroad or direct conflict. If, as a result, Western sanctions were lifted, the Russian government could develop a more positive view of the liberal reform ideas mentioned in Chapter 2, leading to a higher than predicted economic growth. 
15
Were relations with the West to worsen, the prospects for reformled Russian economic growth and the acquisition of modern technologies would decrease. Concern would arise about Western aggressive intentions, both within Russia and in the near abroad. In its strategy for the armed forces, Russia would focus on strategic deterrence and regional dominance. In developing its military capabilities, Russia would use its limited resources on nuclear weapons and long-range strike while pursuing a steady modernization of its ground forces. It could also build up its ready forces in the Western Military District.
Another possibility is that Russia's relations with China could worsen. While Russia's current relationship with China appears strong, conflict over China's growing influence in Central Asia could emerge, leading to greater tensions and a perceived threat from China. 
16
Continuity in Russia's development of ground capabilities is likely, including a focus on long-range strike, C4ISR, and rapidly deployable forces. However, there could be changes in the factors involving energy prices and economic growth or in Russia's relations with the West or China that could give Russia incentives to pursue different ground combat capabilities. The potential outcomes of these options offer insights for the range of different future Russian military capabilities. In general, we continue to expect a prioritization of capabilities associated with strategic deterrence, regional dominance, and internal security.
To draw the policy implications for the United States, we analyzed different ways in which Russia's interests, preparations, and capabilities may in the future interact with U.S. interests, priorities, and capabilities. To achieve U.S. interests, the U.S. military will need to provide forces that can compete with Russia across a range of different types of interactions, from cooperation to conflict. As the 2018 National Defense Strategy articulates, the U.S. military will likely be called on to counter coercion and subversion short of military competition, strengthen allies and partners, deter adversary aggression, and if necessary, defeat aggression by a major power and manage escalation up to and including nuclear war. 
1
The first and last elements of Russia's security strategy, strategic deterrence and internal security, are inherently defensive, although strategic deterrent forces could threaten the United States and its allies. It is unlikely that the United States would initiate conflict with Russia or intervene militarily to support internal groups. The United States should, therefore, not see these capabilities as posing an immediate threat to U.S. interests. Nevertheless, Russia clearly sees threats from the United States and the rest of NATO from NATO enlargement and the enhancement of U.S.-NATO military capabilities on its borders. Though neither the European Deterrence Initiative nor the NATO Enhanced Forward Presence battalions are likely to trigger a Russian military response, the possibility exists that Russia's view of the threat could increase or a crisis could develop that could lead to unintended military escalation. U.S. policymakers need to be attuned to Russian perceptions of the threat posed by U.S. force deployments in Europe. 
2
3
Given these growing capabilities and Russia's greater interests, U.S. support has not and does not appear likely to be able to significantly undermine Russia's dominance in Ukraine, Georgia, and other former Soviet republics. In these countries, the U.S. military can explore options to bolster partners' security forces. A stronger and more accountable Ukrainian security force can better achieve U.S. interests of securing Ukraine's sovereignty and freedom of action without increasing the likelihood of escalation.
The Army and other services could bolster partner-building capabilities by improving the quality and capacity of niche areas such as foreign area officers, units focused on providing security-force assistance, information operations, and military medical units. There may be other ways to adapt U.S. activities across the whole-of-government in Ukraine to improve the prospects for reform, such as adopting longer time horizons (five to ten years); increasing the training, specialization, and tours of duty for U.S. personnel; and working with allies to place greater and consistent pressure on the Ukrainian government to pursue reforms. While existing support to Ukraine, such as U.S. training by the Joint Multinational Training Group-Ukraine, can be beneficial, efforts that more systematically support the security establishment may be more likely to be effective. Lethal aid backed by U.S. Army train-and-equip, may increase the Ukrainian military's capabilities and clearly demonstrate U.S. commitment to the country. But it risks provoking a strong counterreaction by Russia, which has many options to escalate. Further, the potential for strengthening Ukraine's military is minimal compared with the possible benefit of bolstering the ability of Ukraine's large military industrial complex to provide better support to the country's military. 
4
Russia's expeditionary operations and capabilities, the third element in Russia's security strategy, pose a complex challenge that will require both flexibility and preparedness for high-intensity conflict with well-armed adversaries. While Russia has invested in special forces, long-range strike, and air defense, the Russian military is not configured to be a global expeditionary military, especially given its gaps in expeditionary logistics and standing basing arrangements. Russia is likely attempting to secure port or airfield access rights but so far has not made breakthroughs. Nevertheless, Russia may support proxies that may undermine U.S. interests without attribution to Russian forces. The U.S. Army should investigate options to prepare for the challenge of Russian expeditionary capabilities, such as developing further military-to-military connections with Russian commanders. Reference to and study of Cold War-era strategies for engagement may be valuable.
The U.S. government needs to prepare for direct and indirect confrontation with Russia outside of Europe. As in former Soviet republics, the United States and its partners will likely face Russian proxies with advanced military tactics and technology. A clearer understanding of what capabilities Russia can provide through training and equipping partners may illuminate potential capabilities that the United States could provide to its own partners. Furthermore, the U.S. military needs to prepare for the potential that in a conflict like Syria, where both U.S. and Russian forces are deployed, a direct confrontation between the United States and Russia could emerge. Beyond contingency planning for such scenarios, the U.S. Army should assess whether forces deployed in areas where a conflict with Russia is conceivable have the necessary training and equipment and are prepared to take action while avoiding escalation.
Perhaps the most dangerous possibility is the fourth element of Russia security strategy, preparation for a large-scale ground war. 
5
Beyond Russia's advantage in the size of ground forces in Europe, existing research has identified six ways Russia's current and projected near-term capabilities pose a threat to the U.S. Army in Europe. 
6
7
8
For the future, these specific challenges will persist, and some could become worse. Russian C4ISR and long-range strike is likely to improve, posing a greater threat to fixed U.S. and allied positions. Air defense and EW are likely to continue to experience gradual improvement in the coming years. While Russia is unlikely in the near term to significantly improve the quality of its indirect fires or adopt nextgeneration ground vehicles, among other things, its existing capabilities will continue to pose a threat.
Addressing the challenge of Russia's developing military capabilities likely requires a joint U.S. military and combined alliance response. Improving the capabilities of the allies who are most proximate to Russia, such as Poland and the Baltic states, could be invaluable for deterring both Russian subversion short of war and high intensity conflict.
In addition to responding to these geographically specific challenges, analysis of Russia's development of key ground capabilities provides insights for the U.S. Army as it considers options for developing its own capabilities:
• In terms of the maneuver ground forces, we expect incremental modernization of legacy systems unless energy prices increase, continued adoption of advanced fire control, sensors, and protection technologies on legacy Soviet systems, and the very slow adaptation of next-generation systems, including the T-14 and T-15. This calls for the U.S. Army to prepare for challenges from the overall size of Russian forces and from modernized Soviet-era Russian platforms, but probably not significant numbers of new Russian platforms in the next five to ten years. • Indirect fires are unlikely to experience significant improvement in the next ten years, although these capabilities will likely be bolstered by improvements in C4ISR. This calls for the U.S. Army to investigate future options to counter Russian C4ISR, to attrite the long-range indirect fire systems, and to pursue dispersal, denial, and deception. • Russia's long-range strike capacity and capabilities are expected to increase, although production capacity challenges will likely place limits in the near term. This could change if energy prices rise or sanctions are relaxed. The U.S. Army needs to prepare for coordinated and sustained attacks on critical rear-echelon nodes and explore options to counter Russian long-range strike capabilities to include improved air defense and EW. • Russia's rapidly deployable forces are likely to experience steady investment and gradual improvement. The U.S. Army needs to expect and prepare for its partners to face Russian forces or their proxies, including in Europe, the Middle East, South Asia, and Northeast Asia. • Russian C4ISR is expected to improve, though its ability to meet its 2020 goal of a unified information space and production of ISR systems will be pushed farther back, absent improved relations with the West (and, hence, diminished sanctions) or greater oil revenue to fund the high costs of domestic procurement. Improving U.S. cyber and EW capability at the tactical and operational level could be beneficial to address Russia's growing parity in C4ISR, although this may require investment in command, control, and planning, as well as possible changes in authorities to use cyber.
9
While Russia's ground capabilities will continue to develop, they will be constrained and directed by political, demographic, economic, and social factors within Russia, which will likely change slowly over the next five to ten years. Studying Russia's priorities and its constraints helps shed light on how the U.S. military can best develop its full range of capabilities to better compete with Russia and achieve U.S. interests while minimizing financial cost and the risk of war.
7
67  
67  
89  
89  
Ivan Timofeev, Theses on Russia's Foreign Policy and Global Positioning (2017-2024), Moscow: Center for Strategic Research, June 2017, p. 6; interviews with Russian analysts, Moscow, July 2017.
Sergei Karaganov, et al., Strategiya dlya Rossii: rossiiskaya vneshnyaya  politika: konets 2010kh-nachalo 2020-kh godov [Strategy for Russia: Russian Foreign Policy From the End of the 2010s to the Beginning of the 2020s], Moscow: Council on Foreign and Defense Policy, May 2016, p. 14.
10 Interview with Russian government advisor, Moscow, July 2017
.11 Samuel Charap, John Drennan, and Pierre Noël, "Russia and China: A New Model ofGreat-Power Relations," Survival, Vol. 59, No. 1, January 2, 2017.   
In the 2016 Hamilton survey, terrorism is ranked as the second "utmost" threat to Russia
(Rivera et al., 2016)
The Hamilton study of elites showed that 88 percent of respondents in 2016 believed that the United States is either "fairly" or "very" hostile toward Russia
(Rivera et al., 2016)
See Chernenko, 2015.    
Interviews with Russian analysts and officials, Moscow, July 2017.
Interview with former senior official, Moscow, July 2017. See alsoAnton Lavrov, "Russia's  Geopolitical Fears," Moscow Defense Brief, Vol. 55, No. 5, 2016a.    
See Appendix D and E as well as Andrew Monaghan, Power in Modern Russia,Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2017, pp. 68-70; and Igor Sutyagin and Justin Bronk, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations and Implications for National Security, RUSI  Whitehall Papers, Vol. 89, No. 1, 2017, pp. 10-42. Aleksandr Golts also highlights that, due to the 2008 reforms, the military "had a clear mission. They had to win in a short-term local conflict." However, Golts notes that the only way to win a large-scale conflict with the West, given the reformulation of the military, was using nuclear weapons, pointing to the importance of strategic deterrence over a preparation for large-scale war in Russia's current strategy for the armed forces. AleksandrGolts, Military Reform and Militarism in Russia, Uppsala  Universitet,  
2017, p. 290.29  An example is the cyber activities by the GRU (Main Intelligence Directorate [Glavnoye Razvedatel'noye Upravleniye]) in the case of the 2016 U.S. election. See Director of National Intelligence, "Assessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent US Elections," ICA 2017-01D, January 6, 2017.
Kristin Ven Bruusgaard, "Russian Strategic Deterrence," Survival, Vol. 58, No. 4,  August-September 2016.    
For example, while Russia was acquiring aging cargo ships and standing up the ad hoc "Syria express" to supply its forces in the region, the improvised nature of this effort and the weakness of Russian military forces to provide logistical support are indicative of larger challenges for expeditionary logistics. Jonathan Saul and Maria Tsvetkova, "Russia Supplies Syria Mission With Old Cargo Ships Bought from Turkey," Reuters, December 15, 2015. On the larger military logistical challenges facing Russia, see alsoGrau and Bartles, 2016,  pp. 274-283.   
See Makhmut Gareev, "Uroki i vyvody iz opyta Velikoi Otechestvennoi voiny dlya stroitel'stva  i podgotovki Vooruzhennykh Sil," Voennaya mysl', No. 5, 2010.   
See Appendix A for the polling data in these areas and additional analysis on the following observations.
36 "Optimizm rossiyan snizhayetsya, reyting Putina-poka net" ["Russians' Optimism Is Waning-But Not Their Support for Putin"], Deutsche Welle, September 24, 2015; "Deyatelnost gosudarstvennyh institutov" ["Functioning of the State Institutions"], VTsIOM, no
date.37  HilaryAppel, "Is It Putin or Is It Oil? Explaining Russia's Fiscal Recovery," Post-Soviet  Affairs, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2008, pp. 301-323; Edward Lucas, The New Cold War: Putin's  Russia and the Threat to the West, London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014; Daniel Treisman, "Presidential Popularity in a Hybrid Regime: Russia under Yeltsin and Putin," American Journal of PoliticalScience, Vol. 55, No. 3, 2011, pp. 590-609; Kathryn Stoner and Michael McFaul,  "Who Lost Russia (This Time)? Vladimir Putin," The Washington
Quarterly, Vol. 38, No. 2,  Summer 2015, pp. 167-187.   
"Vybory 2018" ["Elections 2018"], VTsIOM, December 2017.
Theodore Gerber, "Foreign Policy and the United States in Russian Public Opinion, Problems ofPost-Communism, Vol. 62, No. 2, No. 98-111, 2015, p. 100.    
"Derzhavnost' I Osobyy Put' Rossii" ["Russia's Special Power and Path"], Levada Center, December 12, 2016.
Jacob Poushter and Dorothy Manevich, "Globally, People Point to ISIS and Climate Change as Leading Security Threats," Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project blog, August 1, 2017.
"Russia and the West: How Russians Think the West Views Them," Levada Center, June 26, 2015; "Greatness Instead of Democracy: How Russia Became a Peer to the U.S. in the Minds of Its Citizens" ["Velichiye Vmesto Demokratii: Kak Rossiya Dognala Nas V Umakh Svoikh Lyudey"], Levada Center, February 4, 2016.
These FDI numbers derive from IMF data on inward flows. They are reported in U.S. dollars and then converted to percent GDP.
59 Dmitry Dokuchaev, "Russian Capital, No Longer on the Run," Russia Direct, August 24,
2016.60  SeeCrane et al., 2016, pp. 41-43; Svetlana Ledyaeva and Mikael Linden, "Determinants of Economic Growth: Empirical Evidence from Russian Regions," European Journal of Comparative Economics, Vol. 5, No. 1, June 2008, pp. 87-105, highlights the importance of domestic investment in Russia by noting that variation in investment explains variation in regional growth rates, at least
before 2008.61  Kudrin and Gurvich, 2015, p. 48, for example, highlight flaws in law enforcement that undermine growth, including "the excessive centralization of law enforcement; prevailing vertical hierarchical coordination; multiple parallel governance verticals; the persisting "ticksheet" evaluation system caused by centralized governance; a lack of external supervision and communication with local communities and civil authorities."
See also Konstantin Sonin, "Russia's Economic Stagnation Is Here to Stay," Project Syndicate,
February 1, 2018.
  79  Projections from World Bank, 2017; UN estimates from United Nations, World Economic Situation and Prospects, New York: United Nations, 2017; IMF from imf.org.
"Army Reform Increased Number of Soldiers, Sergeants to 726,000," ITAR-TASS, February 17, 2010.
Alexey Ramm, "Russian Military Special Forces," in Ruslan Pukhov and Christopher  Marsh, eds., Elite Warriors Special Operations Forces from Around the World, Minneapolis,  Minn.: East View Press, 2017, p. 2.    
See also Valery Gerasimov, "Value of Science in Prediction," Voenno-promyshlennyi Kuryer [Military Industrial Courier], March 9, 2016.
Dmitry Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation, Stanford: Stanford Security Studies, 2010.   
See, for example, "National Guard to Complete Assigned Missions Both in Russia and Abroad," TASS, June 27, 2017.
For example, an upgraded T-72B3 (obr 2016 version) costs an estimated
million rubles compared with an estimated 350 million rubles for a T-14 Armata, although that number is not finalized as the T-14s have not entered serial production. See TableE.4.
See Mary FitzGerald, "Marshal Ogarkov and the New Soviet Revolution in Military Affairs," Alexandria, Va.: Center for Naval Analyses, 1987, and Richard Van Atta, Sidney G. Read, and Seymour J. Deitchman, "Assault Breaker," in DARPA Technical Achievements, Vol. II, Alexandria, Va.: Institute for DefenseAnalyses, 1991.    
Tor Bukkvoll, "Military  Innovation Under Authoritarian Government-The Case of Russian Special Operations Forces," Journal of StrategicStudies, Vol. 38, No. 5, 2015,  pp. 618-619.   
Interview with Russian professor, Moscow, July 2017.
See, for example, FMSO, "Counter UAV Tactics and the 'Leer-3' Electronic Warfare System," OE Watch,Vol. 7, No. 7, August 2017, p. 3.   
See, for example, Russian Federation, 2015, para 37, 62, 69.   
See VenBruusgaard,  
Johan Norberg, "Training to Fight-Russia's Major Military Exercises 2011
-2014
Sutyagin and Bronk, 2017, pp. 25, 43-44.  Another reason given for the creation of division-level headquarters was to provide a professional growth for Army leadership. "The Return of Divisions: The Ground Forces Will Reverse the 'Brigade Bias'" ["Vozvrashhenie divizij: V Suhoputnyh vojskah ispravjat 'brigadnyj perekos'"], Voyenno-Promyshlenny Kuryer, February 8, 2016. See also Appendix E.
One Russian academic noted that Russia's military force was "much smaller," "about 1/4 or 1/5 of what they used to be," but with "equal or greater military capacity." Interview with Russian academic, Moscow, July 19, 2017.
Interviews with former senior Russian officer and Russian analysts, Moscow, July 2017.
Russian analysts noted that reforms proposed by Kudrin's group, with a perceived closer connection with the West, were especially unlikely so long as Western sanctions and poor relations with the West persisted. Interviews with Russian analysts, Moscow, July 2017.
See Alexander Gabuev, "Friends With Benefits: Russian-Chinese Relations After the Ukraine Crisis," Carnegie Moscow Center, June 2016, pp. 25-29.
Department of Defense, "Summary of the
National Defense Strategy of the United States of America," 2018.
Bryan Frederick, et al., Assessing Russian Reactions to U.S. and NATO Posture Enhancements, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1879-AF, 2017.  
3 David E. Johnson, The Challenges of the "Now" and Their Implications for the U.S.Army,  Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2016, PE-184;
Radin and Reach, 2017.
See Andrew Radin and Lynn Davis, "What Ukraine Urgently Needs to Defend Itself," Newsweek, October 16, 2016; Olga Oliker, et al., Security Sector Reform in Ukraine, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2016.
A 2016 RAND study, for example, emphasizes that given the current U.S. posture, in the event of a large Russian invasion, Russian forces would be on the outskirts of the Baltic capitals of Riga and Tallinn
within 60 hours. David A. Shlapak and Michael Johnson, Reinforcing Deterrence on NATO's Eastern Flank: Wargaming the Defense of the Baltics, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2016.
See, for example, Scott Boston and Dara Massicot, The Russian Way of Warfare: A Primer, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, PE-231-A, December 2017.
The combination of long-range strike, coastal defense, and air defenses to obstruct power projection is sometimes referred to as the anti-access/area-denial threat (A2/AD). See, among others, Timothy M.Bonds, et al., What Role Can Land-Based, Multi-Domain Anti-Access/  Area Denial Forces Play in Deterring or Defeating Aggression? Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND  Corporation, 2017, pp. 91-95.    
See, for example, Dmitry Adamsky, "If War Comes Tomorrow: Russian Thinking About 'Regional Nuclear Deterrence,'" Journal of Slavic Military Studies, Vol. 27, No. 1, 2014,  pp. 163-188.   
Austin Long, "A Cyber SIOP? Operational Considerations for Strategic Offensive Cyber Planning," Journal ofCybersecurity, Vol. 3, No. 1, March 1, 2017, pp. 19-28.   
We are grateful for the support of many people over the course of this project. We would like to thank the 
U.S. Army
G3/5/7
Colonel Mark Solomons
Colonel Brian Davis
Major Thomas Arnold
Major Corey Steiner
Moscow
Brian Taylor
Syracuse University
Elina Treyger
RAND
Jerry Sollinger
Natalie Ziegler
Arroyo Center's 
Strategy, Doctrine, and Resources Program. RAND Arroyo Center
RAND Corporation
United States Army
RAND operates under a "
Federal-Wide Assurance
FWA00003425
Code of Federal Regulations for the Protection of Human Subjects Under United States Law
45 CFR 46
U.S. Army