# ID: b173c9a3f96040528f0293fb96014907
# Title: Preparing for War?: Moscow Facing an Arc of Crisis
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
The Strategic Studies Institute (SSI) is part of the U.S. Army War College and is the strategic-level study agent for issues related
The United States Army War College educates and develops leaders for service at the strategic level while advancing knowledge in the global application of Landpower.
The purpose of the United States Army War College is to produce graduates who are skilled critical thinkers and complex problem solvers. Concurrently, it is our duty to the U.S. Army to also act as a "think factory" for commanders and civilian leaders at the strategic level worldwide and routinely engage in discourse and debate concerning the role of ground forces in achieving national security objectives.
The Strategic Studies Institute publishes national security and strategic research and analysis to influence policy debate and bridge the gap between military and academia.
The Center for Strategic Leadership contributes to the education of world class senior leaders, develops expert knowledge, and provides solutions to strategic Army issues affecting the national security community.
The Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute provides subject matter expertise, technical review, and writing expertise to agencies that develop stability operations concepts and doctrines.
The School of Strategic Landpower develops strategic leaders by providing a strong foundation of wisdom grounded in mastery of the profession of arms, and by serving as a crucible for educating future leaders in the analysis, evaluation, and refinement of professional expertise in war, strategy, operations, national security, resource management, and responsible command.
The U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center acquires, conserves, and exhibits historical materials for use to support the U.S. Army, educate an international audience, and honor Soldiers-past and present.
Russia is once again at the front and center of the security agenda of the United States. With many now seeing Russia as one of the most important threats, if not the number one threat to the United States and its allies, there is much debate about how to counter possible threats, where Russia might strike next, and how to deter Russian aggression. The war in Ukraine and Russia's intervention in Syria, combined with its extensive program of exercising for war, lends policy urgency to this debate.
In this Letort Paper, Dr. Andrew Monaghan, a British academic and long-term scholar of Russia based at Chatham House in London, reflects on the view from Moscow. In so doing, he illustrates the increasingly obvious gulf in how security is perceived in Western capitals and in Moscow. Importantly, he emphasizes that the Russian leadership faces numerous doubts and difficulties-to include doubting that, in Clausewitzian terms, Russia is able to withstand the test of war. This is both the root of the emergency measures that the Russian leadership is implementing across the system, from the economy to the political system and the military, and the root of the major investment program to modernize the military that was under way even before the Ukraine crisis erupted in 2014 and led to a sharp deterioration in Russia's relations with the United States and the West more broadly.
This Letort Paper also serves to complement and even supersede the debate in the West about Russian "hybrid" war by looking at Russian actions through the lens of state mobilization, drawing attention to important features of Russia's evolving conventional warfighting capacity. viii This Letort Paper has been completed at a time when Russia's mobilization process is still incomplete. However, it both reminds us to look beyond the urgent headlines of the day, such as the conflicts in Ukraine and Syria, and to look further to the strategic context and Russia's evolution over the next 3 to 5 years. Given the likelihood of continuing, and perhaps even deepening, competition between the United States and its allies and Russia for the foreseeable future, the Strategic Studies Institute recommends this Letort Paper about Russian mobilization to all policymakers who have the task of adapting to the challenges of Euro-Atlantic security in the 21st century. Additionally, he is the founder and director of the Russia Research Network, an independent organization for the generation of information and expertise on Russian politics, security, and economic issues based in London.
Until late-2012, he led Russian-related research in the Research Division of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Defense College (NDC) in Rome. In this role, he was also the NDC's senior researcher on energy security matters. He has also been an academic visitor at St. Antony's College, Oxford (2013-2015), and a senior research associate at the Advanced Research and Assessment Group (ARAG), part of the Defence Academy of the United Kingdom (2005-2009). He has also served as an expert witness to several parliamentary committees including: the UK's National Security Strategy Committee; the House of Commons Defence and Foreign Affairs Select Committees; and NATO's Parliamentary Assembly.
He is widely published and is the author of: 
This Letort Paper explores Russian state mobilization. It first frames how Moscow sees the world and then turns to explore the range of measures that the Russian leadership is implementing to address a series of threats, both real and perceived, as well as numerous internal challenges. These are emergency measures, tantamount to putting the country onto a war footing.
It has been plain for some time that the world is seen very differently by policymakers in Washington, D.C. and Moscow. However, the differences are becoming evermore stark as the United States-and many of its allies-and Moscow increasingly draw different conclusions from the same bodies of evidence. This is true whether the topic is Euro-Atlantic security issues, such as NATO enlargement, missile defense, or-most notably-Ukraine, or whether the security questions are further afield, such as the wars in Libya and Syria. The Russian view contains a multiplicity of challenges, from the potential for war to erupt, to instability in the aftermath of U.S.-led wars of regime change. Many in the Russian leadership are particularly concerned about the possibility of such a regime change campaign being conducted against Russia itself. Russian President Vladimir Putin and others in the leadership circle have been explicit that they see events in Libya, Syria, and Ukraine in this light, and that Russia must learn lessons from these developments.
The Russian leadership has a Clausewitzian-style understanding of war, essentially meaning that it is a test of society. Their view is that despite Russia's actions during the war in Ukraine, and its intervention in Syria, Russia is not yet ready for such a test. xii This is because the Russian system, although in some respects powerful, is often dysfunctional. The leadership faces numerous problems, not only from Russia's Soviet inheritance including a limited and decrepit infrastructure, but also from post-Soviet problems, including corruption and passive opposition from the bureaucracy. The military has also endured many years of underfunding and neglect. At the same time, there are other important pressures, such as longerterm economic stagnation that has developed into a sharper contraction over the last 2 years. This Letort Paper thus emphasizes the point that not only is Russian strategy not made in a vacuum, but also that the process of forming this strategy is itself a complex and arduous task.
This mobilization has been underway for some time and is best understood as a process of consolidation and preparation. Consolidation is reflected in a series of measures to strengthen the political system, both in terms of ensuring the implementation of orders (including the establishment of para-institutional organizations to conduct oversight of the bureaucracy and the firing of ineffective officials) and also ensuring resilience against potential civil disobedience and threats posed by extremism and terrorism. The Interior Ministry has conducted large exercises to prepare to respond to "Maidan-Style" developments in Russia, to seal the borders, and to deal with civil disobedience.
At the same time, the leadership is also conducting a major effort to modernize the military, including a major investment program, enhancements to command and control, and frequent no-notice exercises to test readiness and responsiveness. A spending program initiated in 2010 envisaged spending 20 trillion rubles-some $640 billion at the time-on modernizxiii ing the Russian military and their military-industrial complex over a decade, including not only much improved service conditions, but also replacing Sovietera equipment and increasing the share of "modern" armaments and technologies to 70 percent by 2020. This includes much of the heavy equipment designed for conventional warfighting.
At the same time, the leadership has sought to improve command and control, and combat readiness. A new National Defense Center was opened in late-2014, a federal level organization that provides a single point of coordination for information and control. In the case of war, the National Defense Center would assume control of the country, coordinating all the ministries and agencies. In addition, the military has conducted hundreds of no-notice exercises from the tactical to strategic levels to test readiness, responsiveness, and coordination between the military, federal, and regional authorities.
There are ongoing problems, and despite the attempts to enhance the responsiveness of the system, orders are still implemented tardily, if at all. Furthermore, procurement is being postponed, and there is a continued resistance to some reforms in the military. Nevertheless, progress has been made toward the transformation of the security sector and the armed forces in particular.
For many in the West, the war in Ukraine has become one of the defining features of the post-Cold War era. Although Russia's relations with the West had been deteriorating since 2012, including the failure of the U.S.-Russia "reset" in 2013, the outbreak of war in 2014 precipitated a dramatic worsening. Russia, which for much of the post-Cold War era was absent from the Western political radar, made a dramatic return to the forefront of the strategic agenda. Prominent Western officials have suggested that through its actions in the war, Russia had created a "new strategic reality in Europe." 
1
2
3
4
5
Beyond the obvious disagreements over the nature and causes of the war in Ukraine and the causes of the deterioration in relations between the West and Russia, the picture of international affairs might appear, in some respects, similar in Moscow. Official documents and speeches point to an increasingly unstable, threatening international environment; indeed, it may be said that Russia also faces an "arc of crisis" around it.
However, there are important differences. Russian officials, for instance, have stated their concerns about Western attempts to inspire a "color revolution" in Russia and its neighborhood. Moreover, rather than having confidence in a system that works, it appears that the Russian leadership is implementing emergency measures on the basis that Russia is not ready to face these external and internal challenges-in effect, demonstrating an understanding that war is a test of society, one for which Russia is not ready. Rather than "militarizing" aggressively, therefore, Russian officials appear to be "mobilizing" Russiaa more defensive preparation in the case of war. In different ways, Russian observers and officials alike have referred to these emergency measures in terms of "mobilization"-"mobilizing society," a "mobilization budget," and reshaping and refitting the military.
This Letort Paper examines this sense of "mobilization." It illustrates both the increasingly obvious gulf in how security is perceived in the West and in Russia, and the evolution of Russian state capacity and its ability to create and deliver power at a time of perceived emergency. First, it sketches out this Russian "arc of crisis" and the contours of international instability as they are seen from Moscow. It then turns to reflect on Russian strategy making and the emergency measures being implemented by the Russian leadership. It suggests that the sense of urgency inherent in mobilization is due not only to what is seen to be an increasingly threatening and competitive international environment, but also to the numerous domestic problems and limitations in the Russian system, which means that the system is not yet prepared to cope with the tests that this environment poses. In other words, although Russia has formulated numerous strategies, concepts, doctrines, and plans, the leadership has numerous problems in implementing these plans-which means that Russian strategy, understood as the ability to create power, is limited to certain areas.
Given the sharp deterioration in Russia's relations with the West, there is much debate in Russia about the emergence of a "Cold War 2.0" and a new confrontation between Russia and the West. However, at the same time, there is also much discussion of the possibility of wider instability leading to the outbreak of a major war. Members of the conservative Izborsky Club, for instance, posit four scenarios, three of which are depicted as either negative or very negative ("very bloody"), and only one of which is more positive, with a way out of the crisis with "much less blood spilt." 
6
7
8
Second, it illustrated the emergence of the Russian Security Council as the "chief interagency coordinator" of decisions on the main tasks in domestic and foreign policy. Established in 1992, the Russian Security Council can be said to have emerged as an important body under Putin's leadership. This has been particularly clear since 2008 when close ally of Putin and former director of the security service Nikolai Patrushev was appointed as the council's Secretary. The council has since become the formal representation of the Russian leadership, bringing together as it does ministerial resources, experience, and authority stretching across the executive branch and out into the regions. The Security Council has a two-tier structure. Its core consists of the "permanent members," who are largely drawn from the security services, with only Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev representing the socio-economic agenda. The wider second tier also includes the finance minister and a number of presidential plenipotentiaries and regional governors. The organization has become the central locus for forging and then disseminating consensus, amending where necessary, coordinating, and implementing strategic planning documents (strategies, concepts, doctrines, and programs). 
9
10
11
12
The potential for conflict in the world is growing, old contradictions are growing ever more acute and new ones are being provoked. . . . international law is not working, the most basic norms of decency are not being complied with and the principle of all-permissiveness is gaining the upper hand. 
13
14
15
Third, this is all taking place at a time when the traditional strategic balance of power no longer works. If the Military Doctrine stated that the existing international security system "does not ensure equal security for all," again Putin embellished the picture, stating that there is "no reliable safety net" in place to mitigate these looming threats. "There is no guarantee and no certainty that the current system of global and regional security is able to protect us from upheavals. This system has become seriously weakened, fragmented and deformed," he stated, before noting that the international and regional political, economic, and cultural cooperation organizations are enduring difficult times. 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Second, Moscow's concerns about international instability are rational. Tensions and conflicts abound, from the civil war in Libya to the conflict in Yemen, from the uneasy ceasefire in Ukraine to ongoing (and possibly increasing) instability in Afghanistan and Central Asia more broadly, the tensions in the South China Sea, and between North and South Korea. Seen from Moscow, these form both a series of concentric circles around Russia's borders and offer the potential for the risks and threats to be imported into Russia (such as those Russians who have fought in Iraq and Syria returning to Russia). Because Russia is a ubiquitous state that stretches across many regions, it is unlikely to be able to avoid the ramifications of one of these conflicts erupting into a major war, possibly being drawn into it.
Third, the nature and range of possible conflicts has evolved significantly, and Moscow sees the need to meet a variety of potential challenges: from a major war erupting between states, to the outbreak of lowlevel conflict near Russia, to the possibility of (externally fomented) unrest in one of Russia's neighbors or even within Russia. As Gerasimov has noted, though the modernization of Russia's strategic deterrent and the possession of state-of-the-art weaponry is a priority, warfare is evolving such that combat is moving away from "traditional battlegrounds" such as land and sea "towards aerospace and information," as illustrated by conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East. 
25
26
27
If the Russian leadership views the international environment with concern, it also faces numerous problems at home, and the Russian leadership appears to recognize that Russia is not ready to meet these challenges. The military, after many years of very limited investment and incomplete reforms, requires considerable modernization, both in terms of new materiel and reform. One astute Russian observer has suggested that for much of the post-Cold War period, the Russian military was "shaped by military thinking that dated back, at the very latest, to the 1980s. In fact, some of its aspects had changed little since World War II." From 1992 to 2008, Mikhail Barabanov suggested that the Russian army was a "shrinking iteration" of its Soviet predecessor and was increasingly ill-suited to Russia's new military-political objectives. In the autumn of 2008, and in the wake of a poor performance in the Russo-Georgia war of that year, the Russian leadership launched major reforms to remodel the armed forces, and the leadership has sought to significantly increase both defense and security investment. Despite these reforms, some of which have had positive results, Barabanov notes that the Russian armed forces are still "burdened by major structural problems."
The reorganization of the armed forces has failed to implement some of the structural elements required by the plans, the reserve system remains problematic, and the mechanisms of maintaining and mobilizing the military reserve look "vague and haphazard," including how the reformed brigades are supposed to be reinforced during limited conflicts. In other words, while there are some strengths, there are still major weaknesses. 
28
29
30
Indeed, the leadership has long faced serious problems in terms of the failings of the system of power, including in security and law enforcement. This has been exemplified on several occasions, such as the terrorist attacks on the Domodedovo Airport in January 2011, the responses to the summer fires in 2010 (one of the results of which was the burning down of a military barracks), and the Kushchovskaya mass murder case in which law enforcement agencies appeared powerless to stop organized crime. Similarly, the leadership faces problems in having its plans and instructions implemented except through the direct and personal intervention of the most senior leaders themselves. Indeed, some Russian politicians and observers have stated that bureaucrats are ignoring the May decrees, using terms such as "systemic sabotage." Some parliamentarians have suggested that the May decrees have not been implemented at all 
31
As a result of the combination of this "arc of crisis" and problems in the system of power, there are increasing indications that Russia appears to be implementing emergency measures, effectively preparing to mobilize. For some, this has been a question of the exploitation of a "besieged fortress" or "foreign threat" narrative to mobilize popular opinion to maintain longer-term support for Putin. This is a "patriotic mobilization," essentially, to sustain high levels of popular support for Putin through to the presidential elections scheduled for 2018, though some have suggested that the peak of this has been reached and that it will be difficult to sustain given economic trends, which might lead to the growth of social or even political protest against the leadership. 
32
33
34
The leadership has also established a number of "para-institutional" bodies such as the All-Russian Popular Front (ONF) to create a direct link between the authorities and society. Created in May 2011 as a civil volunteer organization in support of Vladimir Putin, the ONF appears to have gained strength and its role has considerably evolved; it was relaunched as a movement in June 2013. Its goal is to promote unity, civil solidarity, and Russia's development as a free, strong, and sovereign state. It enjoys the explicit support of Putin, is directed from the Kremlin, and now stretches across the country with senior members occupying important roles-such as Alexander Galushka, who was appointed Minister for the Development of the Russian Far East in September 2013. The practical elements of ONF's remit have considerably broadened. It contributes to the formulation of plans and monitors their implementation, often putting pressure on regional governors, even taking a leading role in petitioning Putin for their removal if they fail to implement instructions. It is also responsible for conducting an anti-corruption campaign with oversight of municipal and state property privatization. The ONF has also played a noteworthy role in the "patriotic mobilization" since 2014, for instance organizing the "We're Together" demonstrations at the time of the annexation of Crimea.
There are also preparatory measures being implemented in the military and security spheres. Expenditure on defense and security has been significantly increased since 2011, and targets set in the May decrees indicate the scale of investment that is neces-sary. Two of the May decrees are focused on the military-one addressing necessary improvements to military service, the other on implementing plans for developing the armed forces and modernizing the military-industrial complex. The former decree seeks to provide improved conditions for service members, raise the prestige and appeal of service, and create a national reserve "in line with the concept of creating a new system of training and accumulating mobilization resources for the armed forces." 
35
36
There is an extensive and ambitious "shopping list," including procurement for sea, land, air and space, communications, intelligence and control systems, electronic warfare, unmanned aerial vehicle systems, robotic strike systems, modern transit aviation, precision weapons, and the means to fight them and individual soldier defense systems. 
37
38
39
40
41
42
At the same time, a new National Defense Center had been built. Opened in December 2014, the center is a new federal level organization that is a major upgrade of the Central Command of the General Staff and provides a single point of coordination for information and control. It is meant to monitor military assets, including arms procurement and communications, and threats to national security in peacetime. It also has assumed monitoring control of major exercises. 
43
44
45
46
47
In a meeting of the expanded Security Council in July 2015, Putin stated that: it is clear today that attempts to split and divide our society, play on our problems and seek out our vulnerable spots and weak links have not produced the results hoped for by those who imposed these restrictive measures on our country.
He also noted, however, that: recent events show that we cannot hope that some of our geopolitical opponents will change their hostile course any time in the foreseeable future. . . . We must respond accordingly to this situation of course and take additional systemic measures in all key areas. Thus, he proposed a rapid analysis and, based on this, adjusted the National Security Strategy and other strategic planning documents:
Our direct responsibility is to ensure reliable protection of Russia's security in all areas and preserve our country's social, political and economic stability. Much here will depend on consolidating the efforts of our state institutions and civil society and concentrating resources in priority areas. 
48
49
Two main themes emerge. First, there is an increasingly obvious gulf in how security is perceived in the West and in Russia. Although some threat perceptions are roughly similar, Moscow draws different conclusions from its assessment of the current international environment: what the problems are and what causes them. Developments in Syria are only the most recent example. In some cases, this is the diametric opposite to those of Washington or Brussels, the result of different conclusions having been drawn from developments and different analyses influencing threat perceptions. In others, it is the result of Moscow's geographical position altering priorities.
Furthermore, it is important to note that although many in the West date the "Russian threat" and Russian aggression to 2014 and the war in Ukraine, many of the Russian leadership's concerns have roots that date back a decade or more, and are the consequence of Western adventures in Kosovo, Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and Syria. This also throws important light on what has become known in the West as a "new Russian way of war"-often misleadingly called "hybrid war"-as deployed in Ukraine. As seen from Moscow, this is, in effect, the result of what they have learned about the changing nature of war as deployed by the United States and NATO. The difference in views is made stark: first, by the suggestions of the Russian leadership that the West itself is mobilizing; and second, by the idea that while the West anticipates expansive Russian aggression, the opposite is the case in Moscow, which appears to be preparing for a war that the Russian leadership thinks will be foisted upon it.
The second main theme concerns the recognition in Moscow that the Russian system does not effectively work. Although it is true that Moscow can deliver considerable political, economic, and military power, it is also the case that there are important limits to this power, such that the Russian leadership has concerns that the Russian system is not ready to face the test of war-a modern war that will test not only Russian military capability and sustainability, but also sociopolitical stability and cohesion. The Russian leadership thus faces numerous doubts and difficulties as it faces this arc of crisis around it and is well aware of the weaknesses of the Russian system. The economic stagnation so often remarked upon in the West is but one part of this; equally important are the problems of the generation of political power. Although Putin enjoys very high popularity ratings and has few realistic political competitors, he and his leadership team are very aware of the flaws in political structure within the state that impose limits on the ability to implement plans and respond to crises.
It is in this dual environment of an external arc of crisis with concentric circles of instability, risk and threat, and domestic limitations that the leadership has begun to exert pressure on the system. This pressure is tantamount to a form of mobilization: a defensive state of emergency. It is important to note, however, that although it shares some common features, such as prioritizing economic planning, this is a new, 21st-century form of mobilization-it is not based on the mass mobilization of the population, since this is no longer either politically possible or militarily desirable given the nature of conflict. Instead, it focuses on attempts to consolidate the state and society, particularly through the establishment of movements such as the ONF, and to prepare the military to be able to face a range of 21st-century threats, including through a major rearmament program. Some progress has undoubtedly been made, particularly in terms of modernizing the military and rehearsing its combat readiness. Perhaps the most important aspect of this, however, is the attempt to consolidate coordination between ministries and agencies, and the increasing prominence of organizations such as the Security Council, and establishment of others such as the National Defense Center. The further development of the National Defense Center and the publication in due course of the new National Security Strategy will shed important light on how the mobilization process is evolving.
Nevertheless, significant domestic problems remain. These, in part, are due to the ongoing heavy burden of Russia's Soviet inheritance-both in terms of physical problems, such as an ageing infrastructure and the difficulties inherent in modernizing it, and also conceptual problems, such as resistance to reform from some parts of the armed forces to shifting away from the structures and methods of the 20th century (though this resistance appears increasingly to be coming from retired servicemen). Furthermore, given the economic situation, the pressure on the budget and competition for resources is high, which has meant that some spending plans, including in military procurement, have had to be postponed and the sustainability of military operations remains open to some question. Therefore, if Russia is better placed to address some of the concerns of the leadership, an array of problems remain.
The military and security implications of Russian mobilization processes for the United States are numerous and increasingly urgent, given that the tensions between the United States and Russia are likely to remain serious for the foreseeable future, and possibly deteriorate as other disputes (such as that over the U.S. ballistic missile program) compound it over the medium term. The war in Ukraine has ensured that some of the ramifications are obvious and are already under consideration in the U.S. Army, in the U.S. intelligence community, and more broadly across the body politic. Senior U.S. military figures have pointed to the potential threat Russia poses to the United States, its interests, and allies. But as noted above, it becomes increasingly important that this potential threat is understood in more granular terms so that it does not become a self-fulfilling security dilemma; that moves to deter further Russian aggression do not become provocative, resulting in a further escalation of tensions that the United States does not seek or for which the United States is not prepared.
The sensitivity and difficulty of accurately judging this is made clear by the suggestion noted above that the Russian leadership has concerns (publicly stated at the highest levels) about a Western mobilization, and the consequent need to protect the homeland and democracy. It is particularly important to ensure that Russia does not misinterpret signals from the United States and NATO-but to do so, clear and explicit signals will need to be sent to Moscow. Indeed, the United States will need to conduct a nuanced and sophisticated form of deterrence, one that is appropriate to the 21st-century environment. Nevertheless, while in theory this need for sending clear and unambiguous signals to Moscow about U.S. intentions is a basis for deterrence, it has been harder to generate and transmit such signals in practice. While senior figures in defense and the military point to Russia as a serious threat, others, including in the State Department, have disagreed: in July, John Kerry explicitly countered General Dunford's assessment. Instead, according to a State Department official, Russia is a major power with whom the U.S. engages and cooperates on a number of issues despite disagreements. 
50
Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter has sought to frame an approach to Russia that is "strong and balanced": strong because the United States is making investments in a military capability specifically intended to deter Russian forces and balanced in that he seeks to work with Russia on issues where geostrategic interests "as Putin perceives them" are "compatible." He also suggested that the U.S. is: continuing to hold the door open in case Putin or his successors decide to go in the direction where I believe Russia's long-term future lies, a future in which there are economic and political opportunities for the people there. 
51
52
53
A further necessity is weaving together analysis and policy across disciplines. The Russian military and security establishment will be the main focus for the U.S. military establishment, and it is important to conduct more detailed analysis of the evolution of military theory to correct misinterpretation of "new Russian hybrid war" and to understand the ongoing practical problems, doubts, and difficulties the Russian military leadership faces. This will also allow for a more sophisticated understanding of how the Russian military will evolve in the medium term, facilitating a policy response that can be based on anticipation, not just reaction to Russian moves. At the same time, further examination is required of how the military works in coordination with other elements of Russian power structures, including the interior ministry and other organizations such as the ONF, which are becoming increasingly important as the Russian state attempts to consolidate and develop resilience.
In brief, as the United States begins to respond to Russia in Europe by prepositioning equipment in Eastern Europe and by conducting increased exercises in the region financed by the European Reassurance Initiative, it should be aware of the escalatory possibilities inherent in the Russian view of the international environment. While the United States sees Russia posing a largely local or regional threat to Euro-Atlantic security, Moscow sees and is responding to a different world in which the United States poses an existential threat to the Russian leadership.
DOUGLAS C. LOVELACE, JR. Director Strategic Studies Institute and U.S. Army War College Press ABOUT THE AUTHOR
x xi
The views expressed in this report are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of the Army
Department of Defense
U.S. Government. Authors of Strategic Studies Institute (SSI)
U.S. Army War College
U.S. Army War College External Research Associates Program
Opportunities tab. ***** All Strategic Studies Institute (SSI)
U.S. Army War