# ID: b192f5cc4a344cbd87ceea387b95784b
# Title: Deception: A Necessity of Modern Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information.
In July 2014, a long-range fire strike from multiple rocket launcher systems (MLRS) executed from across the Russia-Ukraine border destroyed two Ukrainian mechanized infantry battalions in less than three minutes. 
1
2
Joint Publication 3-0 Joint Operations defines Military Deception (MILDEC) as operations "to mislead enemy decision makers and commanders and cause them to take specific actions or inactions." 3 It continues to describe MILDEC as operations "focused on causing the enemy to act in a desired manner, not simply to be misled in their thinking" thus requiring extensive knowledge of the enemy's employment capabilities, tactics, and decision making processes. 
4
If well thought out and synchronized, the US commander can take advantage of the enemy's reaction to the MILDEC operation through either lethal or nonlethal means. For example, the Germans in World War II deliberately jammed English radio stations every morning for more than a month making it appear as atmospheric interference. As time went by, the radio operators grew accustomed to the interference and dismissed it as just daily atmospheric interference, eventually allowing three German ships to break out of Brest. 
5
Furthermore, MILDEC operations are critical to reducing risk during forced entry operations, particularly those in an anti-access and area-denial environment. There are three categories of MILDEC supporting joint military operations: Joint MILDEC, Tactical Deception (TAC-D), and Deception in Support of Operations Security (DISO). The following series of short essays will examine the entire spectrum of MILDEC, the history of and the benefit derived, the applicable doctrine, current educational and training efforts, and shortfalls. Lastly, the authors seek to provide recommendations on how technology, training, and education can improve MILDEC operations.
MILDEC is a deception activity planned and executed by deception planners and commanders. The goal of MILDEC is to cause the adversaries to take certain actions or inaction to give commanders an advantage on the battlefield. Successful MILDEC must make the target believe or think the deception is true. To do this, deception planners use the "See, Think, Do" deception methodology. Does the target see the deception event? Does the target think the observations are valid? Does the target do an action or inaction based on what he/she sees and thinks? 
6
When planning MILDEC the commander must first decide the deception goal and objective. The deception goal is the "commander's statement of the purpose of MILDEC as it contributes to the successful accomplishment of the assigned mission."
7
8
Once the deception target is identified a commander must determine the best deception means to achieve the desired outcome. Deception means are the "resources, methods, or techniques used to portray selected information and indicators to the deception target."
9
Physical means are used to "convey or deny information or signatures normally derivable from direct observation or active sensors by the deception target," technical means present information and signatures to the deception target by "manipulation electromagnetic, acoustic, or other forms of energy or through olfaction," and administrative means are "selected written, oral, pictorial, or other documentary information or signatures to or from the deception target."
10
of techniques to use. There are four deception techniques: feint, display, demonstration, and ruse.
The design and implementation of the deception technique is the essence of MILDEC, and the use of historical examples is the best way to describe them. The following chapter will define each one of these deception techniques and provide historical examples of how commanders used them to accomplish their MILDEC objectives. Ultimately, the goal of MILDEC is to target the enemy commander's perception and alter his/her decision cycle so that the US commander may gain a position of cognitive advantage over the enemy. Historical cases offer insights into how commanders apply deception and hence a template for future commanders to integrate deception into future operations.
Since the beginning of warfare, military planners have incorporated deception. Sun Tzu in his book The Art of War states "war is a game of deception" and he further describes the advantage held by understanding the enemy's decision process through an assessment and then taking action (or inaction) with the aim of convincing the enemy to commit to a course of action.
11
12
13
14
The art of military deception has always been a part of warfare and is an integral part of planning a successful military campaign. As military weapon systems and tactics have evolved over the centuries so has the character of war and the ability to conduct military deception.
However, as growth in technologies over time has enabled more effective and elaborate deception, the study of history shows that the principles of deception operations and the foundational techniques to conduct deception have been consistent throughout the evolution of warfare. The next several pages will use history to uncover the principles of deception, the techniques of deception, and how a country's strategic culture affects an army's ability to conduct deception.
The first two principles of deception are focus and credibility. The enemy decision maker, usually the enemy commander, should be the focus of the deception, and the deception planners must ensure the enemy decision maker is getting the required information to enable the deception to work. However, usually, a commander does not receive information directly from a source, but rather through several different intelligence agencies. Thus, the deception information, whether is it visual, audio, electronic or other means needs to be passed to a trusted enemy intelligence agency to ensure the enemy decision maker receives it. This requires knowledge on how the enemy decision maker gets his information and through what trusted sources. Without this knowledge, it will be hard for deception to work. 
15
16
17
A good example of these principles in action was during Operation Fortitude North and South during World War II. The goal of these operations was to prevent the Nazis from knowing the true beach landing locations for the Allied D-Day invasion. Hitler and the German High Command received much of this intelligence through the use of spies in England. However, the British Intelligence agencies knew this and were able to turn many of the German spies into double-agents. The British and Americans then fed much of their deception operation information through these spies to the Germans; mixed along with the fake information was a lot of true information to keep the credibility of the double-agents. The Operations were a success, and the Germans never knew the actual landing sites for D-Day. The British and Americans were able to deceive the Germans effectively by focusing their deception information correctly, through trusted intelligence sources that reached the German decision makers, and ensuring the credibility of the double agents by giving the Germans less important but true intelligence on the British and Americans. 
18
The Deceivers, the misinformation you give to the enemy "does you no good if as a result of his misinformation he takes undesirable action." 19 Lieutenant-Colonel Dudley Clark, a British deception expert, learned this lesson in 1940 when conducting an operation code-named CAMILLA. 
20
21
The fourth principle of deception is centralized control and coordination of efforts. Early in history, the battlefield commander led the deception effort, but as military organizations have grown, staff groups have been created to oversee execution of deception operations. While current doctrine teaches disciplined initiative enables mission command among other things when trying to portray a complex and delicate deception story to the enemy centralized command and control is important to ensure a subordinate action does not contradict the deception story. 
22
23
The fifth and six principles of deception operations are security and adaptability. There needs to be a balance in the level of security and with facilitating coordination of efforts. It is important that enough people know to achieve an effective deception story; however, the "mere existence of a deception plan, let along the details, should be known only by those who need to know." 24 Adaptability is important in deception operations just like it is important in any operation; Von Moltke observed "that no plan survives first contact with the enemy," and as the enemy adjusts to the deception information or as the weather and terrain change so must the deception plan. 
25
The last principle of deception operations is timing. There must be enough time to prepare for and execute the deception operation, and because deception operations are enabling 22 Ibid, 63. 
23
24
operations, there needs to be enough time for the enemy to react in accordance with the desired effect to enable the actual operation. If there is not time to prepare the deceptions across the different avenues of delivery, then it is better to do no deception at all. 26 Again, deception is not about getting the enemy to think or to act in any manner; it is done to get the enemy to do a specific action or inaction.
The next lesson the history of deception operations shows us are a group of deception techniques used by military planners that have enabled successful deception. Fundamental to choosing a deception technique, military planners must determine if they are trying to cover or deceive. Cover "implies making your opponent behave on the belief that something true is something false." 27 Deception "implies making him behave on the belief that something false is something true." 28 Cover is designed to conceal the truth while deception conveys false information. The two most basic deception techniques that enable cover are concealment, hiding military assets with naturally existing terrain features like buildings, trees, and other foliage, and camouflage, hiding military assets with manmade means like nets and clothing patterns. The four most used deception techniques to facilitate deception are a demonstration, feint, ruse, and display. These four techniques are the only four in current military doctrine and will be discussed in greater detail later. The other techniques to facilitate deception will be discussed now. 
29
30
31
32
30
31
33
34
35
33
34
35
36
37
The last four deception techniques are the only four in current U.S. doctrine; they are a feint, a display, a ruse, and a demonstration. To gain a better appreciation of each technique that is in current doctrine and the subtleties between them, the following historical cases are dedicated to examining their employment in various historical campaigns.
The Macedonian Army employed two deception techniques, a feint, and a display, in the Battle of Granicus and won decisively. In 334 BC, Alexander the Great began his next great conquest: the invasion of Asia. In May that year, Alexander and his Army fought the first of three battles against the Persian Army; they clashed along the Granicus River. 
38
36
37
38
39
40
Alexander began the Battle of Granicus with a display and a feint. A feint is "an offensive action involving contact with the adversary conducted for the purpose of deceiving the adversary as to the location and/or time of the actual main offensive action" and a display is "the simulation, disguising, and/or portrayal of friendly objects, units, or capabilities in the projection defense and decisively won the battle. The Macedonians lost between 300 and 400 soldiers, and the Persians lost about 1000 cavalry and 3000 infantry soldiers. 
42
Alexander's understanding of how the enemy commander will receive information and the actions the enemy commander would take with the information presented to him enabled Alexander's TAC-D to be successful. Alexander relied solely on the physical means of deception; he used a feint and a display to show the Macedonian leadership where he intended to attack. Alexander knew the Macedonian leadership, with this information, would move his forces to defend both flanks and in doing so would leave him vulnerable for attack in the center.
Alexander took advantage of the mistake by the Macedonian leadership and attacked in the center giving his forces a position of relative advantage that enabled them to achieve victory at a reduced cost.
During operations along the Mississippi River during the Civil War, Union forces lost control of one of their ironclads the USS Indianola to Confederate forces. The Union Forces, led by Rear Admiral Porter developed a ruse to neutralize the USS Indianola before Confederate forces could benefit from its possession. Joint Publication 3-13.14 Military Deception defines a ruse as a form of MILDEC that is characterized as an attempt to deceive the enemy through a deliberate exposure of false or confusing information and its interpretation by the adversary. 
43
In 1863, Union forces undertook an effort to control the waters south of Vicksburg. In doing so, the Union Navy dispatched the USS Indianola, an Ironclad, to reinforce the Queen and the De Soto which combined, Admiral Porter believed, would all but guarantee the control of both the Mississippi and the Red Rivers. 
44
45
47
48
The Soviet Army employed effective deception techniques focused on utilizing displays and feints during the Battle of Kursk in World War II and as a result won the battle decisively.
The conditions for the Battle of Kursk occurred in the winter of 1943 when the German Offensive on the eastern front ceased due to the upcoming spring thaw. 
51
52
50
53
54
55
The Soviets also used deception techniques to "conceal Soviet intentions and capabilities for the counteroffensive." 
56
53
54
55
56
silence until the attack began. 
57
The Soviet deception plan worked, and the Soviets had a much-needed decisive victory.
The Soviets "stopped in its tracks the greatest attack the Wehrmacht had ever mounted, on level terms, without the advantage of weather or terrain." 
58
The Soviets believed that achieving surprise is a major factor in achieving rapid victory or avoiding defeat, and they believed maskirovka, deception, is the key to achieving surprise. 
57
58
59
Russians are to deception operations. Their commitment to deception principles of security and timing allowed them to achieve surprise in their attack to annex Crimea. Additionally, Russia's use of un-uniformed military combatants in Ukraine and their commitment to their information operations has provided the Russian government cover in lethal retaliation from other world powers.
On August 2, 1990, the Iraqi Army initiated an invasion of neighboring Kuwait triggering the formation of an international coalition opposing the invasion and subsequent occupation of Kuwait by Iraqi forces. This eventually led to what is now commonly known as the Gulf War or specifically, Operation Desert Storm. Multiple courses of action were developed for a coalition invasion of Kuwait to expel Iraqi forces, and General Schwarzkopf selected Operation Desert Storm, a ground invasion from Saudi Arabia with a small fixing force to the south-east and the main effort enveloping the enemy's rear area. 
60
61
60
62
63
64
Navy and Marine Operations off the shores of Kuwait monopolized on Saddam and his military's preconceived notions that the coalition would conduct an attack emanating from the sea. The Navy and Marine Corps amassed a visible presence of more than thirteen ships, and 62 Joint Chiefs of Staff, Military Deception, Joint Publication 3-13.4 (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, February 14, 2017) I-9. 
63
Gulf, 1990-1991: With Marines Afloat in Desert Shield and
Desert Storm;
History and Museums Division, Washington, D.C., 1998, 137-138. 64
65
66
The use of deception in Operation Desert Storm was resource intensive and timely. It utilized more than thirteen ships and 17,000 Marines, but it accomplished the commander's intent of occupying the Iraqi Army's attention, creating the conditions for the ground attack. Military planners knew that utilizing a demonstration to occupy the enemy's attention must appear as realistic and as threatening as possible. Like other deception operations, this operation reinforced preconceived notions and reduced the ambiguity of how the operation would unfold in the enemy's mind. As a result, the U.S. forces began the Operation Desert Storm from a position of advantage over the Iraqi forces, resulting in the lack of commitment of combat power and the complete surprise of the Iraqi Army on the northwestern front.
While American military professionals have executed deception operations well in the past, as evidenced by several of the more famous ones above, it still is not natural to the American military. Deception planning is not ingrained in American military planning as it is in other militaries. The authors of this paper tried to determine why this is the case and looked through the lens of a country's strategic culture to develop a theory.
The strategic culture of a nation impacts the culture of its military, and how a nation uses its military from the strategic down to the tactical level. Colin Gray and David Jones, two respected strategic culture theorists, argue each country has a unique strategic culture that is a result of a combination of "macro-environmental variables such as deeply rooted historical experience, political culture, and geography." 67 David Jones goes further and breaks down the three inputs of strategic culture into "a macro-environmental level consisting of geography, ethnocultural characteristics, and history; a societal level consisting of social, economic, and political structures of society; and a micro level consisting of military institutions and characteristics of civil-military relations." 68 Gray and Jones used their analysis to note the differences in U.S. and Soviet strategic culture and how the differences impacted their nuclear strategy during the Cold War. Gray argued that U.S. morality prevented the Americans from effectively creating a nuclear war strategy because the U.S. could never accept the human cost of a nuclear war. Jones argues "Soviet strategic culture placed a premium on offensive grand strategies." 69 The impact of strategic culture is also seen in a country's ability to conduct deception operations.
American strategic culture rubs with deception-specifically, American's desire to use overwhelming force to destroy an adversary. American geography set the foundation for a free market economy to flourish, and this allowed the U.S. government to create a military that has the worlds most advanced weaponry. Russell Weighley describes well in his book The American 67 Alastair Johnson, "Thinking about Strategic Culture," International Security 19( 
4
69
Way of War: The History of United States Military and Policy how America has adopted a military strategy that focuses solely on a "crushing" military victory either through attrition or annihilation. 
70
Instead of incorporating deception operations, American military planners "emphasized the Army's strong suits in firepower and strategic mobility" and developed a strategy of attrition. 
72
This short survey has highlighted historical cases of the effects and opportunities gained through the employment of MILDEC. In each case, regardless of the deception technique applied, the MILDEC employed provided the tactical commander with a relative advantage they exploited to achieve a decisive victory. MILDEC has been a component of warfare throughout history as evident in the above historical examples and will increase in necessity as the development of advanced weapon technologies allow commanders to target and destroy large areas of the battlefield. Incorporating MILDEC into military operations will be necessary to protect the force, and will enable more effective targeting of an adversary's force. If deception is essential, why is there a renewed need to highlight its importance? Some individuals might agree with its importance and assume that it is being trained effectively to prepare the U.S. Army for potential conflict. Those individuals who believe that it is being trained effectively would be wrong. The recent seventeen years of conflict in Afghanistan and Iraq has presented the U.S. Army with a dilemma. In those countries, U.S. forces have largely faced an inferior enemy, incapable of completely denying the freedom of maneuver, let alone utilizing the fusion and integration of various forms of signals and human intelligence to target forces on a large enough scale to inflict politically unacceptable levels of casualties. As a result, the U.S. forces training for and preparing to deploy have not needed to focus their efforts on fighting a near-peer enemy. 
73
In October of 1981, the first battalions of U.S. Army forces conducted a rotation at the newly designed National Training Center (NTC). NTC was an incredible advancement in the training development where forces could conduct battalion-level live fire exercises and fight 73 Kris Osborn, "Army shifts training to heavy mech war after more than a decade of counterinsurgency warfare," Warrior Maven, last modified March 2, 2017, https://www.themaven.net/warriormaven/land/army-shifts-training-toheavy-mech-war-zw54MGCgP0WYSv4F7dqJ-g each other in force-on-force engagements utilizing laser-based simulation to provide realism. 
74
75
76
77
78
1 illustrates
So, if deception is often ignored at the U.S. Army's largest training area, where is it a focal point? In the current curriculum for officers in the Operations Division, it is completely omitted until Intermediate Level Education (ILE). Even at ILE, the extent of which training and education focused on military deception is the instructors or facilitators saying, "do some deception." The argument can be made that this is appropriate because as a company or troop commander one is executing the Battalion commander's vision and therefore not planning company level TAC-D. Though this is correct, the response given when a reporter asked then Major General James Mattis, during Operation Iraqi Freedom, how he arrived at a decision so quickly and Mattis responded that he hadn't, that he had spent the last thirty years making the decision suggests that perhaps the academic study of deception earlier in one's career is important. 
79
There is some positive effort with regards to deception, and that is the Army's updated FM 3-0 Operations published in October of 2017. The updated manual focuses on how Corps headquarters can utilize MILDEC in the Corps' deep area but to do so must incorporate assets and capabilities that reside outside of the Corps' control. 
80
81
82
One possible solution could be a revival of something similar to the General Headquarters (GHQ) Maneuvers, more commonly referred to as the Louisiana Maneuvers held in the summer and fall of 1941 where entire Field Armies were pitted against each other in simulated warfare across the southern portion of the United States. 
83
84
85
86
87
Whether the Army chooses to return to something similar to the GHQ exercises, expand and utilize the promise of live, virtual, and constructive training environments, or it chooses to do neither it must address the lack of equipment sets available to commanders to employ deception. On December 13, 2017, the United States Marine Corps demonstrated the ability to remotely operate a UH-1 "Huey" by a Marine with no prior training or experience utilizing a handheld device. The Marine Corps has decided to invest in this technology and can now remotely operate any helicopter in their fleet if they choose to do so, giving them the advantage to operate in contested environments without increasing the cost of pilots and crews. 
88
1. Deception is hard, and if you do not know how the enemy decision maker receives information, thinks, and makes decisions deception operations will not work. If you can not put yourself in your enemy's shoes, find someone who can.
2. Understand the enemy's thresholds and operate below them, nested with the overall plan.
3. Attack the enemy's pre-conceived notions, reinforcing his visualization of the battle through as many conduits as possible -deception is NOT a single event.
4. The goal should be forcing the enemy to expose his order of battle or high pay off targets so that U.S. forces gain a temporary positional advantage where they can act to create favorable conditions for the larger operation.
5. Don't over-rely on deception.
6. Deception ethics. When is it right to sacrifice forces for deception.
7. The real challenge becomes how to utilize feints, displays, demonstration without sacrificing actual capability (i.e., barges, floating containers, etc.).
We will now discuss each of these insights in more detail.
First, for deception to be successful, the operation must be artfully planned to fool an enemy commander. To do this the deception planners must know how the enemy commander receives their information, how he/she thinks, and the type of decisions he/she are likely to make given the information. This requires a lot of knowledge on the enemy commander. Deception operations during the Fight Club wargames were arguably easier because American military officers were battling each other. American military officers have similar training and experiences, which allowed deception planners good predictive ability into to how their opponent commanders in the wargame might think and react to certain information. However, in warfare deception, planners rarely have this luxury. The take away is the importance to have within the deception planning team an expert on the adversary. A person that can provide indepth analysis across the political, military, economic, social, infrastructure, and information variables. These additional lenses will allow the deception planners to present information that is credible and focused correctly to achieve the desired actions by the adversary commander.
The second principle is the in-depth understanding of an enemy's threshold and the necessity to operate beneath them while nesting within the operational plan. As evidenced earlier, research has pointed out that the first principle of deception, focus, oriented on fooling the enemy decision maker. This entails a high degree of information preparation of the operating environment and an understanding of likely enemy decisions, specifically their employment of critical weapon systems such as chemical or nuclear weapons. For example, if a large-scale demonstration or display, oriented on fooling an enemy commander as to the location of a joint forcible entry operation or penetration was so successful that it also triggered the decision to employ a nuclear warhead than the mission would result in a tactical success yet an operational failure. This leads to the second critical insight developed through wargaming, the utilization of many conduits.
The third principle of deception is credibility, and one way to bolster the perceived credibility of information is to attack pre-conceived notions through as many conduits as possible. Instead of utilizing large demonstrations or displays that overtly threaten the decision maker and lead him or her to employing a critical weapon system or unit in detriment to the operational plan, the utilization of a series of interrelated displays, demonstrations, raids, and feints should be used. Additionally, when possible, this should be accomplished utilizing low cost, robotic replicas or remotely controlled pieces of equipment. This allows the friendly forces to flood the enemy's decision cycle with credible information while preserving combat power and options for the friendly commander.
There is a fine balance in employing deception as discussed without triggering the employment of strategic weapons or reserves and forcing the enemy to expose high pay-off targets for precision attacks. In the Russia example previously illustrated, it is likely that intelligence and operations staff would consider Russian MLRS as a high pay-off target due to its range and destructive capability. Likewise, the Russians would seek to conceal their MLRS and utilize it discriminatorily. The focus of deception operations should be oriented on forcing the enemy decision maker to expose these critical weapons or reserves so that they may be eliminated by precision fires. MLRS, for example, employs radar and needs to be unmasked to fire. Once it fires, telemetry can pinpoint its location. Thus, deception can orient towards forcing the enemy to activate his emitters that could be picked up by signals detection or forcing him to fire against a perceived threat (ideally unmanned), so that telemetry could produce a location targeted by a unit already on stand-by. Timing and synchronization is everything in deception operations such as these as opportunities are fleeting.
The fifth lesson learned from during the wargaming exercises is to not over rely on deception operations. As discussed in the above paragraph it provides a commander a tactical advantage if he/she can remove enemy high-value targets from the battlefield. Ideally, a commander has studied the enemy and developed engagement criteria he/she thinks they enemy has that will cause them to use their high-value targets. When planning an amphibious invasion on the western coast of North Korea our team planned a large deception operation, a feint with manned and unmanned teaming, to cause the North Koreans to use their artillery assets to engage our feint force, and in turn we would be able to target the North Korean artillery effectively and remove them from the battlefield increasing our chances of an effective attack. We relied heavily on the deception operation to be successful, but we were wrong; it did not have the desired effect and as such significantly altered our course of action which put out forces at a tactical disadvantage. Deception operations are great when they work, but as noted above it is hard to predict actions of an adversary. Plan and execute deception operations, but have a branch plan that is well known and researched.
The sixth lesson gleaned from the Flight Club wargames isn't really a lesson, but a question. What are deception ethics, and is it morally right to commit troops for a deception operation? As technology has improved, it is harder to fool an enemy using fake displays. In today's operations environment to conduct feints, displays, and demonstrations actual troops will be necessary to make a credible threat to an adversary, and this will put troops at significant risk of being targeted. Using consequentialism ethical theory, it is ethically sound to commit forces to deception operations if by doing so fewer soldiers will die during the operation. Ultimately, troops have been committed to shaping operations, which deception operations are, throughout warfare history to create conditions that enable the decisive force to win. Like any decision a military commander makes they must weigh the risk versus the reward. If the likelihood of a deception operation success is high and the risk to force is low it makes sense to commit forces; however, if the chance of the deception working is low and the risk to force is high, it may be better for the commander to seek other courses of action. This transitions into the final lesson learned that has been persistent throughout. When possible, utilize decoys, or replicas to reduce the risk to forces yet still cause the desired effect on the enemy decision maker. Some technological suggestions have been made throughout the paper such as the use of transponder codes to fool identify friend or foe systems or the use election emitters to replicate the signature of our critical systems for enemy targeting. More creativity and ingenuity should be practiced by commanders to develop low-cost alternatives such as decoy barges or containers that could serve dual purposes of triggering sonar/radar signatures and later be employed to detonate mines during an amphibious assault. It is logical that as three-dimensional printing capabilities continue to proliferate the force that if encouraged to do so, commanders could exercise their ingenuity and creativity to print a never-ending assortment of objects or decoys for employment. Commanders do not have to wait on future technology though, as the planned employment of fires such as smoke in areas during wargames was often as effective. The employment of smoke in U.S. doctrine typically assists in masking maneuver or operations such as breach. Thus, if observed by enemy forces, it confirms his indicators of impending contact in that specific area, often diverting additional units or sensors to assist with identifying the contact. None of this occurs though unless education and training focus highlights the need to practice deception.
The use of military deception has persisted throughout the history of warfare. As modern adversaries close the weapons technology gap and operate utilizing tactics of unmanned surveillance systems linked to mass artillery or missile strikes, the necessity to utilize military deception as a form of protection for U.S. forces is an overlooked necessity. American strategic culture at times has blinded commanders from effectively incorporating deception into operations, and this is still evident in the current wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. While there have been operations during these two wars that have incorporated effective deception, it is rare. Americans persist in relying on overwhelming fire to defeat its non-peer threat. As America refocuses, its efforts to fight China, Russia, and North Korea, threats that have near-peer capabilities, America will have to rely on more than just their firepower. Deception is practiced at every level of Russian military planning, and Americans need to look throughout all warfare through a deception lens. It is going to be critical to know if an adversary is trying to deceive and if a deception lens does not exist within a headquarters the American military does not stand a chance. However, there is hope. Americans throughout history have executed deception well.
Deception is a skill that if leaders are not trained, equipped, and practiced at employing they will fail to utilize. Rear Admiral Grace Hopper is often credited with saying that "the most dangerous phrase in the language is, 'We've always done it this way.'" As a profession, the military must re-examine if the National Training Center that was created more than forty years ago still meets or exceeds all of the needs of the modern force or if there are other ways that the Army can provide world-class training to its units. In addition to the training space, units and commanders must be appropriately equipped with the technology such as autonomous or remotely operated vehicles and allowed to experiment with their employment to deceive a real enemy played by another unit to hone their ingenuity and skills of judgment and decision making while managing risk to their force.
A recommended area of future research is the development of systems that assist commanders in planning deception operations and help them identify when they are being deceived in combat. It has been demonstrated that deception is focused on individual decision makers and their preconceived notions. So how can the combination of artificial intelligence and big data analysis enable better conduit analysis and enable better deception planning and how can they enable commanders in real time to determine if they are the targets of enemy deception.
Another area of recommended study is to research what characteristics make a good deception planner. The Army currently is currently undertaking studies at to determine if certain mental attributes make an officer a better staff officer or a better commander. Deception planning takes more effective critical thinking skills; there is an art to envisioning deception and certain skills may better enable a person to be a deception planner. An example of a culture that breeds good deception planners are the British. It is often noted how the British people conceal their true feeling though wit and irony. They are open on the surface but as Geoffrey Household, a British novelist, notes about his own countrymen they are "unconsciously secretive about anything which is of real importance to them." 89 This culture has made deception an important part of British military planning and has created some of the greatest deception minds in history.
For example, Brigadier Dudley Clark, who Thaddaeus Holt in his book The Deceivers describes Dudley Clark as the father of modern deception, is the British officer that created the long-term bogus order of strategic battle deception that was used throughout World War II that proved decisive in helping the allies win the war. 
90
The last recommended area of future study is the utilization of alternative compensatory control measures (ACCM) for deception operations. ACCMs are currently used to safeguard classified information and operations, specifically deception operations in Iraq and Afghanistan when normal control measures are not sufficient. Secrecy is inherently vital in deception planning due to the risk of the deception plan being leaked or otherwise comprised. Still, there should be a further analysis of the required approval authorities to plan and execute military deception operations as well as who and when individuals are read on to ongoing deception operations. If held too close, there is an equal prevalent risk that a units actions compromise the 89 Nicholas Rankin, A Genius For Deception How Cunning Helped the British Win Two World Wars (London: Oxford University Press, 2008), xi. 90 Thaddeus Holt, The Deceivers (New York: A Lisa Drew Book/Scribner, 2004), 32. deception plan, requiring a fine balance of when and who is informed to protect the details of the plan.
52  
52  
61 Ibid, 133.   
83 86  
83 86  
Table 1: A Comparison: Army Organization Equipment……………………………………….29
Ibid., 
Office of Research and Development, Central Intelligence Agency, Deception Maxims: Fact and Folklore. Washington, DC, June 1981, pp. 13-14. Retrieved from: http://www.governmentattic.org/18docs/CIAdeceptionMaximsFactFolklore_1980.pdf
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Military Deception, Joint Publication 3-13.4 (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff,
February 14, 2017)
Ibid, I-5.
Ibid.   
Ibid, I-10.
Ibid, 
Sun Tzu, The Art of War, trans. Lin Wusun (San Francisco: Long River Press, 2003), 11-12.   
Headquarters, Department of the Army. Operations, Field Manual 3-0. (Washington, DC: Headquarters, Department of the Army, October 6, 2017), ix.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Military Deception, Joint Publication 3-13.4 (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, February
14, 2017) I-2.
Office of Research and Development, Central Intelligence Agency, Deception Maxims: Fact and Folklore. Washington, DC, June 1981, p 9. Retrieved from: http://www.governmentattic.org/18docs/CIAdeceptionMaximsFactFolklore_1980.pdf
Jon Latimer, Deception in War (New York: The Overlook Press, 2001), 60.
Paul B. Janeczko, Double Cross (Virginia: Candlewick Press, 2017), 109-175.
Ibid,[203][204][205][206][207][208][209][210][211][212][213][214][215][216][217][218][219][220] 
John Mixter, "Wars of Alexander the Great: Battle of the Granicus." Military History, June 2006, Accessed January 02, 2018 www.historynet.com/wars-of-alexander-the-great-battle-of-the-granicus.htm
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Military Deception, Joint Publication 3-13.4 (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, February 14, 2017) I-12.
Ibid.   
U.S. Army, "Army Live, Virtual, Constructive Integrating Architecture," last modified May 27, 2015, https://www.army.mil/standto/archive_2015-05-27.
by outside agencies such as the 
Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory, Marine Corps Intelligence Activity
Office of Naval Research
We are very grateful for all of the help received from friends, family, and the faculty of the 
Marine Corps University
Dr. Benjamin Jensen
Dr