# ID: b1e70292f9844b7ca557a3bb342cf145
# Title: The United States Army's Current Capability to Conduct Combined Arms Maneuver
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
The United States Army is concluding its responsibilities in the Global War on Terrorism in Afghanistan and Iraq by conducting Counter Insurgency Operations now doctrinally associated with Wide Area Security (WAS). The point of this paper is to explore whether or not the
War is nothing but the continuation of policy with other means…In war, the subjugation of the enemy is the end, and the destruction of his fighting forces the means. 
1
The United States Army is concluding its responsibilities in the Global War on Terrorism in Afghanistan and Iraq by conducting Counter Insurgency Operations now doctrinally associated with Wide Area Security (WAS). This paper argues that the U.S. Army is currently not ready to deploy and execute
Major Combat Operations now associated with Combined Arms Maneuver (CAM) successfully anywhere in the world due to training and organization deficiencies. This is a problem because the Army cannot afford to fail in its primary mission of winning its nation's wars. This paper addresses this problem statement by examining lessons learned from two historical case timeframes in order to learn from and apply them to the current environment. It concludes with an analysis of the U.S. Army's contemporary capabilities to conduct CAM.
The U.S. Army leadership is committed to being able to conduct Full Spectrum Operations, called Unified Land Operations (ULO) in current doctrine. This is executed through decisive action of offensive, defense, stability and direct support to civilian authorities by means of the Army's core competencies of CAM and WAS operations. Army Doctrinal Pamphlet 3-0, Unified Land Operations, states that "unified land operations describes how the Army seizes, retains, and exploits the initiative to gain and maintain a position of relative advantage in sustained land operations through simultaneous offensive, defensive, and stability operations in order to prevent or deter conflict, prevail in war, and create the conditions for favorable conflict resolution."
2
It is important for this discussion to understand how Army doctrine defines its core competencies with CAM and WAS as well as how the Army organizes itself to train and execute these tasks. CAM and WAS are the application of the elements of combat power. CAM and WAS are tactical actions and tasks associated within offensive, defensive, and stability operations. WAS "is the application of the elements of combat power in unified action to protect populations, forces, infrastructure, and activities; to deny the enemy positions of advantage; and to consolidate gains in order to retain the initiative." 3 Whereby CAM "is the application of the elements of combat power in unified action to defeat enemy ground forces; to seize, occupy, and defend land areas; and to achieve physical, temporal, and psychological advantages over the enemy to seize and exploit the initiative." 
4
The dilemma is that the Army has been conducting WAS in Afghanistan and Iraq for the last ten years, it is currently challenged in its ability to conduct CAM due to a lack of training and organization.
Gian Gentile argues, "To be sure the American Army will be told to do lots of things…But first and foremost it must be an Army grounded in combined arms competencies. This must come first." 
5
7
Secretary Gates realizes that we have been fighting WAS and must maintain that skill but also must have the ability to conduct CAM as well. The massing of synchronized lethal effects is what the Army is struggling with and how to train in these atrophied competencies. The Army has not done this since the start of Operation Iraqi Freedom. GEN Dempsey mentions, "The need for heavy Armor and firepower to survive, close with, and destroy the enemy will always be there, as veterans of Sadr City and Fallujah can no doubt attest." 8 He realizes that even if we get into another conflict, and it may be a WAS, that it could easily turn into or have elements of CAM.
6 ADP 3-0, 7. 7 Robert M. Gates, "A speech delivered by the Secretary of Defense to Association of the United States Army" (Washington, DC, October 10, 2007). Speech available at http://www.defense.gov/Speeches /Speech.aspx?SpeechID=1181 (Accessed on September 1, 2011). 8 Robert M. Gates, "A speech delivered by the Secretary of Defense to United States Military Academy" (West  Point, NY: February 25, 2011). Speech available at http://www.defense.gov/speeches/ speech.aspx?speechid=1539 (Accessed on September 1, 2011).
Another problem is that the U.S. Army has been focusing all its resources on training and equipment in order to conduct the Global War on Terrorism for the last 10 years. The Army is withdrawing from Iraq and is in the process of finishing operations in Afghanistan. The Army is now concerned about the future, preparing for what will be the next war or conflict. As a result, there is a genuine concern throughout the Army leadership that our war-fighting skills have atrophied which could affect the Army in its ability to conduct CAM as part of ULO in a contemporary operating environment.
ADP 3-0 states under decisive operations, "Army forces conduct regular and irregular warfare against both conventional and hybrid threats." 
9
10
This paper incorporates some aspects of the doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel and facilities (DOTMLPF) model only in order to organize the major points in each element for each section. Since it is not practical to cover the entire range of DOTMLPF in the scope of this project, elements of it are used to selectively analyze the case studies. Doctrine is the way units fight. Current Army doctrine emphasizes maneuver warfare combined with air-ground campaigns.
Organization is how units organize to fight; from Squads all the way up to Corps. Training is how units prepare to fight tactically from basic training to advanced individual training also including various types 9 ADP 3-0, 5. 10 Martin Dempsey, Commanding General of the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, "Keynote speech for the Association of the United States Army Chapter Presidents Dinner" (Washington, DC: October 4, 2009). Speech available at http://www.army.mil/article/28312/gen-martin-dempsey-delivers-keynote-during-the-ausa-chapterpresidents-dinner/ (Accessed on August 1, 2011).
of unit training and exercises. Materiel is all the things necessary to equip the forces, such as, weapons and vehicles so they can operate effectively. Leadership and education is how the Army prepares its leaders to lead the fight, ranging from squad leader to general and their professional development.
Personnel are the availability of qualified people for peacetime, wartime, and various contingency operations. Facilities are real property from installations to industrial facilities that support our forces.
These definitions inside this model help to understand the flow of the paper.
This paper uses two U.S. Army historical cases of when the Army transitioned from a predominantly, what is doctrinally known now as, wide area security operation to a combined arms maneuver operation. The focus of these historical cases is to analyze lessons learned from the CAM operation because of transitioning from one type of operation to another. These cases enable us to look at lessons learned and how the U.S. Army may look at them in a current environment and ensure it does not make the same mistakes or that it maintains useful practices.
The first case study timeframe is from after the Philippine War through WWI, focusing on major developments that were accomplished before WWI and then lessons learned from WWI. Edward M.  2007).
Victory in World War II gave an in depth perspective on the education system for staff planners because of WWI in preparation for WWII. Also incorporated was Dan Fullerton's "Learning from the Past:
Assessing World War I, Excerpted from Bright Prospects, Bleak Realities: the U.S. Army's Interwar Modernization Program for the coming of the Second World War" for historical analysis and insight. All these resources gave the foundation for the primary historical accounts and assisting in analyzing and understanding of the lessons learned. 
12
Lastly it discusses some possible courses of actions to ensure that the Army is prepared to maintain its ability to conduct WAS, but more importantly, ready for CAM.
The experience. The limited officers that had this experience in the Army was then unprepared for integrating CAM for large-scale operations. The nation and the fast growing Army had many difficulties in their ability to mobilize, organize, train, equip and deploy as an expeditionary force to France in order to support the French and British against a formidable German enemy.
In the evolution of U.S. Army doctrine and understanding of current military tactics, American officers did travel to Russia and Japan and observed the Russo-Japanese War in 1904 to 1905, which Japan defeated the Russians over control of Korea. This was a different type of war than the American officers were used to but gave them the opportunity to observe a European and Asian power. There were many casualties on both sides of this conflict. Observers realized that eventually a tactical stalemate between two powers under modern warfare was likely. The way the Europeans were going to overcome this stalemate was by ensuring a quick offensive operation that resulted in a quick defeat of the enemy.
Mobility was the key to success. This influenced many American officers.
The Both of these were organized like the Regular Army. This was a step in the right direction but there were still problems with execution. The new measure failed for it still restricted the federal government to call up guard units. Weigley mentions that later during the execution of WWI, Secretary of War Baker paid tribute to "Root's reforms as indispensable to the prosecution of that war, but at least to the eve of the war the Root reforms remained more a promise that a fruition." 
24
The Army started to conduct large annual maneuvers and the lessons learned from these all stated the need for large, self-sufficient combined arms teams. "peace strength of the Regular Army to 175,000 over a period of five years." 
25
The Army was not trained to conduct synchronized combined arms operations needed to be successful in a CAM operation. The Army, with its large numbers of infantry units, could not synchronize its artillery in massive amounts to create the needed effects for the execution of the open warfare concept.
In addition, the infantry was challenged in utilizing and fighting with the new armor force. After the war, the War Department Report of 1919 states, "the war has taught the necessity of the appreciation by all officers of the interdependence of all arms of the service in battle. They are to fight together: they must be trained and taught together if the common knowledge of the powers and limitations of each arm, and the mutual confidence, without which efficient teamwork in battle is impossible."
26
27
This type of training deficiencies was prevalent throughout the Army. As a result, at Cantigny, the first American battle in WWI, Millett mentions "the demands of command and logistics so exposed 28 th the Americans that their casualties doubled those of the French Division they had replaced." The 28
Infantry Regiment conducted the attack on Cantigny. The result for that unit was that they took many casualties including many officers and one of its Battalion Commanders. Millett mentions that the Regimental Commander "estimated that one-third of his front line troops had become casualties…also that some of his men had abandoned the front line trenches." 29 Millett goes on to state that the artillery was not synchronized with maneuver and the "firing batteries did not displace forward rapidly enough;
infantry and artillery officers did not correctly identify friendly infantry positions at the front: observed and adjusted fire was virtually nonexistent; and preplanned and scheduled concentrations did not usually fit the fluid situations of open warfare." 30 This lack of cooperation was typically for most units during the war. The 28 th Infantry Regiment did captured Cantigny but with a high number of casualties. The resulting casualties were 38 officers and 903 soldiers. During the U.S. counteroffensive with 1 st and 2 nd Divisions at Soissons from 18-21 July, the Divisions did have success against the Germans, but there were 12,000 casualties. The U.S. Army suffered 320,710 casualties out of 4,743,826 men mobilized.
These numbers were considered very high.
The Army knew that these casualty rates were disproportionately high, unacceptable and could be rectified with changes in organization and training. After the war, the War Department report of 1919 states, that "a reasonable efficiency in peace time training for war can never be secured until the present system of small, isolated Battalion and Company posts, which is a relic of the days of Indian fighting is replaced by a system which enables entire Divisions to be trained together." 
31
The U.S. government did not put the required resources in material or equipment for a large Army during the interwar period and thus was unprepared to support a rapidly growing Army with what it needed to fight in WWI. In the years prior to WWI between 1898 and 1916, Stewart describes, "Congress appropriated only an average of $150,000 annually for procurement of machine guns, barely enough to provide four weapons for each regular regiment and a few for the National Guard." 32 Because of the previous types of threats and conflict, there was no need for a large budget for the Army. The Army was typically fighting inferior guerrilla forces in a WAS. As a result, Stewart also mentions the "development of American artillery and artillery ammunition also lagged behind that of European armies. The Army did adopt in 1902 a new basic field weapon, the three-inch gun with an advanced recoil mechanism." 33 Even so, this was not a large gun suited for the synchronized effects needed for the CAM battlefields of WWI.
The U.S. was thriving and growing during the industrial age. The U.S. had the largest automotive industry in the world but military production was at such low volume that it affected the U.S. Army. The U.S. Government had, as Weigley states, "Neglected the subject of economic mobilization which caused difficulties." 34 This caused the Army not have the basic materials and equipment it needed to fight and ended up using British and French supplies and equipment once it was in France. Also, that "no American tank ever reached the front." 
35
The Secretary of War Newton Baker trusted the leadership of his military leaders and "believed that his primary duty was to build an army with which Pershing could fight, then leave Pershing to fight it." 
37
Corps and Armies." 38
Army grew in size to two Armies that had learned and gained experience. Under the leadership of GEN John Pershing the U.S. soldier earned the respect of the allies. The U.S. soldier was brave during chaos and had the ability to learn quickly and adapt to change.
The number of personnel in the Army was limited and with the start of the war in 1917, the War Department General Staff had "estimated that the U.S. could not fight on the Western Front …would require no less than 1 million men and might reach 4 million. years" 40 with a wartime strength of 300,000. The National Guard was to be increased to strength of over 400,000. Millett states, "When it went to war with Germany, the United States had only 5,971 officers and 121,797 enlisted men in the Regular Army." 
41
42
The U.S. Army lacked the proper facilities and equipment to train and billet soldiers. This is not surprising since the Army was mobilizing and growing at a rapid pace.  
42
43
44
These lessons learned can be used now. The U.S. Army has to be prepared for a CAM operation.
The next war may not necessarily be what was fought before. The U.S. has to invest its resources in keeping up its Army. The Army must continue to establish a solid doctrine that that stays up with technology and takes into an account the current enemy for engagement for a wide range of warfare from WAS to CAM. Then organize and continue to modernize both regular and reserve forces in order to establish the capabilities needed to execute doctrine that ensures success. In addition, it needs to be expeditionary and its ability to deploy light forces rapidly followed by intermediate and heavy forces.
Finally, establish the training system for officers, NCOs and soldiers to achieve proficiency in the core tasks of both CAM and WAS. Otherwise, as seen in WWI the U.S. Army will take a large number of casualties that today would be highly unacceptable to the American public.
The Vietnam War did have CAM against the North Vietnamese Army but had a significant counter insurgency or WAS against the Viet Cong. This took priority over European theater but after the Vietnam War, the U.S. Army quickly refocused its efforts back to the European theater and the defense of its European allies from a possible Soviet Union attack. There were many lessons learned that influenced the outcome of the Persian Gulf War that can be used to assist in the future preparedness of the U.S. 
44
The Divisions also conducted periodic readiness evaluations that tested the Division's ability to deploy quickly, especially units like the 82nd Airborne Division, 101st Airborne Division and 10th Mountain Division. These light Divisions were the Army's quick-reaction force, and were designed for short-notice contingency operations.
The Persian Gulf War was a test of the organization and training model that had been developed and executed. The result was that the U.S. Army planned, prepared and executed operational and tactical operations well. Stephen Biddle explains this in the following: At 73 Easting, for example, the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment maintained a tight, efficient combat formation throughout an extended approach march, and did so in the midst of a sandstorm, in hostile territory, over unfamiliar terrain, and without significant losses to mechanical breakdown or logistical failure en route. Its crews' gunnery was exceptional, outperforming peacetime proving ground standards for both the M1 and the Bradley. The first three kills by Eagle troop were recorded in three shots by a single M1 over an interval of less than ten seconds. 
55
The Army struggled in what it needed in material acquisitions after the Vietnam War until the development of the AirLand Battle doctrine. Stewart mentions, the "AirLand Battle doctrine had additional utility because it helped to define both the proper equipment for its execution and the appropriate organization of military units for battle…the new AirLand Battle doctrine explicitly acknowledged the growth of technology both as a threat and as a requirement for new equipment to meet the threat." 
56
58
59
In the Persian Gulf War, leadership played a vital role. Richard Swain observed that, "President  enabled overwhelming forces to defeat the Iraqis with great success. The civil military relations were the best the United States had seen since WWII.
In regards to personnel changes, the Army ended selective service and on 30 June 1973, the Army established an all-volunteer force. This was being considered while the Vietnam War was still in progress.
The Department of Defense and Army had, as Stewart puts it, "begun tentative planning to transition to an all-volunteer force. This was new ground. Except for a short period of time immediately after World War II, the Army had not had a volunteer force since just before the U.S. entered World War II." 61 This allowed those that did not want to be in the Army to get out and improved the quality of the force. In addition, the draft was not popular and a major reason for discontent with the American public towards the Army and war. Also, during the Vietnam War the Army had to accept substandard soldiers because of the draft. Of these new soldier recruits, 40 percent had no high school diplomas and 41 percent had low mental aptitude scores. These percentages changed with the all-volunteer force and by 1991, the high school graduation rate went up to 98 percent. This was because the Army invested in quality recruiters, financed recruiting bonuses and a college fund as well as increased soldier salaries. The Army did this under the "Be All You Can Be" slogan. The recruitment of a quality Army was a factor that ensured success in the Persian Gulf War.
The Army had to reduce its total strength during the interwar period. Stewart states, "In the interests of fiscal retrenchment, the Army projected budgets for the subsequent five years that would decrease the total size of the active service from approximately 780,000 in 1989 to approximately 535,000 soldiers in 1995." 
62
The result of the Persian Gulf War was that the U.S. Army, in conjunction with its coalition procurement system that accepted only the most motivated and trainable young recruits." 
64
65
63
64
65
Everything the Army invested in was used and contributed to defeating the Iraqis. John Romjue states that "The scores of observations and lessons from Desert Storm pointed to the significant synergistic effects of modern U.S. intelligence, communications, and weapon systems concertedly employed by a well-trained force to produce a higher battle tempo, deep and simultaneous attack capabilities, and the habit of command and control on the move." 
66
The Army had changed and Scales notes "The Army that went to Desert Storm represented the resurgence of an institution crippled both by the Vietnam War and the subsequent period of societal neglect. No victory so complete and unprecedented could have been achieved without an even more fundamental metamorphosis within the American military institutions." 
67
The Army's ability to deploy a sizable force in a relatively short amount of time was impressive.
"Operations in Panama and the Persian Gulf had made a powerful case for anticipating expeditionary combat-the ability to project power around the world on short notice. American forces had rapidly deployed with very little warning to fight on distant and unexpected battlegrounds." 
68
69
The Persian Gulf War had many lessons. Scales notes, "To fight similar wars successfully in the future demands, more than ever, a trained army ready for combat on a moment's notice...an army can be effectively dismantled in months or allowed to atrophy through neglect in a few short years. Although 
The U.S. Army has defined a hybrid threat in ADP 3-0 as "the diverse and dynamic combination of regular forces, irregular forces, terrorist forces, criminal elements, or a combination of these forces and elements all unified to achieve mutually benefitting effects." 71 Threat is no longer a single force but multidimensional. Many countries have either all or some of these combinations such as China, Iran and North Korea. This paper will focus on China. As Michael Swaine, Andrew Yang and Even Medeiros state, "Many American and Chinese views as well as the past behavior of both parties could produce significant 
69
70
71 ADP 3-0, 4. levels of instability, perhaps resulting in unwanted escalation and highly dangerous levels of military conflict." 
72
73
China has already taken the first hostile step with offensive actions conducting cyber-attacks against the United States. GEN Casey mentions, "Additionally, there are an increasing number of foreign government-sponsored cyber programs, politically motivated individuals, non-state actors and criminals who are capable of initiating potentially debilitating attacks on the electronic infrastructure of our Nation." 
74
force to ensure equitable outcomes that are advantageous to China. This could be in direct conflict with U.S. national interests and moral obligations to internationally law-abiding nations.
China has three major territorial disputes other than the most important one with Taiwan. Americans." 80 They also have stated that the U.S. supports one China but continues to sell arms to Taiwan. The Chinese will not tolerate any independence movement. The Chinese have also talked about defending against intrusion into their territorial waters, space and borders. All these create possible conditions for misunderstanding and potential conflict.
China's military budget is extensive and growing because of their economic success. The Chinese military has the second largest, after the U.S., military budget in the world that was close to $165 billion in 2006. This is 1.91 percent of their GDP and has been consistent with their rising GDP of 10 to 15 percent. The statistics show that it has been rising for the last decade. Therefore, the Chinese military is increasing in capabilities and capacity. The military spending was split closely across three areas:
equipment, human resources and operations. They are, according to Cordsmen and Klieber, "increasing salaries and allowances…investment in weaponry and equipment and infrastructure…training of military personnel…compensating for price rise…and expenses for international cooperation." 81 All the critical areas that a modern army needs to create for a solid foundation for a motivated well-trained and equipped soldier and Army.
The PLA doctrine is becoming more global and not just for internal security. China's Defense Review states that the PLA "ensures that it is well prepared for military struggle, with winning local wars under conditions of informationization and enhancing national sovereignty, security, and interests." 82
China is transforming its forces for the long term and according to the SECDEF's Report "is improving its capacity for force projection and anti-access/areal denial. Consistent with a near term focus on preparing for Taiwan Strait contingencies." 
83
China's military organization and structure are as follows. The Central Military Commission (CMC) of the Communist Party of China exercises leadership over the Armed Forces. The National People's Congress elects the Chairman of the CMC and also exercises the right to declare war and holds national defense powers. The PLA is part of the armed forces. The PLA as stated in the Defense Review "aims at moving from regional defense to trans-regional mobility and improving its capabilities in airground integrated operations." 
84
The PLA has been putting emphases on training and learning from other countries' experiences in order to reform and improve their training system. Cordsmen and Klieber state, "The focus of training is being shifted from individuals and units to command posts, key technicians and higher levels of training such as joint and live-fire exercises." 
85
The Chinese forces are acquiring and improving upon their material and equipment. They do this through either internal manufacturing or external purchases. China is increasing its capabilities across the full spectrum of operations. Cordesmen and Kleiber mention, "China has made great efforts to introduce high-tech equipment into its armed forces in order to enable its armed forces to lead extensive joint services campaigns with IT capabilities." 88 They are increasing military research and innovations. China is reforming their equipment procurement and is planning to increase development in long-term capabilities in weapons and equipment. One example of this is that they are acquiring accurate land attack cruise missiles, as well as, inter-continental, short and anti-ship missiles. China is modernizing their nuclear missile capabilities as well. They are increasing and modernizing their air force for deep strike in order to support their ground forces. They have 1,680 fighters, 620 bombers, 450 transport which 490 of those can immediately range Taiwan. China is also increasing its space-based capabilities with intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, ground positioning systems and communications. They launched a navigation satellite in April 2009. They are increasing their technological-equipped systems across the spectrum of capabilities.
China's military personnel numbers are very substantial as expected for a country of 1.4 billion people. China's PLA has 2.5 million personnel and out of that, the ground forces have 1.6 million. They also have a large internal security force that is used to control their own population for internal security.
However, in an attack on China, portions of this force can be used for internal defense to free up conventional forces to focus on enemy conventional forces. Their militias have approximately 12 million and reserves that have 800,000. This is compared to countries like India that have 1.1 million soldiers, North Korea that have 950,000 soldiers, U.S. that have 593,000 soldiers and Russia that have 360,000 soldiers. 
89
With these improvements, the PLA becomes more confident and capable for a possible conflict.
The Chinese present a near peer competitor that the U.S. could engage in CAM. Thomas Donnelly and Fredrick Kegan state that, "China is potentially the greatest likely threat although the probability of direct conflict with China in the near terms is very low. China is also potentially very large, but also complex and unclear." 
90
Army would get involved. Some possible scenarios could be that North Korea invades South Korea, 
89
South Korea defends, U.S. declares war on North Korea, and then China declares war on South Korea and the U.S. This scenario has played out before during the Korean War. Another different scenario is if
China has a territorial dispute with Japan. At which time China declares war on Japan, therefore the U.S.
gets involved and the conflict moves from the sea to the land in either China or Japan. Yet a third possibility could be that China has a border dispute with India and the U.S. comes to the aid of India after having improved relations with India. All these would lead to a possible CAM with the PLA for the U.S.
Army.
The PLA understands the role the U.S. military has in its region. 
The U.S. Army has been conducting WAS for the last ten years. These operations on the Global War on Terrorism in Iraq and Afghanistan have affected the Army. Many senior leaders in the Army have commented on the Army's current situation. They understand that the Army must be prepared for the future and they references that we need to be ready for ULO, which means all aspects of warfare from WAS to CAM. One such leader is GEN Casey who states that the Army is in "an uncertain and increasingly complex strategic environment. Hybrid threats made up of conventional, irregular, criminal and terrorist capabilities will continue to test our forces. Therefore, we must continue to organize our formations, update our doctrine and prepare our forces for the full spectrum of operations." 94 Again, this is referring to ULO that includes CAM. GEN Raymond Odierno states in his introduction email to the Army as the new Chief of Staff that "today is like no other time in our history... It is also a time of uncertainty and historic change. We face a multitude of security challenges, such as transnational and regional terrorism…We have the uncertainty of the Arab Spring, the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and challenges of rising powers. All of this is underpinned by fiscal constraint." 95 Any proliferation of nuclear weapons could cause the U.S. to react with military force. The major rising power mentioned is China. The U.S. fiscal constraints challenge the U.S. Army's ability to influence these external forces of conflict. The only consensus to our current situation is that it is a time like no other.
In Iraq, the current mission is concluding. The number is drawing down as President Obama's administration pushes for zero soldiers in Iraq. There will still have to be some assistance forces but ultimately there will be a minimal presence in Iraq. Over time OIF has included as Nathan Freier states, "a major combat campaign, opposed stabilization, seize and secure operations, a counter-network campaign, foreign internal defense, and support to foreign unconventional forces." 
96
Army, after the success of the surge, is currently reducing the numbers of soldiers in Afghanistan and the current plan is to withdraw by 2014.  Divisions." 100 The Division grew from 10,000 to 18,000 soldiers with Brigades totaling 3,900. Now each Division has four separate BCTs that are a mix of combat, combat support, and combat service support units that are all organic. This is in order to make each BCT capable of independent operations. Each BCT and separate Brigades could be plugged into any Division Headquarters for any given mission.
This new Army organization takes from Divisions many assets that were organic in a separate
Brigade and now makes them separate Battalions organic to the BCTs. The BCT has been reduced from 
98
The BCTs have limited air defense and chemical capabilities. This was designed for the Army to be more expeditionary in a WAS fight and as a result many of the non-maneuver Battalions have been doing an infantry mission. This new concept was developed prior to 9/11 but was implemented during Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom. It has not been tested in a CAM operation or at the training centers in a CAM type scenario. Modularity leaves the Divisions with limited assets to fight and shape the deep fight in a CAM. There are functional brigades but limited numbers to support each of the 10 Divisions and three Corps. This affects the Division's capabilities to conduct extended operations with fires, sustainment, engineer and aviation. All necessary components needed for a high tempo CAM operation.
The Army's sustained operations throughout the world continue to put a strain on the Army's Force Generation (ARFORGEN) model and system. There are 229,940 soldiers in 80 countries deployed outside CONUS and around the world. In addition, the budgetary constraints will stress the modularity BCT. GEN Casey writes, "Additionally we remain aware of the difficult economic conditions at home. These conditions will drive our efforts to transform our generating force into an innovative and adaptive organization."
101
Modular BCTs are now number 3,500 soldiers reduced from legacy BDEs of 5,000. The Army's answer to this is to utilize the reserves and National Guard. GEN Casey stated that we must "institutionalize the investment in our reserve component and obtain assured and predictable access to them, so that the Army can achieve the strategic flexibility and operational depth."
102
Concerning training, General Dempsey mentions that, "the strategy builds on our Army's eight years of combat experience but documents the need to broaden leaders beyond their demonstrated competency in irregular operations toward proficiency in full spectrum operations." 
103
105
108
The Army states it will continue to modernize their equipment and material. Casey notes, "The Army will develop and field versatile, affordable, survivable and networked equipment to ensure our soldiers maintain a decisive advantage over any enemy they confront."
109
Leadership and education in the U.S. Army today is solid except for one aspect. The senior Generals of the Army do not realize the severity of the atrophied skills of many of the branches such as armor, field artillery, aviation, engineer and logistics to conduct a synchronized CAM due to ten years of stability operations and the current organization under a Brigade centric construct. This is no fault of theirs, but they grew up as tactical leaders under the influence of the AirLand battle doctrine and experienced high level of training proficiency over many years in CAM. Many battle drills and synchronization tasks were easily executed and considered basic. These are now untrained. These Army courses have change only slightly in content to build on the Army's ten years of combat experience in WAS but will need to broaden leaders beyond their experience towards proficiency in ULO and especially CAM. In a matter of a short time, these institutions could start training on CAM. With this one exception, there have been no major shifts in the overall educational system and there is no need to change based off the quality of the Non Commissioned Officer and Officer Corps in the U.S. Army today.
Many advocate increasing the total strength of the Army in order to increase its capacity and capabilities. This would increase the cost and for an army of about eight hundred thousand it would be about $240 billion. This would be a solution for the increase in operational tempo and decrease in capabilities. However, considering the current budget constraints and that the Army has already made a decision to reduce its numbers, this is not even an option to ensure CAM at this point.
The future of the Army as stated by the Center for Strategic and International Studies in a report on U.S. Ground Force Capabilities through 2020 found that in a comprehensive review of threats and U.S. ground forces, reached the following conclusion. Fr eier mentions that, "The ground forces remain relevant, useful and increasingly unique and will likely remain in greater demand over the next 10 years…the capabilities associated with strategic and operational responsiveness, forcible entry and armored maneuver will be broadly useful to and important in the future strategic environment." 
110
110
The U.S. Army is not ready for the next CAM operation. This monograph paper uses the U.S. The U.S. Army addresses CAM in doctrine, leadership, and facilities. This paper saw no major deficiencies. The Army's capstone doctrine specifically ADP 3-0 is solid and covers all aspects of the spectrum of ULO. The Army recruits, retains and trains the best and brightest leaders and eliminates those from the ranks that do not make the standard. This has been apparent the last ten years of WAS. Even with the Nation at war, the Army has had no problems with recruitment and retention of officers. The Army has many benefits that retain both officers and soldiers to include equivalent civilian pay, exceptional retirement plan, good medical care and excellent educational benefits. The Army's training facilities are adequate to train on ULO. All the Army posts have local training areas, ranges and impact areas to train up to at least Company/Battery level, if not at Battalion level. In addition, the facilities at the maneuver training centers are excellent. Lastly, the Army has been emphasizing and improving family facilities and programs. But the Army is not currently ready for CAM in regards to training and organization with some minor issues in material and personnel. The Army will need leader emphases to ensure time and resources to develop cohesive organizations under modularity, conduct focused CAM training, improve upon its equipment and ensure the right numbers of quality personnel to execute CAM as well as WAS.
China is a viable threat. If diplomacy does not contain or collaborates with China then there could be conflict. This could start over economic tensions or old alliances such as the one with Taiwan. Freier states "Defense experts inside and outside of government increasingly express the need for a shift in U.S. defense posture focused more heavily against China's rising assertiveness in East Asia."
111
The Army is lacking in armor and field artillery assets with only five current pure heavy Divisions. Our allies such as the United Kingdom, Australia and Canada as well as other NATO members are drawing down their heavy capabilities as well. We are not the well trained and capable Army that decisively executed CAM which defeated the Iraqis in the Persian Gulf War, nor the one that defeated Iraq in OIF I due to years of WAS operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Army, as laid out in its mission, must win the nation's wars. Donnelly and Kegan mention, "The ground forces must be able to retain their core competencies as well as support ongoing struggles." 
112
113
114
Taking into account the major lessons learned from WWI, the Army must able to utilize and synchronize all its war-fighting functions when it conducts operations. If the Army does not then it will take catastrophic amounts of unnecessary casualties and operational setbacks. In the current time of instant access to the media and reporting, these amounts of losses would be unacceptable to the public and political leadership. The lessons from the Persian Gulf War are that when the Army is prepared it takes minimal casualties and equipment damage as well as wins decisively ensuring continued public support.
The nation now prefers quick and painless wars. Since the Army is still fighting in Afghanistan and just finishing operations in Iraq, it does not have any significant operational and strategic reserves. Also, the operations tempo of the force currently serving would not support a drawn out CAM. Based on the project research and findings the Army is not currently ready for CAM. Gentile states concerning CAM that, "It would be hard to do such an operation without the intellectual framework of an Armored Force that the American Army used to have, but of late has gone away…Competent field armies, skilled in all-arms warfare, are not made overnight." 
115
There is enough expertise in the Army on WAS that it will not become a training issue for some time and much has been captured in doctrine. Also, aspects of WAS will be prevalent in a CAM type exercise that will be enough to sustain proficiency. These are recommendations to the U.S. Army's leadership in order to assist in the Army's ability to be prepared to fight and win our nations next CAM operation that could easily happen in today's current global environment.
economically and militarily, there may be a conflict of interest and therefore they could be a possible threat to the U.S. and its allies. There are many books on China. The following were the most helpful in understanding the military capabilities and economic and political policies of China. They were Anthony H. Cordesman and Martin Kleiber's Chinese Military Modernization and Michael Swaine, Andrew Yang, and Evan Medeiros with Oriana Mastro's Assessing the threat: the Chinese Military and Taiwan's Security for general information on policy and military data. The Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, China's National Defense in 2006 gave insight of how China sees itself and the world as well as what it wants the world to know which was one the first times they did this. The Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China, 2010 assisted in how the U.S. military sees China and its military capabilities and interests. Using both books and government references gave a better insight on 17 Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, China's National Defense in 2006. (Beijing:State Council of the People's Republic of China, 29 December 2006); Anthony H. Cordesman and Martin Kleiber, Chinese Military Modernization (Washington, D.C.: The Center for Strategic and International Studies Press, 2007); Michael Swaine, Andrew Yang, and Evan Medeiros with Oriana Mastro, eds., Assessing the threat: the Chinese Military and Taiwan's Security (Baltimore, Maryland: Hopkins Fulfillment Service, 2007); and Office
Pearlmen describes, the "training camps lacked rifles, medical supplies, winter uniforms, sanitary facilities, and fully built barracks." 43 All this had to be built, constructed or established. The logistical supply system was not set up to sustain the large number of soldiers training nor was there a system in place to have a massive influx during a war mobilization. The Army was learning as it went.
Pearlmen describes, the "training camps lacked rifles, medical supplies, winter uniforms, sanitary facilities, and fully built barracks." 43 All this had to be built, constructed or established. The logistical supply system was not set up to sustain the large number of soldiers training nor was there a system in place to have a massive influx during a war mobilization. The Army was learning as it went.
Fullerton, "Learning from the Past: Assessing World War I, Excerpted from Bright Prospects, Bleak Realities: the U.S. Army's Interwar Modernization Program for the coming of the Second World War" (Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Kansas, 2006), 5. Armyvolunteer Total Army needed more than mere numbers. It needed a mission; it needed to focus on what type of war it might need to fight. As a result, the Army began developing a new doctrine to regain its perspective and focus on its new missions after Vietnam." 46 This mission started from the Commander in Chief. President Richard Nixon started to change the mindset of the U.S. Army even while Vietnam was winding down in 1969 with the Guam Doctrine. This doctrine called on the Army to be able to execute one and ½ wars. This done by having a smaller U.S. Army. This meant the Army would have to be prepared to fight a major conflict while still having the capability to engage in a small counter insurgency or peacekeeping task.
Fullerton, "Learning from the Past: Assessing World War I, Excerpted from Bright Prospects, Bleak Realities: the U.S. Army's Interwar Modernization Program for the coming of the Second World War" (Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Kansas, 2006), 5. Armyvolunteer Total Army needed more than mere numbers. It needed a mission; it needed to focus on what type of war it might need to fight. As a result, the Army began developing a new doctrine to regain its perspective and focus on its new missions after Vietnam." 46 This mission started from the Commander in Chief. President Richard Nixon started to change the mindset of the U.S. Army even while Vietnam was winding down in 1969 with the Guam Doctrine. This doctrine called on the Army to be able to execute one and ½ wars. This done by having a smaller U.S. Army. This meant the Army would have to be prepared to fight a major conflict while still having the capability to engage in a small counter insurgency or peacekeeping task.
Stewart, American Military History, Volume II, The United States Army in a Global
Stewart, American Military History, Volume II, The United States Army in a Global
56 nd
56 nd
66  
66  
Taiwan is China's most important diplomatic, military and economic concern and nothing less than reunification under China rule would be acceptable. China's Defense Policy states "the struggle to oppose and contain the separatist forces for 'Taiwan Independence' and their activities remains a hard one...thus still posing a grave threat to China's sovereignty and territorial integrity as well as peace and stability across the Taiwan Straits." 79 This is a strong statement concerning Taiwan and that it is still part of China.
Taiwan is China's most important diplomatic, military and economic concern and nothing less than reunification under China rule would be acceptable. China's Defense Policy states "the struggle to oppose and contain the separatist forces for 'Taiwan Independence' and their activities remains a hard one...thus still posing a grave threat to China's sovereignty and territorial integrity as well as peace and stability across the Taiwan Straits." 79 This is a strong statement concerning Taiwan and that it is still part of China.
83 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China, 2010 (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2010), 1. 84 Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, China's National Defense in 2006. 85 Cordesman and Kleiber, Chinese Military Modernization, 44.
83 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China, 2010 (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2010), 1. 84 Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, China's National Defense in 2006. 85 Cordesman and Kleiber, Chinese Military Modernization, 44.
Headquarters, United States Army, Army Doctrine Publication
3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: 10 October 2011), 1.3 ADP 3-0, 6. 4 ADP 3-0, 6. 5 Gian P. Gentile, "The Death of the Armor Corps", (Article available at www.smallwars.com, Accessed on February 5, 2010).
Dennis J. Vetock, Lessons Learned: A History of the US Army Lesson Learning (Carlisle Barracks, PA: US Army Military History Institute, 1988), 39.
Weigley, History of the United States Army, 350.
Weigley, History of the United States Army, 322.
Weigley, History of the United States Army, 348.
War Department, Annual Reports, 1919, Volume I, 374.   
Allen R. Millett, "Cantigny," America's First Battles 1776-1965, eds. Charles E. Heller and William A. Stofft (Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas, 1986), 165.
Conrad C. Crane, Avoiding Vietnam: The U.S. Army's Response To Defeat In Southeast Asia (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, 2002) 18.
Richard W. Stewart, ed. American Military History, Volume II, The United States Army in a Global Era, 1917-2008, Second Edition (Washington, DC: United States Center for Military History, United States Army, 2010), 381.
Stephen Biddle, Victory Misunderstood: What the Gulf War Tells Us about the Future of Conflict, (Boston, MA: The MIT Press, 1996), 161.
Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic ofChina, 2010, 16.   
Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic ofChina, 2010, 50.   
Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China, 2010, 51.
McHugh and Casey, "A Statement on the Posture of the United States Army 2011," 8.
McHugh and Casey, "A Statement on the Posture of the United States Army 2011," 15.
Dempsey, "Speech to AUSA," October 2009.   
Donnelly and Kegan, Ground Truth, The Future of US Land Power, 30.   
McHugh and Casey, "A Statement on the Posture of the United States Army 2011," 8.
Operations Group D, Mission Command Training Program, January 2011.   
G3, United States Army Forces Command, November 2011.
Kristen Molinaro, "Gen.  Cone lays out TRADOC strategies at annual Maneuver Conference," 13 September 2011. Article available at http://www.army.mil/article/65454/Gen_Cone_lays_out_TRADOC_ strategies_at_annual_ Maneuver_Conference (Accessed on December 15, 2011).
McHugh and Casey, "A Statement on the Posture of the United States Army 2011," 15.
Freier, U.S. Ground Force Capabilities through 2020, Vi.   
Donnelly and Kegan, Ground Truth, The Future of US Land Power, 30.   
Donnelly and Kegan, Ground Truth, The Future of US Land Power, 14.   
Biddle, Victory Misunderstood: What the Gulf War Tells Us about the Future of Conflict, 177.
Gentile, "The Death of the Armor Corps."
Army is prepared for Combined Arms Maneuver (CAM) as an integral part of the 
U.S. Army's Unified Land Operations