# ID: b204bec0ed4d4db1be6f523d7628ec03
# Title: An Aversion to Risk: A Warning from the Past
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
When U.S. forces departed Iraq on 15 December 2011 to return to the U.S., they did so much as General George B
1. REPORT DATE. Full publication date, including day, month, if available. Must cite at least the year and be Year 2000 compliant, e.g. 30-06-1998;  xx-06-1998; xx-xx-1998.   2. REPORT TYPE. State the type of report, such as final, technical, interim, memorandum, master 's  thesis, progress, quarterly, research, special, group  study, etc.   3. DATES COVERED. Indicate the time during which the work was performed and the report was written, e.g., Jun 1997-Jun 1998; 1-10 Jun 1996;  May-Nov 1998; Nov 1998.   4. TITLE. Enter title and subtitle with volume number and part number, if applicable. On classified documents, enter the title classification in parentheses. I would like to thank the Joint Advanced Warfighting School Director and my thesis advisor, Colonel Richard Wiersema, for his initial challenge to take on this topic, his detailed comments, and finally his patience as we worked through this interesting assignment.
I would like to thank the superb staff at the Joint Forces Staff College Ike Skeleton Library. They helped me secure all of Mr. Krick's and Colonel Wiersema's recommendations and assisted greatly in formatting the paper.
I would like to dedicate this to my loving family. My wife, son, and daughter sacrifice a great deal. Being a geographic bachelor, my family was unable to see me on multiple weekends due to my obligations, this paper being one of them. I greatly appreciated their love and support throughout. They have no idea how much it meant to me when they took me to Gettysburg during my mid-tour leave from Afghanistan.
To my father, I would like to thank him for sparking my interest in the great Civil War as we huddled around the wood stove in the cold Adirondack air. I appreciate his willingness to provide multiple edits to this paper. of Maryland. How, given so many advantages, did operational stalemate, followed by strategic crisis, result in so short a time?
The 1862 Peninsular Campaign illuminates problems still with us despite 150 years of vast changes in the conduct of war. What are relevant for contemporary planners are not the obvious differences between then and now, but the unsettling similarities. In 1862, as in post-2001 operations, U.S. forces enjoyed material and organizational advantages over their opponents. They further exploited the strategic initiative through the use of uncontested approaches (at sea, in 1862 and by air and sea post-200 1 ). Both campaigns featured new developments in intelligence gathering, strategic and operational movement, and weapons. There also maybe a parallel, in the strategic reversals that followed the collapse of McClellan's campaign, and the ominous developments since the culmination of our recent military expeditions over the last ten years. Yet the campaigns share an additional characteristic in common. This thesis posits that culmination in 1862, and culmination during the post 9/11 campaigns, resulted from inadequate responses to risk aversion by the government and military leaders, when faced with uncertainty.
To examine this, this thesis describes the setting in 1862, McClellan's background, geography, the Peninsular Campaign plan and how numerous leaders, faced with uncertainty, gradually lost their grip on the strategic initiative and ceded it to the Confederates. The thesis then examines a contemporary military campaign, the 2003 invasion of Iraq, that culminated short of its announced objectives. In testing for evidence of the presence and influence of risk aversion in the U.S. military leaders involved, the thesis uses the JP 5-0, Joint Operation Planning definition of risk: "Probability and severity of loss linked to hazards.',6 It further assesses decision-making with the common model that, when approaching culmination, the leadership faces one of three options: press on, fall back, or do nothing. Lastly, the thesis examines the premise that, despite great changes in the conduct of war across almost 150 years, neither effectively synchronizing joint forces, mastering emerging changes in technology, nor achieving situational awareness is as fundamental to avoiding culmination in a campaign as overcoming risk aversion. The inconclusive outcomes generated by our overseas expeditions since the 9/11 terrorist attacks suggest that overcoming risk aversion is to operational art what closing the last 1 00 yards is to infantry tactics: a decision space fraught with hazard and friction, which cannot be reduced by larger numbers, all-seeing intelligence, or full-spectrum dominance. principles from European (mainly French) military literature. By restructuring the curriculum, Thayer emphasized the importance of studying history and theory. 
3
4
5
6
Napoleonic theory, by contrast, appeared more force-oriented. In addition, the British and French used the latest technology such as the Minie ball rifle, battlefield telegraph, and ironclad warships. The transition to percussion cap, single-shot, muzzle-loading rifles, allowed both sides to exchange accurate fire from 500 yards. 
11
1
Keegan, The American Civil War, a Military History (New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf, 2009)
11 Richard W. Stewart, American Military History, Volume 1: The United States Army and the Forging of a Nation, 1775-1917 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2006)
Infantryman had four times the standoff yet continued to fight from massed formations, which contributed to the horrific casualty rates. No less noticed was the grim tally of 100,000 casualties that resulted from the eight-month siege of Sebastopol, a high cost for the initially bold and largely bloodless strategic movement by sea against Russia's southern flank. 
12
13
14
The less populated, agrarian South depended on exports.
that expanded as it passed through the rifling. This smaller round eased the task of using a ramrod to seat the bullet.
12 Lynn Montross, War Through /he Ages (New York, NY: Harper & Row, Publishers, 1960), 586. 
13
14 Keegan, The American Civil War, 1 .
Its transportation infrastructure was immature in comparison. Plantations still depended largely on rivers to transport their agricultural goods. 
15
Also, by retaining most of the American pre-war Navy, the Union had more warships and therefore the strategic advantage at sea. In addition, northern coastal cities had most of the shipbuilding yards. 17
The Union further had an information advantage over the Confederacy, again due to its infrastructure. In 1847, there were only Jomini's ideas, and endorsed the Jominian view of offensive warfare. 26 Among other insights, Mahan realized that politically active citizen soldiers would fill out the forces his cadets would one day command. A. s a result, Mahan emphasized protection and maneuver over frontal assaults due to the potential political repercussions from large 
23
24
39
I
2
McClellan had a good rapport with his men, who affectionately referred to him as crossing multiple river barriers lying perpendicular to the axis of advance. Each of these afforded opportunities for the defender to conduct delays, defend from successive positions, or defend in depth.
The second approach was from the west through the Shenandoah Valley. The Shenandoah Valley is located northwest of Richmond. It is a self-contained pocket nestled between the Blue Ridge and Alleghany Mountains. 
42
The third approach was from the east along the Chesapeake Bay. Large fingerlike rivers run inland from the bay, and while these formed barriers to a direct overland approach, as noted earlier, the larger estuariesthe Rappahannock, York, and Jamesall were navigable far enough to form potential approaches for deep flanking movements, either behind the Confederate Army, or directly against Richmond.
Land on the peninsulas formed by these riversthe Northern Neck, between the Potomac and Rappahannock, the Middle Peninsula between the Rappahannock and the York, and what was simply called the Peninsula, between the York and the Jameswas marshy, sandy soil that did not lend itself to growing food. Most roads were narrow and mainly served plantation owners transporting their tobacco or cotton to rivers. The few roads that existed were susceptible to flooding and washed out in the heavy spring rains. The Plan This is evidence of Eighteenth Century Jominian conceptual thinking. Jomini said, "In strategy, the object of the campaign determines the objective point. If this aim be [sic] offensive, the point will be the possession of the hostile capital, or that of a province whole loss would compel the enemy to make peace. In a war of invasion the capital is, ordinarily, the objective point.'.4 4
The two leaders also differed over how to strike the enemy. President Lincoln  possessing excellent organizational and garrison leadership skills, having developed a bold plan, and 121,500 soldiers seized the strategic initiative by using an uncontested sea approach, and was poised to defeat the Confederacy with a single, decisive blow.
McClellan had developed what U.S. doctrine would now recognize as a joint campaign. Joint Publication 1 says the following:
A campaign is a series of related major operations aimed at achieving strategic and operational objectives within a given time and space. Planning for a campaign is appropriate when contemplated military operations exceed the scope of a single major operation. Thus, campaigns are often the most extensive joint operations in terms of time and other resources. 
1
land forces east of Richmond. Goldsborough believed his primary duty was to enforce the blockade while protecting his fleet from the Virginia. Yorktown (Gloucester). The Confederate works were well constructed and situated on excellent terrain. The defensive works had few troops and guns though, and Gloucester only had eight guns (32-pound and below). There were nine old smoothbore guns in coastal batteries at the foot of the over-watch. There was a Revolutionary War redoubt facing southeast down the river with only one 32-pound gun. The guns they did have were poor in quality and inaccurate. 
16
Missroon decided his ships could not support the mission unless land forces took out the shore batteries first. 17 guns pounded the Yorktown defenses. The newest ironclad, U.S.S. Galena, had arrived and it was to move up the York River and take the shore batteries from the east. 19
McClellan was aware of the risks associated with an amphibious landing. The Union attempted its first amphibious assault the prior August in Hatteras, North Carolina.
Even against a small, poorly equipped enemy force, General Benjamin Butler's forces missed their planned landing locations, and units were intermingled after the surf destroyed many of their landing vessels. Troops were also unable to locate their follow on ammunition? 0 Richmond to bolster their defenses. The Union's operational initiative was gone, never to reappear for the rest of the campaign. 
23
25
In 24 Dr. Gregory Miller, (Thesis Feedback, Joint Advanced Warfighting School, Joint Forces College, Norfolk, VA, May 8, 2014). Dr. Miller contends this falls in line with the "Prospect Theory" where individuals are more risk averse when facing losses, and more risk acceptant when facing gains.
:u Reed, Combined Operations in the Civil War, 152. Dr. Gregory Miller contends this falls in line with the "Prospect Theory" where we tend to be more risk averse when facing losses, and more risk acceptant when facing gains.  Confederate, General Joe Johnston considered the James River approach to be the enemy's most dangerous course of action. He said, "I suspect that McClellan is waiting for iron-clad war vessels for James River. They would enable him to reach Richmond three days before these troops ... (the ones evacuating from Williamsburg) Should such a move be made the fall of Richmond would be inevitable." 
44
45
The C.I.A. believed that instead of just giving up as they had in 1991, entire Iraqi divisions and brigades would surrender, turn in their equipment, and then be available as whole units to provide security assistance once Phase III, major combat operations were over. CENTCOM's plan called for disbanding the loyal Republican Guard but assumed regular Iraqi divisions would be willing to assist the U.S. effort. These "capitulated" units were supposed to protect Iraq's borders and provide security in the urban areas.
11
This was a bold assumption more suitable for the 1200s when Genghis Khan and his Mongols built their force progressively, using soldiers they captured from armies as they swarmed the Asian steppe into Baghdad. Tommy Franks was no Genghis Khan, and CENTCOM's force no horde.
Similar to McClellan's plan bypassing Yorktown, Franks' plan called for bypassing southern Iraqi cities to reduce the threat of bogging down in urban fighting.
Planners designated Saddam Hussein's regime, which was ensconced in Baghdad, as the "center of gravity." Baghdad had over six million people in it. Saddam's handpicked Special Republican Guard maintained control of the city. At the time of the planning, it was widely believed that they had weapons of mass destruction at their disposal and were prepared to use them. 
12
13
Many well-meaning junior and mid-level officers had to fight the bureaucratic forces on their FOB just to get permission to conduct patrols. As Thomas Ricks highlighted in Fiasco, a Special Forces (SF) soldier said:
The big Army is like a mammoth elephant trying to squish the mouse. It is slow, bureaucratic, and fearful of loss. The enemy has freedom of action, decentralized operations, and care little about the political or environmental impacts of the actions as long as it gets on CNN or CBS. The more we go to bunker mentality and pull away from the people, the harder it will be. We are making this war longer than it has to be. Every day the big Army tries to get more operational control over the only forced trained and ready for the FID [foreign internal defense] mission needed here -SF. They want us to stay in the wire and coordinate to the BCT/DIV [brigade combat team/division] level for every action? 8
Lower ranking non-commissioned and commissioned officers were not that only ones who held disdain for the conservative military leadership above them. A colonel expressed this opinion about the generals he worked for: "They are organization men.  the Iraq War with a small U.S. ground-force footprint. On the surface, the Secretary of deaths, with the added bitterness that now, with no enemy army to defeat or capital to seize; there was no apparent objective to justify these losses. While it is perhaps an oversimplification to say that, the American public always has a hard time accepting casualties, it is perfectly reasonable to understand that they, or any engaged citizenry, will grow weary of war without purpose, and without end. An October 2013 article, "Building Better Generals/' suggests that U.S. general officers are not equipped with the right skill sets because today's senior military officers came of age in the last 12 years of fighting. 3 Instead of attending professional military education schools and taking broadening assignments, these officers were fighting in two combat zones. The article suggests that the personnel system is inadequate to properly vet and place general officers so the most innovative and creative military leaders will be at the helm in the coming years. 
4
Pay heed human capital management officers. This may not be enough though.
At the most mundane level, there should be a comprehensive assessment process, much like a secret or top-secret clearance investigation, combined with the 360-degree peer and subordinate feedback assessments. The investigator and feedback assessment http://www. washingtonpost.comlopinions/why-the-army-should-fire-some-generals-and-promote-somecaptains/20 14/02/21 /7921 a234-9802-ll e3-afce-3e7c922ef31 e _story.html?wprss=rss_ opinions.
3 David W. Barno, "Building Better Generals," Center for a New American Security (2013), 30. 4 lbid.
should focus questions to peers, acquaintances, and subordinates to see what the core character of the person really is. Perhaps a good garrison commander with excellent academic bona vides that is politically connected is not the right leader to do the "bloody work." Why is it that "company men" continue to rise to the top and occupy positions of increased responsibility? Maybe we can do better in honing a personnel system to select the next Grant or Farragut.
There is a larger failing in our thinking however. A doctrine which characterizes risk as a relationship between hazard and loss cannot help but imbue its practitioners with an excess of cautionif all we are to measure is the dangers and the costswe are unlikely to understand the opportunities or gains. Risk is never inherent, but derivative, and so changes with the myriad changes in an operation. The doctrine must teach not 
see only one thing, namely the enemy's main body. I try to crush it, confident that secondary matters will then settle themselves. " 9 West Point officers schooled to view European war through Jomini's ideas and Napoleon's experiences had more recent contemporary examples to contemplate by the outbreak of the Civil War. The 1853-1856 Crimean War offered examples of campaign design as well as insight into emerging technologies that would soon radically change the conduct of large-scale, state versus state wars. In particular, that war saw British, French, and Turkish forces use the Black Sea approach for a strategic flanking movement aimed at Russia's naval base in Sebastopol. 10
15  
15  
20 Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, Thinking in Time: The Uses of History for Decision-Makers (New York, NY: Collier Macmillan, 1986), 232, 25 I . 21 Joseph Cullen, The Peninsula Campaign, 1862: McClellan and Lee Struggle for Richmond (Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 1973), 18. 22 Rafuse, McClellan's War, 29.
20 Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, Thinking in Time: The Uses of History for Decision-Makers (New York, NY: Collier Macmillan, 1986), 232, 25 I . 21 Joseph Cullen, The Peninsula Campaign, 1862: McClellan and Lee Struggle for Richmond (Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 1973), 18. 22 Rafuse, McClellan's War, 29.
2-' Ibid., 33, 36.
2-' Ibid., 33, 36.
Gordonsville provided Johnston maximum freedom of movement due to its proximity to the Orange and Alexandria Rail Line.
Gordonsville provided Johnston maximum freedom of movement due to its proximity to the Orange and Alexandria Rail Line.
12  
12  
23
22  
22  
"Not everyone is good at counterinsurgency. Many people don't understand the concept, and some can't execute it. It is difficult, and in a conventional force, only a few people wilt master it. Anyone can learn the basics, but a few naturals do exist. Learn how to spot these people, and put them into positions where they can make a difference. Rank matters far less than talent-a few good men led by a smart junior noncommissioned officer can succeed in counterinsurgency, where hundreds of well-armed soldiers under a mediocre senior officer will fai1."
"Not everyone is good at counterinsurgency. Many people don't understand the concept, and some can't execute it. It is difficult, and in a conventional force, only a few people wilt master it. Anyone can learn the basics, but a few naturals do exist. Learn how to spot these people, and put them into positions where they can make a difference. Rank matters far less than talent-a few good men led by a smart junior noncommissioned officer can succeed in counterinsurgency, where hundreds of well-armed soldiers under a mediocre senior officer will fai1."
JP 5-0. Joint Operation Planning (Washington, DC: U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, 201 1), GL-15.
Rafuse, McClellan's War, 38. 21 Ibid., 42. 29 Ibid., 46. 30 Rafuse, McClellan's War, 123.
Stewart, American Military History, Volume I, 216. 39 Russel Beatie, The Army of the Potomac (Cambridge, MA: Da Capo, 2002), 264. 40 Stewart, American Military History, Volume I, 216.
Keegan,  The American Civil War, 144. IS
Cohen, Supreme Command, 38.   
Jomini, The Art of War, 66.   
JP 1, Doctrine/or the Armed Forces of the United States (Washington, DC: United States Joint Chiefs of Staff,
2013), 1-9.
Kevin Dougherty and Michael J. Moore, The Peninsula Campaign of 1862 a Military Analysis (University Press of Mississippi, 2005),
Keegan, The American Civil War, 145. The following Union commanders engaged General Jackson in the Shenandoah Valley Campaign: General Nathanial A. Banks, General Irvin McDowell, and General John C. Fremont.
William J. Miller, The Peninsula Campaign 1862, USA COM J3 Staff Ride (Norfolk, VA: US Atlantic Command, 1998), El4.
Reed, Combined Operations in the Civil War, 158, 159.   
Miller, The Peninsula Campaign of 1862, 131.   ~0 JP 5-0, Joint Operation Planning, GL-15.
Richard Stewart, American Military History Volume II: The United States Army in a GlobalEra,  1917Era,   -2008, ,  
2nd ed. (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2010), 406. 2 JP I, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States, ii.
Stewart, American Military History Volume II,  
468-470. 4 Ibid., 481. s Michael R. Gordon and General Bernard E. Trainor, Cobra II (New York, NY: Pantheon Boods, 2006), 104. 6 1bid., 25.
Gordon and Trainor, Cobra II, 105.   
Gordon and Trainor, Cobra II, 79.   
1bid., 503.
Ibid., 169, 177.   
Ibid., 177.   
lbid1, 553.
Ibid., 554.   
Ricks, Fiasco, 394. General  George Casey served as the Coalition Commander in Iraq from 2004 - 2007.21  Ricks, Fiasco, 369.
Adrian Bonenberger, "Why the Anny Should Fire Some Generals and Promote Some Captains,"  Washington Post, Opinions, February 21,2014, accessed March 6, 2014,   
Map3
July 2, 1862:  McClellan's men continued to retreat to Harrison's Landing on the James River. 66 July 3-4, 1862: Skirmishes occurred near Harrison's Landing.67    July 4, 1862: Skirmishers collided at Westover. Seeing that the Union had protective fire from their naval gunboats, Lee did not launch a frontal attack.68    July 5-6, 1862: Confederate artillerymen shelled Union ships on the James River.69    July 8, 1862: President Lincoln met with McClellan at Harrison's Landing. Lee aborted the counteroffensive. He moved his Confederates up the James River closer to Richmond awaiting the next Union move.70   
  '  Ibid.
Defense appeared to show courage by insisting on using a lithe military force. He tried to overthrow a regime risking the least amount of personnel and resources. By invading Iraq with the smallest possible force package, Rumsfeld sought to move on Iraq before Saddam Hussein, international, or domestic pressure could derail the invasion.
Unlike the Peninsula Campaign, Operation Iraqi Freedom did not culminate within operational reach of its objective. U.S. forces successfully defeated the Republican Guard in Baghdad. Franks appeared at first to have planned and executed one of the most successful joint campaigns in U.S. history, yet it ultimately failed.
Franks failed to understand he had just bypassed an enemy, and a casus belli for the insurgents, who would prove to be very adaptive for the next eight years. With limited forces on the ground and few within the mobilization pipeline, the Fedayeen had taken the initiative.
Having lost the initiative and unsure of the true threat, the next two Combined Joint Task Force-Iraq commanders (General Ricardo Sanchez, and General George   Casey)  
Components ofa 10,000-Man Union Army Division Table 
1