# ID: b26c303481b6496eb928999f052137b2
# Title: Training and organization for COIN conflicts a historic perspective with contemporary applications
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
In small wars, the goal is to gain decisive results with the least application of force and the consequent minimum loss of life. The end aim is the social, economic, and political development of the people subsequent to the military defeat of the enemy insurgent. In small wars, tolerance, sympathy, and kindness should be the keynote of our relationship with the mass of the population. 
1
After nine years of conventional United States Army involvement in the conflict in Afghanistan, the combat Brigades and Battalions of the Light, Airborne, and Air Assault Divisions remain organized to defeat a peer or near-peer enemy in a direct, symmetrical conflict. Army Transformation in 2003-2004 dissolved   the primacy of the Division as the metric of Army deployable power, and reorganized the Brigade Combat Team (BCT) with the ability to be more autonomous on the battlespace. The autonomy is derived from an increase in the density of combat support and combat service and support that are now organic to the BCT, versus the traditionally homogenous Infantry formations that required outside augmentation from the Division. John Nagl and Edward Luttwak assert that that Counterinsurgency Operations are not just a "lesser-included offense" of the traditional Range of Military Operations (ROMO), but an entirely different arc of conflict that requires specialized units, operations, tactics and skills that are counter to the current capabilities even of a Transformed BCT. 
2
3
With a few situational variances, historic expeditionary military elements that prepared and organized for a counterinsurgent fight, prior to committing to the fight, enjoyed more relative success than traditionally employed, but technologically more advanced forces. Related to this concept is the question posed by Edward Luttwak but seconded by this researcher. Given the preponderance of low-intensity, COIN-centric conflicts on an international scale, and the likelihood of the next conflict being of a low intensity, COIN-centric nature, is there a benefit to the United States maintaining regionally oriented, quasi-conventional COIN forces? 
4
1.
In this study, I plan to demonstrate a historical validity that there is a correlation between the level of pre-deployment training and organization of a given COIN force, and the resultant level of success that force gains over an opponent. I will accomplish this through a comparative case study approach, in keeping with the George and Bennett models of case study construction. 
5
The independent variable for this experiment is the level of training and organization of historic conventional COIN forces. Rather than a mere "yes" or
"no" answer, I will quantify and describe relevant training received, and how the specifics may have tied into success or failure.
As the research has demonstrated, a preponderance of COIN forces adapt and evolve from their traditional skill sets while engaged in their conflicts. This is commonly conducted through leader education and training centers established within the conflict zone. I will describe the "in-theater" training of some of the more evolutionary forces, where this is an indicator of success.
The dependent variable is the success or failure of a COIN force; despite the best efforts of dozens of military and social science experts, normalizing specific metrics is a daunting task, especially when considering the breadth of the campaigns in this study. From the RAND study, "Victory has A Thousand
Fathers", I will derive metrics to determine the relative levels of success or failure of the various forces used for COIN. The same RAND study also include metrics to determine the success or failure of the whole of the governments involved in a counterinsurgent campaign.
The basis of the RAND study is a data set of thirty counterinsurgent fights that have taken place in the international scene, from 1978 to 2006. Their data is inclusive, as every conflict that started and stopped within those two dates is included in the study; there is no statistical normalization done to the data. 
6
"bad" COIN practices. These metrics are not perfectly opposed to one another, e.g., if the COIN force has 51% of the tangible support of an insurgency, the insurgency has the remaining 49%; some are "good" practices can counteract some "bad" practices. The RAND metrics are qualitative in nature, and lend themselves to analysis of a government and COIN force over the course of a long insurgency. While not in themselves an operational checklist, the "Good"
and "Bad" practices seem worthwhile to periodically review as a COIN force progresses through a campaign, a useful mirror on one's own operations. These metrics, displayed in Table 
1
1
1
The RAND researchers found, through analysis of the forces involved in these recent cases, a set of six key findings that correlate to successful COIN campaigns. They are:
1. Effective COIN practices tend to run in packs 2. The balance of "good" versus "bad" practices perfectly predicts outcomes 3. Tangible support trumps popular support. 4. Of 20 COIN approaches tested, 13 received strong [evidentiary]  support, while three are not supported by evidence 8 7 Christopher Paul, et al., "Victory Has a Thousand Fathers," xviii.
15 "Good" COIN Practices 12 "Bad" COIN Practices
• The COIN force adhered to several strategic communication principles. • The COIN force significantly reduced tangible insurgent support. • The government established or maintained legitimacy in the area of conflict. • The government was at least a partial democracy.
• COIN force intelligence was adequate to support effective engagement or disruption of insurgents. • The COIN force was of sufficient strength to force the insurgents to fight as guerrillas. • The government/state was competent.
• The COIN force avoided excessive collateral damage, disproportionate use of force, or other illegitimate applications of force. • The COIN force sought to engage and establish positive relations with the population in the area of conflict. • Short-term investments, improvements in infrastructure or development, or property reform occurred in the area of conflict controlled or claimed by the COIN force. • The majority of the population in the area of conflict supported or favored the COIN force. • The COIN force established and then expanded secure areas. • The COIN force had and used uncontested air dominance.
• The COIN force provided or ensured the provision of basic services in areas that it controlled or claimed to control. • The perception of security was created or maintained among the population in areas that the COIN force claimed to control.
• The COIN force used both collective punishment and escalating repression. • The primary COIN force was an external occupier.
• COIN force or government actions contributed to substantial new grievances claimed by the insurgents.
• Militias worked at cross-purposes with the COIN force or government. • The COIN force resettled or removed civilian populations for population control. • COIN force collateral damage was perceived by the population in the area of conflict as worse than the insurgents'. • In the area of conflict, the COIN force was perceived as worse than the insurgents. • The COIN force failed to adapt to changes in adversary strategy, operations, or tactics. • The COIN force engaged in more coercion or intimidation than the insurgents. • The insurgent force was individually superior to the COIN force by being either more professional or better motivated. • The COIN force or its allies relied on looting for sustainment. • The COIN force and government had different goals or levels of commitment.
5. Repression wins phases, but usually not cases 6. Poor beginnings do not necessarily lead to poor ends 9
These findings are relative to the final tally of victory or defeat in a COIN struggle. For purposes of my analysis of the historic case studies, I will focus on the top three indicators in the above list.
As noted in the RAND study, for the COIN force, eight of the analyzed struggles are listed as "win," while 22 are listed as "loss," though the definitions of "win" and "loss" bear elucidation in Figure 
1
S
1
10 Christopher Paul, et al., "Victory Has a Thousand Fathers," xvii.
Managing the control variables in order to conduct a case-by-case comparison is a monumental task, given the cross-section of disparate case studies selected. COIN struggles can be an undercurrent to a high intensity model of conflict, highlighted by the differences between the village war fought by USMC Combined Action Program (CAP) platoons, versus the 1-7 Cavalry experience in the A Shau Valley in 1965. 
12
13
The researcher must take a level of liberty with these qualitative assessments, as variations can exist even within the same conflict and Area of Operations (AO). For example, the isolated areas in which the CIA/SF Civilian 
There are hundreds of case studies on counterinsurgency, guerrilla wars, insurrections, and low-intensity conflict. This study will focus on conflicts in the third world of Asia and Africa in which post-colonial Europe or America engaged with expeditionary combat troops, advisors, or combinations of both. I selected the following case studies because they all involve a superpower employing an expeditionary force to an allied or client state, and conducting counterinsurgent operations. Each conflict lasted for a significant duration, long enough for theater-level modifications to the existing force and doctrine to manifest within the affected COIN force, and possibly within the institution itself. I have gathered my data through an analysis of the forces used, domestic or foreign, in the counterinsurgent struggles in Vietnam (1960-1973), Algeria (1954-1962), and
Afghanistan (1979-1988), and the relative success or failures that these forces enjoyed.  1954-1962, 99-101.   18 Bernard B. Fall, The Two Vietnams, 363-365  with a resultant minimal evolution of that force. Not analyzed in the case studies, but noteworthy in Chapter V, is the low-intensity conflict involving the Philippines and the Hukbalahap Rebellion of the early 1950s. This was a proto-western democracy standing in opposition to a Maoist communist insurgency, and represents a level of success on two levels. The Philippine government successful integrated all aspects of national power to defeat the root causes of the insurgency, and they were willing to dramatically reorganize and prepare their armed forces prior to engaging in the contested areas. 
19
2
while this force was strategic in scope, its development was also evolutionary, and the overarching success of the COIN force was tightly woven into the proper utilization of the other elements of state power. I excluded this case from the study as it did not involve the expeditionary forces of an external nation-state to the state in conflict, but the force training and development are worthy of note.
The literature available on COIN related topics is extensive. This summery of the source work for this study includes contemporary theory, historical reviews, historic analysis of the conflicts of the case studies, and the general study of low-intensity conflict.  Grau (2010), and Robert Kaplan (2001)   further analyze the tribal nature of the region, generational memories of honor and conflict, and the predominance of the Pashtun tribes and culture, while
Cynthia Mahmood (1996) provides insights into the neighboring Sikh and Punjabi militant cultures. Various authors (Grau, 1998; Combs, 2006; Kaplan, 2005)   provide insight as to both Soviet and American Coalition military and aid efforts from 1979 to the present.
To meet future challenges, America's Army must turn from the warm and well-deserved glow of its Persian Gulf victory and embrace, once more the real business of regulars, the stinking gray shadow world of "savage wars of peace," as Rudyard Kipling called them. 
For the researcher to place historical COIN forces in perspective, an analysis of a modern model of a COIN force is required. Key to the argument is the difference between the doctrinally organized formation and the missionoriented organization that evolved after several months in the combat theater. With a squadron headquarters, three maneuver troop headquarters, six mounted platoons, and two dismounted platoons, an RSTA can accomplish the following tactical goals on a mobile battlefield. Within the complex, dynamic conditions and threat profiles of future OEs, the squadron is essential to successful Army and joint operations in several ways:
• It provides a significant dismounted or mounted reconnaissance force.
• It enables the higher commander to decisively employ his maneuver battalions and joint fires and to choose times and places for engagement to his advantage.
• It maximizes security of the higher headquarters by providing timely, accurate, and relevant combat information.
• It helps the higher commander achieve advantages over an enemy or adversary in terms of the ability to collect, process, and disseminate information. 28  The organizational line chart in Figure 
3
A concise, historical analysis of prior international COIN forces, used as a basis for determining situational appropriate force packages in a COIN environment would be value added to the Brigade Combat Team-and Battalion Task Force-echelon commanders and staffs. There is no common metric to determine the force required for a specific operational environment in Afghanistan; logic would dictate that the disposition, composition, and strength of the enemy forces would serve as a factor in this decision, but how does this apply to an enemy element that does not wear a uniform? How does a commander determine the extent, or the potentiality of, an insurgency, and then subsequently assign his forces to attain his intended outcomes?
As noted in John Nagl's argument in Joint Forces Quarterly, the American military institution remains focused on high intensity war. The Vietnam conflict was regarded as an abnormality, and the "American Way of War" was reaffirmed in the 1991 Gulf War with Iraq. 
31
Luttwak. 32
32 Edward N. Luttwak, "Notes on Low-Intensity Conflict," 341. Luttwak differentiates the two characteristics of forces as internal versus external focused in their view on the operating environment, and caveats his argument with a statement that all forces fall on a line between the two extremes. The closer a particular force falls toward being pure attrition, the more they focus on internal administrations and operations; warfare becomes a function of "administering superior material resources" against an enemy in a mechanistic fashion. The closer a particular force falls toward being pure relational-maneuver, the more that force becomes outward regarding. This force identifies the weakness of the opponent, and reconfigures itself to capitalize on these weaknesses and achieve victory.
speaking to the contemporary COIN struggle the United States faces, and to the echoes of Army reconstruction post-Vietnam, John Nagl remarks, "For these reasons, the security of the Nation and its interests demand that the army continue to learn and adapt to counterinsurgency and irregular warfare and that it institutionalize these adaptations so they are not forgotten again. The purpose of pre-deployment training is to prepare Soldiers to conduct the missions they will execute while deployed. Even though environments and enemies morph over time, predeployment training should, at the very least, arm Soldiers with the requisite skills they need to be initially effective and survivable in the operational environment, and thus able to adapt and refine their abilities as the situation develops. If pre-deployment training is inadequate, a unit would arrive to its operational area without the requisite skills and initially be attempting to catch up to enemy forces to match their proficiency. Soldiers would hit the ground at a disadvantage to the enemy, instead of being able to arrive equal, identify, adapt, and surpass.
Due to the ever-changing environment, it is completely unrealistic to expect any training plan conducted now to be completely sufficient later for the duration of a deployment. 
36
--We believe in the eventual return of sovereign rights and selfgovernment to peoples who have been deprived of them by force --We believe that all peoples who are prepared for self government should be permitted to choose their own form of government by their own freely expressed choice, without interference from any foreign source. This is true in Europe, in Asia, in Africa, as well as in the Western Hemisphere --We shall refuse to recognize any government imposed upon any nation by the force of any foreign power. 37
America's conventional military entered the Indochina conflict with cadres of military advisors, drawn from across the ranks of the existing forces. Arriving as a "mere handful" of advisors to control the flow of American military assistance in 1950, the personnel strength grew in 1960 to 300 total Americans, 38 and culminated in a staggering 542,000 uniformed members in 1969. 
39
41 Larry E. Cable, Conflict of Myths, 3.
42 Andrew F. Krepinevich, Jr., The Army and Vietnam, 70-71.
43 John Nagl, Learning to Eat Soup with a Knife, 178. The standard infantry battalion in the Army inventory was increased by one rifle company and one heavy weapons company; the intent was to "devise a light, mobile organization that could fight these small engagements all over the country." Using the RAND "Victory Has 1000 Fathers" series of metrics as noted in Chapter I, I have marked trends and tendencies of the U.S.M.C CAP platoons, insofar as observations within the literature of their actions. Table 
5
The U.S.M.C. CAP platoons were highly effective in executing "good" COIN practices. Executing strategic communications was not within their purview at the village level; one example of the scope of a platoon's area of
N/A • The COIN force adhered to several strategic communication principles.
• The COIN force used both collective punishment and escalating repression. N/A Y • The COIN force significantly reduced tangible insurgent support.
• The primary COIN force was an external occupier. Y Y
• The government established or maintained legitimacy in the area of conflict.
• COIN force or government actions contributed to substantial new grievances claimed by the insurgents.
N/A • The government was at least a partial democracy.
• Militias worked at cross-purposes with the COIN force or government. N Y
• COIN force intelligence was adequate to support effective engagement or disruption of insurgents.
• The COIN force resettled or removed civilian populations for population control. N/A N
• The COIN force was of sufficient strength to force the insurgents to fight as guerrillas.
• COIN force collateral damage was perceived by the population in the area of conflict as worse than the insurgents'.
N/A Y • The government/state was competent.
• In the area of conflict, the COIN force was perceived as worse than the insurgents.
N/A Y
• The COIN force avoided excessive collateral damage, disproportionate use of force, or other illegitimate applications of force.
• The COIN force failed to adapt to changes in adversary strategy, operations, or tactics.
N/A Y
• The COIN force sought to engage and establish positive relations with the population in the area of conflict.
• The COIN force engaged in more coercion or intimidation than the insurgents.
• Short-term investments, improvements in infrastructure or development, or property reform occurred in the area of conflict controlled or claimed by the COIN force.
• The insurgent force was individually superior to the COIN force by being either more professional or better motivated.
Y/N later, to repeat the assault, but a single Marine rifle shot repulsed them; the Marines and PF received information from the villagers that the assault was coming, and the shot was a costly signal to the combined enemy force, communicating the solidarity and readiness of the village. 
52
53
54
55
56
58
59
60
61
They had the taste for liberty, the sense of justice and the instinct for generosity. They wanted to create a multiracial, free, fraternal and prosperous society, to set an example for a world divided between rich and poor peoples. One word symbolized their ambition: "integration"! Opposite under the striking red and green banner of Islam, the enemy preached racial hatred and religious fanaticism, the arbitrary terrorism of a one-party dictatorship…to win the hearts of the population, they turned themselves into medical orderlies, administrators, water irrigation project managers, overseers of the rural economy… To protect them, they also became policemen, judges, and executioners. 66
Jean Pouget, Veteran of Indochina and Algeria
The paratroopers responsible for the successful, but bloody, Battle of Algiers in 1956-57, never succeeded in reducing the tangible support for the insurgency, especially among the urban Muslim population from which the FLN drew its ranks. Algeria remains a prime example of the cumulative effect of long duration, low-intensity conflict upon a democratically based government. While the military efforts of the various branches of the French military succeeded in achieving tactical and operational victory at nearly every turn, Algeria was lost to France by growing public antipathy to the war, and international outcries against perceived French excesses of violence and use of torture. The FLN and other revolutionary movements within Algeria effectively turned a military struggle into a political struggle, and nearly destroyed France on their way toward independence. 
67
4
• The government established or maintained legitimacy in the area of conflict.
• COIN force or government actions contributed to substantial new grievances claimed by the insurgents.
• The government was at least a partial democracy.
• Militias worked at cross-purposes with the COIN force or government. Y Y
• COIN force intelligence was adequate to support effective engagement or disruption of insurgents.
• The COIN force resettled or removed civilian populations for population control. Y Y/N
• The COIN force was of sufficient strength to force the insurgents to fight as guerrillas.
• COIN force collateral damage was perceived by the population in the area of conflict as worse than the insurgents'.
Y/N N • The government/state was competent.
• In the area of conflict, the COIN force was perceived as worse than the insurgents.
• The COIN force avoided excessive collateral damage, disproportionate use of force, or other illegitimate applications of force.
• The COIN force failed to adapt to changes in adversary strategy, operations, or tactics.
N/A N
• The COIN force sought to engage and establish positive relations with the population in the area of conflict.
• The COIN force engaged in more coercion or intimidation than the insurgents.
• Short-term investments, improvements in infrastructure or development, or property reform occurred in the area of conflict controlled or claimed by the COIN force.
• The insurgent force was individually superior to the COIN force by being either more professional or better motivated.
• The COIN force or its allies relied on looting for sustainment. Y N
• The majority of the population in the area of conflict supported or favored the COIN force.
• The COIN force established and then expanded secure areas.
• The COIN force had and used uncontested air dominance.
• The COIN force provided or ensured the provision of basic services in areas that it controlled or claimed to control.
• The perception of security was created or maintained among the population in areas that the COIN force claimed to control.
• The COIN force and government had different goals or levels of commitment.
were meaningless, exercising this COIN practice infers attempting to connect with the host population, which is a net positive. This was manifest in the battle for Algiers in 1956-57, and in tactical leaflet drops and loudspeaker broadcasts within the contested areas of the urban areas of the country. France also had to communicate strategically with the neighboring country of Tunisia, whom was offering sanctuary to members of the FLN. 
68
69
70
71
70 Alistair Horne, A Savage War of Peace, 125-130.
vast bulk of the Muslim Algerian populace. Without renouncing their subservience to sharia law, the Muslims could not attain French citizenship, and the accompanying voting rights. 
72
73
74
In the initial stages of the conflict, from 1954 -1957, the presence of the  magnify the people's distance from the French colonial forces. French practices of collective punishment and repression further alienated them from the Muslim population. 
80
81
82
83
84
85
87
88
89
In a chilling commentary that nearly describes the British adventures in Afghanistan in the 19 th century, Les Grau describes the difficulties facing the Soviet Army during the Afghan War of 1979-1989, and the little-known domestic socio-political effects of the conflict:
The Armed Forces of the Soviet Union structured, equipped and trained their forces for nuclear and high-intensity war on the great northern European plain and the plains of northern China. However, their political leadership thrust them into the middle of the Afghanistan civil war to reconstitute and support a nominally Marxist-Leninist government. The terrain, the climate and the enemy were entirely different from what they had prepared for. In this locale, their equipment functioned less than optimally, their force structure was clearly inappropriate and their tactics were obviously wrong…returning soldiers were not welcomed as heroes or treated with respect. A gap opened between the Armed Forces and the citizenry and many veterans found they could not fit back into the lifestyle of the complacent and self-centered citizenry. The effects of the Afghanistan war reverberate throughout Russia today. 
92
The contemporary American involvement in the conflict in Afghanistan is merely the latest chapter in the history of a region rife with developmental issues that spans over nearly two centuries of European involvement in the area. The aspiring colonial powers of Great Britain, Germany and Russia nominally influenced the polity of Afghanistan, openly or covertly, through religiously legitimate emirs of various tribal and ethnical persuasions from Kabul. In keeping with the disparate notion of decentralized state power that was historic Afghanistan, the colonial powers also entreated with tributary tribes and princes in the general geographical area that is Afghanistan of the present. While we consider the development of the modern nation state as a function of both inter-92 Lester W. Grau, The Bear Went Over the Mountain: Soviet Combat Tactics in Afghanistan (Portland: Frank Cass Publishers, 1998), xvii. and intra-nation conflict, the lack of stability, unity, and strength of the Afghan nation poses a conundrum to one unfamiliar with its historic past of disunity.
Charles Tilly makes the comment, relative to European nations, that "States make War, and War Makes States," but this transitional mechanism has not occurred in Afghanistan, despite that Afghanistan has been a scene of nearly constant conflict over the last 30 years. 
93
Understanding the Afghanistan environment requires an in-depth grasp of the regional history, and a thorough understanding of the ethnic and tribal diversity of the country. Through just the last two centuries of foreign intervention, the Afghan collective national memory has developed a justifiably xenophobic attitude towards outside influences, despite remaining highly fiscally dependent upon them. nascent industrial, agricultural, or personal income tax bases. 
94
95
96
98
97 David Loyn, In Afghanistan, 143; Ali Ahmad Jalali and Lester W. Grau, The Other Side of the Mountain: Mujahideen Tactics in the Soviet-Afghan War (LaVergne,TN: Books Express Publishing, 2010), 150-51,168. Jalali and Grau discuss how many of the Mujahedeen were simply local men, defending their villages, similar in concept to the Afghan harbakai, the tribal police or militia who maintained tribal law and order in a particular area.
98 Christopher Paul, et al., "Victory Has a Thousand Fathers," 12.  
5
annotation; in mixed result findings, the reader will find a "Y/N". Annotations of "N/A" indicated either an insufficiency of data either for or against exhibition of a certain "Good" or "Bad" COIN practice, or a subjective assessment by the researcher placing the practice in some manner outside of the abilities of the Soviet Army. For this particular case study, there are a greater number of adjudications that list "Y/N"; the ten years of Soviet involvement, and three distinct phases of the operation, exhibit the Soviet's adaptations to the COIN environment. • The COIN force used both collective punishment and escalating repression.
• The COIN force significantly reduced tangible insurgent support.
• The primary COIN force was an external occupier.
• The government established or maintained legitimacy in the area of conflict.
• COIN force or government actions contributed to substantial new grievances claimed by the insurgents.
Y N
• The government was at least a partial democracy.
• Militias worked at cross-purposes with the COIN force or government.
Y N/A • COIN force intelligence was adequate to support effective engagement or disruption of insurgents.
• The COIN force resettled or removed civilian populations for population control.
Y N
• The COIN force was of sufficient strength to force the insurgents to fight as guerrillas.
• COIN force collateral damage was perceived by the population in the area of conflict as worse than the insurgents'.
• The government/state was competent.
• In the area of conflict, the COIN force was perceived as worse than the insurgents.
• The COIN force avoided excessive collateral damage, disproportionate use of force, or other illegitimate applications of force.
• mitigated the lack of tangible support the insurgents could not receive from the depopulated border regions. 
102
103
104
105
106
105 Christopher Paul, et al., "Victory Has a Thousand Fathers," 11-12.  witnessed from both sides of the Durand line. 
107
108
As a method to compensate for these strategic setbacks, the Soviet Army relied on excessive applications of force, with the purpose of crushing the rebellion in 110 David Loyn, In Afghanistan, 151-52; Christopher Paul, et al., "Victory Has a Thousand Fathers," 19. As quoted in the RAND study, Anthony Joes remarks, "to achieve the traditional 10to-1 ratio of troops to guerrillas, the Soviets would have had to put at least 900,000 soldiers in Afghanistan, eight times the size of their actual commitment…," and "…even then there would be no assurance of a speedy solution;" Lester W. Grau, The Bear Went Over the Mountain, xii-xiii.  its perceived gestational period. The Soviets subsequently shifted their tactics to targeting the civilian population, intending to deprive the insurgency of tangible support within the rural areas of Afghanistan. 
111
Muslim civic and religious leaders on the central governance payroll.
Additionally, the Soviets mandated the PDRA revoke the original inciting grievance, the land reformation initiatives instilled by Hafizullah Amin in 1978; by this stage in the war, the damage was nearly irreversible. 
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
117 Thomas J. Barfield, Afghanistan: A Cultural and Political History, 255-56. Afghan male refugees taking shelter in the Pakistan tribal regions were enticed by free room and board to attend a number of Deobandi madrassas (religious schools); from thence, they became known as talib (students), and would return to Afghanistan as the Taliban, conquering Kabul in 1996.
118 Robert D. Kaplan, Soldiers of God, 223. Kaplan visited Kandahar in 1988, and compared the once sprawling city in the Pashtun tribal heartland to the remnants of a German city at the end of WWII, or the images of Hiroshima following the atomic weapons usage. In a subsequent report (page 120-21), Kaplan discusses the Soviet use of collective punishment and atrocity in an event subsequently investigated by Amnesty International: " On January 16, 1988, after Soviet troops and an Afghan Communist militia unit captured the village of Kalegu in Paktia province from the Mujahedeen, they bound together 12 villagers, seven of whom were children, inside the local mosque before they burned it to the ground; nine of the twelve died." David Loyn, In Afghanistan,157; Loyn describes the totality of Soviet infrastructure destruction in a figure dated 1988: 1,814 schools, 31 hospitals, and 11 health centers destroyed in the contested zones.
suffered from high desertion rates among their forces; the Afghan Army was particularly prone to desertion. The Afghan Army also contributed tremendous resources to the Mujahedeen, and examples exist of entire Afghan battalions defecting, with all men, weapons and equipment, to include tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, and supplies. 
119
120
121
122
The Soviet Army at the inception of the Afghan War was composed mainly of conscript forces, led by a professional officer cadre. Comparable, but in opposition to NATO, the overarching strategic purpose of the training, doctrine, and equipping of their ground forces was to succeed in a nuclear or high-intensity theater-level war in Northern Europe, or Northern China. Further constrained by ponderous bureaucratic processes, the Soviet Army lacked an operational flexibility and mindset that would have enabled them to adapt and evolve to the The Soviets departed in defeat in 1989, leaving behind a modestly strong central Afghan government, nationalized, modern military and police forces, and a disorganized, but financially sound, insurgency of Pakistani-supported mujahedeen. Surprisingly, the PDPA government, led by Haji Najibullah in Kabul, would remain in power longer than the USSR, falling in March 1992 to the effects of civil war, and the loss of its Russian patron. 
126
The Army's culture is its personality. It reflects the Army's values, philosophy, norms, and unwritten rules. Our culture has a powerful effect because our common underlying assumptions guide behavior and the way the Army processes information as an organization.
128
The following tables summarize the results of the COIN case studies of Algeria, Vietnam, and Afghanistan. Not surprisingly, engaging in a COIN campaign with ROMO forces does not succeed, as shown in the studies. We can also see in all three examples evidence of evolution of sub-elements of ROMO forces into units more attuned to conducting constabulary and civic-action oriented operations; in the Marine CAP example, the evolution was a polar shift from their traditional mission, and the results were extremely economic relative to a cost/benefit analysis of blood, treasure, and time. In all three examples, we see also the importance of linking military action with national or foreign policy, and the essential nature of similarly tying the military to the inter-agency effort.
Control of the tangible support network of an insurgency seems to be a salient point of success or failure for a COIN force, but the Soviet technique offers a warning to operational planners. Using a Maoist comparison, draining the ocean to get at the fish is not a viable technique. Not only did the masses of Afghan refugees generated by such a tactic inflame world opinion, but also from within the war orphan population of young males sprung the foot soldiers of the Taliban, trained and educated in Pakistan Deobandi madrassas in the interwar period.
Collective punishment and escalating repression, as executed by the French Airborne, does not work unless deliberate, and equally overwhelming, consequence management efforts are taken to mitigate the negative effects on a host population; in this, strategic communications are essential. 
• The COIN force significantly reduced tangible insurgent support.
• The government established or maintained legitimacy in the area of conflict.
• The government was at least a partial democracy.
• COIN force intelligence was adequate to support effective engagement or disruption of insurgents.
• The COIN force was of sufficient strength to force the insurgents to fight as guerrillas.
• The government/state was competent.
• The COIN force avoided excessive collateral damage, disproportionate use of force, or other illegitimate applications of force.
• The COIN force sought to engage and establish positive relations with the population in the area of conflict.
• Short-term investments, improvements in infrastructure or development, or property reform occurred in the area of conflict controlled or claimed by the COIN force.
• The majority of the population in the area of conflict supported or favored the COIN force.
• The COIN force established and then expanded secure areas.
• The COIN force had and used uncontested air dominance.
• The COIN force provided or ensured the provision of basic services in areas that it controlled or claimed to control.
• The perception of security was created or maintained among the population in areas that the COIN force claimed to control.
Total "Yes" 11 8 4 Total "No" 1 8 11
Vietnam Algeria
• The COIN force used both collective punishment and escalating repression.
• The primary COIN force was an external occupier.
• COIN force or government actions contributed to substantial new grievances claimed by the insurgents.
• Militias worked at cross-purposes with the COIN force or government.
• The COIN force resettled or removed civilian populations for population control.
• COIN force collateral damage was perceived by the population in the area of conflict as worse than the insurgents'.
• In the area of conflict, the COIN force was perceived as worse than the insurgents.
• The COIN force failed to adapt to changes in adversary strategy, operations, or tactics.
• The COIN force engaged in more coercion or intimidation than the insurgents.
• The insurgent force was individually superior to the COIN force by being either more professional or better motivated.
• The COIN force or its allies relied on looting for sustainment.
• The COIN force and government had different goals or levels of commitment. hotbed of Islamic instability ever since, but that is a topic for an ancillary study.
In assessing the force relative to the RAND metrics, the paratroopers were evenly balanced in "yes" or "no" answers for execution of the "Good" COIN practices. They were unable to maintain an operational mission set that inculcated the "Good" COIN practices into their force, and failed to control the tangible support of the insurgents, save for in isolated tactical settings, such as the Battle of Algiers. While the paratroopers were largely regular Army professionals, the vast majority of the French military involved in Algeria were conscripts from metropolitan France, Foreign Legion, or Muslim Battalions raised from the occupied territories in Algeria. The discipline and esprit de corps of the regular paratroopers was lacking, as indicated by excesses of violence, looting, and desertion.
A revealing view of the French airborne is afforded by their recorded execution of "Bad" COIN practices, in which they accrued 10 "Yes" and three "No" answers. While the "Good" and "Bad" practices are not perfectly diametric, a positive answer to one side of the chart generally equates to a negative answer on the other side of the chart. Most significant to the study is the mixed answer relative to the populations perceptions of the COIN force, compared to the insurgent. Within Algeria, and over the course of the conflict, the FLN and ALN conducted nearly as much collateral damage and atrocity against the population, as the French did in collective punishment and repression. As the war dragged on, discipline within the COIN force writ large waned, and revenge killings against the Muslim population began to increase among the conscripts, further reducing all French forces from maintaining legitimacy in the eyes of the populace, and the world.
The insurgent organizations, operating both in Algeria and metropolitan
France, were able to leverage battlefield events into information operations, and thusly, into political action. Six French Prime Ministers fell to the wavering of public support for the war, and the entirety of the Fourth Republic Government fell, as a related result of national war fatigue. This weariness was also compounded by the recent defeat in French Indochina, and had profound effects upon mid-to-senior grade soldiers that left one war, and reported directly into another. While the French military was tactically and operationally successful in Algeria, highlighted in the 10 th Airborne's victory in the Battle of Algiers, political pressure forced Charles De Gaulle and the Fifth Republic to capitulate and withdraw military forces from Algeria.
The force. Fifteen Marines, specially selected and amiable to the Asiatic population, when coupled with 30 Popular Forces, were more than adequate to defend an area of 5 square miles and 5,000 civilian population. The Marines lived in the town with the populace, and drew a sizable portion of their material sustenance from the village. They were tactical patrolling masters, preferring to conduct night patrols and ambushes with small arms and grenades; not relying on heavy artillery, the Marines were surgically judicious with force, which maintained the support and respect of the villagers.
Examining a small organization in a small sector with metrics that examine operational-level characteristics is difficult; I assessed a number of characteristics, both "Good" and "Bad", as Not Applicable. 
The Philippines and the Hukbalahap (Huk) Rebellion of the early 1950s was a proto-western democracy versus a Maoist communist insurgency, and represents a level of success as both a former American protectorate, and in the dramatic reorganization and preparation of troops prior to engaging in the contested areas. military in order to win the war they were involved in. These observations are not polar opposites of the case studies, but are significantly different enough to warrant comment, and further study.
Then-Philippine Secretary of Defense Ramón Magsaysay identified one of the grievances that the Huk rebellion had was with the Philippine Armed Forces (PAF); their actions sent strategic communications to the populace, and the message was that the Quirino administration held the population in derision. The population needed to trust the PAF, because the military would be the executors of the central government's policies. The PAF initially was modeled after American Army formations, and had many veterans of WWII among its officers and NCOs. The PAF routinely conducted intimidation and extortion operations against the rural population, and had a level of corruptness and incompetence that was unacceptable. 
130
132
133
The government executed population relocation, but combined it with a positive information campaign that preempted counter-propaganda by the Huks;
Magsaysay and JUSMAG went as far as to recruit former Huks to populate relocation camps, and used radio and television to broadcast their stories to their former comrades. The population resettlement/relocation program was combined, publically, with land reform acts, addressing yet another root cause of instability. 
134
Party". The PAF used Reserve Officer Training Corps cadets to assist in securing the polling stations, which had the effect of further inculcating the national values into the next generation of military leaders. 
135
In order to more efficiently execute the kinetic aspects of the campaign, the PAF formed hybrid BCTs, manned by specially selected leaders, and stringently cleansed of corrupt and incompetent members. Addressing a salient issue of the Huks, the Philippine government underwent bold restructuring of land ownership policies, and placed a heavy emphasis on communicating the changes to the populace in and around the contested zone. Lastly, by instilling the values system of the nation into the military, the PAF was entrusted to secure the most sovereign of events during an insurgency, a national vote. A metric of the honest conduct of the vote is indicated by the decrease in strength of the incumbent party.
Magsaysay's wholesale reorganization of his nation's armed forces stands in direct contravention to Gian Gentile's contemporary views on the United States armed forces. Gentile argues that, while nation building (Iraq and Afghanistan) have become the mission set of the modern U.S. Army, the skills required to execute high-intensity warfare have atrophied, and placed America's strategic defense and force projection capabilities at risk. As soon as possible, the nation and military must return to preparing for the next high intensity fight, because the military that has developed over the last decade is not capable of executing those mission sets. 
136
Through the failure of the Soviet, French, and American ROMO formations during their respective trials, this study does demonstrate that COIN is not a lesser-included offense of the wider Range of Military Operations; if that was the case, the aforementioned conventional forces would have had higher success rates, and scored higher on the RAND "Good and Bad" practices scale.
This study draws a correlation between training for COIN, and effectiveness at COIN; it also illustrates a level of the positive effects of selectivity in personnel staffing. Each of the ROMO forces had small groups and key leaders within the larger service that demonstrated levels of flexibility and adaptive learning, and subsequently attempted to institutionalize some of that In order to highlight the key points of the capability gap, we will define the RSTA conceptually from what is designed to do, both regarding men and material, and I will briefly remark upon a few scenarios from OEF Rotation 08-09 that highlight the deltas in these capabilities. To successfully execute the GWOT in the capacity that combatant commanders are using them, Light, Airborne and Air Assault RSTA Squadrons need to increase in size by a maneuver Troop, all
Troops need to be MTOE as mounted assets, and Squadron Command and Control node needs additional personnel above those authorized.
The astute reader will note that the platoon math does not add up; eight combat platoons organic, but nine committed to the fight in some manner. C/1-61 organically had 30-33-man dismounted platoons, while the Alpha and Bravo The preponderance of forces that the American military will detail to the Afghanistan campaign will be, for the foreseeable future, light in orientation (not Mechanized or Classical Armor Heavy). Light, Airborne and Air Assault RSTA Squadrons will continue to be employed as "property owners," vice the traditional 
As noted above, the Charlie Troop organization in a Cavalry Squadron is designed to be a dismounted asset, with a minimal vehicular trace. 
141
Though the 4/101 BCT and 1/61 CAV may have been 80% or higher Changing the MTOE of the Charlie Troop organization from a dismounted capacity to a mounted capacity will directly impact the home-station training priorities, changing the organizational culture and creating a more efficient, effective unit that will thrive in an Afghanistan environment.
The GWOT will continue into the near future, and COCOMs will continue to assign RSTA Squadrons in property-owning, non-reconnaissance-oriented operational mission sets. Changing the MTOE of a Light, Air Assault or Airborne
Irregular Defense Groups (CIDG) operated demonstrated marked reductions in SVN village chieftain intimidation/murder, school teacher murder, and income taxes/land taxes paid into the central government of SVN. These positive trends ceased when MAC-V reallocated the forces to more of a direct action/counter terrorism mission. 15 While the entirety of the COIN (pacification) campaign in Vietnam was a failure, the isolated groups of U.S.M.C. CAPs in the I Corps sector of South Vietnam were highly successful. Though highly trained as 14 David Loyn, In Afghanistan: Two Hundred Years of British, Russian, and American Occupation (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2009), 138. 15 Andrew F. Krepinevich, Jr., The Army and Vietnam, 70-71. traditional
. Comparative Results of Historic COIN Forces No forces were committed to the initial fight task organized or trained specifically for COIN. The most poignant example of a successful unit in a failed mission is the U.S.M.C. Combined Action Platoons of the I Corps AOR; insofar as a cost-benefit analysis is concerned, 15 U.S. Marines pacified an urbanized area of five square miles, 20 and defeated two 100-140-man VC and NVA 19 Larry E. Cable, Conflict of Myths: The Development of American Counterinsurgency Doctrine and the Vietnam War (New York: New York University Press, 1986), 52-54. 20 F. J. (Bing) West, The Village (New York, Pocket Books, 2003), 353.
To provide baseline knowledge of counterinsurgent operations and contemporary doctrine, I refer to FM
To provide baseline knowledge of counterinsurgent operations and contemporary doctrine, I refer to FM
38 Andrew F.
38 Andrew F.
operations recruited from the urbanized, southern areas of SVN; this affected the CAP only at a tactical level. 49 The governance of Vietnam during the period of 1965-70 was a shifting set of military autocracies that under the advisement of American forces, partially espoused democratic principles. Tactical levels of intelligence increased as the Marines developed deeper relations with the affected village population; this was compounded by the trust and interdependency of the combined team, namely the Popular Forces, and the local police officers. 50 This intelligence network was crucial to the success of the Marines' COIN mission, as well as their survival; in two incidents in the Bihn Nghia village, the VC and NVA massed into conventional formations, and attempted to obliterate the Marines at Fort Page. The first attempt, a 140-man combined force, was repulsed at the cost of five Americans KIA and six PF, KIA. 51 A larger NVA and VC force attempted, months 47 F. J. (Bing) West, The Village, 176. 51 Peter Brush, "Civic Action: The Marine Corps Experience in Vietnam, Part I," 3; Max Boot, The Savage Wars of Peace: Small Wars and the Rise of American Power (New York: Basic Books, 2003), 305-07.
55 Andrew F. Krepinevich, Jr., The Army and Vietnam, 175. 56 F. J. (Bing) West, The Village, 134, 239, 293; Keith F. Kopets, "The Combined Action Program: Vietnam," 2.
Algerian War, fought from 1954 to 1962, was one of the critical decolonization wars to follow World War II. Major antagonists were French federated forces, and a number of Algerian militant independence movements; this war was fought nearly concurrently with French decolonization efforts in French Indochina (Vietnam), and severely disrupted the national characteristics and values systems of both North Africa and Metropolitan (European) France. The National Liberation Front (FLN) initiated the conflict on 1 November 1954 by perpetrating nationwide acts of violence against European settlers, and pro-French Muslim civilians; this was the so-called "All-Saints Day Massacre." The
78 Alistair Horne, A Savage War of
78 Alistair Horne, A Savage War of
Edward N. Luttwak, "Notes on Low-Intensity Conflict," 340-41.
Edward N. Luttwak, "Notes on Low-Intensity Conflict," 341.
Alexander L George, and Andrew Bennett, Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005), 151-164.
Christopher Paul, Colin P. Clarke, and Beth Grill, "Victory Has a  Thousand Fathers: Sources of Success in Counterinsurgency," (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2010), http://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG964.html (accessed 10 October 2010), 8-9.
Christopher Paul, et al., "Victory Has a Thousand Fathers," 9, Figure 2.2.   
Peter Brush, "Civic Action:  The Marine Corps Experience in Vietnam, Part I," Small Wars Journal, http://smallwarsjournal.com/documents/brush.htm (Accessed 10 November 2010), 4.
Peter Brush, "Civic Action:  The Marine Corps Experience in Vietnam, Part I," 2.
Daniel P. Bolger, "The Ghosts of Omdurman," Parameters (Autumn 1991), 28-39, http://www.carlisle.army.mil/usawc/parameters/Articles/1991/1991%20bolger.pdf (Accessed 11 November 2010). LTG Bolger is presently the Deputy Chief of Staff, G-3/5/7, U.S. Army.
Dennis Sullivan, Interview with LTC Dennis Sullivan, edited by Operational Leadership Experiences Project (FT Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute, 26 June 2006), http://cgsc.cdmhost.com/cdm4/item_viewer.php?CISOROOT=/p4013coll13&CISOPTR=446&CIS OBOX=1&REC=12 (accessed 3 November 2010), 7. COL Sullivan served as the battalion executive officer of 1-87 IN, 1/10 BCT, in Regional Command-East, in Afghanistan from JUL 2003-APR 2004.
U.S. Department of Defense, "DoD News Briefing with Colonel John P. Johnson from Afghanistan at the Pentagon Briefing Room, Arlington, VA," (Department of Defense Webpage: 21 November 2008), http://www.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=4321 (accessed 14 July 2010), 2.
TF Currahee, Afghan Commander AAR Book, Currahee Edition, (West Point, N.Y.: U.S. Army Center for Company-level Leaders, 2009), https://call2.army.mil/docs/doc5803/CURRAHEE.pdf (accessed 29 December 2009), 27-30, 37.
Headquarters, Department of the Army, FM 3-20.96 (Reconnaissance and Cavalry Squadron). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, 2010, https://armypubs.us.army.mil/doctrine/DR_pubs/dr_c/pdf/fm3_20x96.pdf (accessed 11 November 2010), 1-1.
Headquarters, Department of the Army, FM 3-20.96 (Reconnaissance and Cavalry Squadron), 1-8.
Eric Sauer, Jeremy Peifer, and Oleksandr Tkachuk, "1-61 CAV Squadron in the Battle for the KG Pass (Jun-Aug 2008)." Paper read at Organizational Design for Special Operations class, Naval Postgraduate School, 10 December 2009.
F. J. (Bing) West, The Village, 103-105.
Alf A. Heggoy, Insurgency and Counterinsurgency in Algeria (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1972), xi-xiii.
Henri Coustaux, "The Algerian War: Personal Account of Colonel Henri Coustaux," 235.
Robert D.Kaplan, Soldiers of God, xv; Martin Ewans, Afghanistan: A Short History,. The Soviets strategic concerns about perception of legitimacy were well founded; on 14 January 1980, the United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution condemning the invasion by a majority of 104 to 18, with 18 voters absent.
Robert D.Kaplan, Soldiers of God, 41, 136; Martin Ewans, Afghanistan, 7.   
Lester W.Grau, The Bear Went Over the Mountain,[99][100][101] Christopher Paul, et al.,  "Victory Has a Thousand Fathers," 16.   
David Loyn, In Afghanistan, Loyn remarks that the Soviet military was not consulted on the concept of the invasion until 10 December 1979. Nikolai Ogarkov, the chief of the General Staff, received his reluctant marching orders from then Defense Minister Ustinov, then-head of KGB, Yuri Andropov, and foreign minister Andrei Gromyko.
John Nagl.  Learning to Eat Soup with a Knife, 5-6. Original quote in Theodore G. Stroup, Jr., "Leadership and Organizational Culture: Actions Speak Louder than Words," Military Review LXXVI, No.1 (January/February 1996), 45.
Lawrence M. Greenburg, The Hukbalahap Insurrection, 100.
Larry E.Cable, Conflict of Myths,[54][55] 57; Lawrence M. Greenburg, The Hukbalahap  Insurrection,[86][87] 
Lawrence M.Greenburg, The Hukbalahap Insurrection,[88][89][90] 
Larry E. Cable, Conflict of Myths, 61; Lansdale, Edward G. In the Midst of Wars: An American's Mission to Southeast Asia (New York: Fordham University Press, 1991), 88-92.
Gian P. Gentile, "Let's Build an Army to Win All Wars," Joint Forces Quarterly 52, 1 st Quarter (2009), 27-33, http://www.thefreelibrary.com/Let's+build+an+army+to+win+all+wars.-a0193510865 (accessed 13 October 2010), 27.
Defense Acquisition University, "DOTMLPF Analysis," ACQuipedia: Your Online Acquisition Library, https://acc.dau.mil/CommunityBrowser.aspx?id=28870&view=w (accessed 30 November 2010).
Headquarters, Department of the Army,, 7-6-7-8. Chapter 7 of FM 3-20.96 focuses on Stability Operations, and largely quantifies the mission set and capabilities of a Cavalry Squadron in a low-intensity environment.
TF Currahee, Afghan Commander AAR Book,[27][28] 
U.S. Department of Defense, "DoD News Briefing with Colonel John P. Johnson," 3-4. COL Johnson emphasizes the Khost-Gardez Road, and the importance for the economic development for the AOR.
Headquarters, Department of the Army, FM 3-20.96 (Reconnaissance and Cavalry Squadron), 1-8-1-9.
TF Currahee, Afghan Commander AAR Book, 37.   
TF Currahee, Afghan Commander AAR Book,[37][38] 
I want to first thank 
God
Professor Dayne Nix
First Reader
Naval War College
Naval Postgraduate School
Professor Leo Blanken
Second Reader
Scientific Study of War class
Professor Anna Simmons. Her
Mark Nordwall
MAJ Steve Clay
DeAnna. Countless
After Action Review The Marine CAP platoons evolved from the U.S.M.C organizational history of small wars, a role in which from their inception was the Marines niche within the nation's defense policies. Massed operations such those in WWII and Korea were an abnormality for the Marines, a small element that had an organizational culture and affinity for "relational-maneuver" warfare, as described by Edward
Luttwak. The CAP platoons tallied 11 "yes" answers for the "Good" COIN practice, and two "yes" answers for "Bad" COIN practices. Key "Yes" answers include control of the insurgents tangible support sources, perceptions of legitimacy of the COIN force, and perceptions of security offered by the COIN
A.
RSTA Squadron is critical to ensuring the ability of these RSTA Squadrons to accomplish any mission that they are given within the CENTCOM AOR. These 