# ID: b2df745269f749a892a736cdd90d180c
# Title: Capoeira with a Hedgehog: Joint Force Operational Penetration and Exploitation in 2025
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
Although technology continues to proliferate, states have access to means of warfare, including national and industrial mobilization, that dwarf those of non-state actors.
Although this could change in the next 10 years, and states do collapse, history shows that people associate themselves strongly with their nation-state and will fight and die for it if its existence or core interests are threatened.
Even powerful non-state actors, such as Hizballah, are reliant on states for their military power.
See William S. Lind, "Understanding Fourth Generation War", Military Review, 2004: 12-6. ;
Martin Van Creveld, The Transformation of War (New York: The Free Press, 1991). ;
Foreign Affairs, "The Clash at 20: What did Samuel P. Huntington's "The Clash From an intellectual and conceptual standpoint, China and Russia in particular have successfully enacted these strategies and show clear ends, ways, means constructs.
Interestingly, both countries seem to have concluded that strategies that create de facto victory or present victory as a fait accompli are best suited to countering U.S. military power.
Recent Chinese actions in the South China Sea where they are using reclamation techniques to build islands that can support military missions on previously uninhabitable, and highly contested reefs, as well as development and deployment of A2/AD systems, shows this country has chosen this method and is currently enacting it.
There is no need for China to seize terrain by military force, it simply builds new terrain under its control and places offensive and defensive capabilities on that terrain.
Russia's actions in the Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea show the presence of a concept of how to use military force in a manner that causes cognitive paralysis in the U.S. decision making process by creating either ambiguity or plausible (or even implausible) deniability of involvement.
The central idea within the JCEO is the employment of "opportunistic, unpredictable maneuver, in and across multiple domains, in conjunction with the ability to attain local superiority at multiple entry points to gain entry and achieve desired objectives."
This local domain superiority may not be permanent; more often it will be temporary.
After landing, the entry forces themselves may be able to achieve the operational objectives and then extract, thus not requiring the introduction of follow-on forces.
In other operations entry forces may need to transition the effort to follow-on joint or coalition forces, or in some cases, non-military partners.
The authors tested the concepts and their predicted 2025 DOTMLPF outputs against competitors in two scenarios, appended in Annexes A and B. This was not a formal turn-based war game, and served as a thought experiment vice the pitting of exact forces against each other.