# ID: b37abfadd3274eeab904a693a4cb7b93
# Title: Closing the Gap: How to Defeat Integrated Fires Commands
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
During the last eighteen years of persistent conflict in the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT), the primary duties for the US Army's Field Artillery units changed from providing fires to conducting nonstandard missions. While necessary to assist during multiple deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan, this led to the atrophy of core competencies, and Field Artillery units ability to provide indirect fires. In the intervening period since 2001 adversaries studied the way US forces deploy, operate, adapt, and modernize. As the US Army shifts its focus to large-scale combat operations, the lessons available from the Russian-Ukrainian War provide examples of how potential peer adversaries developed their fires and Field Artillery capability. This research intends to identify capability gaps the US Army could exploit in future conflicts and mitigate weaknesses with changes to doctrine, organization, or training. Each section of this monograph compares the doctrine, organization, and training of Integrated Fires Commands (IFC) and US Army divisions and division artillery (DIVARTYs) while recommending solutions to mitigate the gap between them. To mitigate gaps the US Army will need to complete proposed longrange precision fires modernization and implementation of the Division Fires Command (DFC). Implementation of the Division Fires Command will optimize fires for large-scale operations and ensure that the US Army is prepared for future conflicts.
Artillery and rockets provide the greatest firepower and sear a path for infantry, mechanized forces and armor both physically and spiritually. Throughout the centuries, no army has understood this better than the Russians.
-Chris Bellamy, Red God of War
Beginning with World War I and continuing since, the percentage of casualties resulting from indirect fires during large-scale combat operations skyrocketed. 
1
(truck mounted rocket tube system), upgraded BM-21s with forty mounted 122mm rockets per system, destroyed two Ukrainian mechanized battalions in a matter of minutes. 
2
During the last eighteen years of persistent conflict in the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT), the primary duties for the US Army's Field Artillery units went from providing fires to conducting nonstandard missions. These nonstandard missions including patrolling as supplementary infantry formations or performing convoy security. While necessary to assist during multiple deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan, this led to the atrophy of core competencies of Field Artillery. 
3
4
Specifically, and most concerning, is the US Army's capability to conduct large-scale combat operations as compared to counter-insurgency operations (COIN). As the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq drawdown, the Army began to shift focus to large-scale combat operations with the 2017 publication of Field Manual 3-0, Operations. The US Army must examine and address the operational requirements facing its forces. It will also require a study on operational fires in the future. Unlike recent US Army operations in support of GWOT, operational fires will be the application of firepower to achieve a decisive impact on the outcome of a campaign or major operation. 
5
6
During the US engagement in the GWOT, other nations used this opportunity to prepare for large scale combat operations. 
7
As the US Army shifts its focus to large-scale combat operations, the lessons available from the Russian-Ukrainian War show how potential peer adversaries developed their fires and Field Artillery capability to achieve significant effects. This research intends to identify capability gaps the US Army could exploit in future conflicts and mitigate our weaknesses from changes to doctrine, organization, or training. By comparing US Army organizations with peer adversaries, the US can close the gap between them. Focusing specifically on the doctrine, organization, and training differences to examine critical areas, the US Army can overcome the overmatch in fires of peer competitors. Each of these sections are from the framework of Doctrine, Organization,   Training, Material, Leadership, Personnel, Facilities, and Policy (DOTMLPF-P). This monograph focuses specifically on the first three elements. The organization of each corresponding section in this monograph examines the enemy perspective followed by the US. Each section will also provide specific solutions and recommendations. While the US Army is unable to quickly fix the range or artillery tube number disparity between the US and other adversaries, other solutions could help to achieve parity in a future conflict.
How do US forces defeat a peer adversary's Integrated Fires Command (IFC)? To answer this question, it is imperative that the Field Artillery community determine "what problem it is trying to solve?" Answering the question will lead clear priorities for the fires community while ensuring overmatch in large scale combat operations. What choices should US forces make to prepare to fight IFCs in the future? US forces will need to develop and resource the right capabilities and conduct the appropriate training with correct doctrine. Appropriate training such as combined live fires, with large scale exercises will stress US Army formations and prepare them for the rigors and challenges of future operations. The US Army in its current configuration is at a disadvantage regarding fires in large-scale combat operations. Current structure is deficient, with shortfalls in both range capability and in the total number of Field Artillery systems. The shortcomings are not only an issue for large-scale combat operations, but as seen in recent conflicts, fires capability will be critical in smaller, regional conflicts. Russia is the most probably US adversary, and will employ its fire support systems across a range of military operations using the full breadth of its capabilities. The US must address these shortfalls by identifying ways to increase its fires capability in order to match and defeat any advantage held by competing nations.
Understanding the gaps in adversaries' capabilities will ensure that US forces are utilizing their resources appropriately and developing organizations and systems that overmatch those of other countries. Combat operations in Ukraine and Syria show the ability to mass fires on a large scale is still relevant and necessary. The potential effects from mass fire missions will require units to rethink how they configure and conduct reception, staging, onward movement, and integration (RSOI) for initial phases of operations. Enemy artillery range can severely limit security of seaport and aerial ports of debarkation. Unlike previous conflicts, the tyranny of geography alone will not be able to stop enemy artillery from targeting and destroying US units as they prepare for combat operations or conduct forcible entry. For example, when US forces staged for Operation Iraqi Freedom, they built combat power with a low risk of air or rocket attack in Kuwait. 
8
Providing operational fires to defeat peer adversaries will require the Field Artillery community to alter its doctrine and training. Similarly, the use of artillery and fires changed drastically to match the needs of maneuver formations. This transformation will require similar Modularization shifted enablers (such as fires, information operations, electronic warfare, etc.)
and other functions from where they had historically been and re-located to meet new requirements in BCTs. The publication of FM 3-0 Operations re-asserted the division as a tactical Headquarters (HQ) shifting the operational HQ upwards depending on the situation. As such, there is not a comparable organization in the US Army that directly aligns with an IFC that has organic cannon and rocket assets at the division and corps level.
It is essential to identify the origin of the term "integrated fires commands. 
Essential to the foundation of IFCs is the use of systems warfare to provide the best possible advantage to target enemy systems. In this structure, the centrally run Russian strike complex (разведивательно-ударный комплех (RYK)), is the operational level organization, with the reconnaissance fires complex (разведивательно-огновой комплех (ROK)) held at the tactical level. 12 With recent modernization efforts, the new centrally run reconnaissance-strike system includes both tactical and operational level capabilities. 
13
14
Relying on doctrine that is trying to exploit enemy vulnerabilities requires IFCs to have deep strike capability. To be able to exploit this, all fire support systems are available to the artillery group commander including surface-to-surface missiles, aviation, and long-range rockets. Which is essential to prevent an enemy force from entering the theater of operations. 
15
The role of Field Artillery forces in the US Army continues to evolve as technology and capabilities develop. The shift in doctrinal focus to large-scale combat operations will drive a corresponding need for change in Field Artillery doctrine and tactics. The changing character of war will mean shifting mission requirements such as the need to mass fires at the battalion and higher level. Increased challenges with enemy anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) capability coupled with a robust counter-battery threat will change how artillery fights. The potential of operating in a degraded environment (communications/GPS limited) will challenge US technological advantages and capability. However, this is not the first-time Field Artillery units have changed to match shifts in overarching doctrine.
Following the US involvement in Vietnam, the change to the current FM 3-0 Operations came after an era of persistent conflict. In most of the previous large-scale combat operations, the shift in Field Artillery units was in tactics and equipment. The development of indirect fire during World War I forever altered the role of Field Artillery. During the war, Field Artillery units together with aviation, provided mass effects on the battlefield and became a critical feature of breaking the stalemate front of 1918. 20 Throughout its history, the US Army published capstone doctrine under various titles such as Field Service Regulations and FM 100-5. Published at different intervals from 1923 to 1993, each publication outlined the specific role of each branch.
Beginning in 1923, the Field Artillery's "principal mission is to support the infantry by fire" which represents the lessons learned from World War I. 
21
Field Artillery units have continuously deployed in combat operations in both theaters of GWOT. The resulting lost training opportunities and operational experience from deployments in executing fires on a large scale left an impact on the ability of Field Artillery units to provide operational level fires. 
22
23
Similar to the issues that arose following an era of persistent conflict in Vietnam, the US Army finds itself with the need to revamp its doctrine. Likewise, the Field Artillery community 
20
24
Per FM 3-0 Operations a central function of the Fires WFF will be to counter the enemy's forces capability to mass at moments of penetration. Focusing on counterfire is one of the best ways that US Army divisions and corps can mitigate the IFCs overarching range and volume capacity. Organizations such as IFCs, or the Russian Artillery Group possess an overwhelming numerical strength in the number of fire support systems. In their current configuration, US Army BCTs and divisions are unable to match system to system numerically, forcing these units to over-rely on joint fires to defeat enemy units and systems.
When considering if US Army divisions and corps can create windows of opportunity is to examine if these formations have adequate amounts of fire support to accomplish the task.
Comparing IFCs to US Army Field Artillery units end to end reveals that the IFC possesses a considerable numerical advantage. One of the crucial factors in ensuring a higher chance of success is the ability to deter, and defeat adversary IFCs in the "deep area." Per Army Technique Publication 3-09.9, Division Artillery Operations and Fires Support for the Division the deep area is "the portion of the commander's area of operations not assigned to subordinate units." 25 US Army divisions without an organic long-range shooter lack the ability to shape the deep area and have an over-reliance on joint fires. As divisions lack long-range artillery assets, the only 24 US Army, FM 3-0 (2017), 2-45. 
25
The publication of specific DIVARTY and division fire support doctrine in 2017 helped to bridge the gap between the activation of DIVARTYs and prior doctrine. While Army Technique Publication 3-09.9, Division Artillery Operations and Fires Support for the Division identifies the role, function, and organization of DIVARTYs, it does not align with FM 3-0 Operations. ATP 3-09.9 addresses counterfire operations, delivering fires in mass, and the Joint Air Ground Operations Center (JAGIC) but does not address utilizing them together in largescale combat operations. Specifically, the US Army needs to update its fire support doctrine to align with FM 3-0 Operations for large-scale combat operations and strengthen the role of delivering fires in mass, and counterfire for DIVARTYs. Additionally, the new doctrine should focus on delivering fires at echelons above brigade, and coordinating all lethal and non-lethal effects across the division.
IFCs are scalable and adaptable organizations that are changeable to meet the commander's intent or situation. Generally, they contain multiple cannon artillery battalions with appropriate support elements, ground reconnaissance, and target acquisition radars. Each IFC also contains multiple launch rocket battalions with various systems capable of engaging short-range targets to larger intra-theater ballistic missiles that can range hundreds of kilometers.
Numerically, system to system an IFC contains more howitzers and multiple launch rocket launchers than US Army BCTs, and FABs.
Typecasting what an ideal IFC would look and operate like requires an examination of an artillery centric army such as the Russian Ground Force. The Russian Ground Force is an army that utilizes fires as the primary means of execution. The Russians use ground maneuver forces in support of fires in contrast to how most western nations and the US operate. Known as the "God of War," Russian artillery has a strong tradition of excellence throughout its history. 
26
27
28
The ability of IFCs to conduct long-range fires and mass on an overwhelming scale is the principle objective and primary advantage they provide. Paramount to the numerical advantage is the manner in how the fire support systems are controlled and utilized to ensure dominance.
Moreover, IFCs also integrate other joint fires under one centralized headquarters to control all lethal and non-lethal effects. Placing lethal and non-lethal effects under one command HQs enables the IFC to affect the entire battlefield from one command.
Comparatively, a US Army BCT contains one organic artillery battalion, however a Russian combined arms brigade with a smaller maneuver forces, possesses more fire support systems. A motorized rifle brigade consisting of three motorized rifle battalions and a tank battalion will frequently deploy with two self-propelled artillery battalions, a multiple launch rocket battalion, and an anti-tank artillery battalion. 
29
30
31
The IFC HQ "forms the framework for the command and control (C2) of indirect fires in the division or DTG (Division Tactical Group)." 32 Without additional task organization, the IFC at the divisional level can engage operational and strategic targets. Built specifically to provide the appropriate level of C2 to any additional assets. Particularly critical is the logistical support assets available to the IFC commander. This support allows for adding subordinate batteries and battalions. With a framework prepared to engage targets at either the strategic or operational level, IFCs provide multiple options for striking targets in the initial phases of any operation.
One of the critical components of the IFC is its ability to conduct reconnaissance fires to destroy targets in the initial phases of operations. Reconnaissance fires is defined as the 
29
30 US Army, FM 3-0 (2017), 1-11. 
31
32
"integration of RISTA [Reconnaissance, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Target Acquisition], fire control, and weapon systems into a closed-loop, the automated fire support system that detects, identifies, and destroys critical targets in minutes." 
33
Reconnaissance fires utilizes multiple radar sensors in conjunction with UAVs controlled centrally under one HQ. Accelerating the entire targeting process, this system results in the increase of fires volume executed in a short amount of time.
One of the critical aspects of IFCs structure is the incorporation of other lethal and nonlethal effects. These additional components include Army aviation, missile (surface to surface missile), and long-range reconnaissance. Additionally, built within the RISTA section is dedicated information warfare element that seeks to deceive, and degrade enemy forces decisionmaking abilities. Coupling fire support with information warfare provides nonlethal alternative to confuse, deceive, delay, disrupt, disable, and disorganize the enemy at all levels. 
34
Artillery and non-lethal effects are an essential requirement for large-scale combat operations. As the framework for the C2 of indirect fire in the division, IFCs exploit the combat power inherent in the division. 
35
33
34
35
the IFC allows the enemy operational level commander maximum flexibility to command and control all lethal and non-lethal effects. In principle, the IFC HQ is capable of controlling fires across multiple artillery battalions and regiments while also managing its independent targeting processes to strike deep high-value targets. While US Army artillery systems have made technical and mechanical upgrades since the 1990s, they remain fundamentally the same. The recent modernization enhancements are focusing on implementing digital systems and controls. During this same period the Russians developed new systems and sought to reintroduce older ones back into the formation. The Russian Ground Force recently reactivated large caliber and additional long-range systems such as the 2S7 Pion (203mm). 
36
Currently on active duty, the US Army has thirty-one BCTs split between three different configurations, Infantry (Light, Airborne, and Air Assault), Stryker (Mechanized), and Armor (Heavy Mechanized). In the total army force, including the National Guard, the number of BCTs increases to fifty-eight. While the total number of BCTs may seem high, to put the total numbers in perspective, there were more artillery battalions in Vietnam in 1966 (sixty-four), than are currently on active duty today (forty-two). 37 Organic to each type of BCT is a Field Artillery battalion consisting of three firing batteries with six howitzers. In infantry BCTs, these composite Field Artillery battalions are "mixed" with two M119A3 (105mm FA system) and one M777A2 (155mm FA system) firing batteries. In the Stryker Brigade Combat Team, the Field Artillery battalion comprises three M777A2 batteries. The Armor Brigade Combat Teams (ABCTs) contain three M109A6 (Paladin) firing batteries. Typically, when considering operational level fires, the specific configuration of the tactical BCTs would not be as important. However, with the US Army's current configuration, this is the entirety of the Field Artillery assets organic to Which among other impacts, would provide additional assets to each division. However, this is not the first time that the US Army has examined adding additional assets to increase the firepower and fire support range of divisions.
With the modular transformation of US Army divisions and brigades, the new BCT became the principal tactical HQ in the US Army. With modularity in place, the need to have a consolidated Field Artillery HQ to serve as the Force Field Artillery (FFA) HQ at the divisional level became unnecessary for operations. ADRP 3-09 Fire Support defines the role of the FFA HQ "as the senior Field Artillery headquarters organic, attached, or placed under the operational control of that command." 
38
39
43
44
45
46
Providing each DIVARTY, as proposed in the DFC concept, with a long-range asset such as MLRS or HIMARS battalion, would enable divisions with the ability to shape their deep area without relying on corps or joint fires assets.
To counter the numerical advantage of enemy systems the US Army relies on joint fires, namely US Air Force and US Navy assets to execute targets identified during the ninety-six-hour targeting cycle. The JAGIC facilitates near real-time selecting and servicing of targets. The JAGIC incorporates an Air Support Operations Center and US Air Force Tactical Air Control Parties with division fires, airspace, air, and missile defense, intelligence, and aviation personnel.
Additionally, the JAGIC works to enable the simultaneous execution of surface to surface fires, aerial-delivered fires, and aviation maneuver. This central point serves as the primary asset manager to handle shifting conditions and to help manage the vast scale and scope of large-scale ground combat operations. Unlike the IFC, the JAGIC in conjunction with the DIVARTY, assists in managing sensors (radars, UAVs, etc.) across the entire division. The evolution of sensors and collection assets increases the range and scope of the Combined Operations Integration Center and allows for faster processing of information. However, in the current configuration 
45
DIVARTYs and FABs do not contain any organic UAV asset beyond small portable systems.
Which are not suitable for long-range fires. Currently the only and primary detection assets within the organization is multiple radar assets.
Currently, as part of an ongoing modernization strategy, the US Army has two different fires related priorities, long-range precision fires, and air and missile defense capabilities. Both seek to reduce the deficit between the US and foreign systems and in-turn upgrade what the US Army fields today. The long-range precision fires program is modernizing MLRS ammunition and will increase the range of HIMARS and MLRS to over 499 km. 
47
The current structure of the fires WFF in US Army division and corps is unable to meet the requirements of large-scale combat operations unless supported by joint fires and other fire support assets. Configured to meet the oversight needs of modular BCTs, divisions and corps lack the long-range capability and staff function to adequately fight the deep area. The proposed future force structure concept, the DFC, provides the appropriate level of command and control, and organic firepower to enable a division to combat an adversary's integrated air defense systems and IFCs. The DFC gives the fires community an integrated command post that is the central point for all lethal and non-lethal effects more than the current structure of DIVARTYs. If implemented in each division would posture the US Army to be able to fight in multi-domains 
47
48
To best facilitate fires for large-scale combat and multi-domain operations in the future, the US Army Fires Center of Excellence (FCoE) developed a fires HQ to mitigate the current gaps in US Army divisions. The DFC is task organized with long-range cannon and rocket systems that would be capable of striking at the enemy's long-range assets. 
49
50
Unlike the current DIVARTY structure, the DFC will contain the logistical capability of supporting its own formation, with the ability to supply and support its organic elements and provide support to any additional asset. The DFC fully addresses one of the biggest weakness that US Army divisions face for large-scale combat operations. It provides the division commander with "a force fires headquarters capable of integrating the employment of cross-domain fires between the division's coordinated fire line and the fire support coordination line (FSCL), setting conditions for successful brigade combat operations." 51 Providing a sufficiently robust fires 48 Chris Compton and Lewis Boothe, "The Fires Complex: Organizing to Win in Large-Scale Combat Operations," Fires Magazine (May-June 2018): 4. 
49
50
51
Over the last eighteen years, the nations with near-peer capabilities such as Russia and China began to modernize and train with a focus on conducting large-scale combat operations.
Comparatively, neither Russia nor China have the recent combat experience of the US and NATO. Historically, nations who prided themselves on having more combat experience than potential adversaries have not seen that "advantage" in combat experience preventing catastrophic losses. 
52
Notable examples from Russia and China show militaries that continue to modernize.
The goal of this modernization is to prepare for the realities of combat in the twenty-first century.
This modernization gives Russia a chance to return as a dominate military power capable of conducting operations around the world. Russia, assessing the results of NATO excursions in Serbia and Gulf War I, determined its military should not have a singular focus on regional conflicts. Following the end of the Cold War however, Russia's military became limited in capacity and capability. Unable to project force, Russia focused on regional conflicts. However, these limited conflicts may not be enough to protect Russian interests. To promulgate its larger goals, Russia requires a military capable of global reach. 
53
In 2018 the Vostok exercise was able to simulate mass mobilization while stressing strategic and operational level commands while providing command and control over vast distances. This exercise also comprised over three hundred thousand troops with thousands of combat vehicles and aircraft. 
54
As Major General J. B. A. Bailey (British Army) wrote: "artillery training in peacetime has all too often proved inadequate in war." The intensity, scope, and scale of large-scale combat 
55
56
57
58
59
Currently, artillery training primarily focuses at the battalion level, which is the highest echelon that generally conducts field maneuvers to certify (dry fire training) and qualify (live-fire training). Mostly, these training events include Field Artillery gunnery tables and require battalions and BCTs to conduct rigid, stepped training progression, ensuring each level is complete before moving onto the next firing table. 
60
As discussed in the organization section, the ability of an FFA HQ to conduct clearance of fires, and manage airspace throughout the battlespace is a critical responsibility and essential to success in combat. Facing a potentially hostile A2/AD environment could limit the ability of joint fires assets to operate freely though-out a theater of operations, and limit the support that divisions and corps receive. Most peer adversaries have significant amounts of Air Defense Artillery (ADA) and tend to integrate them in a combined manner to provide the broadest "bubbles" of protection. 
61
62
Airspace management is critical to avoid potential conflicts with the scheme of fires in support of maneuver forces. Clearance of fires is the process by which supported commanders ensure that fires or their effects will have no unintended consequences. 
63
64
The synchronization of enablers across the division requires extensive preparation and training. Since DIVARTY's do not contain any subordinate Field Artillery battalions, the only time it can test its command and control abilities is during exercises. Realistic training throughout the entire fire support system from a sensor to shooter will be essential to meet the speed, Managing and controlling all lethal and non-lethal effects and airspace will habitually frustrate the division unless the entire system trains properly. These can only be accomplished through actual real time execution.
In the face of the numerical system and general range advantage of peer adversaries, Similarly, the high usage of artillery in the Russian-Ukrainian War is closer to previous large-scale conflicts such as the world wars or the Korean War. Unlike Iraq or Afghanistan, there was not a general restriction on the extensive use of artillery. Only in recent operations in Syria has the US Army and US Marine Corps Artillery units routinely fire a substantial number of rounds, often in the hundreds or thousands per day. These conflicts emphasized the use of artillery as an area fire weapon system rather than just a precision-strike capability. The critical difference between a precision strike and area fire is the volume of fires and the consideration of collateral damage.
The use of precision-guided artillery munitions was a force requirement in Iraq and Afghanistan to assist in mitigating civilian casualties and collateral damage. Comparatively, the lethality and heavy use of artillery drove the Russian-Ukrainian War into a defensive battle with each side digging entrenchments which is an aspect of combat the US Army is inexperienced. 
67
The long-range capabilities of foreign artillery systems are not something that the US can match quickly. As exhibited in the Russian-Ukrainian War, the volume of fire makes the firing units susceptible to counter-fire radars. Each US Army DIVARTY, FAB, and BCT possesses a Q-53 radar system with a range of sixty kilometers in a ninety-degree range fan. This system sees further than any adversary's radar and gives a targeting advantage to the US. Crucially the centralized command and control of sensor management of all radar systems within the division allow US Army formations to overlap coverage and ensure deep area target identification. The DIVARTY synchronizes radar employment throughout the division and with adjacent units. It also ensures integration of all radars both FA and ADA to provide a full sensor to shooter linage. This gives US Army divisions the best opportunity to utilize long-range assets, either attached or from its organic DFC similar to what occurred in the Gulf War.
The 1991 Gulf War is one of the most recent large-scale combat operations and serves as an example of how the US Army and joint services will have to collaborate in future conflicts.
With years of past experiences during the GWOT, the potential challenges of large-scale combat operations will require more direct collaboration and inter-service cooperation. The Iraqi Army possessed a large and robust artillery and rocket inventory with years of combat experience. In the lead up to the ground campaign during Operation Desert Storm the risk of the Iraqi's regime use of Soviet-made Scud missiles to target critical coalition infrastructure forced the US to target the Scuds over other high-priority targets. Though Iraq only fired eighty-six Scuds during the lead up to Operation Desert Storm over 40 percent of all air sorties flown hunted for Scuds. 
68
Just like Gulf War I, future large-scale combat operations could require joint force assets to prioritize other targets than the land component (or the US Army) need to have an advantage in offensive operations. Unlike Iraq in 1991, current peer adversaries have kept pace with technological advances in precision fires and air defense capabilities. As Desert Shield demonstrated, when US forces conduct reception, staging, onward movement, and integration (RSOI), the US could have to commit extensive amounts of air sorties to target critical enemy weapon systems. Long-range weapons such as the 9K720 Iskander, or the S-400 (SA-21) ADA system will effectively give the opposing force a primary advantage unless they can be systemically targeted. 
69
70
68
69
70
To defeat a peer adversary in the future will require a systems approach to mitigate the adversary's technological advantage in rocket systems and ADA. However, for these integrated advantages to be effective against US forces, they must link together. Which provides US forces a targetable system. Having a centralized command and control system in the division and corps HQs allows US forces to target adversary fires commands by integrating the components of the various WFFs. Specifically, by utilizing the sensor to shooter system within the BCTs and Divisions to directly target enemy recon-strike formations. IFCs rely on their organic UAVs to observe targets in their deep area and are capable of rapidly responding after identifying targets.
Using counter-UAV tactics to destroy their ability to engage targets would reduce the long-range advantage. Divisions will need to use such tactics as frequency jamming, and use of counter-UAV weapons (such as short-range ADA systems) to neutralize the systems. This allows US Joint fires the time to seek out and destroy enemy fires systems. Also, directly targeting enemy radars and sensors would prevent counter-battery missions after US fire missions.
In US Army training scenarios and guidance such as digital WFXs and US Army training circulars, IFCs are successful at integrating with air defenses to prevent aviation assets from reducing their capabilities. However, there are no real-world examples of producing this level of systemic integration in the current operational environment. Additionally, any adversary would have to deal with the same operating environment and conditions as US forces. Training to a higher level in WFXs makes sense and is critical for preparation for future conflicts. However, this does not mean that the US Army should not field the DFC. Fielding the DFC would ensure the US Army maintains dominance in the fires domain.
Currently, the Russian reconnaissance strike complex, can leverage multiple artillery systems across the depth of the formation. Each echelon uses its own UAV to report back to its command post, with IFCs executing fire missions quickly as possible. Unlike the consolidated targeting approach in US Army division and corps, there is not a centralized system to ensure that multiple weapon systems deconflict target servicing. The lack of redundancy creates numerous dilemmas that US Army Division and Corps can exploit to stress the fires complex of an adversary without necessarily placing units at risk.
The challenges of future conflicts are unpredictable. However, lessons gleaned from past conflicts demonstrate that fires will play a crucial role. US Army corps and divisions will have to fight through multiple contested domains, often at the same time, to be successful. 
71
Emerging from eighteen years of persistent conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan the US Army pivoted back to focusing on large-scale operations. With this transition, the need for operational fires in the future will grow in demand. Providing operational fires for matching and defeating the capabilities of peer adversaries will require the Field Artillery community to alter its doctrine, organization, and training. Massing fires at the battalion and higher level will become a requirement in future conflicts. Division commanders will require the ability to shape the deep area and the doctrine and training of Field Artillery battalions and DIVARTYs must be able to meet the requirement. The publication of ATP 3-09.90, Division Artillery Operations and Fire Support for the Division is a start to ensuring that divisions can conduct fires in pursuit of tactical and operational objectives.
72
The publication of FM 3-0 Operations refocused US Army doctrine squarely on largescale combat operations. It also prepares the US Army for conducting multi-domain operations in the future. As the capstone doctrine of the US Army, FM 3-0 Operations changes the way the US Army will fight with impacts throughout the entire organization. In the future corps and divisions will need to operate from displaced postures and utilize all domain resources available to maintain continuous pressure on both integrated air defense systems and IDF networks, so they are disrupted, and collapse as forward enemy forces attempt to reposition rearward. 
73
75
74
75
9  
9  
53 Renz, Russia's Military Revival,
53 Renz, Russia's Military Revival,
60.
Peter J. Schifferle, Americas School for War: Fort Leavenworth, Officer Education, and Victory in World War II (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas,
2017), 40.
2
Boyd L. Dastrup, Artillery Strong: Modernizing the Field Artillery for the 21st Century (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2018), 176.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), IX.
Milan N. Vego, Operational Warfare (Newport, RI: Naval War College, 2000), 239.
James N. Mattis, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS) of the United States of America (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 1.
LTG Michael Lundy, "Foreword," Military Review 98, no. 5 (September-October 2018), 1.   
Robert H. Scales, Certain Victory: The US Army in the Gulf War (Washington, DC: Brasseys, 1997), 181.
Walter L. Williams, "Integrated Fires Commands: A Flexible and Adaptable Organization Part II," OEE Red Diamond Threats Newsletter 8, no. 02 (February 2017), 6.
The WFX is the training venue in which US Army divisions and corps practice and rehearse conducting large-scale combat operation.
MAJ Charles K. Bartles, "Recommendations for Intelligence Staffs Concerning Russian New Generation Warfare," Military Intelligence Professional Bulletin 43, no. 4 (October-December 2017),
TRADOC G-2, Threat Tactics Report Compendium: ISIL, North Korea, Russia, and China  (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute, 2015), 94.
Lionel Beecher, et al., Analyzing the Russian Way of War: Evidence from the 2008 Conflict with Georgia (West Point, NY: Modern War Institute, 2018), 43.
Colby Howard and Ruslan Pukhov, Brothers Armed: Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine (Minneapolis, MN: East View Press,
2015), 219.
Lester Grau and Charles Bartles, The Russian Way of War: Force Structure, Tactics, and Modernization of the Russian Ground Forces (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2016), 260.
Bettina Renz, Russia's Military Revival (Medford, MA: Polity Press, 2018), 33.    
Scott Boston and Dara Massicot, The Russian Way of Warfare: A Primer (Santa Monica: RAND Corporation, 2017), 2.
COL Liam Collins and CPT Harrison Morgan, "King of Battle: Russia Breaks Out the Big Guns," Association of the United States Army, January 22, 2019, accessed February 26, 2019, https://www.ausa.org/articles/king-battle-russia-breaks-out-big-guns.
David E. Ott, Vietnam Series: Field Artillery, 1954-1973 (Washington, DC: Government  Printing Office, 1995), 171.   
US Army, FM 3-0 (2017),1-34.   
US Department of the Army, Army Technique Publication (ATP) 3-09.90, Division Artillery Operations and Fire Support for the Division (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017),2-34.    
US Army, ATP 3-09.90 (2017),1-3.   
US Army, FM 3-0 (2017), 2-52.
Karber, Lessons  Learned from the Russian-Ukrainian War, 16.
Karber, Lessons  Learned from the Russian-Ukrainian War, 21.
Headquarters, United States Army Training and Doctrine Command, US Army Concept for Multi-Domain Combined Arms Operations at Echelons Above Brigade 2025-2045 (Fort Eustis, VA: Government Printing Office, 2018), 6.
US Army, ATP 3-09.90 (2017), 2-1.   
I must thank my wife, Ciara and my sons John and Nicholas for their understanding and support over the past year. I could not have done this without them. I would also like to thank my monograph director 
Dr. Curatola
Seminar Leader COL Clubb
Ms. Venita Kruger
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or