# ID: b37abfadd3274eeab904a693a4cb7b93
# Title: Closing the Gap: How to Defeat Integrated Fires Commands
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
How do US forces defeat a peer adversary's Integrated Fires Command (IFC)?
To answer this question, it is imperative that the Field Artillery community determine "what problem it is trying to solve?"
Answering the question will lead clear priorities for the fires community while ensuring overmatch in large scale combat operations.
What choices should US forces make to prepare to fight IFCs in the future?
US forces will need to develop and resource the right capabilities and conduct the appropriate training with correct doctrine.
Appropriate training such as combined live fires, with large scale exercises will stress US Army formations and prepare them for the rigors and challenges of future operations.
The US Army in its current configuration is at a disadvantage regarding fires in large-scale combat operations.
Current structure is deficient, with shortfalls in both range capability and in the total number of Field Artillery systems.
The shortcomings are not only an issue for large-scale combat operations, but as seen in recent conflicts, fires capability will be critical in smaller, regional conflicts.
Russia is the most probably US adversary, and will employ its fire support systems across a range of military operations using the full breadth of its capabilities.
The US must address these shortfalls by identifying ways to increase its fires capability in order to match and defeat any advantage held by competing nations.