# ID: b4238c30df46446f8584b4c500a5f1e0
# Title: Combining Sequential and Cumulative Air Strategies for Victory: The Past Informs the Future
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2000.0
# Fulltext:
Harold Winton, whose laser-guided insights frequently dispelled the fog of war in my poor, muddled head. The most inspiring part of working this effort with Dr. Winton was his morale was always high and he had the strength of ten because his heart was pure. I would also like to express gratitude to Colonel Dennis Drew, who patiently suffered my convoluted logic and grammar forays into uncharted territory. The opportunity to study
outlines the historical context in which air strategies in these campaigns were conducted and describes the sequential and cumulative aspects of the air strategies. Next the thesis examines the nature of the relationships or interactions between both types of air strategies and whether those interactions contributed to achieving victory. The historical evidence from the three cases shows that each air strategy contained both sequential and cumulative aspects. Also, where the air planners appreciated the effects of both types of strategies, it was clear that there was an effort on their part to ensure the sequential air strategy aided the cumulative and vice-versa. Conversely, where the air planners had a ix more limited appreciation for the effects of the sequential and cumulative air strategies, the interactions between the two were negative. That is, the sequential strategy hindered the cumulative and vice versa. Here the negative relationship between the two strategies did not contribute to victory in the air campaign. The broad conclusion is that air planners should appreciate the effects of both types of strategy and how those strategies can interact positively to create conditions that can promote victory in war. A secondary conclusion is that although the cumulative aspects of air strategy are frequently more subtle than are the sequential, air planners ignore those effects at their peril.
Chapter 1
Strategy…can and should be an intellectual discipline of the highest order, and the strategist should prepare himself to manage ideas with precision and clarity and imagination in order that his manipulation of physical realities, the tools of war, may rise above the pedestrian plane of mediocrity. Thus, while strategy itself may not be a science, strategic judgment can be scientific to the extent that it is orderly, rational, objective, inclusive, discriminatory, and perceptive.
-J.C. Wylie
Theory is drawn from two sources: other theory and analysis of experience. A useful example is Sir Julian Corbett's theory of maritime strategy, which is derived from the theoretical works of Carl von Clausewitz and Alfred Thayer Mahan and Corbett's own analysis of England's maritime campaigns. In the same spirit, airpower theory can benefit from consideration of previous theorists as well as from historical analysis. This exposes the air analyst to new possibilities for exercising his strategic skills when planning air operations. If the air strategist neither understands the nature of sequential and cumulative strategies and their interactions, nor how they manifest themselves in air operations, then he constrains his ability to use either or both strategies to achieve victory. Wylie opined, "Our strategic success in the future may be measured in great part by the skill with which we are able to balance our sequential and cumulative efforts toward the most effective and least costly attainment of our goals." 
6
7
5 The sequential air strategy aids the cumulative air strategy. 6 The sequential air strategy hinders the cumulative air strategy. 7 The sequential air strategy has no interaction with the cumulative air strategy. 8 The cumulative air strategy aids the sequential air strategy. 9 The cumulative air strategy hinders the sequential air strategy. 10 The cumulative air strategy has no interaction with the sequential air strategy.
Chapters Three through Five will present case histories from World War II that examine the interactions between sequential and cumulative air strategies. Chapter Three will explore the Battle of Britain from the German perspective. This analysis prompts the air strategist to consider a failed campaign and thus determine if a lack of complementary effects between sequential and cumulative aspects in air strategy may have contributed to defeat. 
6
7 For an explanation of the law of economy of force, see J.F.C. Fuller, The Foundations of the Science of War (London: Hutchinson & Co., 1926), 194-207. For an explanation of the "better state of peace,"see B.H. Liddell Hart, Strategy, 2 nd rev. ed. (New York: Meridian, The Penguin Group, 1991), 322, 349-350,  353-360.  Chapter Four investigates the Combined Bomber Offensive (CBO) in the European theater. The CBO provides an opportunity to explore how sequential and cumulative air strategies supported or failed to support the larger European theater strategy.
Chapter Five examines air strategy in the Pacific theater with special emphasis on the Southwest Pacific Area (SWPA). The nature of the Pacific theater, including its unique geography and its ranking in Allied grand strategy shaped General Kenney's choice of airpower strategies. The Southwest Pacific campaign provides an interesting case study to examine how sequential and cumulative strategies were combined in a different way to support gaining Pacific theater objectives.
There will be a standard approach for each historical case. First, each chapter will provide a description of the political, economic, and military context for the air strategies.
Second, each case will identify strategic assumptions political and military leaders made that affected their choice of overall theater and air strategies. Third, each scenario will describe both sequential and cumulative aspects of the air strategies, who formulated them, and how they fit into the broader theater strategy. Finally, the analysis of the evidence will identify if and how sequential and cumulative characteristics of the air strategies interacted to contribute to success or failure.
Chapter Six will explore trends among the cases that might indicate broadly applicable generalizations about how sequential and cumulative aspects of air strategies interact to produce victory or defeat, and the implications for future airpower employment.
Chapter 2
There are actually two very different kinds of strategies that may be used in war. One is the sequential, the series of visible, discrete steps, each dependent on the one that preceded it. The other is cumulative, the less perceptible minute accumulation of little items piling one on top of the other until at some unknown point the mass of accumulated actions may be large enough to be critical.
-J.C. Wylie
According to Wylie, strategists normally consider warfare to be a series of discrete steps or actions, one following another. In this series of actions, the order and results of previous events bear directly upon the operations and results of subsequent events. 
8
This view of strategy and warfare is not only intuitive, it also dominates the history of strategic practice. Examples of sequential strategies include the Napoleonic Wars in Europe and many World War II campaigns including the German drive through the Soviet Union, the American offensive from French beaches to the heart of Germany, and the American campaigns through the South and Central Pacific theaters of operations. In each of these examples there was a series of identifiable steps leading to a final objective.
These strategies were also characterized by a physical goal, a decisive battle or series of battles, a denouement, and an identifiable victory or defeat.
There are several characteristics of a sequential strategy. In contrast to a cumulative strategy where a particular operation's failure does not necessarily dictate abandoning the course of the strategy, because every step of a sequential strategy depends upon the success of every previous step, the course of a war can change radically when there is an unforeseen failure or an unanticipated event. For example, during World War II, the Japanese heavily reinforced their forward base Rabaul, using it to threaten the sea lines of communication between the United States and Australia, as well as employing it as a base from which to threaten Australia proper. When the Allies captured bases in New Guinea, destroyed much of the Japanese navy at the Battle of Bismark Sea, and gained control of the Solomon Islands in a series of amphibious operations, the Japanese at Rabaul were cut off and no longer able to project power forward. 9 Japan's inability to reinforce its outward reaches signaled a change in the course of the war. For the first time, the Japanese moved from an offensive to a defensive/holding strategy in the Southwest Pacific.
Related to the first characteristic of sequential strategies is the ability to predict, or at least anticipate, the outcome of a series of events, since the final objective is the clear result of a series of steps. 
10
A cumulative strategy is the logical converse of a sequential strategy. It is a collection of events, actions, or individual effects, the sum of which bears upon the enemy in such a manner as to bring about the strategy's ultimate purpose. 
11
9
10
11 Wylie, 23.  the effect with a physical example, imagine that the objective is to fill a bucket with water so that it overflows. Imagine also that the strategist has at his disposal various sizes of small measuring utensils he might use to scoop up water and fill the bucket.
Each individual measurement of water the strategist adds to the bucket is an event that contributes to the overall strategic goal. Individually, the amount of water he adds at any particular time might be small. Also, the measuring instruments do not have to be the same size. Some may be teaspoon size, others tablespoon size, still others a large cup, depending upon the size of the resources available to the strategist. The sequence in which these portions are added is of no consequence. But, with sufficient measures of water added, eventually the bucket will overflow. Thus, cumulative strategies consist of individual events, each of which has an effect, and the summation of effects brings the strategist to his objective.
Wylie suggests two historical examples of cumulative strategies: the submarine warfare campaigns in both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans against the Germans and Japanese during World War II. 
12
13
Cumulative strategies have certain characteristics that distinguish them from sequential strategies. First, unlike sequential strategies, cumulative strategies consist of individual actions or events, and their effects are independent of time and position. In a cumulative strategy events do not depend upon the results of previous actions. Instead, each event has an isolated value that contributes to the final strategic result. Second, the effects of cumulative strategies are more difficult to predict than those of sequential strategies. While a cumulative strategy can be very effective, it is difficult to determine exactly when and in what manner the effects will make a difference to the enemy's ability to resist. Thus, measuring a cumulative strategy's effectiveness while it is in progress is problematic. Third, while sequential strategies frequently end in a decisive battle or series of battles, cumulative strategies typically work in the background, less spectacularly, with slow, steady pressure. Because sequential strategies are more intuitively understood and their conclusions are more readily anticipated, the cumulative strategy's value is sometimes overlooked and under-appreciated. Wylie asserts that sea power has long been characterized by cumulative strategies (guerre de course, in particular) and speculates that the case may be the same for airpower. 14
Sequential and cumulative strategies are distinct in their nature; however, they seldom exist in isolation. Indeed, Wylie asserts that the two strategies complement each other. He argues that in many instances cumulative strategies working in the background provide sufficient pressure upon the enemy to enable the success of a sequential strategy.
Absent the compounding effects of cumulative strategies, many weaker sequential strategies may have failed. Wylie cites the Yorktown Campaign, the Peninsula Campaign in Portugal, and the American Civil War as examples of such interaction. 
15
14 Ibid., 25. 
15
Recognize the existence and power of cumulative strategies and integrate them more carefully into basic strategic thinking. Also, study the strategies more closely than we have in order that we might be able to determine whether or not they profitably could be critical. And if they could, then identify the points in their development at which they do become critical determinants in the progress of war. 
16
Determining sequential or cumulative aspects of an air strategy may depend upon the perspective from which it is examined. For example, during the 1991 Persian Gulf War, initial operations were characterized by intensive air strikes against Iraq. The Joint Forces Air Component Commander (JFACC), General Charles Horner, orchestrated a strategy with both sequential and cumulative aspects at the operational level. First, Iraqi integrated air defenses were neutralized as an intermediate step to conducting a cumulative attacks across the depth and breadth of Iraq against leadership, system essential, infrastructure, population, and fielded force targets. While at the operational level, the air strategy combined a sequential step followed by very definite cumulative operations. At the strategic level the air strategy reflected predominantly sequential characteristics. General Norman Swartzkopf placed the effects of the cumulative air strategy sequentially prior to a ground invasion of Iraq and Kuwait. His intention was that the cumulative effects of air strikes between 16 January and 23 February would aid 
16
the subsequent ground invasion on 23 February. In other words, beginning the cumulative portion of the air strategy prior to the ground invasion was not only sequential in time, at the strategic level there was a logical and causative relationship between the two phases of the war. This brief example clearly demonstrates that combat actions appearing cumulative at one level of analysis can appear sequential when placed into a broader context. The salient point is that the level of analysis bears upon the interpretation of cumulative and sequential air strategies.
The interactions between sequential and cumulative strategies will first be examined in the case of the Battle of Britain from the German perspective. In the Battle of Britain, the Germans failed to establish the air superiority required to launch an invasion of the British homeland. In examining the German strategies as they were executed in the air war over Britain, the analyst can identify both sequential and cumulative aspects. The case will provide evidence of how particular interactions or the absence of such interactions between the two types of strategy failed to lead to victory.
The Battle of Britain, by contrast, was to be a truly revolutionary conflict.
For the first time since man had taken to the skies, aircraft were to be used as the instrument of a campaign designed to break the enemy's will and capacity to resist without the intervention or support of armies and navies.
-John Keegan American and British histories of World War II both assert that in the spring and summer of 1940 British strategists had to consider seriously the probability that Hitler planned to invade Britain. 
18
18
Germany's ability to win the Battle of Britain was directly connected to its economic mobilization. Hitler's unwillingness to put the Germany economy on a wartime footing constrained its ability to produce aircraft platforms in the numbers necessary to support 
19 Collier, 147. Adolf Galland, The First and the Last: The Rise and Fall of the German Fighter Forces, 1938
-1945
, translated by Mervyn Savill (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1954)
Wood and Dempster,
[20]
[21]
25,
29. 26
Kesselring; and Luftflotte 2 fighter pilot Adolf Galland doubted Hitler's full commitment to the invasion of Britain. 
28
29
31
33
Royal Navy forces at their home bases, overcome coastal defenses, break resistance of 
27
28 Galland, 18, 20-21, 31. David Irving, The Rise and Fall of the Luftwaffe, The Life of Field Marshal Erhard Milch (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1973), 97-98. Kesselring, 65-69, 72-73, 82-83. 29
30
31
Williams,
94. Wood and Dempster,
[158]
[159]
33 Hough and Richards,
110. Wood and Dempster,
160.
34
To prevail over Britain, Germany's Luftwaffe faced several challenges. In doctrine, equipment, and training, the Luftwaffe was unprepared to execute a campaign of independent air operations against Britain. 
35
and training focused on building itself as a ground-support arm. 36 While Germany's 1935 air doctrine Luftwaffe Regulation 16 addressed all air missions including strategic air operations, these were envisioned in the context of combined arms warfighting. 
37
38
Also, since enemy air forces posed no substantial threat to the Luftwaffe, Hitler remained convinced that extant bombers and fighters were adequate to prosecute the war. 
39
43
44
40
41 Galland,
[14]
[15]
22. 42 Wood and Dempster,
[148]
[149]
[335]
[336]
43
44 Collier,
[161]
[162]
452,
[464]
[465]
112
Germany had two options to eliminate Britain from the war. Executing the first military strategic option would have been unique to that point in the history of warfare.
If the Luftwaffe could bring airpower to bear directly upon the military, economic, and moral resources Britain depended upon to wage war, a ground invasion might not be necessary. Here the Luftwaffe's air operations during the Battle of Britain "led to uncharted fields of air strategy." 
45
46
47
The argument against this option pointed to the lack of evidence that such a strategy September, just a few weeks before fall and winter weather closed in making an amphibious landing impossible. 
49
50
Luftwaffe operations would be driven by the primary assumption that air supremacy was necessary before sea supremacy could be gained-and that air and sea supremacy were necessary for a successful ground invasion of the British homeland. 
51
53
One observation may be in order. In Wylie's definition of a sequential strategy, one step builds upon the success of the previous step. Ironically, in the Battle of Britain, the sequential air strategy might more accurately be characterized by the fact that later steps were built upon the failure of previous steps, rather than their success.
The first phase, Kanalkampf or Channel Battle, was marked by the German's lodgment of forces at airfields along the Norwegian, Dutch, Belgian, and French coasts, 
52
53
As it was, critical sector radar stations and airfields in southeast Britain were barely operating at some points during this phase. This had serious ramifications for how efficiently the British were able to employ the few aircraft they had available to meet the German onslaught. The number of British pilots were dwindling at such a rate that, even if the British had sufficient numbers of fighter aircraft, they would not have had the necessary number of trained pilots to fly the aircraft. 
72
66
67
68
69
70
73
Command and achieve the air superiority the Germans assumed as a necessary condition to invade Britain.
74
Phase Three: The Airfield Phase, 24 Aug -6 Sept 1940 
75
81
82
83
Command's overtaxed resources.
In the meantime, the difficulty the Luftwaffe faced in gaining air superiority took its toll on the plans for Operation Sea Lion. On 3 September, Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel, Chief of Staff of the Wehrmacht, issued a new schedule for Sea Lion launch preparations.
The earliest date for Army landings on Britain was delayed from 15 to 21 September. 
84
In considering the characteristics of a sequential air strategy, the reader will recall that because one step of the strategy depends upon the success (or as the German strategy perhaps demonstrates, the failure) of the previous step, frequently the course of wars changes unexpectedly when there is an unforeseen failure or an unanticipated event. In the case of the Battle of Britain, the Germans did not intend to bomb London on 24
August, nor were they strategically prepared for the ramifications of that accident. When Britain responded in kind with bombing raids against Berlin, both Hitler and Göring lost political face. Hitler and Göring had consistently and publicly assured the German population that the Wehrmacht and Luftwaffe, the Fatherland's protectors, were invincible. The worst medicine to swallow was to have Bomber Command successfully reach Berlin and prove both the Führer and the Reich Marshal wrong. In the minds of Hitler and Göring, such an affront required an appropriate response from Germany.
Thus, Hitler removed restrictions against bombing London, and Göring moved from
Holland to France to oversee the Battle of London personally. 
85
86
87
88
89
92
93
The critical characteristic of a sequential strategy is that actions are temporally interdependent. Decisions made or operations undertaken in one instance will have direct bearing upon the success of future operations. The German strategy in the Battle of Britain was sequential in that it attempted to defeat Britain's Fighter Command and gain air superiority by moving from the southeastern edge of Britain northward and from the Channel westward. In the final analysis, if the sequential aspect of German air strategy depended upon a series of interdependent actions that would result in Britain's 
90
91
Kesselring,
75. Wood and Dempster,
274. 92 Galland,
53. Williams,
[95]
[96]
At the grand strategy level, sluggish economic mobilization limited the numbers of bomber and fighter aircraft available to execute the operational level air strategy. The process of building up the Luftwaffe's strength in numbers of aircraft platforms proceeded at a "leisurely pace" with production factories working in low gear. 
94
Second, at the grand strategic level the Luftwaffe failed to understand that aircraft design choices made in the mid-1930s would have far-reaching effects upon its ability to execute wartime air strategies in 1940. In reality, Germany's choice of aircraft and their technical characteristics directly influenced their probability of success. For example, the Luftwaffe delayed developing a long-range, heavy bomber. As a result, German bomber crews were unable to reach certain targets and could not carry heavy bomb loads to the targets they did reach. Lack of sturdy defensive armament left the aircraft vulnerable to British fighters. In short, the Luftwaffe was at a great disadvantage in delivering ordnance on targets without the benefit of long-range, heavy bombers. 
95
On the surface, the German phasing of operations from the Channel coast to inland areas and from the southeast to the north of Britain was sequential in character; however, there existed an underlying cumulative logic to the character of Luftwaffe air strategy in the Battle of Britain. The operational objective throughout the campaign remained constant: achieve air superiority. The means of achieving this objective also remained constant: destroy Fighter Command. To succeed, each sequential phase should have attrited Fighter Command to bring about the cumulative effect of its ultimate destruction.
Considered from this perspective, the cumulative strategy determined which force could continue fighting despite the losses of both aircraft and aircrew. The prevailing air force would be that which could attrite its adversary either because it was more efficient or because it had larger resources upon which to draw. If the analyst examines the air strategy from this perspective, there are cumulative aspects not only among the operations within each phase but also between phases that transcend the sequential aspects of Germany's air strategy.
Within phase one Luftwaffe air strategy was cumulative in nature because no one engagement was necessarily a precursor to successive engagements; instead, the effects of destroying individual convoys, harbors, and ports accumulated as well as the losses of fighter aircraft and pilots in both the British and German air forces. However, the Germans found the total accumulated effects of these operations within the phase were not sufficient either to force Britain to sue for peace or to destroy Fighter Command.
They therefore surmised that the phase could not achieve the precondition necessary for Operation Sea Lion. During phase one, German strategy failed to attract a sufficient number of British fighters to engagements because Luftwaffe targets were shipping convoys, harbors, and selected southern ports. British air leaders conserved fighter resources from being expended over what they judged to be relatively insignificant targets. 
98
99
100
101
Victory not only depended upon aircraft, but also upon pilots. In July the Germans lost approximately 125 fighter pilots or about 11% of their total pilot pool. In comparison, the British lost approximately 168 pilots or 15% of their total pilot 
98
99
100 Collier,
[161]
[162]
452,
[464]
[465]
112
101
numbers. 
102
103
As Operation Eagle commenced, individual sortie statistics for aircraft and aircrew losses compounded at the operational level. During this phase the targets concentrated attacks along the southeast coast and were designed to increase Fighter Command's losses. The Luftwaffe's air strategy was cumulative in nature inside the phase with 
102
103
105
106
Luftwaffe and Fighter Command aircraft strengths on 8 August were 1,029 German fighters and 714 British fighters with German strength falling to 926 by the end of the phase. 
108
In the case of fighter pilots, during this phase the Germans lost a much smaller percentage (15%) of their total pilots than did the British (26%). 
109
German pilots, the Luftwaffe wiped out 237 Fighter Command pilots. The British were not in an advantageous position with their combined losses of pilots since the beginning of the campaign at 321 as opposed to 292 German pilots lost. 
110
104
105
106
108 Collier,
[161]
[162]
452,
[464]
[465]
92,
102. Galland,
55. Hough and Richards,
112
109
110
Fighter Command; however, the Luftwaffe would have had to increase their operational crew readiness by producing more pilots. 
111
Command's relatively steady aircraft strength in comparison to the Luftwaffe's waning numbers. Nor did the Luftwaffe identify a lucrative area to exploit: Britain's growing difficulties with fighter pilot loss rates. The primary driver for Göring's change in targets and tactics was increasing German aircraft attrition. The Luftwaffe began flying at higher altitudes and fighters were ordered to provide closer escort for the bombers. Also, the Germans began to withdraw Stuka dive-bombers from the campaign as their losses increased. In the meantime, as winter weather approached less time remained available for the Luftwaffe to secure air superiority and support Sea Lion.
112
Phase Three: The Airfield Phase, 24 Aug -6 Sept 1940 
113
Göring to abandon what was perhaps the most effective operational phase of the campaign.
During the airfield phase, target sets remained the same; however, the Germans' focus moved inland to airdromes and aircraft factories, and used new tactics to protect their bombers from prohibitive losses. 
115
116
Germans showed alarm at the rate of their losses, and not only because of fighter losses.
Bomber attrition threatened to weaken the Luftwaffe's strength to the point that it would be unable to support Sea Lion when, and if, it was launched. 
117
118
119
120
Like Operation Eagle, this phase was costly for the British, adding significantly to accumulating losses. The number of fighters was the most important aircraft variable in the contest for air superiority; and Fighter Command was hit particularly hard, losing 290 fighters, while of the Luftwaffe 380 aircraft lost, only half were fighters. 121 Also, the functional utility of fighters depended upon sector operations rooms and radar warnings.
According to British Group 11 Commander, Air Vice Marshal Keith Park, had Germany continued attacks on sector operations rooms at airfields, the fighter defenses would have been powerless to oppose heavy attacks either against London or full invasion. 
122
123
124
125
126
As the Germans moved into the Battle of London phase of the campaign, the cumulative aspects of German air strategy bore more heavily upon German aircraft and aircrew, while relieving the British of the worst pressure. British. 
127
128
129
Göring ordered all Me 110s to be escorted by Me 109s. Also, attacks were to be concentrated upon aircraft industry vice the radar stations, which the German's mistakenly believed to be unsuccessful. 
130
131
At this point, even morale factors became important byproducts of the cumulative aspect of the air campaign strategy. That Fighter Command continued to survive to fight another month helped re-establish British morale. 
132
127
128
129 Collier,
[161]
[162]
452,
[464]
[465]
92,
102. Galland,
55. Hough and Richards,
112
130
131
132
"For well over two months the aircrews had been told that victory was just around the corner . . . failure to achieve any notable success . . . had a most demoralizing effect on the fighter pilots who were already overtaxed by physical and mental strain." 
133
Although Hitler postponed Operation Sea Lion, he consoled himself with the belief that the invasion might be possible in the spring of 1941. With that thought, he did not yet want to end the air campaign and "preparations for "Sealion" [were] continued solely for the purpose of maintaining political and military pressure on England." 
134
135
To minimize losses during the Blitz, more operational-level adjustments were made including transitioning to night operations and withdrawing many Heinkel and Dornier bombers in favor of using Messerschmitts as fighter-bombers. 
136
137
Losses during this last phase of the campaign continued several familiar trends. The Germans lost 318 aircraft for a total of 1,709 lost during the campaign. The British lost 144 for a total loss record of 936 aircraft. 
138
139
however, the British lost 165 more pilots for a total loss of 750.
The effects and logic of a cumulative air strategy underlay all five phases of the Battle of Britain both individually and in combination; however, the Luftwaffe's ability to discern those effects and either plan for them or leverage them was problematic. Each phase contained operations that were independent in their nature, but whose effects accumulated at the operational level within that phase. Additionally, at the militarystrategic level, cumulative aspects of German air strategy should have been a consideration as the Luftwaffe executed its air strategy.
The British awareness of the effects of a cumulative air strategy can be supported by direct evidence. For the British, victory was to stave off Luftwaffe attacks with Fighter Command until winter weather set in and precluded a German amphibious invasion. At both the strategic and operational levels, British leaders made decisions to safeguard Where the British fully appreciated the effects attendant with cumulative aspects of air strategy, the Germans failed to account fully for those effects-either in guarding against the negative or capitalizing on the positive. Some evidence indicates that the Germans did not wholly ignore the cumulative dimension of strategy. At the operational level, the Luftwaffe's changes in aircraft employment indicate its recognition some effort had to be made to stem the flow of losses of both aircrew and aircraft. Requiring closer escorts, flying at higher altitudes, switching to night operations, limiting the number of officers per aircrew, withdrawing Stukas from the campaign, and implementing the fighter-bomber concept demonstrate that the Germans knew they were suffering high levels of attrition and attempted to make adjustments. However, the Germans failed to appreciate the full effects of the cumulative air strategy and recognize that there were strategic-level decisions necessary to offset those effects. Despite Field Marshal
Kesselring's claim in his memoirs that "even allowing for average losses of 30 to 50 percent, [they] were assured of regular replacements," German staff actions failed to fulfill that promise.
142
143
Unlike the British, the Germans did not address the cumulative air strategy effects upon pilot attrition. For example, the Luftwaffe did not rotate pilots to relieve battle fatigue. Nor did German pilot production keep up with pilot attrition as shown in aircrew operational ready rates in Appendix 5. Despite higher losses for British fighter pilots, strategic level data trends between German and British pilot losses favored the British from July to September. British pilot attrition showed a decreasing rate of losses whereas German pilot attrition rates were increasing. The German trend does not include losses of Me 110 aircraft pilots whose data were unavailable. However, given the fact that during Operation Eagle Me 109 pilots were required to begin escorting Me 110 aircraft because of their high loss rates, there is a strong probability that Me 110 pilot losses also were increasing. 
144
145
Understanding how sequential and cumulative air strategies interacted during the Battle of Britain in part depends upon the level of analysis. At the level of German grand strategy, the Battle of Britain was a part of a sequential strategy to neutralize Britain before turning on the USSR. There was also a sequential logic to the military strategy.
First, the Luftwaffe would have to achieve air superiority over the Channel and Southern
England. Then, the German Army and Navy would commence Operation Sea Lion and invade Britain proper.
At the operational level, there was a mix of sequential and cumulative air strategies.
On the one hand, there were sequential requirements for interdependent air operations. casualties. The Germans also failed to understand that operational level adjustments would not mitigate the strategic effects of their cumulative air strategy. The Luftwaffe suffered significant losses of both pilots and aircraft in each phase. However, the production levels of pilots and aircraft were never adjusted to account for those losses.
Therefore, with each passing month the Luftwaffe became weaker as the British became stronger.
As mentioned earlier, in a campaign of attrition, the party that can operate with the best combination of efficiency and resource availability will prevail. Given the number of objectives the Luftwaffe needed to secure during the Battle of Britain, there are grave doubts that even if Luftwaffe leadership had a coherent cumulative air strategy, the resources available made executing the strategy very difficult. 147 However, had the 
146
147
Luftwaffe understood that if operational resources were limited they would have appreciated the need to execute each sequential phase with more cumulative efficiency and plan reinforcements at the strategic level. They would have had better insight into how the cumulative and sequential aspects of their air strategy might have been combined.
The Luftwaffe failure to think about the interrelationships between sequential and cumulative air strategies contributed to its failure. Neither the sequential aspects of Germany's air strategy supported the cumulative aspects, nor did the cumulative air strategy support the sequential. The Germans did not prevail in the Battle of Britain, in part, because the two strategies lacked coherent interaction. Moreover, it did not help that the Luftwaffe fought against an adversary whose centuries of sea power tradition had
given it an almost intuitive appreciation for the logic of a cumulative strategy.
Though it failed, the Luftwaffe's experiences were open to examination and interpretation on the part of all the combatants. If the steps Germany took "led into uncharted fields of air strategy and became a hypothesis," then the next steps in proving the hypothesis were taken by the Allies. 
148
148 Ibid., 64.
Chapter 4
It is a conceded fact that OVERLORD will not be possible unless the German Air Force is destroyed. Therefore, my personal message to youthis is a MUST-is to, "Destroy the enemy Air Force wherever you find them, in the air, on the ground, and in the factories.
-General Hap Arnold, New Year's Message issued December 1943
The heavy bomber offensive was an impersonal sort of war and monotonous in its own particular way. Day after day, as weather and equipment permitted, B-17s and B-24's went out, dropped their deadly load, and turned homeward. Rarely was a single mission or series of missions decisive; whatever earlier theory had taught of sudden paralysis of a nation by strategic bombardment, in actual practice…the effects of the bombing were gradual, cumulative, and during the course of the campaign rarely measurable with any degree of assurance.
- Command for an air offensive that would be feasible in 1943. 
159
When the Allies met in Casablanca in January 1943, they made substantial decisions about the course of the war against the Axis powers by outlining their objectives, the assumptions behind those objectives, and the strategies to gain those objectives. As the 
The Casablanca directive outlined two objectives for the air effort. Airpower would facilitate the ground invasion of Western Europe by achieving air supremacy over the invasion area as well as Germany proper. 
163
Offensive directive (CCS 166/I/D) adhered to many of the same principles outlined in the American directives, AWPD-1 and 42, as well as the 1941 British-American ABC-1
Agreement. 
164
To conduct a joint United States-British air offensive to accomplish the progressive destruction and dislocation of the German military, industrial, and economic system, and the undermining of the morale of the German people to a point where their capacity for armed resistance is fatally weakened. This is construed as meaning so weakened as to permit initiation of final combined operations on the Continent. 
165
166
168
170
171
172
173
The sequential portion of CBO air strategy was influenced by three considerations:
first, economic and technical decisions the United States made prior to and during the war; second, time constraints driven by operation OVERLORD; and third, operational capabilities and limitations of the British and American air forces.
The first factors that forced a sequential pattern on the Combined Bomber Offensive air strategy were the economic and technological choices President Roosevelt and the Army Air Forces made with regard to force structure. As R. J.  Cooling, 287-288. Webster and Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany, 1939-1945,  vol 2, part 4, Endeavor, 78.  allowed escort missions with a 600 mile radius. 
179
If 
A third set of factors dictating a sequential air strategy during the CBO was the operational capabilities and limitations of American and British air forces.
POINTBLANK strategy was actually executed in several sequential steps. In the first phase during the fall of 1942 and before the CBO officially began, the Eighth Air Force conducted a series of bombing experiments by executing several operations in occupied Western Europe with British fighter escort. 
181
182
The second phase of the sequential air strategy, from January 1943 to March 1944, was characterized by lodgment of forces and limited operations at great cost to 8 th Air Force and Bomber Command. Their objectives were to gain air superiority and commence bombing operations to weaken Germany's capability and will to wage war.
The original CBO plan called for increased bomber strengths over the course of the year;
however, competing interests in other theaters and the normal friction of war precluded the Americans from meeting their intended aircraft strengths. Failing to have higher numbers of aircraft earlier in theater handicapped American ability to execute POINTBLANK. From April to July, bomber strength was to have built up to 950 and missions during that time would be limited to targets within British fighter escort range.
From July to October 1943, bomber strength was supposed to increase to 1200 and targets would be hit within a 400-mile radius. Attacks were concentrated against aircraft factories, fighter assembly plants, airdromes, aircraft repair facilities, and submarine construction yards. From October 1943 until January 1944, American bomber strength was to increase to 1700, allowing the Americans to attack in force to secure the three CBO objectives: air superiority, weakening German war capabilities, and weakening German will. 
183
184
185
According to two historians of the CBO:
The tremendous victories of the German fighter force emulated those achieved three years earlier by Fighter Command…A less resolute force would have broken down and a more versatile one would almost inevitably have followed the German and British example of changing to night attack. In the event, the 8 th Air Force was cast by a combination of resolution and rigidity into headlong assault on the German fighter force.  
Webster and
Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany, 1939-1945, vol 2, part 4, Endeavor, 5. 192
bombing for the purpose of targeting German morale or weakening Germany's willingness to fight. Instead, Bomber Command's efforts were to be more focused upon winning the air superiority intermediate objective. 
193
194
195
196
The direct use of airpower in support of OVERLORD characterized the third phase of the CBO as it was executed. Instead of targeting German war-making industry for long-term effects, this phase in the CBO sequential air strategy directly facilitated the amphibious landings and breakout of American and British ground units across the Atlantic wall beachhead. Airpower concentrated against airfields within striking distance of Allied ground troops, rail bridges, marshaling yards, maintenance facilities, and limited efforts against some oil targets.  
. 201
202
The sequential air strategy underlying the CBO reflected a functional dependence of the series of steps of the strategy up until Germany's surrender. 
While the Combined Bomber Offensive contained identifiable steps of a sequential air strategy, cumulative logic nevertheless played an important role in the CBO. First, the logic of a cumulative air strategy was evident inside each step of the sequential air strategy. Second, the effects of one stage in the sequential air strategy did not disappear with the beginning of the next phase. Instead, airmen hoped that the accumulating effects from all air operations would contribute to the air objectives. Third, the cumulative effect of the attacks on oil and transportation targets from the spring of 1944 to the end of the war produced the increasing debilitation of German industry, which materially aided the ground advances of both the western Allied and Soviet armies. While the Combined Chiefs of Staff and General Eisenhower were very conscious of the sequential aspects of CBO air strategy, both the US Army Air Force and RAF Bomber Command's approaches to the CBO were primarily based upon the cumulative air strategy within and between the phases. In fact, one school of thought among airmen held that the cumulative air strategy, based upon the combined effects of independent bombing operations, might have rendered the ground invasion unnecessary altogether.
If the POINTBLANK air offensive had a relatively identifiable sequential air strategy revolving around four phases, within each of these phases, air operations are best characterized as cumulative. The intended target set concentration within each phase changed slightly in accordance with the overall sequential logic, but operations proceeded one day at a time with each sortie's bombing effects contributing to the weight of the total effort. The POINTBLANK mission statement was particularly well suited to executing a cumulative campaign because the objectives were served by escalating pressure resulting from independent operations. By directing an offensive to "accomplish the progressive destruction of the German military, industrial, and economic system and the undermining of morale," the strategy depended upon independent destructive acts combining to provide the desired effect. 
203
There was no particular order of those operations, nor did the success of one sortie depend upon the success of the previous. 
203
While Generals Spaatz and Eaker as well as Air Marshal Sir Arthur Harris attempted from the outset to pursue a cumulative air campaign within each phase, they differed in their opinions about the targets for that campaign. As a result, there was difficulty in the cumulative aspect of the strategy in maintaining concentration and persistence against the targets that would be most lucrative in accomplishing the air campaign's objectives.
Consistent with Wylie's observed characteristic of a cumulative strategy, measuring the strategy's progress or success was difficult. This difficulty gave rise to considerable argument concerning the efficacy of bombing different target systems. As the official history noted, because "the effects of the bombing were gradual, cumulative, and during the course of the campaign rarely measurable with any degree of assurance, there was little visible progress." 
204
Carl von Clausewitz discussed the difficult but necessary exercise of attributing causes and effects in warfare. 
205
This tension between prediction, observation, cause, and effect, resulted in differences of opinion regarding the efficacy of certain targets in the CBO cumulative air strategy. The CBO directive did not clear up any confusion because it addressed several objectives and target systems.
While the directive was intended to promote complementary operations, it instead resulted in competing operations that in many ways lacked concentration. American airmen believed more precise attacks against warmaking industries would be most efficient in subverting German war capabilities. Sir Arthur Harris insisted that dehousing German workers and targeting German morale more readily accomplished the CBO objective, and thus chose urban area targets such as the Ruhr, Hamburg, and Berlin. As the timeline to OVERLORD shortened, there was tremendous pressure to concentrate CBO operations on gaining air superiority and preinvasion preparation of the battlefield. Harris clung to the theory that area bombing would be decisive and continued to execute his bomber sorties against cities despite direction to the contrary. Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Portal and his deputy, Air Marshal Bottomley, sent several letters to Harris directing him to abandon general area attacks and coordinate his raids with 8 th Air Force efforts so as to achieve better concentration. 
206
207
208
Not all British leaders felt as strongly as Harris did, however. Sir Charles Portal observed, "Thus, while area bombing, if it could have been continued long enough and in sufficient weight, might in the end have forced the enemy to capitulate, his countermeasures would have prevented us from maintaining such a policy to the decisive point. We would have been forced to precision attack to maintain the air situation needed to continue the offensive at all." 209 Even though the Americans and several British officers disagreed with Harris, the cumulative nature of the CBO proceeded throughout on dual tracks with the Americans pursuing precision attack and Harris general area bombing. The effect of the cumulative air strategy "was not a single, spectacular victory, but a slow and lethal erosion of fighting capability." 210 Despite philosophical difficulties underlying the cumulative air strategy, under the general onslaught, Germany's ability to withstand the bombing and continue to protect itself from the Allied ground offensive gradually broke down.
The success of a cumulative air strategy within each phase of the CBO depended upon Allied ability to outlast the Luftwaffe by maximizing the quantity of aircraft and aircrew produced and minimizing losses to the same. Luftwaffe fighter production and strength increased each year, despite POINTBLANK bombing efforts. (Appendices 8 and 9) That fact notwithstanding, the number of aircraft and crew available to the Luftwaffe were no match for overwhelming Allied numbers. (Appendices 10 and 11)
The Allies out-produced Germany consistently, which led to significantly greater air strength as seen in Appendix 8. 
211
213
219
220
221
2
222
A cumulative logic underlay Allied air strategy during the Combined Bomber
Offensive. The effects of independent air operations combined to place tremendous pressure upon both the German economy and military forces. The cumulative aspects of Allied air strategy were not, however, without tension. The difficulty in measuring precise effects of the strategy led to British and American air leaders having divergent opinions about the most efficacious targets. This resulted in a lack of concentration on any one target set . . .perhaps to the detriment of the strategy, in the minds of many airmen who subscribed to the theory that sufficient concentration upon a single target might constitute the knock out blow against Germany. Ultimately, the combination of the increasing effects from striking several well-chosen target groups showed how the cumulative aspect of Allied air strategy contributed significantly to ultimate victory.
The original CBO directive suggested that Allied strategic air forces would pursue two types of air strategies, one sequential and one cumulative. In this construct, the sequential air strategy facilitated the cumulative. The sequential air strategy began with economic and technological decisions about force structure that could provide sufficient numbers and kinds of aircraft platforms to execute the cumulative air strategy. Next, gaining the political backing to pursue a cumulative air strategy was necessary to proceed. In another sequential step in the air strategy, rising losses in 1943 forced both RAF and American air leaders to recognize the need to concentrate on gaining air superiority before OVERLORD could proceed. At this juncture, the effects of a purely cumulative air strategy were difficult to measure and were thought not to be decisive. Chapter 5
The first-line strength of [Japan's] naval air units had been sacrificed in the Solomons and on New Britain, and the first-line strength of its army air units had fallen a victim…at Wewak and elsewhere on New Guinea. One of the decisive victories of the war had been won. It was a victory primarily for land based air power, and other victories which followed, among them the conclusive one, undoubtedly came easier because of it.
-Wesley Craven and James Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II It is the capacity to return day after day to the same targets, to tear up again and again the same runways, and to keep an unbroken watch against the reinforcement of threatening enemy air bases that permits an air organization to perform its primary function by winning and keeping control of the air.
-   USSBS Reports Pacific War No. 43, 1946, 5.   However, despite high levels of economic mobilization, Japan waged war at an extreme disadvantage. Even at its peak level of mobilization in 1944, in comparison with the United States, Japan produced war materials at only 10 percent of the potential capacity of the U.S. economy. 
233
234
235
236
237
In the early part of World War II, the SWPA suffered doubly from pre-war military stagnation as well as a result of taking a back seat to European theater operations. As previously noted, War Plan Orange identified insufficient resources available for defending theater objectives. Knowing that there were not sufficient forces in theater to prevail in the case of attack, the United States had forward deployed B-17 bombers in the Philippines as a deterrent to Japanese aggression and a signal that the Allies would defend their interests. 
238
239
Until Japanese aggression at Pearl Harbor roused American ire, the Allies were politically unable and unwilling to mobilize sufficient forces in the theater to do anything more than support a defend-reinforce-buildup-attack strategy. 
240
241
242
243
In 1941 and virtually throughout the duration of the war, there was no comprehensive strategy palatable to both the Army and Navy. 
251
252
253
254
267
268
269
270
271
272
273
First, initial tactics and munitions proved ineffective and until innovation occurred in both arenas, early interdiction effects were limited. Poor weather proved to be a continuing problem; however, not even General MacArthur could influence the weather.
Finally, the fact that there were so few fighter aircraft platforms and that fighter crews were continually in a state of semi-exhaustion from unrelenting mission tempo, meant the operational effectiveness of the interdiction effort was marginal. 
274
275
However, prevailing on the ground was a necessary precondition for the construction of airfields from which land based airpower would then be used to project power to the next objective.
After supplying reconnaissance, securing air superiority, protecting the initial landings of ground troops, and isolating the battlefield, Allied air operations centered around providing air transport to furnish resupply and reinforcements and close support for ground troops engaged in battle. For example, in the case of Australian ground troops at Wau and Kokoda, air transport was critical to sustain their attacks. The terrain in SWPA frequently denied over land resupply/reinforcements; therefore, the only way some ground troops were able to maintain contact with the enemy was through aerial resupply and reinforcement. 
276
277
278
The case of close air support (CAS) for ground forces was more complicated in the SWPA than other theaters by virtue of the terrain involved. CAS operations were complicated by difficulties with command and control, communication connectivity, and target identification. Despite heroic efforts and increasing success levels, checkered CAS records in many of the objective areas, for example, the Buna/Wau operations in New Guinea, reflected that CAS missions were the most difficult step in the sequential air strategy. 
279
The jungle simply did not permit it." 
The Allies intended to bring war home to the Japanese home islands as quickly as possible to force Japan's surrender. Given the distances in the Pacific theater and Japan's early successes in establishing an extended defensive perimeter, the Allies could not immediately strike directly at the home islands. In the interim, a sequential air strategy facilitated a series of Allied successes beginning at the outermost reaches of the Japanese defensive perimeter and moving ever inward. MacArthur's advance would ultimately provide bases from which the Allies could execute concentrated anti-shipping interdiction, large-scale air attacks against the Japanese home islands, and prepare for a ground invasion of Japan.
291
Within each battle there was a sequence of interdependent air operations. Adequate reconnaissance preceded all air operations and provided necessary information about enemy dispositions. Air superiority strikes facilitated successful interdiction to isolate the battlefield. Air superiority and interdiction facilitated air operations to provide coverage for amphibious landings with pre-assault bombing and continuous air screens over landings. Successful close air support of landed troops was in turn interdependent upon the troops landing safely and air interdiction denying as many enemy reinforcement as possible. Air resupply and reinforcement could not be successful until after air superiority, interdiction, pre-assault bombing, and troop landings and protection were secured. 
292
land reinforcements regularly through November 1942, bringing their ground strength up to approximately 9,000. 
293
294
306
307
Another cumulative aspect of the air strategy in the SWPA was the air attacks on Japanese merchant shipping to weaken Japan's war economy. The purpose of such attacks was to impede Japan's ability to prosecute the war and its ability to resist Allied landings on the home islands, should those landings be necessary. shipping and played a significant and indispensable role in denying Japan its trade lifelines. In fact, the operations around the Philippines and Marianas islands made those locales the most concentrated areas for Japanese ship casualties in the war. 
313
The SWPA air strategy was cumulative in several respects. First, individual air sorties that together constituted the logical core of steps in the sequential air strategy followed a cumulative logic. Individual sorties' effects were, in a sense, banked together to present the Japanese with an operational reality. The operational realities included such effects as successful local air superiority or interdiction to isolate an Allied objective. Against Japanese air forces the Allies were able to exact cumulative effects from their air strategy by attriting Japan's aircraft platforms and aircrew in early operations-attrition from which Japan could not recover despite its extensive economic mobilization in 1943. Finally, the air strategy against Japanese shipping was cumulative in nature in that individual and independent anti-shipping operations denied Japan critical merchant shipping tonnage.
In the case of the SWPA campaign, the air strategist can discern a complicated set of relations between sequential and cumulative air strategies that created the conditions to promote victory. One possible interaction is for a sequential air strategy to facilitate executing a cumulative strategy. This scenario applies to the SWPA in relation to the overall Pacific strategy. At the strategic level, the sequential air strategy implementing ELKTON was a causal precursor to the cumulative air strategy later associated with antishipping operations. Once SWPA aircraft were within range of Japan's principal shipping routes, they could conduct strikes against merchant vessels. One-third of the shipping tonnage sunk was attributed to air strikes, of which the FEAF contributed significant effort.
There was also a nesting of sequential air strategies. While the air strategy at the strategic level was sequential because reaching within striking distance of Japan was a necessary step before direct strikes could begin, getting to within that radius also entailed a sequential air strategy at the operational level. MacArthur's progression from Port Moresby, New Guinea to Lingayen's beaches on Luzon depended upon a sequential air strategy that secured each Allied objective before moving northward to the next. The air strategist can clearly identify the series of objectives won with a sequential air strategy at Table 
3
A cumulative air strategy of independent operations at the tactical level provided sufficient concentration of effort and ample effects to promote success at the operational level for each sequential step. Also, increasing attrition pressure promoted success for both sequential and cumulative air strategies at the operational and strategic levels. Not only did the sequential air strategies bring the Allies close enough to hit Japan directly, the attrition consequences resulting from the sum of sequential operations from New Guinea to Luzon had their own cumulative effect. Added with the effects of the strategic bombing and anti-shipping campaigns, cumulative effects attendant with the sequential operations allowed the Allies to create favorable conditions for victory.
In the SWPA, there is evidence that a cumulative air strategy facilitated the sequential air strategy and conversely, that a sequential air strategy facilitated the cumulative air strategy. These interactions contributed to the Allied victory over Japan in the Southwest Pacific Area.
Chapter 6
There are actually two very different kinds of strategies that may be used in war. One is the sequential, the series of visible, discrete steps, each dependent on the one that preceded it. The other is the cumulative, the less perceptive minute accumulation of little items piling one on top of the other until at some unknown point the mass of accumulated actions may be large enough to be critical. They are not incompatible strategies. They are not mutually exclusive. Quite the opposite, in practice they are usually interdependent in their strategic result…The cumulative aspect has long been a characteristic of war at sea and may be a characteristic of air warfare. But there has been no conscious analytical differentiation of this cumulative warfare from the sequential in any of the major writings on strategy; and there is no major instance in which a cumulative strategy, operating by itself, has been successful.
-J.C. Wylie
This thesis has taken Admiral Wylie's challenge to examine both sequential and cumulative air strategies and attempted to answer the research question "How do the sequential and cumulative aspects of an air strategy interact to contribute to victory in war?" In considering this question, there have been six possible answers:
16 The sequential air strategy aids the cumulative air strategy. 17 The sequential air strategy hinders the cumulative air strategy. 18 The sequential air strategy has no interaction with the cumulative air strategy.
19 The cumulative air strategy aids the sequential air strategy. 20 The cumulative air strategy hinders the sequential air strategy. 21 The cumulative air strategy has no interaction with the sequential air strategy.
It is possible, of course, in any given operation or campaign for several of the above to be simultaneously valid. A re-examination of the interactions between the sequential and cumulative aspects of air strategy in each historical case should reveal patterns of such relationships and may lead to insights that will be of value to future strategists.
In the Battle of Britain, there were clear sequential aspects in the Luftwaffe's In sum, the CBO illustrated two of the possible interactions between sequential and cumulative air strategies. Each aided the other to contribute to Allied victory.
The effects of air operations in the SWPA were, at the strategic level, almost mirror images of the CBO air strategies in Europe. Where in Europe the Allies used the cumulative to aid the sequential, in the SWPA the distances to reach Japan required using a sequential air strategy that would ultimately serve the cumulative. MacArthur's eventual capture of the Philippine Islands gave the Far East Air Force a base from which it was able to conduct systematic, sustained attacks against Japanese shipping. These attacks provided a vital enhancement to ongoing submarine operations and further crippled the Japanese economy.
Two layers of operational level sequential strategies also supported the cumulative The cumulative logic again underlay the success of the sequential aspect of air strategy. At each step in the sequential strategy, effects accumulating from independent air operations combined to aid the success of the sequential strategy at that point. Japan's losses mounted with each Allied objective won. Allied losses also increased, but were offset by the ever-increasing numbers of aircraft and aircrew sent from the United States.
Thus, each sequential step saw Japan's power erode and Allied power swell in cumulative fashion. The effects of the cumulative air strategy thus aided the sequential.
In sum, the SWPA illustrated two of the possible interactions between sequential and cumulative air strategies. Each aided the other in a synergistic fashion to contribute to securing an Allied victory in the Pacific.
It is clear from a comparison of the three historical cases that Wylie's suspicion about cumulative and sequential strategies is true in the case of air strategies: that in practice, the two strategies are usually interdependent in their strategic result. The research question under examination is: how do the sequential and cumulative aspects of an air strategy interact to contribute to victory in war? The CBO and SWPA air campaigns together illustrate that interactions between the sequential and cumulative aspects of air strategy include instances in which the sequential aids the cumulative and, conversely, instances in which the cumulative aids the sequential. Those interactions contributed to victory. When viewed from the German perspective, the Battle of Britain is perhaps an illustration that lacking an appreciation for the cumulative aspects of air strategy and failing to anticipate the cumulative aspects with appropriate decisions early in the sequential strategy, results in each aspect of strategy hindering its counterpart. The failure to achieve positive interaction between the two aspects of strategy contributed to the German defeat.
In summary, sequential and cumulative aspects of air strategies can either aid each other or hinder each other. When the interactions are positive, there is a high probability that these two components of an air strategy will contribute to victory. If the interactions are negative, however, defeat is more likely.
resource strengths and that the cumulative effects gained in the interim would eventually weigh more upon the Germans and Japanese than they would upon the Allies.
Ultimately, a successful cumulative air strategy demands that the force necessary to secure the objective is available at the correct place and time, and that the adversary is denied the same.
A second aspect of the space/force/time conceptual framework of interest in the cumulative air strategy is the ability to identify the correct targets (the space factor), measure the effects of the pressure (the force factor) applied upon those targets, show that the "art of the cumulative" is in choosing the most appropriate targets, applying the correct amount of concentrated or diffused pressure across those targets, accurately measuring those effects, and convincing the leadership that some combination of those effects will eventually result in the enemy's capitulation. In the final analysis, only the adversary will determine which effects will compel his submission . . . and when that will be.
Kathleen Williams, "Air War, 1939-1941," in 
Kathleen Williams, "Air War, 1939-1941," in 
20  
20  
, 18. Albrecht Kesselring, The Memoirs of Field Marshal
, 18. Albrecht Kesselring, The Memoirs of Field Marshal
30  
30  
85 Galland, 41. Hough and Richards, 245. Irving, Göring: A Biography, 295.  86 Hough and Richards, 294. Keegan, 96. Williams, 95. Wood and Dempster, 70, 264
85 Galland, 41. Hough and Richards, 245. Irving, Göring: A Biography, 295.  86 Hough and Richards, 294. Keegan, 96. Williams, 95. Wood and Dempster, 70, 264
122  
122  
The Political Context
The Political Context
The Combined Chiefs of Staff gave the British Chief of Air Staff, Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Portal, the responsibility for the strategic direction of the CBO and coordination of both RAF and American bomber actions. In reality however, throughout 1943 Bomber Command's commanding officer, Air Marshal Sir Arthur Harris, and General Ira Eaker of Eighth Air Force, had significant operational autonomy. In January 1944, Air Force elements participating in POINTBLANK expanded to include the newly formed 15 th Air Force. General Eaker became the commander of 15 th Air Force in Italy, while Lieutenant General James Doolittle took over as commander of 8 th Air Force in England. Responsibility for both the 8 th and 15 th Air Forces fell to Lieutenant General Carl Spaatz, commander of the United States Strategic Air Forces in Europe (USSTAF).
171  
171  
It was almost involved in tragic defeat.
It was almost involved in tragic defeat.
Eisenhower also used strategic bomber forces to attack German V-1 missile facilities to mitigate the terror bombings Hitler commenced in a desperate attempt to force Britain out of the war. Phase four of POINTBLANK began in September 1944 and continued through the end of the war in Europe. Eisenhower relinquished command of the strategic air forces back to Chief of Air Staff Chief Air Marshal Portal, General Spaatz, and Air Marshal Sir Arthur Harris
289  
289  
John B. Hattendorf, introduction to Military Strategy: A General Theory of Power Control by J.C. Wylie (Annapolis, Md: Naval Institute Press, 1967), ix.
J.C. Wylie, Military Strategy: A General Theory of Power Control with an introduction by John B. Hattendorf (Annapolis, Md: Naval Institute Press, 1967), 22.
Ibid., 23.   
Ibid.,[23][24] 
Galland, 64.   
Ibid., 12.   
Cooling, 149.   
Ibid.,[69][70] 159.   
Hough and Richards, 137.   
Kesselring, 73.   
Churchill, 319. Collier, 159. Galland, 12, 20. Hough and Richards, 109, 245, 327. Williams, 94.  Wood and Dempster, 160, 162.   
Galland, 30. Kesselring, 79.   
Price, 183.   
Keegan, 94.   
Ibid., 96.   
Williams, 95.   
Wood and Dempster, 212, 226.   
Kesselring,[78][79] 
Hough and Richards, 223.   
Irving, Göring: A Biography, 295. Hough and Richards,[248][249][250][251] 71.   
Hough and Richards, 224. Irving, The Rise and Fall of the Luftwaffe, 101.Wood and Dempster, 229.   
Wood and Dempster, 232.   
Hough and Richards, 245.   
Hough and Richards, 301.   
Wood and Dempster, 164.   
Kesselring, 76.   
Ibid., 68.   
Hough and Richards,[214][215] 309.   
Murray, 51. Wood and Dempster, 348.   
Wood and Dempster, 151.   
Keegan, 94.   
Hough and Richards, 223.   
Williams, 95.   
Collier, 
Wood and Dempster, 226.   
Williams, 95.   
Wood and Dempster, 226. Price, 179.   
R.J.Overy, The Air War, 33.   
Hough and Richards, 275.   
Ibid., 301.   
Galland, 55.   
Galland, 53. Keegan, 102. Williams,[95][96] 290.   
Galland, 53.   
Collier, 
Overy, The Air War, 33.   
Weinberg, 128. Wood and Dempster,[130][131][132] 
Hough and Richards, 138, 333.   
Kesselring, 84.   
Murray, 100.   
Wood and Dempster, 204.   
Price, 183.   
Richard Overy, Why the Allies Won (New York: W.W.Norton & Company, 1995), 192-193.   
Ibid.,[40][41] 
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, vol 1, Plans and Early Operations, 132.   
Craven and Cate, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, 290-295. Haywood S. Hansell Jr., The Air Plan  that Defeated Hitler, (Atlanta: Higgins-McArthur, Longino and Porter Inc., 1972)  105.
Hansell, The Strategic Air War against Germany and Japan, 33.   
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank,[46][47] 
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, 210,278.  Hansell, The Strategic Air War against Germany and Japan, 33. Overy, The Air War 1939-1945, 106, 117.   
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, 300. Basil Henry Liddell Hart, History of the Second World War (New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1970), 599.Overy, The Air War 1939-1945, 73.   
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, 304-305.  Hansell, The Air Plan that Defeated Hitler, 153. Hansell, The Strategic Air War against Germany and  Japan, 72. Webster and Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany, 1939-1945, vol 2, part 4,  Endeavor, 12-13.   
Verrier, 340.   
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, 212.
Hansell, The Air Plan that Defeated Hitler, 151.   
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, 216-217.
Ibid.,[301][302] 
Cooling,[285][286]. Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, 564.Webster and Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany, 1939-1945, vol 2,  part 4, Endeavor, 82.   
Liddell Hart, 604. Webster and Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany, 1939-1945,  vol 2, part 4, Endeavor, 79-81.   
Webster and Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany, 1939-1945, vol 2, part 4,  Endeavor, 10.   
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, 214-217.
Ibid., 296.   
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, 370-371.  Webster and Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany, 1939-1945, vol 2, part 4, Endeavor,  
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, vol 3, Europe: Argument to VE Day, 27-28. Hansell, The Air Plan that Defeated Hitler, 177-178. Hansell, The Strategic Air War against Germany and
Weinberg, 679.   
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, vol 3, Europe: Argument to VE Day, 58, 160.   
Ibid., xiv.   
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, 286.
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, Vol 2, Europe: Torch to Pointblank, ix.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton  University Press, 1976), 156-157.   
Webster and Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany, 1939-1945, vol 2, part 4,  Endeavor, 35-36, 59-69.   
Liddell Hart, 609.   
Webster and Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany, 1939-1945, vol 2, part 4,  Endeavor, 26. Weinberg, 775.   
Craven and Cate, The Army Air Forces in World War II, vol 3, Europe: Argument to VE Day, 62.  Murray, 303. Overy, The Air War 1939-1945, 81. Weinberg, 617.   
Davis, 528.   
Davis, 507.   
Overy, The Air War, 86. Weinberg, 310   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 20.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 44.   
Center for Aerospace Doctrine, Research and Education, The United States Strategic Bombing Surveys,European and Pacific Wars, 61. Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 131, 194,  549.   
Military Supplies Division, The United States Strategic Bombing Survey, Japanese War Production Industries,USSBS Reports Pacific War No. 43, 1946, 5.   
Center for Aerospace Doctrine, Research and Education, The United States Strategic Bombing Surveys, European and Pacific Wars, 78-79. Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific: Matterhorn to Nagasaki, 740.Military Supplies Division, USSBS Reports Pacific War No. 43, 1946, 6.   
Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific: Matterhorn to Nagasaki, 740.   
Overy, The Air War, 94.   
Military Supplies Division, USSBS Reports Pacific War No. 43, 1.
Center for Aerospace Doctrine, Research and Education, The United States Strategic Bombing Surveys, European and Pacific Wars, 78.
Center for Aerospace Doctrine, Research and Education, The United States Strategic Bombing Surveys, European and Pacific Wars, 50.
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 19.   
Griffith, 235.   
Overy, The Air War, 96.   
Overy, The Air War, 97.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 134.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 555. Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific:  Matterhorn to Nagasaki, xiv.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, xiv. Griffith,74. Overy, The Air War, 101   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, xvii.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan,[19][20][21] 
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, v.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 129.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 55.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan,[111][112][113] 
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 183, 188.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 221.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 161.   
Griffith, 233.   
Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific: Matterhorn to Nagasaki, 411.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 57.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 146.   
Griffith, 245.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 150.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 345.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 223, 262.   
Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific: Matterhorn to Nagasaki,[376][377] 
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 108, 136.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 167.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 177, 186.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 123.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 231.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 384.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 385.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 211.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 571.   
Morton, 587.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 85, 174.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 587.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan,[63][64][65][66][67] 106.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 197.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan,[241][242] 
Center for Aerospace Doctrine, Research and Education, The United States Strategic Bombing Surveys, European and Pacific Wars, 62.
Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific: Matterhorn to Nagasaki, xi.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 122.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 122.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 589.   
Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific: Matterhorn to Nagasaki, 377.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan,[123][124][125][126][231][232] 
Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific: Matterhorn to Nagasaki,[433][434] 
Aerospace Doctrine, Research and Education, The United States Strategic Bombing Surveys, European and Pacific Wars, 60. Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific: Matterhorn to Nagasaki, 740. Center for
Center for Aerospace Doctrine, Research and Education, The United States Strategic Bombing Surveys, European and Pacific Wars, 62.
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 598.   
Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific: Matterhorn to Nagasaki, 740.   
Military Analysis Division, The United States Strategic Bombing Survey, Japanese Air Power, USSBSReports Pacific War No. 62, 1946, 41-43.   
Military Analysis Division,USSBS Reports Pacific War No. 62,[33][34] 
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 598. Military Analysis Division, USSBS  Reports Pacific War No. 62, 14.   
Craven and Cate, vol 4, The Pacific: Guadalcanal to Saipan, 598.   
Craven and Cate, vol 5, The Pacific: Matterhorn to Nagasaki, xx. Military Analysis Division, USSBS  Reports Pacific War No. 62, 2.   
I would like to acknowledge several people without whose support and guidance this study would have remained at the conceptual level. In particular I gratefully thank 
Dr.
was commissioned through the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps at Duke University in 1986. After graduating from 
Intelligence School
The views expressed in this academic research paper are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the official policy or position of the US government or the Department of Defense. In accordance with Air Force Instruction 51-303, it is not copyrighted, but is the property of the United States government. 
Although Allied objectives included the complete military defeat and surrender of Japan, priorities in World War II focused on a Germany-first strategy that called for predominant levels of manpower and equipment to be invested in the European theater. 
223
Britain, China, Australia, and the United States each pursued diverging political interests that "forestalled any agreement on strategy and fostered a command system of bewildering complexity." 224 However, in agreement with the British and in deference to its preponderance of force, the Americans acted as the lead agent for strategy in the Pacific theater. American plans were based upon its pre-war Plan Orange and Rainbow Five. War Plan Orange was admittedly more a statement of hope than a realistic plan for operations in the Pacific. 
225
226
227
Equipment that leaders in Washington D.C. believed to be already in use was frequently in transit and unusable for theater operations. Nevertheless, the nature of geography in the Pacific theater meant all combatants had to contend with the logistics of deploying, supporting, and reinforcing isolated garrisons. Availability of shipping and air transport thus constituted a major advantage.
Pacific geography fundamentally affected the nature of military operations in other ways as well. Pacific warfare was island warfare, placing a premium on the mobility of forces over vast distances. In the SWPA military strategy depended heavily upon joint operations and dictated important roles for both naval and air forces. 
244
245
246
Given the distances and nature of leadership personalities in the Pacific Theater, command and control relationships were complicated and fragmented. Unlike Europe, where there was a pronounced effort to streamline command and control, in the Pacific Theater there were two co-equal commanders. The Central Pacific, by virtue of its heavy dependence upon naval power, was commanded by Admiral Nimitz. South of an imaginary line dividing the theater in two, General MacArthur commanded the Southwest Pacific Area. SWPA included the Philippines, Netherlands East Indies, New Guinea, the Admiralties and the Solomons. MacArthur's area was further complicated by another 
244
245
Kenney. 247
248
249
The Allies based SWPA strategy upon several assumptions. First, they assumed the Pacific war would be a total war waged over a long period of time. Based upon the Arcadia Conference in late 1941, the Allies assumed the early loss of Guam and the Philippine Islands and adopted a defensive posture to limit the extent of the Japanese advance. Originally there would be limited means in both equipment and manpower because of the Europe first strategy; however, in time the U.S. would be able to pour sufficient resources in theater to prevail, provided the defense could hold in the interim.
A second assumption the Allies made was that geography in the Pacific theater would require unprecedented coordination between operations in all three mediums: land, sea, and air. Finally, in the Pacific theater, the force of events was not easily foreseeable; therefore, the Allies needed to pursue a strategy with several different options that would provide flexibility for future decisions. 
246
247
248
249
In keeping with the grand strategic objective in the Pacific Theater to force unconditional surrender of the Japanese, the Allies strategy pursued several strategic tracks. First, the effort would depend heavily upon U.S. allies in theater to defend against and place maximum pressure upon the Japanese. This included resistance from the British in the Burma/India/Indian Ocean area as well as Chinese forces in Burma and in China itself. Later in the war, the U.S. encouraged Russia to attack Japan from the north.
Second, using America's vast economic advantage, the strategy was to build up a large fast carrier fleet as well as numerous air platforms (both fighters and long range bombers) for several purposes. Top priority would be to keep the lines of communication open between the U.S. forward-deployed forces, and Australia. Also, forces would be used to acquire suitable bases from which the Allies could project power (including strategic bombing) at the Japanese mainland. Fleet and air assets would re-supply all Allied forces in theater including British and Chinese. Most importantly, the Allies would use the interdependence of land/sea/air operations to attrite Japanese forces in such a way that Japan might unconditionally surrender once the Allies reached Japan proper. The third aspect of Allied strategy was a blockade of the Japanese home islands using both naval (surface and subsurface) and air assets to deny them war-making material and weaken the economic base from which Japan prosecuted the war. Finally, if necessary the Allies recognized the possibility that an invasion of the Japanese homeland might be necessary to gain military capitulation and unconditional surrender. 
250
The Navy advocated pursuing an "island hopping" campaign through the Central Pacific islands including Saipan, Iwo Jima, and Okinawa, from which an Allied Normandy-like invasion could be mounted. 
255
256
258
As Commander of the SWPA, General MacArthur intended to support the Pacific strategy by positioning himself to strike Japan directly from the Philippines. The overall Pacific strategy was to isolate Japan, attrite Japanese forces along its outer perimeter, move U.S. forces increasingly to within direct striking distance of the homeland, and strike the homeland directly with strategic bombing and if necessary, an invasion. To Task three called for SWPA to neutralize New Britain, specifically attending to the Japanese stronghold at Rabaul. 
259
The success of the strategic bombardment campaign which ended so dramatically at Hiroshima and Nagasaki was rooted in the two years of bitter fighting by air, naval, and ground forces which had carried the Allies from Guadalcanal and Port Moresby to Guam and Sansapor. It was the campaigns of those years which had blunted the enemy's air weapon and had provided the bases within bomber radius of Honshu. 
260
262
263
264
265
283
284
Two technical advances facilitated executing the sequential air strategy that brought Allied forces ever closer to the Japanese home islands. Without these innovations, the operational effectiveness of airpower in the SWPA would have been far inferior and General Kenney's and COMAIRSOPAC's ability to successfully gain air superiority and isolate the battlefield through interdiction may have been fatally compromised. The first advance was in adding drop tanks to fighter aircraft to extend their range. The limited fighter aircraft radius was a major factor in determining the rate of advance of SWPA operations. 
285
Cumulative air strategy is characterized by a relative independence among air operations. Moreover, the individual effect of the operation contains a certain value that is, in effect, banked away. When the value executing a number of independent air operations reaches a certain level, the air strategist can use their cumulative effects to further his goals. In this manner the SWPA air strategy also demonstrated cumulative aspects.
In the SWPA, air planners intended for specific categories of air operations to be executed in a certain predictable order in order to project Allied power ever closer to the Japanese home islands. If at the strategic and operational levels of war there was a sequential air strategy, that did not preclude those same air planners from leveraging cumulative aspects of the air strategy at the same time. The sequential air strategy shaped air operations at the operational level with a generally predictable pattern of operations: 11 Reconnaissance 12 Air Superiority 13 Air Interdiction 14 Air Transport 15 Close Air Support Within these sequential steps however, there was a cumulative phenomenon. At the tactical level, individual air sorties may have been successful or unsuccessful with their execution independent of each other. For example, to gain control of the air prior to moving into Buna and Guadalcanal, the Allies flew several air superiority operations against Japanese airfields. Operations against airfields in Rabaul, Buin, and Munda were executed to pin down Japanese air so that Allied operations could proceed without enemy air harassment. While the totality of the sorties' effects was to provide air superiority, the individual raids did not depend upon each other for their success. At the tactical level, the success of B-17s targeting New Britain airfields really had no bearing upon success of other B-17s on their way to Bougainville for the same purpose. The logic is equivalently applied to air interdiction missions of shipping targets for the purpose of denying the Japanese reinforcement and resupply. For example, at Buna the Japanese were able to 
December 1941
December through mid-1942. 308 . 308
Compared to the Japanese, American mobilization increased tremendously as aircraft and pilot production soared to 85,000 planes and 82,000 pilots in 1943. 
309
In comparison with Japan, the Allies were able to increase the number and quality of aircraft and aircrew in the Pacific theater and thus take advantage of the cumulative aspect of their air strategy. By increasing the number of aircraft and crew, the number of individual sorties increased and the accumulated effects from each of these sorties what strategic-level measures were necessary for Germany to prevail. As a result, the Luftwaffe changed their sequential air strategy, curtailing operations in phases two and three that had the most potential for breaking Fighter Command. Also, the Germans did not increase fighter aircraft or pilot production during the campaign to support operations. The Luftwaffe's failure to appreciate the cumulative aspects of its air strategy in a broad context produced a dysfunctional relationship between the campaign's cumulative and sequential characteristics. The resulting lack of synergy contributed to Germany's eventual defeat.
In the Combined Bomber Offensive, the Combined Chiefs of Staff crafted a strategy that was both sequential and cumulative. The CBO's sequential aspects weakened Germany's ability to defeat an amphibious invasion by the western Allies. Thus, OVERLORD was logically dependent upon a certain level of success of the CBO.
Within the CBO itself, the Allies correctly anticipated that gaining air superiority was a necessary pre-condition for sustained bombing. The cumulative aspect of the CBO was reflected in the years of independent air operations whose effects combined to neutralize the Luftwaffe as an effective fighting force, weaken the Wehrmacht's fighting potential against Allied ground troops, and ultimately destroy the economic base of the German war machine.
The sequential aspects of Allied air strategy thus aided the cumulative during the CBO. Economic decisions made by the Americans in their Victory Program and British efforts to maintain high levels of mobilization with shadow factories and purchases of American aircraft helped the Allies create resources deep enough to continue to supply aircraft for the CBO despite periodically high loss rates. Also, the Allies recognized that air superiority was necessary prior to fully implementing the cumulative aspect of their air strategy. They therefore described the destruction of the Luftwaffe as an "intermediate step" in the POINTBLANK Directive. The operational hiatus during the fall of 1943 while the Allies solved their long-range fighter escort difficulties also attested to their understanding that air superiority was a pre-requisite for destruction of the German economy. Fitting the P-51 with the Merlin engine provided the long-range
The paradigm of strategy being force applied across space and time provides a useful basis to examine the interactions between sequential and cumulative air strategies. In both shorter campaigns, such as the Battle of Britain, and longer air operations, such as the CBO and SWPA, planners must consider the obvious sequential aspects of air strategy. If there are intermediary steps necessary to win prior to moving forward with the strategy, those objectives (the space factor) must be clearly identified and pursued with the sufficient force and in the order (the time factor) dictated by the logic of the situation. In the case of air strategies, it appears that the intermediate step of gaining air superiority is a necessary phase prior to conducting other operations. In any campaign it is almost axiomatic that the ultimate effects of a strategy can not be instantly achieved.
Therefore, strategists will almost always be reduced to devising a series of steps that lead to victory. When they do so, they should look for ways that these steps can both positively support and be supported by the cumulative aspects of the strategy. For example, some aircraft design choices as well as force structure decisions may more positively support the cumulative aspects of a campaign than other options.
In their pursuit, however, the less obvious cumulative aspects of air strategy frequently have important ramifications. First, the cases demonstrate that regardless of the duration of the campaigns (the time factor), the resource base and its erosion as a result of operations must be a consideration (the force factor). In a short campaign, either the immediately available resource base must be sufficient to resupply the force's attrition losses, or operations must be significantly more efficient than those of the adversary. During the Battle of Britain, the Germans did not have sufficient resources to prevail over the British, nor could they produce such resources in the course of a short campaign. This problem was compounded by the fact that the Luftwaffe did not have a favorable attrition rate vis-à-vis the RAF. In fact, it was the opposite case since Luftwaffe loss rates outstripped Fighter Command's statistics. In a longer campaign, while the immediate efficiency of operations might not be a factor in countering attrition costs of the campaign, strategic-level decisions must be made in sufficient time to reinforce equipment and manpower for the campaign's long-term attrition demands. In the case of the CBO and SWPA operations, the Allies realized they had time to build up