# ID: b4a5bd96e0f4444c87f098fb878b6c4c
# Title: The roots of military doctrine: Change and continuity in understanding the practice of warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
In making this observation it must be remembered that during this period "modern" militaries had not yet been fully institutionalized, even within the most "advanced" European states.
For this reason, they cannot be expected by this era to have developed an institutional discourse.
Charles Tilly, Coercion,  Capital, and European States, AD 990-1992, Oxford: Blackwell, 1992, pp.
67-95.
 Principles of War, Contributions in Military History No.
30, Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1982, which traces the routes of the principles of war to Sun Tzu, but nevertheless observes that their popularization within the West began during the 18 th century.
30.
Echevarria's insight is itself an indication of the implicit ontological assumptions made within tactical doctrine.
In this case the assumption is that war is the province of states, while battle is the province of armies.
Antulio J. Echevarria  33.
There have of course been many second school doctrine manuals that address how to combat non-state groups.
The assertion here is not that there has not been, but rather that different approaches are needed to meet different challenges.
This doctrine only becomes irrelevant if the manuals available (or consulted) do not contain the appropriate approach for addressing the challenge at hand.
On second school doctrine written about how to combat non-state groups, see: Max 38.
Spiller, "In the Shadow of the Dragon," pp.
15-6.
  39.
In Spiller's words, "the October War had the effect of organizing knowledge in the absence of operational theory.
What had been until now a collection of undifferentiated suppositions and disparate intentions was given substance and an organized framework from which specific reforms could be undertaken."
Spiller, p. 27.
43.
For the purposes of this monograph, details of the content of this manual are less important than the process and debate surrounding its development.
Readers interested in more details about the content of this manual and the criticisms it drew are encouraged to consult: Doughty, pp.
40-6.
  44.
For a concise overview of the "AirLand Battle" concept, see: John L. 46.
The implications of this for the Prussian/German and Russian/Soviet militaries are that in these militaries the second and third schools of doctrinal ontology appeared in a much closer succession than they did in the English speaking militaries that are the subject of discussion herein.
Because of the limits of this study (it's focus on English speaking militaries) the implications of this difference are not discussed here.
On the reasons for the U.S. lag behind Germany and Russia, see: Vego, Joint Operational Warfare, pp.
I. 15  85.
An interesting aside is that New Zealand not only fits within this construct, but occupies a position where one would logically expect to find it given the small size of its military relative to the other English-speaking militaries examined.
Each of its Services briefly engaged in the production of third and fourth school doctrine during the early and mid-1990s, prior to deferring to foreign, usually Australian, doctrine, in lieu of undertaking further internal doctrine development in these schools.
Since the early-2000s the New Zealand Defence Force has produced comprehensive joint doctrine manuals that fit within both of these schools, with the content of these manuals being strongly influenced by conceptual developments featured in allied doctrine, again primarily that of Australia.
Thus, relative to the U.S., New Zealand appears to be situated in a more outer circle than either Canada or Australia, although another thought community also appears extant wherein Australian doctrine writers occupy an inner circle and New Zealand doctrine writers an outer circle.