# ID: b4a5bd96e0f4444c87f098fb878b6c4c
# Title: The roots of military doctrine: Change and continuity in understanding the practice of warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
During the 1980s a fable circulated within the US Army concerning Soviet planning for a potential war with the United States. In the most common version, a Soviet general is alleged to have declared in frustration, "It is impossible to plan against the Americans because they don't follow their own doctrine." Many readers of this book will have heard (or said) that "doctrine is only a guide." Indeed, the tactical agility demonstrated by the US Army on the battlefields of Iraq and Afghanistan is due in no small part to a cultural imperative that prizes solutions above all else.
While not disputing the value of unorthodox solutions to difficult challenges, the organizational culture that underpins this perspective has resulted in a widespread lack of knowledge of Army doctrine by company and field grade officers and mid-level and senior noncommissioned officers. Recognizing this, the Army has dramatically re-engineered its doctrine to distill the timeless principles into a series of accessible, easily read documents. This process has led to a larger discussion of what should and should not be called "doctrine," and has also included discussion of how we as members of the profession of arms conceptualize warfare. Unfortunately, this conversation has not yet included the bulk of the Army's mid-level leaders.
Dr. Jackson's monograph is an excellent contribution to remedy that shortfall. Its greatest value lies in the fact that it forces the reader to reconsider basic assumptions about the purpose and utility of doctrine, and what a nation's military doctrine says about its military institution. Jackson's arguments are well reasoned, his assertions are provocative, and his conclusions are profound. After reading this work, your view and understanding of doctrine will be powerfully enhanced, and will lead to lively discussions at every level.
This monograph examines military doctrine and explains why understanding its evolution and the influences that shape it are of vital importance to military practitioners, strategists, and statesmen alike. Doctrine, defined herein as the expression of a military's institutional "belief system," constitutes a significant yet hitherto unrecognized means by which this belief system can be understood and evaluated. This understanding and evaluation is in turn important because it is this belief system that determines the way a military fights, the relationship it will have with the state and society that sustain it, and its institutional culture.
To get the belief system right means good strategy, victory, stable civilmilitary relations, and organizational wellbeing. Getting it wrong means sub-optimal strategy and operational outcomes or even defeat, strained civil-military relationships, and organizational dysfunction. This is why it is vital that military practitioners, strategists, and statesmen all have a well-developed understanding of this belief system and its implications. Yet currently, many do so only subconsciously, if at all. The aim of this monograph is to help make this understanding explicit.
The potentially detrimental results of many military practitioners, strategists, and statesmen having developed only an implicit understanding of the military belief system can be seen in the state of conceptual confusion that has reigned since the end of the Cold War. Today, Western militaries are awash with competing and contrasting terms, ideas, and concepts. As Colin S. Gray recently observed, "Americans in the 2000s went to war and by and large have remained conceptually wounded." 
1
2
3
4
To address this conceptual crisis as well as to address or avert other potentially detrimental results of the failure to develop an explicit understanding of the military belief system, it is necessary to address the underlying cause of this failure. This requires going to the heart of what a military institutionally (and by inference what the community of practitioners that constitute it) believes and making these beliefs explicitly known. What is a legitimate understanding of the military's role considered to be and what is considered illegitimate? And why is that the case? Only once these questions are answered can the cause of the conceptual crisis be understood and only then can it be properly addressed. Making knowledge of a military's institutional belief system explicit is vital because this system needs to be founded upon a robust intellectual construct to ensure that strategic, operational, and tactical analysis is sound. If this intellectual construct is not robust, buzzwords will continue to proliferate but performance will nonetheless falter. This monograph examines the evolution and nature of the belief systems of western militaries through an analysis of their military doctrine. More specifically, it examines the meaning and significance of the ways in which English speaking western militaries conceptualize, develop, implement, and reform their doctrine. 
5
In undertaking its analysis, this monograph chronicles the evolution of military doctrine since the 17th century. It employs ontology and epistemology as the key tools for its analysis even though in military circles these are not commonly used terms (Robert Leonhard, for example, remarked that "as a professional infantry officer, when I first heard the word epistemology, I thought it had something to do with field sanitation!"). 
6
7
This monograph proceeds in six chapters, this being the first. In the next section of this chapter key terms are defined including military doctrine, epistemology and ontology, and their interrelationships are also examined.
The second chapter offers a history of military doctrine from its emergence in the early 17th century to the end of the 20th. This discussion is undertaken from an ontological perspective and it is determined that doctrinal ontology can be divided into four "schools," each of which emerged at a different point in doctrinal history. These schools are labeled the technical manual, tactical manual, operational manual, and military strategic manual schools, with the delineation between each school being determined by three factors. First, the scope of the content and intended audience broadens between each school. Second, the manner in which manuals in each school is applied varies with manuals in each successive school being applied respectively as instruction manuals, training aids, guidance, and as instruments for analysis. Third, each manual has a different type of relationship to a military's accepted institutional ontology. This relationship can be described as absent (technical manual school), implicit (tactical manual school), explicit (operational manual school), and inquisitive (military strategic school), by which it is meant that manuals in the fourth school are used as a means to examine ontological questions and pose answers to those questions.
In the third chapter, the relationship between these schools is analyzed from training and educational, scientific and bureaucratic perspectives. These perspectives are adopted because each sheds light on a different aspect of the military's institutional belief system as it is expressed within doctrine and together these perspectives also explore the range and significance of the relationships between doctrine, strategy, the military, and its environment. It is also determined in this chapter that despite the differences between each of the four ontological schools, doctrine has nevertheless consistently employed ontological realism as the basis of its discourse. This has formed an enduring bond between each of the schools of doctrinal ontology and has usually ensured that they remain mutually compatible despite the different scope of their focus.
Turning next to the epistemology of doctrine, the fourth chapter determines that positivism, an approach characterized by (self-proclaimed) rationality and objectivity, has provided the epistemological foundation of doctrine for the first four hundred years of its existence. As such, examples of positivist approaches abound within doctrine and include most measurable, quantifiable, or linear processes such as that used to determine when a soldier has qualified on a weapon system or even the military planning process itself.
While positivism remains dominant, since the start of the 21st century anti-positivism, emphasizing relativity and subjectivity, has begun to influence doctrine, signaling what is perhaps the most salient change in the nature of doctrine since its inception. The emergence of this new epistemological approach and the state of the debate surrounding its most prominent manifestation to date (that being the "design" concept featured in several recent US Army, Marine Corps and joint doctrine manuals) is also addressed in the fourth chapter. 
8
9
The idea of doctrine as a belief system is revisited in the conclusion (Chapter 6) and the monograph's core argument-that developing an explicit comprehension of the ontology and epistemology of military doctrine will assist military practitioners, strategists, statesmen, and doctrine writers to ensure that the institutional belief system doctrine represents is founded upon a robust intellectual construct-is elaborated. This is of the utmost importance because a robust appropriate institutional belief system (and the doctrine that represents it) contributes greatly to determining whether a military will succeed or fail at implementing national strategy and strategic policy, at developing corresponding military strategy, and at conducting military operations.
Before proceeding, it is pertinent to note that this monograph's focus is limited to the doctrine produced by English speaking militaries. Other militaries are discussed but only in instances where their doctrine has subsequently had a substantial impact within their English speaking counterparts. In the words of Azar Gat, "the center of military thought has normally tended to follow the center of military power." 
10
The first problem encountered when attempting a study of military doctrine is definitional. Specifically, the term "doctrine" has been defined in so many ways that it has become thoroughly ill-defined. 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Third, there is general acceptance (often implicitly) that doctrine is essentially cognitive in nature. The sources quoted in the opening paragraph of this section all hint at this aspect and it is also central to the definition of doctrine embraced herein. As Dennis Drew and Donald Snow observe, "the use of the word believe [in the definition of doctrine] suggests that doctrine is the result of an examination and interpretation of the available evidence." 
20
21
Because epistemology is concerned primarily with knowledge acquisition and development, doctrine is understood to play an inherently epistemological role within the military institutions that produce it. Discussion herein is thus unavoidably epistemological also, and the term warrants further explanation. As an academic discipline, epistemology is the branch of philosophy that examines theories of knowledge. 
22
23
24
25
26
While at first glance this seems to imply a hierarchical relationship, epistemology and ontology are actually interrelated, meaning that they continually shape one another. To illustrate this by continuing the above example, let's suppose that a military determines (using an epistemological process) that it is best to produce two separate doctrine manuals, one discussing military strategies for winning irregular warfare and the other military strategies for winning conventional warfare. In this case, the ontological model adopted will in turn influence the subsequent epistemological process that determines exactly what type of strategy will be established within each of the two manuals.
A simple, "real-world" example of the overlapping nature of ontological and epistemological processes is US Marine Corps General James Mattis' well-known memorandum ordering US Joint Forces Command to cease using the term "effects based operations." In declaring that "a clear understanding of [this] concept has proven problematic and elusive for US and multinational personnel," Mattis showed that he considered-although it is unlikely that he did so in these terms-that the concept's ontology was not sound and that its implementation did not align with the epistemological processes that he as a military practitioner considered warranted.  
This chapter offers a reconsideration of the history of written military doctrine. Its discussion proceeds chronologically but ontology is used as its principle analytical tool (doctrinal epistemology is discussed in later chapters). Through this history, it is determined that doctrine manuals can be grouped into four "schools," which can be labeled the technical manual, tactical manual, operational manual and military strategic manual schools.
In addition to each school having emerged at a different point in time and as a result of different events, there are three noticeable distinctions between the schools. First is the nature of their relationship to a military's ontology. Doctrine in the technical manual school has no relationship to a military's ontology, as manuals in this school discuss matters at a micro scale without discussing how these connect to other matters (an instruction manual for the employment of a weapon system is a typical example of this doctrine). Tactical manuals have an implicit relationship with ontology as they assume away "bigger picture" aspects of military endeavor in order to concentrate on events within a localized time and space (such as the "battlefield").
Operational manuals have an explicit relationship with a military's ontology as they define preferred methods of conducting military activities but their scope is nevertheless limited, although they may detail the relationship a military has with the state and the types of operations it expects to undertake, they give these details as though they are a constant and usually do so only to the extent necessary in order to explain why particular operating methods have been established. Military strategic manuals take their discussion a step further, constituting a means by which militaries examine a broad range of ontological questions and pose answers to them. In addition to proffering an approach to strategic or operational conduct that is likely to overcome the challenges posed within a given environment, they also actively seek to define the nature of these challenges and to determine what the environment itself is and, in some cases, why it is.
The second noticeable distinction between the four schools is that the scope of the contents and the intended audience broadens between each school. At one end of the spectrum, technical manuals are usually aimed at users of specific systems within segments of the military while at the other end, military strategic manuals are usually aimed at broad internal (military) and external audiences. The final distinction is that the manner in which the manuals in each school are applied varies with manuals in each successive school being applied respectively as instruction manuals, training aids, guidance, and as instruments for analysis.
The written doctrine of Western militaries has a lineage dating to 1607 when "the first modern drill book" was published. The book, Wapenhandlingen van Roers, Musqetten, Ende Spiessen [Arms Drill with Arquebus, Musket, and Pike], contained-in the form of a series of sketches-instructions for the correct employment of the modern weapon systems of its day. Its publication in Amsterdam the year after the establishment of the first modern Military Training Academy at Sedan in northern France is a noteworthy coincidence. 
1
3
5
6
Although doctrine that fits within the technical manual school is almost always "micro" in focus, it occasionally transcends this focus and has a "macro" effect. The US Army's "training revolution" of the early 1970s is a good example: [General Paul M.] Gorman formed a joint army-academic analysis group and instructed them to identify and list all the steps necessary to accomplish a particular task or mission in the most efficient manner. They then distributed these lists in the form of training manuals mandating exactly how each task was to be performed. An annual evaluation is the final step in the process, requiring soldiers and units to demonstrate their mastery of these "skill sets." 
7
8
9
In the absence of other schools of written doctrine what has instead existed beyond technical manuals has generally been transient, informal, and highly personalized. Doctrine of this nature has been identified historically within the British Army:
Largely eschewing formal written doctrine, the Army made a cult of pragmatism, flexibility, and an empirical approach…That is not to say that the British Army entirely neglected "doctrine" broadly defined…However, doctrine tended to be semi-formal at best was centered around one individual commander or existed in a specific set of circumstances (usually high-intensity war) and was not necessarily easily transferrable elsewhere; and in some cases it was more honored in the breach than the observance. 
10
11
12
13
To the extent that broad publics thought about problems of war and peace, they were generally resigned to war as a fixed characteristic of human life or as a divine punishment for the sins of people. War was taken for granted. Causes and consequences were not the object of study or speculation. Writers were more interested in the details of diplomatic maneuvers and military campaigns. 
14
The expanded armed forces of the period developed in a fashion that did not challenge the social reality of societies organized around the principles of inegalitarianism and inheritance. Larger armies brought more opportunities to nobles who benefited both from the assumption that they were naturally suited for positions of command and from the fact that this was usually the case. Thus, armies were not forces "outside" society but rather reflections of patterns of social control and influence and the beliefs that gave cohesion to them. 
15
16
Despite the ongoing primacy of unwritten doctrine, accompanied by a limited number of manuals that fit within the first school of written doctrine, the 18th century nevertheless witnessed the production of the first theoretical treatises that aligned with the second school. During the latter part of the 18th century in particular, several military theorists offered treatises that pre-empted the development of the second school. Most notably, these theorists included Paul Gideon Joly de Maizeroy and Jacques Antoine Hippolyte Comte de Guibert in France, Henry Humphrey Evans Lloyd in Britain, and Adam Heinrich Dietrich von Bürlow in Prussia. Together with a few others, these writers began to theorize about tactics mostly using a mixture of historical studies of earlyto-mid-18th century warfare and Roman warfare and the application of geometry as their methodology. 
17
18
[N]either Wellington nor Napoleon had doctrinal manuals describing for them the principles of war and the approach they should take towards operations. However, even while Napoleon was still campaigning, the famous Swiss military commentator Baron Henri Jomini began publishing works purporting to explain Napoleon's method…As militaries professionalized and standardized (and bureaucratized), there came about an increasing tendency to formalize not just the tactical details of drill but the very approach to war that higher commanders should take…by 1914 this approach was quite formally established in all major Western forces to a greater or lesser extent. 
19
20
Just as they triggered drastic reforms to the social structure of several European states, so too did the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars bring about a change in common attitudes towards and the prosecution of warfare. 
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
In the US Army this concentration led to the development of what has since been labeled the "American Way of War" (or as Antulio Echevarria has suggested, what might be more accurately called the "American Way of Battle"). 
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
Although the "AirLand Battle" concept was central to the 1982 edition of FM 100-5, 44 the manual's key ontological contribution was to assert the existence of an operational level of warfare. Stating that "operational level of war uses available military resources to attain strategic goals within a theater of war," the doctrine also determined that "military strategy employs the armed forces of a nation to secure the objectives of national policy" and that "tactics are the specific techniques smaller units use to win battles and engagements which support operational objectives." 
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
The second noteworthy difference between the 1982 edition of FM 100-5 and previous doctrine was that the process used to develop and refine the new manual was a radical departure from what had previously occurred. Hitherto, doctrine had tended to be written by individuals or small teams and then circulated to a limited audience for pre-release feedback. The new process, later summarized by John Romjue, was much broader in scope:
The development of the new doctrine was one thing, its acceptance by the Army and an influential cadre of civilian defense writers and critics was another. Fresh in memory was the debate over the 1976 version of FM 100-5 with its active defense doctrine. In 1981, TRADOC Headquarters proceeded differently from the way it had with the 1976 concept. First, [then Commander of TRADOC] General Starry took pains to include the Army at large in the development of AirLand Battle, disseminating information through briefings and wide circulation of Fort Leavenworth's draft of the new FM 100-5 during 1981. The doctrine was well received. AirLand Battle was an offence-oriented doctrine that the Army found intellectually, as well as analytically, convincing. 
54
No longer was the role of doctrine limited to the dissemination of technical instructions and tactical best-practice. Instead, doctrine manuals became a mechanism for disseminating analytically sound theoretically-derived operational concepts that prompted commanders to engage with them in a much more intellectual manner than had previously been the case. Due to this intent, the third school of doctrinal ontology could be labeled the "operational manual" school. Manuals in this school have tended to be applied to provide "guidance" for operational commanders and planning staff. This doctrinal role has been accompanied by major changes in the pedagogical use of doctrine. Specifically, its usage has increased markedly in prominence within intermediate and senior level officer education courses. 
55
56
57
Like the 1982 edition of FM 100-5, the new edition of FMFM 1 explicitly recognized the existence of an operational level of warfare and in so doing, expressed the USMC's acceptance of a similar ontological outlook to that of the Army. This was not, however, the central concept featured within the manual. Instead, its key conceptual contribution was its development of maneuver warfare, which was defined as "a warfighting philosophy that seeks to shatter the enemy's cohesion through a series of rapid, violent, and unexpected actions which create a turbulent and rapidly deteriorating situation with which he cannot cope." 
58
The 1992 edition of Air Force Manual (AFM) 1-1 Basic Aerospace Doctrine of the United States Air Force was the equivalent US Air Force (USAF) publication. For the first time in USAF doctrine, this manual incorporated a discussion of the operational level of conflict. However its main conceptual contribution was the elaboration of seven "tenets of aerospace power." 
59
60
61
62
64
65
66
67
68
69
The third school of doctrinal ontology also spread to the militaries of key English speaking US allies. The examples of Britain, Canada, and Australia are illustrative. In Britain, the Army was the first of the three services to experiment with doctrine in the third ontological school, although the inspiration for this experimentation has been contested. on one hand, Markus Mäder, has observed that it was "in close alignment with the US Armed Forces' reorientation after the Vietnam War and their development of an AirLand Battle concept for the European battlefield." 70 Hew Strachan, on the other, has asserted that the intellectual inspiration for General Sir Nigel Bagnall's (Chief of the General Staff from 1985-88) decision to adopt the operational level of war was the German Army and that "the British army mirrored but was independent of comparable trends in the United States." 
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
Army. 82
One must situate the paradigm shift within the context of a single group of military professionals defined by a common purpose rather than locating it in two distinct groups separated by nationality… The experts within the larger collective were the doctrine writers and then the practitioners of the United States Army…None of the hallmarks of the paradigm shift [that could be] attributed to professional discourse took place in Canada because it had already occurred in the United States. The Canadian military implicitly viewed itself as part of a single community of practice that extended across the continent and followed the paradigm shift that had taken place. 
83
From the available evidence, it appears that the extent of the influence of international developments as a substitute for domestic debate is related to the size of the military in question. The larger the military, the greater the extent of the intellectual debate surrounding the emergence of the third school of doctrinal ontology. This notion aligns with Fleck's conception of the structure and pattern of communication within a thought collective. "This group [the experts] communicates knowledge within a circle of laypeople that provides feedback on these views. Knowledge passes from the inner to outer circles and back again so that this cycle is strengthened and collectivized." 
84
85
88
89
90
91
By the mid-1990s the third school of doctrinal ontology had proliferated to most English speaking militaries. However, the global strategic situation was changing drastically during the same period, generating unusually high and widespread levels of strategic uncertainty for Western militaries. This uncertainty was initially generated by the fall of the Berlin Wall and the subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union. Over the next few years, this would be accompanied by Iraq's unexpected invasion of Kuwait leading to an equally unexpected US success in repelling Iraqi forces, substantial post-Cold War military budget cuts, renewed policy debate about homosexual and female integration in military and combat units, the need to integrate an array of newly emergent technologies, and finally by the onset of an awkward transition from peacekeeping to peace enforcement which involved the conduct of bloody, indecisive, or ultimately failed operations in several places, most notably Somalia and the former Yugoslavia. 
92
94
95
The Army presents a preferred style of warfare. The [Royal]  Navy is cautious about prescription and offers what is essentially a conceptual framework, distilling wisdom from the corpus of work on maritime strategic theory. The Royal Air Force provides a rigorous and coherent analysis of tasks within an overall framework of principles and in so doing, makes a logical case for an independent air force. 
96
97
98
99
100
101
103
104
106
107
109
110
112
113
114
In the face of the uncertainty that followed, doctrine became at once "the military's instrument for analyzing past experience, guiding current operations, and exploring future challenges" or what could be labeled an "instrument for analysis." 
115
In a few significant ways, doctrine in the fourth school is similar to that in the third. It plays a vital role in establishing the military's perception of its role in relation to society, the state, and government policy for example. It also constitutes a mechanism for disseminating theoretically derived concepts that prompt intellectual engagement, however evidence of the ontological uncertainty of the period abounds in the plethora of new concepts that have been included in the doctrine manuals that together constitute the fourth school. These concepts have notably included the Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA), effects based operations (EBO), network centric warfare (NCW), military operations other than war (MOOTW), stability and support operations (SASO), and rapid decisive operations (RDO) to name but a few. 
116
117
119
5. Childs, "The Military Revolution I," p. 33.
In making this observation it must be remembered that during this period "modern" militaries had not yet been fully institutionalized, even within the most "advanced" European states. For this reason, they cannot be expected by this era to have developed an institutional discourse. Charles Tilly, Coercion,  Capital, and European States, AD 990-1992, Oxford: Blackwell, 1992, pp. 67-95.  Principles of War, Contributions in Military History No. 30, Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1982, which traces the routes of the principles of war to Sun Tzu, but nevertheless observes that their popularization within the West began during the 18 th century. 30. Echevarria's insight is itself an indication of the implicit ontological assumptions made within tactical doctrine. In this case the assumption is that war is the province of states, while battle is the province of armies. Antulio J. Echevarria  33. There have of course been many second school doctrine manuals that address how to combat non-state groups. The assertion here is not that there has not been, but rather that different approaches are needed to meet different challenges. This doctrine only becomes irrelevant if the manuals available (or consulted) do not contain the appropriate approach for addressing the challenge at hand. On second school doctrine written about how to combat non-state groups, see: Max 38. Spiller, "In the Shadow of the Dragon," pp. 15-6.   39. In Spiller's words, "the October War had the effect of organizing knowledge in the absence of operational theory. What had been until now a collection of undifferentiated suppositions and disparate intentions was given substance and an organized framework from which specific reforms could be undertaken." Spiller, p. 27. 43. For the purposes of this monograph, details of the content of this manual are less important than the process and debate surrounding its development. Readers interested in more details about the content of this manual and the criticisms it drew are encouraged to consult: Doughty, pp. 40-6.   44. For a concise overview of the "AirLand Battle" concept, see: John L. 46. The implications of this for the Prussian/German and Russian/Soviet militaries are that in these militaries the second and third schools of doctrinal ontology appeared in a much closer succession than they did in the English speaking militaries that are the subject of discussion herein. Because of the limits of this study (it's focus on English speaking militaries) the implications of this difference are not discussed here. On the reasons for the U.S. lag behind Germany and Russia, see: Vego, Joint Operational Warfare, pp. I. 15  85. An interesting aside is that New Zealand not only fits within this construct, but occupies a position where one would logically expect to find it given the small size of its military relative to the other English-speaking militaries examined. Each of its Services briefly engaged in the production of third and fourth school doctrine during the early and mid-1990s, prior to deferring to foreign, usually Australian, doctrine, in lieu of undertaking further internal doctrine development in these schools. Since the early-2000s the New Zealand Defence Force has produced comprehensive joint doctrine manuals that fit within both of these schools, with the content of these manuals being strongly influenced by conceptual developments featured in allied doctrine, again primarily that of Australia. Thus, relative to the U.S., New Zealand appears to be situated in a more outer circle than either Canada or Australia, although another thought community also appears extant wherein Australian doctrine writers occupy an inner circle and New Zealand doctrine writers an outer circle.
For further details about doctrine development in New Zealand, see: Aaron P. 89. Even though the U.S. military stresses the need for interoperability and constantly takes measures to enhance it, interoperability is nevertheless a more pressing concern for its smaller allies. The reasons for this are summarized by Middlemiss and Stairs: "It should be clear that, in any military alliance, interoperability is primarily an issue for the lesser powers. This is because it is the lesser powers that must deal with the military equivalent of "keeping up with the Joneses." Nowhere has this been more starkly revealed than in NATO, where all the members, save in some degree the United Kingdom and France, have found it a perennially daunting challenge to maintain military forces that can operate effectively with the vastly superior military establishment of the United 93. For a prominent example of this debate, see: Charles Krauthammer, "The Unipolar Moment," Foreign Affairs, Vol. 70, No. 1, Winter 1990-1, pp. 23-33.   94. This division has been promulgated within some capstone doctrine manuals. See, for example: British Armed Forces, Joint Warfare Publication (JWP) 0-01 British Defence Doctrine, 1 st ed., London: Her Britannic Majesty's Stationary Office, 1997, pp. 1.8-1.9; Australian Defence Force, Australian Defence Doctrine Publication-Doctrine (ADDP-D) Foundations of Australian Military Doctrine, 2 nd ed., Canberra: Defence Publishing Service, July 2005, para. 1.7.
95. Doctrine hierarchies have long contained designated keystone or capstone manuals. Prior to the emergence of the fourth school of doctrinal ontology, these manuals were often accompanied by several other manuals in the hierarchy that fit within the same ontological school. The important difference between these and manuals in the fourth school is that fourth school manuals are generally the only manual of their school within a hierarchy. Below them, it is common to find the remainder of the hierarchy consists of several operational, tactical and technical manuals. 97. In a study of military strategic doctrine in these three countries, this author found several similarities between each army, navy and air force, but few similarities between the three services of each country. The key reason for this was service culture, which caused army doctrine to have a "downwards" focus (providing guidance for operational conduct was the key concern), navy doctrine to have an "upwards" focus (justifying funding for acquisitions to government was the key concern) and air force doctrine had an "inwards" focus (educating airmen about the significance of air power was the key concern). Interestingly, joint doctrine exhibited elements of all three of these foci as well as a fourth, "outwards" focus, to which end it was employed as a device for explaining military strategy to the general public. Aaron P. Jackson, Doctrine, Strategy and  Military Culture: Military-Strategic Doctrine Development in Australia, Canada  and New Zealand, 1987-2007, Trenton, ON: Canadian Forces Aerospace  Warfare Centre, 2013.   98. A holistic study of U.S. military strategic doctrine development and its impact is notably absent from the existing literature. Although some, such as Chapman, provide a starting point, their work is nonetheless limited. Chapman, for example, focuses on doctrine development since World War Two, providing a general overview rather than examining military strategic doctrine development specifically. As his main objective is to identify sources available for further research, his analysis is understandably limited. In contrast, the development and significance of military strategic doctrine in Britain, Australia, Canada and New Zealand has been the subject of comprehensive analysis. See: 
The Relationship between the Four Schools By the end of the 20th century, four distinct schools of doctrinal ontology had emerged within English speaking western militaries. Before proceeding to discuss the epistemology underlying these schools and the impact of the developments of the early 21st century, it is first pertinent to reflect on the nature of the relationship between these schools. This relationship is important as it situates the emergence of each school within its broader intellectual context while concurrently allowing for the conduct of a detailed analysis of the significance of each in relation to the others.
In this chapter, the relationship between the schools is analyzed from three different perspectives: the educational, the scientific, and the bureaucratic. These perspectives are adopted because each sheds light on a different aspect of the military's institutional belief system as it is expressed within doctrine and together these perspectives also explore the range and significance of the relationships between doctrine, strategy, the military and its environment. It is subsequently determined that despite the differences between each of the four ontological schools, doctrine has nevertheless consistently employed ontological realism as the basis of its discourse. This has formed an enduring bond between each of the schools of doctrinal ontology and has usually ensured that they remain mutually compatible despite the different scope of their focus.
The first of these perspectives relates primarily to the role of doctrine in the delivery of professional military training and education (the difference between training and education is that training is designed to teach a skill whereas education is designed to increase the recipient's knowledge). 
1
2
Entry level formation…is based on engineering and the assumptions that one is to focus on learning how to apply known procedures to address the profession's (tactical) issues. Mid-level Officer…and senior [non-commissioned member]… formation is based on the natural sciences and the assumption that, at this level, one must learn how to develop general (operational) plans of action and update existing (tactical) procedures through some form of structured analysis (the Operational Planning Process dominates). Senior level Officer [formation is] based on the liberal arts and the assumption that, at the most senior level, one must learn how to analyze complex issues to establish (strategic) guidance which, in turn, informs operational planning. 
3
4
The significant challenge identified is that individuals have to transit across all three major faculties of engineering, sciences, and the arts while also expanding their focus from mastery of the military arena…[to] the full spectrum of government objectives… the key conclusion is that those moving to the most senior staff roles also need to move away from predominant reliance on engineering models based on the assumptions of a knowable, definable, programmable world to adopting philosophical models that acknowledge that one rarely gets the question right let alone determines the answers with absolute certainty. 
5
Throughout one's military career, doctrine in the technical manual school is consulted to provide instructions about the employment specific systems. Manuals in this school thus enable training to be conducted with the intent of teaching military practitioners the technical skills they need to do their job. Although technical manuals are more likely to be of relevance to those employed in technical trades (such as artillery or engineers) or to those in the initial stages of their career, there may nevertheless be cause for those at any stage of their career to "consult the instruction manual" if required. Thus, doctrine manuals in this school form a foundation for training throughout one's career.
In alignment with Okros' analogy, doctrine in the tactical manual school can be viewed primarily as a training aid for military "engineers." This doctrine is produced with the underlying assumption that the problems confronting tactical forces are knowable, definable and, to an extent, programmable (regardless of how frequently "re-programming" may be required). Accordingly, the employment of this doctrine as a training aid aligns with the requirements of training military practitioners using an engineering approach. Doctrine in the other two schools assists in the delivery of education, rather than in the conduct of training. Continuing with Okros' analogy, doctrine in the operational manual school is targeted at an audience of military "natural scientists." In the words of R. K. Taylor, it "is more about creating a framework within which to prepare, plan, and conduct operations…rather than [establishing] procedures on 'how to fight'." 
6
Finally, as it constitutes an instrument for analysis, doctrine in the military strategic school can be interpreted as a component of attempts to determine which ontological questions militaries need to ask. Doctrine manuals in this school therefore constitute something akin to academic textbooks for military "arts" students who (to again paraphrase Okros) are required to analyze a myriad of complex problems as they arise, determine their own creative solutions and while in the process of doing so, define which questions need to be answered. To this end the philosophies, principles, and concepts contained in doctrine manuals that fit within this school fill two roles. In the first, they are an expression of thought about the nature of the strategic questions confronting militaries, and in the second, they are an important source of intellectual support to which military practitioners can refer when justifying why they have determined to ask certain questions. Coincidentally, this latter role corresponds to the citation by arts students of texts that support the hypotheses of their papers.
From the training and educational perspective, it can be seen that the emergence of each school of doctrinal ontology roughly corresponds with major developments in the expansion of formalized professional military training and education programs. As previously mentioned, the publication of "the first modern drill book," Wapenhandlingen van Roers, Musqetten ende Spiessen, the year after the establishment of the first modern military academy, is a noteworthy coincidence. 
7
8
9
10
11 Alongside these changes is the trend in most English speaking militaries towards an ever increasing percentage of officers holding tertiary or even postgraduate degrees.
The second perspective from which the relationship between the schools of doctrinal ontology can be analyzed is the scientific perspective. In conducting this analysis, the work of Antoine Bousquet is most useful. Conducting "enquiry into the profound interrelationship of science and warfare," Bousquet determined that "throughout the modern era the dominant corpus of scientific ideas has been reflected in the contemporary theories and practices of warfare in the Western world." 
12
13
Bousquet. 14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
The third scientific regime Bousquet identified is the cybernetic and its dominant metaphor is the computer, an apparatus designed to capture information from its environment, process it, and then transmit the results back into the environment thus potentially creating a "feedback loop." This regime has its origins in the technological developments of the Second World War and became a dominant scientific paradigm during the decades thereafter. 
22
23
24
This influence was subtle, however. The 1982 edition of FM 100-5 is illustrative. Despite prominently discussing command and control and addressing the employment and effect of several cybernetic technologies such as sensors and electronic warfare, the cybernetic regime was not immediately evident in most of the content of this manual. 
25
26
The final regime is termed "chaoplexity" by Bousquet in a deliberate amalgamation of the terms "chaos theory" and "complexity science," the two dominant scientific paradigms underlying it. 
27
28
29
30
31
32
Overall, from the scientific perspective it can be seen that each of the four scientific regimes identified by Bousquet has had a substantial influence on the development of concepts featured within the doctrine produced during the period of its epoch and that each of the regimes has left a noticeable conceptual legacy thereafter. As the emergence of each of the schools of doctrinal ontology has coincided with the dominance of a different scientific regime, the scientific undercurrents of the doctrine in each school can be seen to have expanded from the last. In light of this, it is possible to determine the existence an ongoing relationship between the progress of scientific endeavor on one hand and the content of doctrine on the other.
The third perspective from which the relationship between the schools of doctrinal ontology can be analyzed is the bureaucratic perspective. Unlike the educational and scientific perspectives, analysis from the bureaucratic perspective is not linked to the writings of any particular individual. Instead, analysis from the bureaucratic perspective draws on various examinations of the rise and expansion of the modern state. It is posited that through this lens the expansion of doctrine can be seen to have paralleled crucial changes in the nature of the states that sustain modern military forces.
The emergence of the modern state, and for that matter of the statecentric international system in which modern militaries purport to operate, is contentious and alternate dates have been suggested. While those attempting to specify a precise date often cite the proclamation of the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, 
33
34
35
36
37
The period following the Peace of Westphalia was dominated by the monarchic governance of European states, by the occurrence of "limited wars" and by the expansion of European power into newly-established colonies. The practice of warfare during this period remained limited to the conduct of war by permanent "volunteer" military forces that were officered primarily by members of the aristocracy. The role, scope, and modus operandi of the state and its institutions evolved slowly throughout this period, at least relatively to those preceding and following it. 
38
The revolutions in North America from 1774 to 1783 and France from 1789 to 1799 brought fundamental changes to the relationship between states and society. In particular, the concept of citizenship was drastically altered. After the revolutions, citizenship became universal and a new relationship between "the people" and the state was established wherein the people were subjected to increased state jurisdiction in exchange for an increased stake in the state itself. 
39
40
Gradual expansion of the state continued into the 20 th century, accelerating during the decades following the Second World War. As mentioned above, this encompassed most prominently the expansion of public education and welfare mechanisms as popular notions of citizens' rights again expanded during this period. This is related to the expanding concept of human rights that was traditionally confined to civil and political rights (such as those granted by the Bill of Rights enshrined within the US Constitution), but which has more recently expanded to include economic rights (such as freedom from poverty and access to education) and social and cultural rights (to ensure the protection of culture and identity). 
41
42
43
44
Just as the appearance of the first and second schools of doctrinal ontology coincided with certain key aspects of state emergence and expansion, so too did the third and fourth. The singular explicit ontology of doctrine in the third school can be viewed as the translation into writing of what had, by the latter part of the 20th century, become the dominant idealized model of the state/military relationship. 
45
46
47
48
In the period following the Cold War, the ontology defined within the third school was challenged both by the removal of the Soviet military threat to the West and by the proliferation of military activities other than conventional war. As they were called upon to undertake an increasing variety of activities including most notably peace enforcement missions and the provision of humanitarian assistance, English speaking western militaries were also challenged by post-Cold War budgetary pressures. 
49
50
Viewed from the bureaucratic perspective, it can thus be determined that each of the schools of doctrinal ontology emerged either as a result of state expansion (the first and second) or because militariesunderstood to be bureaucratic institutions of the state-were acting to either increase or maintain their legitimacy (the third and fourth). It is therefore unsurprising that the expansion of the modern state, of modern military institutions, and of the scope of written doctrine, has occurred concomitantly.
When examined together, the educational, scientific, and bureaucratic perspectives reveal that the relationship between the schools of doctrinal ontology is complicated and multifaceted. Returning to the definition of doctrine given at the opening of this monograph-that doctrine is the most visible expression of a military's belief system-it can now be concluded that this belief system has been shaped by an interwoven mixture of trends that are inherent within western society itself. It is further evident that the ontology underlying written doctrine (and for that matter whether doctrine has taken written or verbal form) is related to the institutional evolution of modern militaries. Changes in doctrinal taxonomies have resulted from, and have in turn influenced, concurrent military expansion, professionalization, and bureaucratization. The nature of these changes has been strongly influenced by emerging technologies and by dominant scientific and sociological paradigms.
It is worth pausing at this juncture also to recall that ontology is the examination of the nature of being and of the first principles-or categories-involved. It is concerned with the formulation of taxonomies that enable an understanding of relationships between objects to be reached. Analysis to this point has established the existence of four distinct ontological schools of doctrine, has discussed the taxonomies identified within each, and has elaborated the significance of their evolution in relation to broader trends.
Before moving onto the next chapter, a final observation about ontology is required. The difference between each of the four schools of doctrinal ontology is evident most clearly in the scope of their content, which incrementally, but also greatly, expands between the first and fourth schools. Despite this difference, it is also noteworthy that all of the schools have traditionally been linked by the single ontological assumption that reality exists, regardless of how individuals may perceive (or fail to perceive) its existence. Because of this, doctrine is fundamentally realist-an ontological perspective that emphasizes that the world beyond human cognition is structured and tangible regardless of whether or not humans perceive and label it. This perspective is often contrasted with nominalism, which emphasizes that the identification and labeling of structures is fundamentally necessary for establishing their existence. Without labels, reality remains unstructured. 
51
52
Having now explored the nature of doctrinal ontology, this monograph shifts its focus to the epistemology of doctrine. To this end, the first section of this chapter determines that positivism, an approach characterized by (self-proclaimed) rationality and objectivity, has provided the epistemological foundation of doctrine for the first 400 years of its existence. As such, examples of positivist approaches abound within doctrine and include most measurable, quantifiable, or linear processes, such as that used to determine when a soldier has qualified on a weapon system or even the military planning process itself.
While positivism remains dominant, since the start of the 21st century anti-positivism, emphasizing relativity and subjectivity, has begun to influence doctrine, signaling what is perhaps the most salient change in the nature of written doctrine since its inception. The emergence of this new epistemological approach is chronicled in the second section of this chapter. The third section then discusses the situation that led to the emergence of the most prominent manifestation of this new epistemological approach to date -the "design" concept featured in several recent US Army, Marine Corps, and joint doctrine manuals.
Although anti-positivist approaches have already shaped contemporary operational conduct, the epistemological shift to antipositivism is still in its infancy and concepts such as design have been the subject of much recent debate. The state of the debate surrounding deign in particular is summarized in the final section of this chapter and from this it becomes clear that anti-positivist approaches have yet to reach their full potential. 1
Given the consistency with which doctrine has reflected ontological realism, it is unsurprising that its epistemology also remained constant from the 17th to the 20th centuries. Its epistemological approach is positivism, the key aspects of which require explanation. The term "positivism" was coined by philosopher Auguste Comte in the mid-19th century and his work subsequently "played a significant role in shaping the emerging social sciences in the latter half of the 19th century"-the period during which the second school of doctrinal ontology was in its adolescence. The origins of the positivist approach, however, are in the Enlightenment, an intellectual era that ran approximately from the late 17th century to the conclusion of the 18th century. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Basing his analysis on a two-dimensional continual construct featuring endurance (defined as the rate of change required to maintain doctrinal currency over time) on the horizontal axis and exclusivity (determined by the number of concepts featured in a manual) on the vertical, Paparone identified a key difference between what he labeled "highly positivist" and "moderately positivist" doctrine. 
9
Given the relevance of Paparone's work to this study, cursory though it may have been, it is worth recounting his description of each of these types of doctrine at length. Regarding highly positivist doctrine, he assessed that: Doctrinal remedies (like independent variables) for a standing list of problems (like dependent variables) can be expressed in predetermined terms of tasks and standards. For example, doctrine expressing how a Soldier, Sailor, Airman, Marine, or Coast Guardsman (military practitioner) must qualify on his or her assigned weapon can be quite effective…Effectiveness of [highly positivist] doctrine is assessed as much more objective than subjective, using mathematical probabilities and measures of effectiveness…Rule-based, sequential, well-oiled, machinelike command and control works well in executing this type of doctrine…A "trade school" (basic and advanced individual training) approach is suitable for indoctrination of Soldiers in this type. 
10
11
12
13
That positivism can be identified in doctrine manuals that fit within all four ontological schools, and in countless manuals produced across the span of several centuries, are indicative of the pervasiveness of this branch of epistemology amongst doctrine developers. 
14
The pervasiveness of doctrinal positivism is evidenced further in the official definition of doctrine employed by many Western militaries, including the US military and its North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) partners. The US definition, for example, is that doctrine constitutes "fundamental principles by which military forces or elements thereof guide their actions in support of national objectives." 
15
16
17
The implications of this intellectual foundation have been the subject of much recent analysis, although this has rarely been undertaken from an epistemological viewpoint. The timing of the growth of this analysis has been driven by two factors. The first is the implications of the emergence of Bousquet's fourth scientific regime or more specifically the growing application of chaos theory and complexity science within doctrine. The second has been a response to the nature of the wars of the early 21st century and the initial failure of doctrine to provide adequate guidance for their prosecution. Both of these factors are explored in depth in the next section but it is nevertheless necessary to mention them here as these motives, particularly the second, provide an explanation as to why much of the recent analysis of doctrinal positivism has viewed that positivism negatively. 
18
The revolution in strategy founded on a mechanistic ordering of reality has been frozen in place and the provocative doctrines of the last century have become the confining dogmas of this one… Not only does classical strategic thought seek to explain conflict in linear, sequential terms, but it compels us to reduce highly complex situations down to a few major variables. 
19
As observed above, the number of critiques of "traditional" military doctrine (that founded in positivist epistemology) has grown in recent years. 
20
21
Traditionally, we see strategic thought as the interplay of a limited number of factors, principally military, economic, and political. More sophisticated discussions expand the set to include factors such as the environment, technological development, and social pressures. Yet even this list fails to convey the full complexity of international affairs…The closer we come to an honest appreciation of the international environment, the more we must confess that it is nonlinear and frustratingly interactive. 
22
23
24
25
26
Since the onset of the major wars of the 21 st century, in particular those in Iraq and Afghanistan, the willingness of military practitioners to accept the introduction of new paradigms into doctrine has markedly increased. This is due mostly to the initial failure of positivist doctrine to provide adequate guidance for the conduct of these wars, an occurrence that brought criticism of earlier modes of doctrinal thinking into the mainstream and which triggered doctrine writers to look for new solutions to military problems.
The story of the emergence and evolution of this criticism has been widely told. Notably, its scale and pervasiveness has been compared to the "doctrinal renaissance" of the early 1980s, which itself had brought about the emergence of the third school of doctrinal ontology. Just as this "renaissance" was the result of the US military experience in Vietnam, the initial criticism of doctrine as ill-suited to the wars of the 21st century grew out of the experience of the early years of the War in Iraq.
As far as most of the popular literature is concerned, the most significant manifestation of this criticism was the development and publication of the 2006 edition of the US Army and Marine Corps Counterinsurgency doctrine manual. 
27
28
The situation leading to the development of this manual is now a familiar tale. In very brief summary, it begins sometime after the invasion and occupation of Iraq when a small but growing cadre of junior and mid-ranking US Army officers began to publically criticize the US military strategy being used there. 
29
30
31
32
33
34
This strategy was developed in close consultation with several of the officers and civilians who had previously expressed dissenting views about the prosecution of the Iraq war. It also involved an unprecedented level of collaboration between Petraeus and his USMC counterpart, Lieutenant General James Mattis, a cooperation that resulted in the manual being given positions in both the Army and USMC doctrine hierarchies. Updating the Counterinsurgency doctrine manual was the primary mechanism used to put forward the strategy with the writing team headed by a retired Army officer-turned-academic, Dr Conrad Crane. 
35
36
For the purposes of discussion herein, two components of its content are especially important. The first was a discussion of "social network analysis." Although included in an annex, this discussion was closely linked to the third chapter which addressed the role of intelligence in counterinsurgency operations, stressing the importance of building an understanding the social, economic, cultural, religious, political, ethnic and linguistic aspects of the operating environment as well as conducting more traditional analyses of enemy forces. 
37
38
Second, the Counterinsurgency manual discussed "designing counterinsurgency campaigns and operations" in its fourth chapter. The significance of this is the incorporation of design thinking into doctrine. The chapter defined "design" by contrasting it to traditional military planning:
Design and planning are qualitatively different yet interrelated activities essential for solving complex problems… Presented a problem, staffs often rush directly into planning without clearly understanding the complex environment of the situation, purpose of military involvement, and approach required to address the core issues… Planning applies established procedures to solve a largely understood problem within an accepted framework. Design inquires into the nature of a problem to conceive a framework for solving that problem. In general, planning is problem solving, while design is problem setting. Where planning focuses on generating a plan, a series of executable actions, design focuses on learning about the nature of an unfamiliar problem. 
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
From an epistemological perspective, the inclusion of social network analysis and design thinking within doctrine (as well as the USMC's earlier discussion of chaos theory within certain manuals in the MCDP series) signal a move away from doctrine's traditional positivism and towards an approach more akin to anti-positivism. Refuting the core methodology underlying positivism-i.e. objective assessment of the subject of study based on observation from a neural perspective-antipositivism instead determines that there can be no such thing as an "observer" when studying social phenomena (which include warfare, strategy, and most other areas of military endeavor such as the conduct of humanitarian operations as an example). Instead, "the social world is essentially relativistic and can only be understood from the point of view of the individuals who are directly involved in the activities which are to be studied." Hence, "one can only 'understand' by occupying the frame of reference of the participant in the action." 
46
Anti-positivism has an intellectual lineage dating to late 19th century thinkers including Max Weber and Wilhelm Dilthey. Unlike positivists, who assert that the same methodology can be applied in the natural and the social sciences, Weber, Dilthey, and subsequent anti-positivists have argued that the social sciences and humanities differ from the natural sciences and therefore require a different methodology. The key reason for this difference is that, contrary to the behavior of objects in nature, human interaction is subject to subjective influences such as human will, thought, and emotion. These influences cannot by their nature be observed objectively and for that matter cannot be accurately quantified. 
47
48
49
Paparone offered a brief analysis of the 2008 edition of FM 3-0 and of a Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) paper discussing design thinking that was published in the same year. The issue with nomenclature notwithstanding, he concluded that aspects of the 2008 edition of FM 3-0 are "moderately postpositivist," a newly-emergent doctrinal category. Rather than describing it's subject matter categorically, as Paparone observed of positivist doctrine, moderately post-positivist doctrine "would call for viewing the world through overlapping continua… this type of doctrine requires improvisation, mentally agility [sic], and collaborative military practitioners." 
50
3-0. 51
52
53
Unsurprisingly in a large organization such as the military, the introduction of anti-positivist approaches into doctrine has not been without debate. Proponents of design and other concepts applying anti-positivist approaches have lauded their employment of non-linear thinking, problem framing and emphasis on the role of subjective factors such as culture, environment, interconnectedness, and adaptation. 
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
14. There is a slight discrepancy in the wording of the U.S. and NATO definitions, but this is not substantial enough to impact on the underlying meaning, which is the same in both cases. 16. The temporal relationship between the observer and subject is also observed by Paparone, who determines that highly-positivist doctrine is "present-to-past" oriented, while moderately positivist doctrine is "present-tofuture" oriented. Unfortunately, he does not provide a great deal of detail about his reasoning in reaching this conclusion. Paparone, "FM 3-0: Operations on the Cusp of Postpositivism." 17. For an overview of these trends, see: Azar Gat, A History of Military Thought: From the Enlightenment to the Cold War, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001, Bk I, Pt 2, Bk II & Bk III. A more cynical observer might be forgiven for thinking that the caveat has been included as a disclaimer, in case the application of doctrine goes awry.
18. This criticism emerged within military circles about forty years after critiques of positivism had become widespread within the academic community not yet been (or cannot yet be) proven false. The means of determining that something is false can, however, be objective in nature. Johnson & Duberley,  Understanding Management Research, pp. 27-33.   49. Paparone's definition of post-positivism, given here verbatim, is: "Postpositivism is nested in the worldview that humans always are biased in their 'objective' perceptions of reality; hence, this orientation permits going beyond an empirical sense of reality (i.e. we can never be positive about the way the world of military operations works). Postpositivism suggest that we can only approach the truth of reality, but can never really explain it fully; hence, to appreciate the complexity of life we humans must learn to value multiple perspectives. There can be no one best way of examining the complicated truth; hence, interdisciplinary interpretations are necessary to study reality. Rather than pursuing a quest for an objective, physical sense of reality, postpositivism demands we have to make sense of it all (and accept that this sensemaking is subject to change). Postpositivism does not reject positivism outright, but subordinates the view" [original emphasis]. Paparone, "FM 3-0: Operations on the Cusp of Postpositivism." 50. Paparone, "FM 3-0: Operations on the Cusp of Post-positivism.
The nature, scope, and content of doctrine can only be fully understood in light of the intellectual context in which it is written. In addition to well-known influences such as military operations and national strategies, other lesser realized influences that shape this intellectual context include culture, both national and service; intellectual trends in the natural and social sciences, and in the humanities; the relationships between military institutions, states and societies; and a host of other factors.
Previous chapters have shed light on these influences through an analysis of the ontology and epistemology of military doctrine. This chapter builds on this analysis to address the significance and implications for contemporary military doctrine, strategy, and operations. Discussion proceeds in four sections, with the first asserting that a significant "paradigm shift" is currently underway regarding what constitutes an acceptable military belief system. The second section discusses possible directions in which military strategic and conceptual thinking may evolve in the near future. The third section discusses implications for the relationships between militaries and other agencies. In the fourth section, discussion turns to the benefits ontology and epistemology potentially yield for conceptual and terminological clarity.
As defined herein, doctrine is the most visible representation of a military's institutional belief system. This belief system regards the accepted paradigms by which a military understands, prepares for and (at least in theory) conducts warfare. These paradigms are themselves corollaries of the perceptions a military has of its institutional role and legitimacy within broader society, hence these aspects of a military's belief system are also discernible through its doctrine, albeit at a greater level of abstraction. For this reason, doctrine constitutes an institutional discourse which is reflective of the dominant modes of military thinking during various epochs. Historical analysis, such as that conducted in previous chapters, offers insights into to how this belief system has changed over time.
From the analysis above, it can be seen that the nature of this discourse has undergone several of what Thomas Kuhn identified as "paradigm shifts." A "paradigm," as defined by Kuhn, exists amongst a community of scientific practitioners who base their research upon a "coherent tradition," which encompasses "law, theory, application and instrumentation together" 1 -what might otherwise be understood as a shared belief system. 
2
3
There is, however, one important departure from Kuhn's thesis. Kuhn determines that the emergence of a new paradigm will lead to the previous paradigm gradually disappearing. While this is true of certain concepts and theories that have appeared in doctrine, risen in favor to a pinnacle and then fallen out of favor and disappeared, it is not true of the schools themselves. Rather, each of the different schools of doctrinal ontology have continued to exist alongside one another, in this respect being more akin to the scientific "regimes" identified by Bousquet. 
4
5
Significantly, a paradigm shift appears currently to be underway. Furthermore, this shift is arguably the most pervasive to have occurred in 400 years of doctrinal history. The reason for this is that it is an epistemological rather than an ontological shift. The emergence in recent years of concepts grounded in anti-positivism, in particular those related to chaos theory and the complexity sciences, are challenging existing doctrinal paradigms at a more fundamental level. These new concepts question longstanding assumptions made within all four schools of doctrinal ontology, for example by proposing that knowledge acquisition is subjective rather than objective, and by readily accepting and working within, rather than attempting to regulate around, remove, or simply ignore, the existence of metaphysical factors such as culture, chance, and human will. This paradigm shift is far from complete, however. According to Kuhn, "during the transition period there will be a large but never complete overlap between the problems that can be solved by the old and new paradigm but there will also be a decisive difference in the modes of solution." 
6
7
8
10
11
12
13
Despite this array of possibilities, historical precedence suggests that the new doctrinal paradigm will most likely solidify and eventually take its place alongside previous paradigms. Already the debate summarized in the previous chapter indicates that several of the issues yet to be resolved are under discussion in scholarly and military forums. Again historical precedence indicates that the result of these debates is likely to shape doctrine over the coming years and indeed, the state of the non-doctrinal debate is already yielding clues as to how anti-positivist doctrine may evolve in the next few years.
By evaluating both the state of the debate about anti-positivist concepts and the evolution anti-positivism within existing doctrine, one can deduce several issues that still need to be addressed. Despite the difficulties that satisfactorily resolving these issues pose, addressing them will nevertheless be necessary before a paradigm shift can be said to have completely occurred.
One of the issues that will need to be addressed concerns the appropriateness of the extent of anti-positivist doctrine. It has already been acknowledged that anti-positivist approaches are more applicable at the strategic and operational levels than at the tactical, 14 however this debate may yet go a step further. In an influential monograph, Justin Kelly and Mike Brennan recently posited that "operational art" has now expanded to the extent that it has "devoured" several aspects of strategy. They call for operational art to re-focus on bridging tactical encounters and for a reassertion of strategy to fill all of the other areas currently absorbed by operational art. 
15
A second issue concerns the means of translating understanding derived through anti-positivist approaches into practical results and to date, this area remains underdeveloped. Given that anti-positivism emphasizes subjectivity, it challenges the legitimacy of most if not all traditional mechanisms for measuring the results of military operations. In place of this, anti-positivism stresses the importance of perception: victory or defeat exists only as it is perceived by participants in conflict (be they friendly, enemy, civilians, or neutral fourth-party observers). Furthermore, these perceptions are likely to change over time and are unlikely to be "black and white." How to work within this conceptual framework and where victory can never be considered as either "complete" or "total," remains an issue to be resolved. 
16
17
18
Finally, there are two prominent "gaps" that need to be filled. First, there exists at present a "comprehension gap:" despite having developed an awareness of anti-positivist concepts such as design, many strategists and military practitioners are not yet aware of the epistemological roots of these concepts or of the implications of these roots. Second, there exists also an "application gap," the bolting of anti-positivist ideas onto existing positivist ones has caused this. Both of these problems are epitomized by the current placing of design at the beginning of existing operational planning processes. A detailed assessment of the nature of anti-positivist concepts that takes explicitly into account their epistemology may yet determine that their application at the strategic or operational level requires a separate planning process than the application of other doctrine at the operational or tactical level and that a bridging construct is necessary between the two. In short, the further development of the new epistemological approach is likely to have a greater impact on doctrinal ontology than has yet been forthcoming.
Another implication of the analysis herein concerns the ill-explored nature of the relationships between militaries and other actors. In the past few decades, there has been a growing discussion of the need for strategic and operational approaches that are "whole of government," "interagency," "multinational," or some other term implying cooperation between militaries and other organizations. 
19
20
21
22
23
24
Closer to home, there has been another interesting development within the last decade. This monograph chronicles the expansion of written doctrine within western militaries over the course of 400 years. Within the last few years, military-style doctrine-specifically that which could be assessed as fitting within the fourth ontological school-has been released by other organizations. These include the United Nations and non-profit organizations, the latter of which have collaborated with the US military. 
25
Another significant implication of discussion herein is the realization that most of the factors that have affected doctrine development have, for most of the existence of doctrine, done so subconsciously. For English speaking militaries, it was not until the 1980s that they explicitly defined their institutional ontology. Explicit discussion of military ontology and epistemology to date remains limited to a dozen papers or so. Yet awareness of these is of the utmost importance because: how we come to ask particular questions, how we assess the relevance and value of different research methodologies so that we can investigate those questions, how we evaluate the outputs of research, all express and vary according to our underlying epistemological commitments. Even though they often remain unrecognized by the individual, such epistemological commitments are a key feature of our pre-understandings which influence how we make things intelligible. 
26
Defining military doctrine as expressive of a military's "belief system," this monograph has conducted an examination of the expansion and significance of its written form. This examination occurred first through an ontological and subsequently through an epistemological lens and links have been established between doctrine on one hand and professional military education, scientific discovery, the growth of the modern state, the increasing institutionalization and bureaucratization of society, and the evolution of thinking within philosophy and the social sciences on the other. From this examination, it is discernable that military doctrine is a product of its environment. It's a belief system that has been shaped, often subconsciously, by a diverse and seldom acknowledged array of factors.
The ontology of doctrine can be divided into four schools that can be labeled the technical manual, tactical manual, operational manual, and military strategic manual schools. The delineation of doctrinal ontology into these schools is based on three factors. First, the scope of the content and the intended audience broadens from one school to the next. Second, the manner in which manuals in each of these schools is applied varies, with the schools being respectively applied as instruction manuals, training aids, guidance and as an instrument for analysis.
Third, each manual has a different type of relationship to a military's accepted institutional ontology. Manuals in the first school do not engage with this ontology at all, focusing instead on describing micro-level processes in isolation from outside factors. Manuals in the second school offer only an implicit ontology. Those in the third offer an explicit ontology, which initially viewed militaries as subordinate to the state and as narrowly tasked with undertaking operations to defeat the (conventional) military forces of other states. Although recognition of the military's subordination to the state has remained central within this school, the range of military tasks envisioned has since expanded to include several other roles (including irregular warfare and a variety of operations other than war) and the various relationships militaries have with other organizations (both government and non-government) are now also addressed. Manuals in the fourth school are often used as a means to examine ontological questions, posing answers to these by way of establishing very general principles or a core conceptual framework for military activities.
The relationship between each of the schools is complicated and multi-faceted. It is also somewhat blurred and some manuals exhibit characteristics attributable to multiple schools. Despite this, the division of doctrine into four ontological schools is a useful mechanism for examining its evolution over time. When this evolution is examined from educational, scientific, and bureaucratic perspectives, the relationship between military doctrine, the institutional development of militaries themselves, and the changing nature of their relationship with society, is elucidated. Given that ontology examines the nature of being and the taxonomies used to define reality, it is unsurprising that the evolution of doctrine has been closely linked to these relationships.
Yet even as doctrine has evolved into each of the four schools, it has consistently been underpinned by ontological realism, a perspective that emphasizes that the world beyond human cognition is structured and tangible regardless of whether or not humans perceive and label it. The taxonomies propounded in doctrine have not been about defining and structuring reality. Rather, they have been about understanding reality and ultimately manipulating it, the intent being to achieve military victory as efficiently as possible. Where doctrine fails to sufficiently address a military's ontology or where the taxonomies that constitute that ontology are inappropriate, adherence to doctrine can potentially create a dissonance between tactical means and strategic ends, as doctrine becomes susceptible to providing ill-suited guidance when faced with situations outside of its remit. Accompanying doctrine's ontological realism has been its positivist epistemology. This epistemology advocates a methodology wherein the subject of study (warfare) should be observed from a neutral viewpoint, with the results of the observation subsequently being assessed in a rational, objective manner. This allows the assessor to determine the universal laws governing relationships and, using this knowledge, to subsequently manipulate these relationships to achieve a desired end state (victory). By its nature this doctrine focuses on linear and therefore predictable cause-and-effect relationships. It is both logical and reductionist in its outlook. Its advantage is that it allows military practitioners to establish processes, both rigid (such as doctrine describing how to employ a weapons system) and flexible (such as doctrine detailing a military planning process). These processes are relatively easy to comprehend and follow, even in instances where departure from them may be encouraged in certain situations. The institutional belief system represented by this doctrine is one in which warranted knowledge is that which can be mathematically measured from an objective position.
Presently, doctrine may be (to paraphrase both Paparone and Kuhn) on the cusp of a paradigm shift. 
1
It must be emphasized that the shift to anti-positivism is still embryonic, having commenced at most a few decades ago. The shift may therefore turn out to be a chimera, especially given the longstanding and entrenched nature of positivist military thinking and antipositivism's relative difficulty to grasp. Indeed, current doctrine appears to graft anti-positivist concepts onto existing positivist ones, without deference to the epistemological confusion-and resultant conceptual perversion-that this causes. The conduct of a more detailed assessment of this new doctrinal paradigm from an epistemological perspective would be highly useful in determining whether to further develop or to abandon anti-positivist approaches. At best, their continued ad hoc application will translate into sub-optimal operational and, resultantly, strategic outcomes. Such an assessment may also assist as a mechanism for pruning existing concepts that either muddle these competing epistemological approaches or which use the language of one but the substance of another.
Ultimately, however, understanding the epistemology of military doctrine is important for far broader reasons. Doctrine, expressive of a military's institutional belief system, is a gauge for the way militaries view their role and therefore their institution, in relation to the states and societies that sustain them. The emergence of each new school of doctrinal ontology and more recently the inclusion of anti-positivist concepts within doctrine, indicate changes in a military's institutional understanding of its relationship with state and society. These changes have occurred for one of two reasons. First, formal (written) recognition of the military's role has replaced previously informal (verbal or implicit) recognition. Second, following the conclusion of the Cold War, changes in what states and societies expected of their militaries led these militaries to re-evaluate their role altogether.
This belief system also explains why a military may prefer a certain type of strategic approach and why it plans and conducts operations the way it does. The incorporation of anti-positivist approaches into doctrine has been partly due to the initial failure of positivist strategies and tactics during the wars of the early 21st century. The proliferation of new, anti-positivist doctrine, in particular the 2006 edition of FM 3-24, was accompanied by a change in overall strategy, which had a positive effect on the outcome of the war in Iraq in particular. This example illustrates the epistemological link between strategy and tactics on one hand and doctrine on the other.
The broad range of influences on military doctrine discussed in this monograph demonstrate that for most of its 400 year history, most of the factors that have influenced doctrine development have been at best implicitly understood and at worst not understood at all. The ontological and epistemological consideration of doctrine undertaken herein has helped to shed light on these influences. Since everyone adheres to a set of ontological and epistemological beliefs, whether they realize it or not, the advantage to military practitioners, strategists, statesmen, and doctrine writers of recognizing and understanding these beliefs is that better doctrine, better strategy, and ultimately better operational performance, will inevitably come of it.
Dr Aaron P. Jackson is a Doctrine Desk Officer at the Australian Defence Force (ADF) Joint Doctrine Centre. In this appointment he has been project manager and/or lead author of six doctrine publications, including Australian Defence Doctrine Publication (ADDP) 00.1-Command and Control, edition 2, and ADDP 5.0-Joint Planning, edition 2. He has also contributed in various ways during the development of fifteen other joint doctrine and related publications, including interagency projects such as the Guide to Defence and Australian Federal Police (International Deployment Group) Interoperability for Offshore Operations, for which he was the ADF's primary representative and key content authority, and a contributing author. Aaron has also served in the Australian Army Reserve for over ten years. He has deployed on operations in Timor Leste and has served on exercise or exchange in the United States, New Zealand and the Philippines. He holds a Doctorate of Philosophy (International Relations) and is appointed as a Visiting Fellow at the Griffith Asia Institute, Griffith University, Australia. He is the author of Doctrine, Strategy and Military Culture: Military-Strategic Doctrine Development  in Australia, Canada and New Zealand, 1987-2007 (Canadian Forces  Aerospace Warfare Centre, 2013), Keystone Doctrine Development in Five Commonwealth Navies: A Comparative Perspective (Sea Power Centre-Australia, 2010), and several peer-reviewed journal articles and other academic papers.
Author's note: My thanks to Drs Alan Okros and Eric Oullet, and to Colonel  Howard Coombs PhD, for their valuable feedback on earlier drafts. I would also like to offer a special thank you to Dr Paul T. Mitchell, who volunteered a lot of his time to act as an unofficial mentor to me during the development of this monograph. Any errors are, of course, my own.