# ID: b59dce1e2b714da6ab8ae5c71d2d0140
# Title: Digitalized Dark Art: Russia's Information Operations Against Georgia
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
First, it is important to develop a long-term vision of cyber security and cyber defense strategy, using cyber capabilities to support both day-to-day security infrastructure Sixth, internationalization of efforts against foreign cyber-attacks is of paramount importance, as cyber-attacks and other active measures are, normally, accompanying larger and more serious political campaigns that target the country's resilience and military readiness.
Therefore, domestic strategic communications should be complemented with international measures, through diplomatic and security channels with the leading strategic international partners, i.e., the United States, NATO countries, including, especially, the leading European nations, and Turkey.
Georgia enjoys special strategic relations with NATO, framed in the Alliance's enhanced opportunities initiative.
Since 2014, Georgia has had NATO's Substantive Cooperation Package, which was only recently updated and strengthened at the 1-2 December NATO Foreign Ministerial.
The new additions to the Substantive Package include secure communications and cybersecurity elements.
This indicates that the NATO-Georgia cooperation is rather well-established and coordinated in the information warfare domain.
And this direction seems to be gaining more and more dynamic speed in mutual relationship.
Given that Russia seems to more sensitive and apprehensive to international response to its actions, especially when it comes to sanctions, than to Georgia's (or, for that matter, Ukraine's) military capabilities, Georgia's effective coordination with international community may be a more potent (and certainly costeffective) deterrent against Russia than the development of defense infrastructure and hardware.
The point is that in some great and medium powers, especially in Europe, acuteness of Russian threat to European security is still disputed politically.
Therefore, for effective international deterrent, Georgia needs more and more enhanced coordination at the international level to achieve meaningful political effectiveness for developing a persuasive political deterrent against the adversary.
Eighth, given that cyber domain is often privately driven, Georgian Government should pay greater attention to the coordination between public institutions and private entities in ensuring that there is enough capacity for waging information campaigns both in technological as well as political terms.
Technological resource can be found and integrated throughout the country, among the cutting-edge innovative private enterprises and start-ups that have been supported by Georgian Government in the last few years.