# ID: b59dce1e2b714da6ab8ae5c71d2d0140
# Title: Digitalized Dark Art: Russia's Information Operations Against Georgia
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
Since declaring national independence in 1991, Georgia has been in asymmetrical power relationship with Russia. 1 Russia has tried to exploit Georgia's defense and security vulnerabilities from the very beginning of its independent statehood by fomenting regional conflicts, encouraging political extremism, and, as in 2008, even invading militarily. 
2
3
Cyber strategies as a part of twenty-first century political warfare is an emerging pattern for the new technological era. In the last two decades, there have been four distinct cases of Russia's use of information warfare and its cyber capabilities to disrupt Georgia's information security systems. These happened during the Russian invasion of Georgia in August 2008; twice when Russia hacked Georgia's government agencies in 2011 and 2019;
and the latest-a combined cyber and disinformation campaign against Georgia's critical infrastructure and medical facility in the midst of the COVID-19 crisis.
These four cases were part of Russia's relatively newly established arsenal of information warfare that has gained significance in Russia's foreign and security policy in 1 Georgia's population is 3.7 mln while Russia's population exceeds 142 mln. Militarily, the imbalance is even more striking, see "Chapter Five: Russia and Eurasia," The Military Balance 120, no.1 (February 14, 2020).
2 Stephen F. Jones, Georgia: A Political History since Independence (New York, NY: I.B. Tauris,  2012).
3 Stephen F. Jones and Neil S. MacFarlane, Georgia: From Autocracy to Democracy (Toronto, University of Toronto Press: 2020). the last decade. For Russia, cyberspace has become integral to the information space and cyber activity has emerged as a subcategory of the information warfare. Given the decline in Russia's defense resources in comparison with the times of USSR, and the asymmetry relative to the capabilities of the United States and its NATO allies, information warfare has become a relatively affordable option for waging political warfare abroad, especially in Russia's so-called "near abroad," which encompasses the countries that had been part of the former Soviet Union prior to 1991.
Such operations have been deployed against Estonia, Georgia, and Ukraine at different times in the last two decades. Russia's activity in these countries displayed a discernable pattern, which presumes deployment of soft power means for winning the local populations' sympathy, and, in case of failure of such, continues to coerce and intimidate the target audiences. Manipulation of target audiences' perceptions has become the primary objective of Russia's information operations, while the purpose of cyber activity has been short-term critical disruption of the target's state institutions and/or support for Russia's on-ground military operations.
However, the record of Russia's use of cyber strategies as a part of political warfare indicates that the Kremlin has not been very effective in relation to its purported political objectives and has failed when countered by the target states with appropriate political and technological tools in systematic and consistent ways. This record also shows that Russia's cyber operations may not have succeeded even in conditions of significant power asymmetry in Russia's favor. This is particularly evident when countermeasures are taken both in terms of international and informational domains, by aggregating political and technological tools against Russia's activities.
This thesis has both analytical and prescriptive purposes as it seeks to describe and analyze Russia's approach to information warfare, discuss a case study of Russia's cyber operations against Georgia, and, finally, identify potential countermeasures to Russian activities, as developed by other countries in similar or comparable circumstances.
As historical tendencies demonstrate, Russia is likely to continue to pose an existential threat to Georgia's national security. Therefore, the primary focus of this paper is to analyze Russia's cyber operations against Georgia as an integral part of Russia's information warfare and seek successful models of countermeasures, as created by Israel and Estonia in particular.
The more specific question this thesis seeks to answer is what the most appropriate defense and security systems may be for countering Russia's information warfare and in conditions of power asymmetry.
For answers, the thesis relies on deductive logic, inferring conclusions from Russia's doctrinal and conceptual documents; analyzing the patterns of Russia's historically documented activities in cyber domain; and by comparing the experiences of countries with similar international standing and adequate systems for coping with malicious cyber activities by asymmetrically superior powers. These comparative cases include successful cybersecurity models based on technologies, science, and cyberspace but also on political and diplomatic effectiveness. While answering the question, regional and infrastructural similarities as well as power asymmetry and some other factors, including international involvement will also be considered.
The lead hypothesis for this paper is that a rigorous model of information warfare management can work even in a case of power asymmetry, when based on both technological as well as political efficacy, and long-term vision of cybersecurity and cyber defense strategy. Employing cyber capabilities to support national security is essential for the security strategy for Georgia and some other regional countries, and can be force multiplier, given the fact that Russian cyber operations are normally an accompanying element to more conventional operations rather than stand-alone attacks against the target countries. Strategic communications, as part of political measures, are also a crucial element in countering Russian information warfare.
This thesis uses case study as a method for answering the research question and validating the hypothesis. The case is Russian aggression against Georgia, which includes the information warfare aspect. The thesis draws practical recommendations based on comparative study of information warfare systems in Georgia, Estonia, and Israel, all of which exist and operate in conditions of power asymmetry with regional powers.
In the first chapter of the thesis, analysis of Russia's doctrinal and conceptual documents is given, complemented with anecdotal historical experiences in Russia's information warfare in the past two decades. This chapter aims at identifying patterns in Russia's cyber activities, with potential implications for smaller neighboring countries, such as Georgia.
The second chapter analyzes the historical record of Russia's actions in Georgia in four distinct cases, ranging from the cyberattacks accompanying ground offensive in 2008 to the 2020 disinformation campaign and cyberattack against the so-called Lugar Lab, established in close partnership with the United States Government.
The third chapter analyzes the cybersecurity systems created by Israel and Estonia, two countries that are similar to Georgia in a sense that they cope with power asymmetries with neighbors and also face information warfare challenges from multiple sources, including state and private entities.
The major method of researching the case study is deductive reasoning, which draws inferences from Russian doctrines and conceptual documents pertaining to information warfare. A comparative method is also used, which juxtaposes Georgian experiences with those of Israel and Estonia, inferring recommendations for Georgia's future cybersecurity system from the analysis of Israeli and Estonian experiences.
In the final, concluding part of the thesis, recommendations for Georgia's information security are presented.
The Kremlin has a long history of executing well-coordinated influence operations against its perceived adversaries in order to subvert and undermine them indirectly. With the advent of the information age, Moscow has realized new cyber domain opportunities and started to exploit this domain as a force multiplier for their political-military campaigns, thus, making specific operations more feasible and cost-effective as well. In other words, it has provided additional means for Russia to bolster its influence campaigns by employing a combination of cyber intrusions and propaganda. In retrospect, Russia's activities primarily against its neighbors-Estonia, Georgia, and Ukraine-demonstrated that it perceives cyberspace as an effective domain for employing their tactics successfully.
Georgia was the first country that Russia targeted with a combination of kinetic and cyber means during the international conflict in 2008. Some of the similar cyber techniques Russia employed against Estonia in 2007, but tensions never escalated to a full-scale war.
Since then, the Kremlin has only become more active in waging information warfare against its perceived adversaries while demonstrating interest in reclaiming its sphere of influence.
This chapter reviews the literature on Russia's information warfare and examines how cyberspace has been utilized by Russia within the broader information warfare concept. Also, it explores Russia's perspective on cyberspace as a fifth domain of strategic confrontation. The purpose of this chapter is to extract and highlight the major aspects of Russia's understanding of employing cyber ways and means based on existing studies and observations.
Over the past decade, there has been a considerable amount of study and analysis with Russia's "new" way of war. It can be said that in the twenty-first century, the Russian Federation has successfully revived the Soviet tactics of "active measures" using modern information warfare is conceived as a means that could be employed both during both peacetime and wartime. 
9
In order to discuss the Kremlin's refined information warfare, it is important to have an understanding of the main concepts that underpin Russia's holistic approach.
Jolanta Darczewska from the Centre for Eastern Studies notes that Moscow's information warfare has a long history and follows the same approach as the preceding Soviet period spetspropaganda (special propaganda), which under President Vladimir Putin has obtained additional value in a "battlefield" against the West and its "near abroad" countries. 
10
11
12
13
14
15
18
The of coordinated military, diplomatic, and economic tools." 
19 Robinson et al.
21
In 2016, the Russian Ministry of Defense, which is mostly responsible for performing cyber-attacks, propaganda-oriented actions and inserting malware in the command and control systems of opponents, established "information operations troops."
22
23
Russia's contemporary "informational confrontation" against its perceived adversaries is based upon Soviet era methods and is a core of psychological warfare.
Hence, exploring the theory of reflexive control can facilitate in further analysis of the Russian perspective on information warfare. The concept of reflexive control originated in the Soviet Union in the 1960s and has been more or less continuously developed ever since.
According to one study, "the ultimate goal of reflexive control is that the object of control will not be aware of the manipulation." 
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
Posard, Marrone, and Helmus from RAND Corporation argue that the reflexive control theory "assumes that people live in a polarized world of cooperation versus conflict."
32
Emerging cyber capabilities create new opportunities and challenges for the various actors in the world to engage in a new type of interaction for social and political reasons.
Ryan Maness and Brandon Valeriano support the claim that cyber is a tactic and one of the instruments of a threat in diplomacy and international relations available at states' disposal. 
34
Cyber espionage is planned to "steal critical information or manipulate information asymmetries in a manner that produces bargaining benefits between rival states engaged in long-term competition." 
41
Furthermore, Jensen et al. draw attention to two aspects. First, cyber espionage, in the event of network penetration, has a potential to prepare the ground for future operations.
As explained, "not only do you access critical networks and steal information altering the balance of information in a crisis, but even if the intrusion is revealed, the target is left wondering what else was stolen and what other networks are compromised." 42 Second, cyber espionage can be a low-cost tool for manipulation of a target audience's perceptions. 38 Valeriano, Jensen, and Maness, 36.   39 Jensen, Valeriano, and Maness, "Fancy Bears and Digital Trolls," 216.   40 Valeriano, Jensen, and Maness, 124.   41 Jensen, Valeriano, and Maness, "Fancy Bears and Digital Trolls," 216.   42 Jensen, Valeriano, and Maness, 219.  However, as examined by Valeriano et al., cyber degradation, which is a costlier signaling option than cyber disruption or espionage, "is more likely to have a compellent effect than disruptions or espionage." 
43
Clapper stated that Russia was ready to conduct offensive cyber operations with engagement of newly established cyber command. 
44
Computer security studies assert that unspecified Russian cyber actors are developing means to access industrial control systems (ICS) remotely. These systems manage critical infrastructures such as electric power grids, urban mass transit systems, air traffic control, and oil and gas distribution networks. These unspecified Russian actors have successfully compromised the product supply chains of three ICS vendors so that customers download exploitative malware directly from the vendors' websites along with routine software updates, according to private sector cybersecurity experts. 
45
The Kremlin uses cyber means for waging a modern form of political warfare. As mentioned earlier, Russia's actions in cyberspace have a similar patterns both in peacetime and in wartime-Russia uses low-cost, unsophisticated cyber techniques to disseminate malign propaganda and sows discontent within the targeted country, "while signaling the risk of escalation." 46 Moreover, despite having moderate cyber power, Russia is one of the most determined and active players in terms of conducting offensive operations in cyberspace. 
47
45 Statement for the Record: Worldwide Cyber Threats, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (2015), https://fas.org/irp/congress/2015_hr/091015clapper.pdf. 46 Valeriano, Jensen, and Maness, Cyber Coercion, 111.   47 Valeriano, Jensen, and Maness, Cyber Coercion, 74.  non-existing entry barriers that have given Moscow the opportunity to design less sophisticated and low-cost operations "to shape public opinion and signal resolve." 48
However, it should be noted that Russia rarely employs sophisticated cyber methods and preferred to strike on non-governmental and non-military institutions. Also, Russia's coercive actions have never caused any escalation beside diplomatic and economic sanctions, which actually coincided with the use of military power from Russia's side as well.
There is another aspect of Russia's hostile campaign in cyberspace, which should be emphasized, and which makes Russia exclusively notorious-the Kremlin and cyber proxies. After the fall of the Soviet Union, the grave economic situation caused by mass unemployment and the unstable political environment turned many computer-savvy Minister for Foreign Affairs Linas Linkevicus noted, "Russia Today's propaganda machine is no less destructive than the military machine in Crimea." 52 "Informational Confrontation" is based upon psychological warfare and is one of the main aspects of the Russian approach. In general, the informational-psychological influence represents the initial phase of the conflicts inspired by Russia, consisting of nonconventional operations aimed at manipulating the public opinion inside the target country, as well as through the international media. In order to change or manipulate information, Russia widely uses a group of controlled internet users who have been identified to attack social media posts and news pieces countering the pro-Russian narrative. In fact, it is a paid commentator army of so-called trolls, which is the innovative instrument at Putin's disposal. 
53
54
55
56
Within the last 20 years, the Kremlin had an attempt to use technology and the internet in pursuit of its broader political goals. This was motivated by the belief that character of war has changed and with the advent of the information revolution the future battlefield would require totally new approaches. As a result, the Kremlin decided to focus on outweighing its own shortcomings and disadvantages through digitalized subversive and covert actions. This Russian political warfare tactics has a focus on division and deception of the enemy that is similar to the old Soviet methods. However, modern technologies allowed Russia to refine its signature moves and adjust them to adjust contemporary environment. Russia has excelled in framing discussions in a way that serves Russian interests. This becomes extremely dangerous in times of crisis, because Moscow can dominate and transmit another reality. Having this in mind, Russia most likely will continue to develop and expand its information tools of influence with the same success.
However, the empirical analysis based on the most well-known cases suggest that the Kremlin has not received any significant gains as a result of its hostile cyber actions so far. 
58
Undoubtedly, Georgia is not and will not be an exception in the near future. The Kremlin will continue to undermine Georgia's development and democratization process by attempts to sow chaos and facilitate destabilization. Georgia's official document, Strategic Defense Review 2017-2020 emphasizes that Russia seeks "to limit international political support for Georgia and weaken cooperation directed at strengthening of defense capabilities." 59 Presumably, Moscow will predominantly rely on the elements of its soft power "to ensure the weakening of state institutions, strengthening of pro-Russian civil and political movements and discredit pro-Western foreign policy agenda." 
60
61
After the end of the August War 2008, it soon became clear that Moscow would use all types of instruments in the future to continue pressuring pro-Western Georgia in order to coerce and convince Tbilisi to accept the so-called "new geopolitical reality"-the loss of its two historic regions of Abkhazia and Tshkhinvali ("South Ossetia"). 
62
This chapter will demonstrate the threats that Georgia faces from Russia in the cyber domain by looking at various Georgian official documents pertaining to its cyber posture and four cyberattacks on the state from 2008 to 2020, which have been attributed
to the Russian Federation.
For Georgia, as an object of Russia's constant targeting, securing and defending its cyberspace is a national security priority. According to the annual report of 2018 of the State Security Service of Georgia (SSSG), it has been established that foreign countries and their special services have been using cyber capabilities more and more actively, in their own interests.
Conducting cyberattacks and cyber intelligence operations against government and critical infrastructure objects by special services of foreign countries and hacker groups controlled by them also represent a major risk to the security of the country. 
63
Russian-Georgian war and the subsequent evolving cyber threats have invigorated cybersecurity policy of Georgia.
Today, threats stemming from the Russian Federation remain among the top security challenges for Georgia, according to Georgia's Strategic Defense Review (SDR) of 2017-2020, which was published in April 2017. The SDR describes the future priorities of the Ministry of Defense and the Georgian Armed Forces, and also outlines the new structure that the armed forces hope to achieve by 2020. According to the SDR, Russia has an aggressive foreign policy, which is "a special threat for Georgia's security environment." 
64
It should be noted that, these undermining activities are in line with the Russia's perception on soft power, which is the integral part of Russia's "new way of war. "if the Western vision is based on building attractiveness, the Kremlin believes soft power to be a set of tools for manipulation." 
66
67
The Russian-Georgia war of 2008 was the first time that Russia used combination of coordinated cyber and information operations in support of its military campaign. 
68
69
71
72
73
These DDoS attacks on average lasted approximately two hours and fifteen minutes, and the longest lasted six hours. 
74
76
It is noteworthy that the August War in 2008 served as a harbinger for future contingencies, which should have been a wakeup call for the West. However, as the Ukrainian crisis showed, still there was a huge surprise component in Russia's tactics. The Russia's military campaign in Georgia demonstrated that a similar type of cyberattack and information campaign had the potential to develop further and also, to bring more severe consequences for a target country, that is more dependent on modern information technologies. As noted by Ronald Heickerö,
The new modus operandi gives deniability for actors in combination with strategic benefits such as obtaining political goals. The possibility to deny any involvement could be a tempting driver for an aggressor. The implication is that the IW weapon will be used more in future conflicts both as a stand-alone method and in conjunction with military operations. 
77
78
The GEORBOT case took place in March 2011. The Georgian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) and computer experts discovered that the hackers, who allegedly were affiliated with Russian intelligence agencies, had infected between 300 and 400 computers across six Georgian government agencies. 
79
The malicious software was programmed to search for specific keywordssuch as USA, Russia, NATO and CIA-in Microsoft Word documents and PDFs, and was eventually modified to record audio and take screenshots. The documents were deleted within a few minutes from the drop servers, after the hacker had copied the files to his own PC. 
80
79 Thomas Rid, Cyber War Will Not Take Place (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), 151.
80 Jeremy Kirk, "Georgian Cyber Counterattack Exposes Russian Hacker Seeking NATO Document," Atlantic Council, November 4, 2012, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/natosource/georgian-cybercounterattack-exposes-russian-hacker-seeking-nato-document/.
81 Thomas Rid, Cyber War Will Not Take Place, 151.
Apart from another example of Russia's cyber espionage, this case addresses the problem of attribution. Thomas Rid makes a very interesting observation regarding the GEORBOT case,
The GEORBOT incident is probably the only detailed example of a successful case of active attribution on the public domain. But perhaps its most unusual feature is the fact that the Georgian government made the information public. Most intelligence agencies and their governments are highly reluctant to publicize such operations, for that could reveal vulnerabilities, tactics, skills, and create potential political blowback. Yet, if a small and technologically limited agency like Georgia's Ministry of Justice can pull off an active attribution operation in a legally grey area, then the assumption is reasonable that mighty and highly specialized intelligence agencies of the world's most technologically sophisticated powers can achieve a much higher degree of attribution. 82
This assumption dates from 2011 to 2013. The next incident, which took place in 2019 basically echoes what Thomas Rid suggested here.
On October 28, 2019, the cyberattacks were launched on the websites and servers of Georgian governmental agencies and private organizations. As a result, almost fifty thousand webpages were defaced and attacked through a distributed denial of service (DDoS). For "website defacement" the hackers used an image of the former president of Georgia, Mikhail Saakashvili, to replace the original content. Presumably, the hacker sought to add a political ground to an attack and a had an attempt of a political trolling that aimed to cause unrest in Georgian society. 
83
83 Givi Gogitashvili, "Russia's 2019 Cyber Attack against Georgia Followed by Full-Spectrum Propaganda Effort," Medium, April 23, 2020, https://medium.com/dfrlab/russias-2019-cyber-attackagainst-georgia-followed-by-full-spectrum-propaganda-effort-4460673cb3e9. of incidents. To this end, Moscow does not require to invest more and design costly cyber operations that can paralyze the critical infrastructure and have more destructive effect.
On February 20, 2020, as a result of investigation and cooperation with Georgia, the United Kingdom and the United States published the statement, which said that the cyber actor behind the October attack was the Main Center for Special Technologies, also known as "Unit 74455" of the Russian General Staff Main Intelligence Directorate, namely, the Russian military intelligence service. 
84
The United Kingdom assessed the correctness of its attribution as "almost certain" (95 percent + probability). 
85
86
Prior to the attack, on October 22, 2019, the U.S. House of Representatives unanimously passed the Georgia Support Act (H.R.598), once again underscoring U.S. support for the independence and sovereignty of Georgia. 
87
88
Apart from cyber intrusions, Russia's "crown jewel" in the twenty-first century political warfare is a dissemination of propaganda and disinformation by employing statesponsored media, infamous Internet Research Agency (IRA), and agents of influence. It should be mentioned that the IRA is a Kremlin-backed organization, also known as the "troll farm," which is a cornerstone of the modern Russian information warfare. It operates thousands of fake twitter and Facebook accounts to run different types influence operations. For instance, according to a study conducted by RAND corporation,
In October 2017, news broke that Russia had exploited Facebook as part of its information campaign. The Internet Research Agency created dozens of Facebook pages that sought to exploit and expand various social division created dozens of Facebook pages that sought to exploit and expand various social divisions within the United States that included race, religion, political affiliation, and class. These pages used Facebook advertising algorithms to target the ads to populations most vulnerable to the intended message. 
90
95
96
Center, which operates the Lugar Lab, by one of the foreign special services. According to their statement, "part of the documentation obtained as a result of illegal entry into the system is currently uploaded on a foreign webpage and is available to the public. At the same time, these pages are loaded with obviously falsified information, deliberately forged documents aimed at intimidating the public and generating distrust." 
97
The main effect of the "information confrontation" concept well known in Russian military circles is to manipulate the perceptions of the target audience and influence their behavior. Russia considers the field of information to be a strategically decisive and critically important domain of the new type of military conflict, which could be used to both to exert control over its own population and also, to acquire influence over opposing countries.
Russia's holistic approach to information warfare encompasses disinformation, propaganda, DDoS attacks and espionage. These components of information warfare technique are continuously utilized on a daily basis by the recently established cyber units of the Russian Ministry of Defense. Many other Kremlin affiliated groups are also engaged in performing "cyberattacks, propaganda-oriented actions and inserting malware in the command and control systems of opponents." 98 Russia is becoming more assertive "to target critical infrastructure systems and conduct espionage operations even when detected and under increased public scrutiny." 99 Furthermore, it is most likely that Moscow will continue to be opportunistic and exploit the existing environment in order to advance its strategic interests as seen during the Covid-19 pandemic situation. The global crisis caused by the virus gave impetus for Russia to intensify its political warfare agenda. This again reinforces the assumption that there are blurred lines between war and peace in the Russian understanding. As witnessed with regard the Lugar case, subversive actions in cyberspace will continue to pose critical threats to Georgia's security architecture. In particular, Russia's hostile operations in cyberspace will continue to undermine Georgia's credibility as a modern European country that can be a part of NATO or the European Union. Therefore, the Western partner 98 Andro Gotsiridze, Russia's Cyber Activities-A Growing Threat for Georgia, #95 (Tbilisi, Georgia: GFSIS, 2018), 4, https://www.gfsis.org/files/library/opinion-papers/95-expert-opinion-eng.pdf.
99 Michael Connell and Sarah Vogler, Russia's Approach to Cyber Warfare, 2.
countries need to focus on collaboration with Georgia in order to develop joint informational and diplomatic response measures. For instance, attribution and globally coordinated "name and shame" campaigns could limit the effectiveness of Russia's malign information operations, because it would be harder for Russia to deny its actions and would also, raise awareness in society with regard to the problem itself.
Bearing in mind that Georgia is not the only country being affected with misleading and hostile narratives, a coordinated international approach should be a basic silver bullet for tackling the problem. Therefore, in response to the Russian threat, which is a critical threat for the West as well, Georgia needs to seek solutions on the domestic and international levels. It is important to create a cyber defense mechanism that can prevent the cognitive outcome of destructive cyber operations, in addition to the technical effects of computer network attacks. In order to counter Russian threats in cyberspace, Georgia should design and enforce an effective platform to counter fake news, disinformation and propaganda dissemination.
For finding a way forward for Georgia, the next chapter will examine how Israel and Estonia approach to their national cybersecurity and cyberdefense. Like Georgia, these two small states face security threats from much bigger and power neighboring states, which try to coerce and intimidate them. However, Israel and Estonia continue to move forward in a challenging geopolitical environment. Moreover, they timely noticed what opportunities would cyber bring and started to invest in development of cyber capacities in order to respond to some of the existing challenges for the national security and also, to outweigh their shortcomings. In addition, Georgia has historical ties with both countries and has been in close cooperation in terms of developing defensive capabilities, including cyber field as well.
Israel and Estonia have aggregated vast experiences in mitigating risks in cyberspace and addressing modern cyber challenges. Moreover, in the past few years, they have developed a long-term vision of cyber security and cyber defense strategy and have excelled in using cyber capabilities to support their national security and conventional military operations as well. Therefore, as different countries in the world that strive to develop their cyber capabilities in order to meet the challenges related to the information age and the cyber era, advanced Israeli and Estonian models can serve as a source of learning. Furthermore, Israel and Estonia have been selected for analysis due to their special relations with Georgia, including cooperation in military and cyber spheres, which primarily focuses on sharing best practices, experiences and lessons learned.
This chapter examines two case studies of the Israeli and Estonian approaches to cybersecurity and cyber defense. Due to an unstable geopolitical environment, both Israel and Estonia perceive advanced technologies, science, and cyberspace as avenues to gain a qualitative edge over their adversaries. This aspiration stems from a severe reality that is created by existential security threats posed by rogue and powerful actors that claim the status of regional hegemon.
Israel faces a wide range of challenges in the Middle East region, which has been involved in a never-ending conflict since the end of the World War II. The current unstable security environment for Israel is largely caused by the Iran and its network of allies in the region. Moreover, Iran seeks to expand its cyber capabilities an also cooperates with foreign hacktivists as well, including the Syrian Electronic Army, Shi'a Islamist hacker groups, and Lebanese Hizballah. 
100
infrastructure-Iran has started to utilize information domain to implement "international influence campaigns promoting news and stories aligned with Iranian interests." 101 Marie Baezner argues, that Iran tries to duplicate Russia's way of waging information warfare and have built a "complex networks of fake websites and social media personas to promote anti-Saudi Arabia, anti-Israel, pro-Palestinian stories and news on U.S policies in favor of Iran." 102 It is noteworthy that, according to the cybersecurity firm FireEye, a Russian lab might be involved in developing a malware used during the Saudi ARAMCO incident. 
103
Georgia and Estonia, both as post-Soviet states, are still perceived as a sphere of privileged interest by Russia. In addition, Estonia has a significant Russian-speaking minority. According to 2011 data, almost 30 percent of Estonia's citizens are Russian speakers, of which 25 percent perceive and identify themselves as Russians. This factor gives the Kremlin the leverage to undermine the Baltic state by internally disrupting it. For instance, in 2007, "the state's banking and public administration systems" were attacked as a result of the DDoS attack, "following a dispute with Russia over the movement of a 101 Marie Baezner, Hotspot Analysis: Iranian Cyber-activities in the Context of Regional Rivalries and International Tensions (Zurich: Center for Security Studies, 2019), 17, https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-b-000344841.
102 Marie Baezner, Iranian Cyber-activities in the Context of Regional Rivalries and International Tensions, 17.
103 Quentin E. Hodson, Logan Ma, Krystina Marcinek, and Karen Schwindt, 26.
published as a unified document, some aspects and approaches are given in different national regulations and activities. 
108
The next milestone was the launch of the National Cyber Initiative, which in 2010 incentivized the first cyber-strategy design and facilitated the adoption of the Government innovative society that is governed by an electronic government (e-government). However, this new initiative, which implies the use of information and communication technologies for various interactions, automatically poses additional challenges for Israeli national security and for its cyber security in particular. Therefore, securing cyberspace is one of the main national interests of Israel and obviously, cyber security strategy serves as a practical foundation for it.
Today, Israel's cyber security strategy is "designed to efficiently structure the national efforts and to ensure a stable, long-term solution." 
115
117
As mentioned above, the CERT-IL, which is under the National Cyber Directorate, works actively with the private sector to develop Systemic Cyber Resilience by encouraging information sharing and offering assistance during cyber incidents. 
118
119
125
126
127
128
129
126 Joby Warrick and Ellen Nakashima, "Officials: Israel Linked to a Disruptive Cyberattack on Iranian Port Facility," Washington Post, May 18, 2020, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/ officials-israel-linked-to-a-disruptive-cyberattack-on-iranian-port-facility/2020/05/18/9d1da866-9942-11ea-89fd-28fb313d1886_story.html. The Israeli focus on building cyber capacities represents a holistic responsive mechanism to modern cyber threats. This comprehensive approach is largely premised by the Israeli total defense model, which itself is a common feature for a small state.
Estonia is visited by thousands of delegations each year to learn about its existing digital ecosystem. In 2007, Estonia became the first country to face different forms of DDoS attacks that lasted for three weeks and had a politically motivated ground. 
145
146
147
148
149
The CDU is formed from individuals who have different backgrounds and want to contribute to cyber security. CDU objectives include several interesting and important tasks. For instance, such as the development of cooperation among qualified IT specialists, the creation of public-private partnership network, participation in international cyber security training events.
Estonia plays a key role in developing NATO's cyber defense policy. In August 2018, the Estonian Cyber Command was formed on the basis of the Headquarters Support and Signal Battalion and the Joint Headquarters. The major missions include defending the country's information systems, assisting NATO allies, and preparing for active cyber defense operations. 
150
Its mission is to enhance capability, cooperation and information-sharing between NATO member states in cyber defense. Moreover, Estonia cooperates with NATO allies and partners in cyber field as well. Its primary objective is to achieve outstanding competence in conducting large-scale cyber exercises on the technical as well as strategic level. More than 1,500 cyber experts from 30 nations took part in 2019's Locked Shields exercise.
Another exercise, Crossed Swords, focused on developing the tactical responsive cyber defense skills of cyber experts. 
151
152
153
154
155
Cybersecurity remains a challenging component of broad national security and defense. Gradually, some nations have started to pursue steps similar to those taken by Estonia and Israel, focusing on digital governmental services or emerging technologies.
Many countries have yet to develop an overarching cybersecurity strategy and to ensure the security of their critical infrastructure and citizens by cooperating with the private sector and the international community. The Estonian and Israeli cases demonstrate both the opportunity of the cyberspace and the threats that are related to unsecured networks and systems. They understood that investing in science, technological development, and human capital would result in a more secure cyberspace.
The Estonian and Israeli cases demonstrate both the potential severity of digital threats, and responses that states may take to safeguard against future cyberattacks. A cyber-crisis management plan at a national level is a very important element in a national cybersecurity strategy, as it focuses on the national coordination and mitigation efforts during the crisis. Many cyber-incidents occur on a daily basis and are mitigated promptly at an operational level, without necessarily leading to a crisis situation. Cyber-crisis specific procedures should explain the steps and actions that are needed during the cybercrisis. Few countries have pursued similar steps in the direction of securing cyberspace like Estonia and Israel. Many countries have yet to develop an organization-wide cybersecurity strategy and start engaging in cooperation and information sharing globally. The use of an international engagement strategy could be considered as an instrument for fostering international cooperation.
effectively countered by the opponent's consistent and coordinated efforts -both technologically and politically.
Russia's experience with the armed conflict with Georgia shows that in case of short-term military campaign of August 2008, Russia employed its cyber-warfare capabilities as a corollary to its extensive ground military operation. These cyber-measures aimed at hindering the Georgian Government's efforts to resist and retaliate the adversary's superior ground and naval forces. The major achievement of Russian cyber-operations during the war was psychological, having demonstrated Moscow's ability to disrupt Georgian Government's communication channels with its own population. However, for Russian armed forces, these cyber-measures did not bring about any qualitative advantage over Georgia.
The following two cases of Russian intrusion into Georgia's cyber-space were less effective, in terms of political objectives, as they represented isolated cases of hacking of computer networks of several agencies of the Georgian Government. And finally, in the case of the Lugar Lab, Russia attempted to use propaganda and disinformation to discredit the work of US-backed Central Public Health Reference Laboratory, but also, later in 2020, targeting the Lab's computer system so that to discredit its work in the eyes of the domestic and international public.
As Russia continues to pose critical threat to Georgia's defense and security infrastructure, it is of paramount importance to share and adopt the experiences of countries with similar infrastructural and political structures, including the power asymmetries with the opponents. Two such cases are Israel and Estonia. These small countries managed to create effective long-term cyber defense and cybersecurity systems, capable of fending off potential cyber-attacks from disproportionately superior powers.
The key elements of such effective systems that enable the smaller countries, specifically, Georgia, to counter the superior adversaries' information measures, both political and cyber-generated, include the following:
First, it is important to develop a long-term vision of cyber security and cyber defense strategy, using cyber capabilities to support both day-to-day security infrastructure Sixth, internationalization of efforts against foreign cyber-attacks is of paramount importance, as cyber-attacks and other active measures are, normally, accompanying larger and more serious political campaigns that target the country's resilience and military readiness. Therefore, domestic strategic communications should be complemented with international measures, through diplomatic and security channels with the leading strategic international partners, i.e., the United States, NATO countries, including, especially, the leading European nations, and Turkey. Georgia enjoys special strategic relations with NATO, framed in the Alliance's enhanced opportunities initiative. Since 2014, Georgia has had NATO's Substantive Cooperation Package, which was only recently updated and strengthened at the 1-2 December NATO Foreign Ministerial. The new additions to the Substantive Package include secure communications and cybersecurity elements. This indicates that the NATO-Georgia cooperation is rather well-established and coordinated in the information warfare domain. And this direction seems to be gaining more and more dynamic speed in mutual relationship. Given that Russia seems to more sensitive and apprehensive to international response to its actions, especially when it comes to sanctions, than to Georgia's (or, for that matter, Ukraine's) military capabilities, Georgia's effective coordination with international community may be a more potent (and certainly costeffective) deterrent against Russia than the development of defense infrastructure and hardware. The point is that in some great and medium powers, especially in Europe, acuteness of Russian threat to European security is still disputed politically. Therefore, for effective international deterrent, Georgia needs more and more enhanced coordination at the international level to achieve meaningful political effectiveness for developing a persuasive political deterrent against the adversary. Eighth, given that cyber domain is often privately driven, Georgian Government should pay greater attention to the coordination between public institutions and private entities in ensuring that there is enough capacity for waging information campaigns both in technological as well as political terms. Technological resource can be found and integrated throughout the country, among the cutting-edge innovative private enterprises and start-ups that have been supported by Georgian Government in the last few years.
technology and information space. According to Shultz and Godson, active measures, which is an
technology and information space. According to Shultz and Godson, active measures, which is an
28 Thomas, "Russian Military Thought: Concepts and Elements," 7-7.
28 Thomas, "Russian Military Thought: Concepts and Elements," 7-7.
shape an adversary's decision-making."
shape an adversary's decision-making."
ability to achieve concessions through conventional means." 40 This way Moscow seeks to demonstrate the ability to inflict damage of the target's network. The first precedent occurred when the websites of the Estonian government were targeted by DDoS attacks and were defaced but had a limited coercive impact.
65 Peter
65 Peter
of Russia. According to him, "the near simultaneous deaths of a large number of volunteers give reason to believe that the Lugar Center was researching a highly toxic and highly lethal chemical or biological agent."
of Russia. According to him, "the near simultaneous deaths of a large number of volunteers give reason to believe that the Lugar Center was researching a highly toxic and highly lethal chemical or biological agent."
layer
142 Juvien Galano, "i-Voting -the Future of Elections," e-estonia, March 19, https://e-estonia.com/ivoting-the-future-of-elections/. digitalized
Keir Giles,  The Next Phase of Russian Information Warfare (Riga: NATO StratCom COE, 2016), 4, https://www.stratcomcoe.org/next-phase-russian-information-warfare-keir-giles.
Marek N. Posard, James V. Marrone, and Todd C. Helmus, "How You can Fight Russia's Plans to Troll Americans During Campaign 2020," The RAND Blog, July 14, 2020. https://www.rand.org/blog/ 2020/07/how-you-can-fight-russias-plans-to-troll-americans.html.
Valeriano, Jensen, and Maness, 110.   
Alexander Rondeli, Georgia-Russia: From  Negative to Positive Uncertainty, #3 (Tbilisi, Georgia: GFSIS, 2013), 3, https://www.gfsis.org/files/library/opinion-papers/3-expert-opinion-eng.pdf.
Ronald J. Deibert, Rafael Rohozinski, and Masashi Crete-Nishihata, "Cyclones in Cyberspace: Information Shaping and Denial in the 2008 Russia-Georgia War,"
Roland Heickerö, Emerging Cyber Threats and Russian Views on Information Warfare and  Information Operations, 5.  
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications, 64.   
Soviet-era statue." 
104
105
Israel has constantly faced existential threats from state and non-state actors since its foundation. Yet the country has been coping with this complex geopolitical situation, and today, it has a reputation as a democratic state with a highly technological army. The responsibility for implementing and conducting Israel's cybersecurity and defense cyber strategy is assigned to two organizations: The Israeli National Cyber Directorate (INCD)
and the Israel Defense Forces (IDF). Despite the fact that the strategy has not been
In the post-Soviet period, Russia continued the Soviet tradition of active measures in foreign and security policy, subverting the perceived adversaries, and extended these measures to the cyber domain. This, for Russia, was a cost-effective way of increasing its influence, especially in the so-called "near abroad" and coercing weaker powers into submission, exhausting their morale and the will to resist.
Russian defense and security doctrines consider cyberspace as part of the information space and view cyber operations as a unified concept, integral to its defense and security policy. These views are best expressed in the so-called Gerasimov doctrine, which has become a shorthand for Russia's active measures both in case of stand-alone cyber-attacks as well as when serving as accompanying part of larger, more complex military operations. The purpose of these operations is the reflexive control of perceived adversaries, winning their populations' "hearts and minds," and, in case of failure, pursuing the tactics of coercion and intimidation. Cyber disruption, spying, and the manipulation of the perceptions of the target audiences have been the major objectives of Russian information operations as evident in the cases with Georgia, Estonia, and Ukraine at different times in the last decade and half.
For cyber operations, Russia uses proxy groups, which can be deployed both in longer-term, continuous manner as well as for immediate cyber-disruption in a relatively short-term period during special and/or military ground operations. These are coupled with the means of psychological warfare in a form of "informational confrontation," which is normally the initial phase of the conflict aimed at degrading the adversary's capacity for resistance.
However, the historical record shows that Russia's active measures have certain limits. Frequently, they are isolated acts of cyber-disruption with no significant political consequences. Also, in cases when they are employed in conjunction with propagandistic measures, these acts of informational warfare are not necessarily fatal and may be as well as military operations. Such documents help to develop coordination between various branches of authority, as well as between the center and the regions, when it comes to resisting a superior invading power. Secure communication infrastructure may become key in such cases. Coordination between the armed forces and police, as well as between the central government and local administrations, and strategic communication with own population may be key in ensuring avoidance of panic (causing various shortages in fuel and food as well as fleeing from the epicenter of the conflict toward the border areas) and other forms of civil disruption, which were widespread during the August 2008 war.
Second, a separate, yet integrated cybersecurity unit should be established and maintained in the highest civilian office of the country, the one directly responsible for the coordination of national cybersecurity strategy and operations. Normally, this is Presidential or Prime-Ministerial administration. In a hypothetical scenario, such an office would coordinate secure communication between various ministries and agencies, in case if normal communication channels have been disrupted. Such a generic system is being implemented in Georgia, known as Business Continuity Management system, under the auspices of the European Union and United Nations Development Programme. The system is implemented in various key state institutions and, yet, the system may require a separate and consolidated administrative unit, which would ensure its smooth nation-wide functioning in extraordinary circumstances.
Third, an appropriate national security strategy plan, as a single document, should be created and widely acknowledged as such a document helps to coordinate the work of all relevant bodies responsible for not only cyber but also conventional security activities throughout the nation. Such documents raise awareness about the potential dangers of information warfare both in technological as well as political terms. Also, such documents may help to endow Government's actions with more legitimacy in critical times, as political opposition in today's polarized world may deem the Government's actions arbitrary and self-serving. In the follow-up of the August 2008 war, after a brief hiatus, Georgian opposition staged large-scale demonstrations with demands to oust the Government, and the Government found itself in difficult situation as it had no legitimate reference for explaining some of its security and diplomatic actions during and after the war to the population. Fifth, with the increased digitalization of Georgia, the cybersecurity threats will only gain in importance, elevating information warfare issues in the hierarchy of national security priorities. Therefore, addressing these pressing issues should be one of the major concerns of national security establishment of Georgia. As evidenced from the substantive chapters of this thesis, in 2008, Georgia was relatively spared of cyber disruption, due to the latter's underdevelopment. This is not the case anymore. With the nation-wide digitization, Georgia's governance and economy is becoming fast dependent on its digital infrastructure. Therefore, the management of its cybersecurity should be developing in anticipation of progress, not following it. Therefore, cybersecurity matters should be introduced in every sphere of public management and constitute one of the core areas of Georgia's civilian defense component of its "total defense" philosophy, which is currently under development.