# ID: b633a120810f46dabad0cc33cc4320db
# Title: What Is Technology Strategy?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
The purpose of this thesis is to explore and define the framework for a type of military development strategy that links technological decisions to strategic effects-technology strategy. This study is novel, as most approaches to technology strategy focus on producing technology as an end in itself instead of focusing on technology development and acquisition as the principal means for achieving strategic effects. By placing technology as the means and strategic effects as the ends, this study deduces an original, perhaps seminal, description of technology strategy and a framework for its formulation. Arms-racing case studies and an exploration of offense-defense theory structure this exploration and enable the observation of technology strategy's core characteristics, which are its relationships to doctrinal innovation and organizational design, forms or templates, approaches to acquisition, and potential pitfalls. The structural components of the technology strategy concept illuminated are then arranged in a proposed taxonomy that fits within the U.S. military's joint concept development process. Beyond the descriptive and structural components, this study also identifies notable best practices in the application of technology strategy, particularly those that an effective technology strategy should encompass-both the decisions surrounding which weapons, transportation, and information systems to invest in, and their implications, in practice, for organization and doctrine. This thesis seeks to aid in bringing efficiency and focus to technological decisionmaking by defining a concept and framework of technology strategy that sets technology emphasis and acquisition as the means and strategic effects as the ends. This approach is descriptive of technology strategy instead of prescriptive. The output serves as a foundation for recognizing, analyzing, and structuring a technology strategy.
The first key finding is that military technological decisions are strategic when they result in a deliberate flow from a way-of-war paradigm to a warfighting concept, then to a portfolio of required capabilities, and finally to choices about technology acquisition (technology strategy), organizational structures, and doctrinal innovation (the "DOT triad"). At a minimum, the contents of the technology strategy guide the decisions about the acquisition, development, and/or refinement of weapons, delivery, and information technologies by identifying the technological capabilities required in the warfighting concept, acquisition approaches, and the primary technological emphasis.
The second key finding is a taxonomy to organize force development strategies.
Understanding each level is key to technology strategy formulation and analysis. The taxonomy is displayed in Figure 
1
The warfighting concept level shows the connection between the paradigm and concept and organizes technological pursuits by their strategic end in the grand strategy (i.e., how the technology will create effects in the strategic environment). The warfighting concept is how the military envisions war being fought in a particular context and how that military will fight it (i.e., Mosaic Warfare or AirLand Battle).
A capability portfolio is a grouping of all DOT triad components and their DOTMLPF-P counterparts needed to achieve a capability in the warfighting concept (i.e., autonomous aircraft or swarm drones to support the JADC2 capability in the Mosaic Warfare concept). The principal benefit of viewing technology and its accompanying DOT strategies in this manner is that it keeps the DOT decisions linked to a specific concept, and thus to its desired strategic effects.  During this time, the extremes of men and their environments were on visual display. The good that men can do and the evil they can wreak painted an exciting, yet somber picture of modernizing societies. This duality led Dickens to his shining example of poetic parallelism: "It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness." 1 It is perhaps the same duality that describes technology's role in war. Indeed, a brief sample of many historians' and analysts' views about technology over the last century gives a Dickens-like sense of the role of technology in war:
Tools or weapons, if only the right ones can be discovered, form 99 percent of victory. 2
Most of the really important variance in combat outcomes has stemmed not from technological change but from the failure of particular states to implement the … methods called for by the modern system. 
3
Technology has long been a deciding factor on the battlefield. 
5
6
7
8
9
5 Jackie Mansky, "Operation Desert Storm Was Not Won by Smart Weaponry Alone," Smithsonian Magazine, 2016, https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/operation-desert-storm-was-not-won-smartweaponry-alone-180957879/.
6 Trevor Nevitt Dupuy, The Evolution of Weapons and Warfare, 2nd ed. (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill,  1980), 315-16.  7 Fuller, Armament and History, 157.   8 David Kilcullen, The Dragons and the Snakes: How the Rest Learned to Fight the West, Illustrated (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020), 5.
9 Elting E. Morison, Rosalind Williams, and Leo Marx, Men, Machines, and Modern Times  (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2016), 161.
With the United States' shift to Great Power Competition, there is a growing discourse calling for the creation of technology strategies to maintain the West's technological edge in warfare. While a technological focus is characteristic of the U.S.' approach to warfare, as a concept, "technology strategy" is undefined in doctrine and often misused. As a result, discourse and often strategic analysis, treats the concept as a document that simply answers the question, "what technology should the military develop adopt?" This simplistic view of technology strategy does little to answer the traditional ends, ways, and means architecture for strategy formulation and ignores the accompanying organizational and doctrinal implications that are frequently highlighted in military innovation studies. While the U.S. military has certainly evolved technologically, organizationally, and doctrinally, this thesis claim that this process can be increased in efficiency and focus with a better understanding of the framework that connects technological decision making to strategic effects-the framework of technology strategy.
The expanded concept of technology strategy put forth requires a clear definition, structure, and description. Because the subject lacks these basic descriptive components, the overarching question of this work is: "What is technology strategy?" The following chapters answer the research question with a description based on expert literature, a suggested location of it in the military system, its structural characteristics, strategic forms (templates), observed pitfalls and corresponding stratagems, and a suggested taxonomy. A heuristic case study approach is the chosen methodology to guide the exploration. 
10
Chapter III explores technological adoption decisions as the independent variable in two historic arms-race case studies. The arms-race phenomenon and case studies examine how strategists may choose to modify their strategic environment through their technological choices. It is natural to assume that for any type of strategy to be valid, it must enable the strategist to create external effects. Observing technological decisions through the lens of arms-racing places technology strategy as the independent variable and allows observation of changes in the environment-giving an inside-to-out viewpoint.
Chapter IV explores technological decision making as the dependent variable in an exploration of offense-defense theory and a case study of the 1919-1940 French military.
Offense-defense theory argues, generally, that there is a state of balance between offensive or defensive-leaning technologies which can increase or reduce the efficiency of one's technologies. Thus, observing technological decision making through an offense-defense theory lens, observes how the technological environment affects internal decision making-giving an outside-to-in viewpoint. While the offense-defense theory and arms races are often examined as casually related, this thesis observes the two separately in order to focus on the effect of technological decision-making on the environment.
Chapter V merges the observed characteristics from the preceding chapters with U.S. developmental doctrine to provide the final piece-allowing for a concluding definition and structural description of technology strategy. In overlaying doctrine and observation, the chapter suggests where the concept of technology strategy belongs in Western military systems, identifies a starting point for its construction, and proposes a taxonomy for application and future study.
Enjoyment lies in the search for truth… - 
Leo Tolstoy 11
As an additional aid to identifying technology strategy in historical case studies, the second section of this chapter begins to deconstruct the technology decision by suggesting three ways a strategist may choose to acquire technology, identifying an observation methodology, and outlining the characteristics of technology strategy.
A working description of military technology strategy is necessary to enable recognition of it in the forthcoming analysis. This section begins by listing several partial definitions in the military literature. Building on these observations, the literature turns to a deconstructivist approach to understand the underdefined concept. Strategies with an accompanying adjective, such as naval strategy, or armor strategy, denote the means used. A war caused by "technology [that] flows on without regard for human intentions, and each technological breakthrough offers the possibility for decisive advantages to the side that first exploits it." 
12
13
More recent authors such as John Arquilla and Keith Carter, describe technology strategy as a process of decision making. Keith Carter states that techno-strategic integration is a "process through which militaries integrate technological advances into a strategy that maximizes their advantages." 
14
12 Stefan T. Possony and J.E. Pournelle, The Strategy of Technology (Cambridge, Mass.: University Press of Cambridge, 1970), 2.
13 Merritt Roe Smith and Leo Marx, eds., Does Technology Drive History? The Dilemma of Technological Determinism (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1994), 2.
14 Keith L Carter, "Technology Strategy Integration" (Master's thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 2012), v, https://calhoun.nps.edu/bitstream/handle/10945/7317/ 12Jun_Carter.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y. John Arquilla's examination of German Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz's technological decisions leading up to WWI, suggests more nuance inside technology strategy. In his study, Arquilla identified the principal question in technology strategy as "Which technologies to emphasize [and] which to relegate to realms of lesser importance." 
15
16
The most recent explanations of military technology strategy continue to carry forward the process approach but are limited in their explanation of the process and purpose. The Center for a New American Security (CNAS) defines technology strategy very simply as a "systematic approach for how to prioritize [military] technology investments." 
17
Their work is very much grounded in the same approach to technology strategy as this study; however, its lack of a functional framework leaves their approach difficult to apply  
There are multiple definitions of technology with some disagreement. To aid in further exploration, this section derives a working definition from expert literatureultimately defining technology as applied human knowledge.
The common definition of technology is "the practical application of knowledge
[or] a capability given by the practical application of knowledge However, there is disagreement among the definitions and a decision must be made.
While van Creveld and Simon seem to define technology as the know-how behind the physical representation, many authors suggest a physical representation for technology. In their study on the effects of military technology on the arms-race, B.T. Feld et al. defined   technology stating, "military technology is concerned … with trucks, tanks, and ships, with guns, bombs, and explosives, with rockets, and airplanes, with surveillance and communication." 25 Similarly, J.F.C. Fuller referred to military technology quite simply as "weapons or tools." 
26
The logical starting place for defining a strategic act is by analyzing the standing definitions of strategy. Analyzation of various expert military authors allows a derivation of common themes. The common themes of a desired end-state, deliberate effort, and continuing intervention lead to the conclusion that acting strategically means participating in a continual decision-making process designed to achieve a premeditated goal that would not otherwise be reached without intervention. Leading to the intuitive, but meaningful, conclusion that technology strategy's strategic goal is to utilize technology to aid in solving a defined problem.
In military literature, definitions of strategy are numerous. Clausewitz defined strategy as "the use of engagements to attain the object of war."
27
Summarizing, acting strategically is a continual decision-making process designed to achieve a premeditated goal that would not otherwise be reached without intervention.
Considering that technology is for "coping with the world's problems" and strategy is goal oriented, an intuitive conclusion is that technology strategy's strategic goal is to utilize technology to aid in solving a defined problem. 31
The existing literature suggests technology strategy consists minimally of a choice of technological emphasis (or focal point) and an approach to choosing and integrating the technology into the military system. While the approach to choosing and the integration method are two separate decisions, they are closely related, and can be categorized utilizing the same terminology. This section discusses why an emphasis must be chosen and clarifies the choosing versus integrating language by providing definitions and examples for the three approaches which are imitative, developmental, and monitoring. examination is focused on the diffusion of major military innovations, his work suggests militaries have options for achieving their desired capabilities. Directly, the options are: 1) the military can choose to imitate another state's technology and practices through purchase or internally building copies, 2) it can choose to develop novel technologies and accompanying practices, or 3) it can maintain use and improvement of its current technologies and practices.
Therefore, inside technology strategy there are at least three approaches to technological emphasis and technology acquisition: the imitative approach, the developmental approach and the monitoring approach. Notably, most strategies will contain multiple technologies supporting a primary or group of primary technologies. The approaches for the supporting technologies may also be classified as imitative, developmental, or monitoring; however, when classifying the technology strategy, the emphasized technology(s) are the primary concern. 
36
The imitative approach can be used as a description of an acquisition approach and technological emphasis. In general, imitative acquisition approaches focus on copying technology already in use by another nation. When the copied technology is the primary technology in the technology strategy then imitative also describes the approach to technological emphasis. Although some other approaches may be present for acquiring supporting technologies. In other words, a state is pursuing an imitative technology strategy when its emphasized technology is generally similar to those currently or previously emphasized by another military.
Peter the Great's technology strategy in the naval campaigns of the early 18th century is an example of an imitative approach. Faced with a superior Swedish navy in the Baltics, Peter imitated the Venetian naval technology strategy to achieve a unique advantage against the larger ships-of-the-line employed by the Swedish navy. Because 36 The initial inspiration for these three types of approaches to technology strategy acquisition was provided by Dr. John Arquilla. John Arquilla, Discussion on Acquisition Types, October 19, 2021.
Peter's strategic goal was to conquer Finland-a nation with notoriously rocky coasts-he realized that he could achieve a technological advantage by building ships with a shallower draft. Peter learned how the Venetian navy successfully employed oar-driven shallow-draft galleys to "fight the Turks in the confined waters of the Aegean and Adriatic." To capture this skill, "Peter sent numerous young Russians [to Venice] to learn the art of galley building." 
37
38
Similar to the imitative approach, the developmental approach can describe the inspiration for the choice of technological emphasis and the acquisition approach. In general, developmental acquisition approaches focus on the invention of new technologies, exploitation of emerging technologies, and/or the reimagining of established technologies.
These approaches require creativity to envision and if successful can be game-changing.
The German Blitzkrieg is an example of a developmental approach because the Germans were the first military to emphasize the tank, aircraft, and radio combination as their primary technology. The Germans changed from the WWI emphasis on artillery and riflemen to using existing, but still evolving, technologies in new configurations and with 37 Robert K. Massie, Peter the Great: His Life and World, 1st ed (New York, NY: Knopf, 1980), 584-85.
38 Massie, 585.  new methods. In this sense it was a developmental technology strategy, developmental doctrinal approach, and developmental organization design. 
39
A developmental acquisition approach can also mean and will frequently involve the new use and/or combination of new and emerging technologies. Examples of the developmental approach and its successes are often associated with paradigm-changing events such as the U.S. development and use of the nuclear weapons in WWII, code named
The Manhattan Project. As with all the approaches, when the approach is used for the primary technology, the developmental approach describes the strategies primary inspiration and the strategy itself.
The monitoring approach assumes that the military has at least some means and reason to pursue technological change but has chosen to continue typical upgrading along present lines. It is important to note that the monitoring approach is an intentional strategic choice and not a default strategy due to lack of resources, capability, or ignorance of technology availability. Inside the monitoring strategy, there is continuing technological progress along present lines of emphasis (i.e., more tanks are purchased) and some minor incremental change (i.e., software is updated, engines are upgraded). The monitoring label simply states that there is not an intent to create a major change in technological emphasis or practice at the present time.
Defining three approaches to technology acquisition and selection of the technological emphasis provides another indicator of decision making in technological pursuits. While the inspired approach for the emphasized technology is likely to be the greatest interest to this study, it is also logical to assume that any technology strategy will include non-emphasized technologies that employ multiple if not all of the deduced approaches. Thus, the identification of acquisition approaches also represents the first observed structural element of technology strategy. Where these decisions lie in the architecture of technology strategy is to be discovered in the coming chapters and discussed in the concluding chapter.
What Technologies Are Important to This Exploration? 
Clausewitz defined war as "an act of force [sometimes translated as violence] to compel our enemy to do our will." Since war is the application of force, many tools in war are agents of violence. Thus, the first category of technology is weapons. Weapons are any tools designed with the primary purpose of killing or disabling personnel or destroying 40 see Carter, 131.  property. 
41
Multiple authors, including Clausewitz, Fuller, Jomini and Dupuy have noted the importance of mobility in war. 
42
Clausewitz noted that surprise is both the "means to gain superiority" and an "independent element." 
43
44
merger of weapon and delivery technologies, information technologies are increasingly becoming part of the mosaic of military technologies. While the Cold War case study in Chapter III is able to examine information technologies in a clear, delineated manner, future examinations will find that the information content of weapons and delivery systems may blur the distinction between these categories.
Compiling the above delineations, in future chapters technology strategy is identified by the decision-making process surrounding the emphasis and/or acquisition of particular weapons, transportation/delivery, and information systems and their accompanying practices in order to enable the military to meet a desired strategic intent.
The provided description will serve as an indicator and separator of technology strategy from other forms of strategy and decision making in exploration.
This final section outlines the structure of the forthcoming exploration and details the technology strategy characteristics of interest. The first part defines how the arms-race phenomenon and offense-defense theory is used as a lens for technology strategy observation. The final sections detail the characteristics of interest which are the relationships of technology strategy to the military system, its common strategic forms, and executional pitfalls.
Because any strategy's purpose is to create and/or control the cause-and-effect relationship between the decisions in the strategy and the external environment, the relationship between the strategy and environment is the ideal place to stand-and-observe.
The next two chapters observe technology strategy through the arms-race phenomenon and the state of the offense-defense balance. provides more objectivity to the analysis and may increase universality to the observed characteristics.
Of the three principal characteristics pursued in this study, the relationship characteristics most explicitly define technology strategy's connection with the military system. Surveying the current literature shows that military doctrine and organizational design are the most interrelated to technological decision making.  van Creveld, Arquilla, and Beyerchen compel   this exploration to note doctrinal and organization design elements in tandem to ensure a more complete understanding of the subject.
While technology strategy, as defined in this exploration, has yet to have dedicated 
Any discipline is wise to capture its mistakes, learn from them, and develop best practices for future operations. Throughout the forthcoming exploration, pitfalls (mistakes) are noted and analyzed to suggest stratagems (best practices or tools-of-the-trade) in the formulation and execution of technology strategy. Identification of pitfalls and stratagems also provides an epistemological component to accompany the largely structural observations and may aid in providing a more complete understanding of the subject. With a working description of technology strategy, a structured approach, and a detailed list of desired characteristics, this work now turns to observing technology strategy through the arms-race phenomenon.
World War I broke out largely because of an arms race, and World War II because of the lack of an arms race.
-Herman Kahn
50
The initiation and response dynamics of arms-races provide an observational lens for observing the way technological decisions contribute to changes in the strategic environment.
This chapter begins with an explanation of the arms-race phenomenon and its connection to 
When choosing what technologies form the basis of a technology strategy, strategists frequently consider how international actors may perceive their acquisition and development of new military technologies and capabilities. Often referred to as the security dilemma, the acquisition of more or newer technologies, although intended to increase one's own security, can also decrease the perceived security of other players in the international community. 
51
52
53
Technology strategy is identified by searching for the decision-making process surrounding the emphasis and/or acquisition of particular weapons, transportation, and information systems and their accompanying practices in order to enable the military to meet a desired strategic intent. 55 Holger H. Herwig, "Luxury" Fleet: The Imperial German Navy, 1888-1918, Rev. ed (London ;  Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Ashfield Press, 1987), 19, 36.  believed that several other colonial powers, specifically "Spain Portugal, Denmark, and the Netherlands" were in decline and their colonies would soon be ripe for the taking. 
56
57
Therefore, from the onset Germany's navy had to consider its capability against the other major naval powers. Most notably France, Russia, and the British Royal Navy. For Germany to expand, it would need to deter the other naval powers from intervening. Early discussions within the German Admiralty focused on the Russian Navy as Germany's closest rival on the Baltic. 
58
To help accomplish his dream, the Kaiser appointed Rear Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz as the German State Secretary of the Naval Office. Soon after his appointment, Tirpitz made it clear that the German Navy would be built as a "a measure of naval power" against Britain. 
59
In the distinctions between one class of ship and another, and in the choice among ship designs within the various classes, the most difficult situation in war into which our fleet can come must be used as a basis. For that constitution of our naval force which meets the most difficult situation will be seen to be sufficient for all other situations. The limits of our resources prevent any attempt to meet every conceivable eventuality on its own in an ideal manner … For Germany the most dangerous naval enemy at present time is England. It is also the enemy against which we most urgent require a 56 Herwig, 19.   57 Herwig, 17.   58 Steinberg, Yesterday's Deterrent, 121.   59 Steinberg, 18.  certain measure of naval force as a political power factor … A fleet must be so constructed that it can unfold it greatest military potential between Heligoland and the Thames [North Sea] … A fleet constructed on this basis corresponds so well to our requirements both against France … and against Russia that for the moment we need to not pay particular attention to those enemies in determination of our ship classes and in the selection of designs. 
60
62
1
64
Admiral Sir John Fisher, the First Sea Lord of Britain, declared, "our only probable enemy is German. Germany keeps her whole fleet always concentrated within a few hours of Britain.
63 Editors of the Encyclopedia Britannica, "German Empire -Tirpitz and the German Navy," Britannica, accessed May 21, 2022, https://www.britannica.com/place/German-Empire/Tirpitz-and-the-German-navy. 64 Herwig, "Luxury" Fleet, 42.  We must therefore keep a fleet twice as powerful concentrated within a few hours of Germany." 65 Admiral Fisher also instituted sweeping reforms in training, recruiting practices, equipment quality, organization, and leadership. 
66
67
2
From the beginning Tirpitz wanted to shape the strategic environment with his technology strategy. Although the results did not match his intent, his strategy intended to build a deterrent fleet while avoiding both an arms-race and a preventive attack. 
72
Tirpitz felt that by building a Risk Fleet of fewer battleships with high quality weapons, armor, and optics, and placing it in the North Sea he would be able to deter Britain; thereby shaping the strategic environment and providing Germany the political leverage and naval deterrent it needed to build its empire.
Tirpitz likely knew Germany would lose a naval arms race if he pursued battleship parity. Besides having a much larger standing fleet, Britain also possessed the majority of the world's shipping building facilities and expertise. In 1896, British shipyards produced an average of 78% of the world's ships. 
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
To successfully conclude that the technology strategy is indeed strategic and the observations valid, it is necessary to suggest that alternate technological choices may have altered the strategic environment in the desired way. If one accepts the assumption that an arms-race was, at least partially, contributed to by Tirpitz's technological decisions, and that the arms-race was undesirable, then it is applicable to examine the Tirpitz case to see if a different technology strategy could have still met the Kaiser's intent and avoided an armsrace.
Tirpitz had other options for technological emphasis. Considering the Kaiser's desire for Germany to become a major naval power, and Tirpitz's strategy to deter the British Royal Navy, there were three options for technological emphasis: battleships, cruisers, and submarines. 80 Analysis of one of the choices not taken sheds light on characteristics and the strategic effects of technology strategies.
79 "How Serious Was the German Naval Threat to Great Britain before 1914?," Churchill Archives Centre, accessed April 27, 2022, https://archives.chu.cam.ac.uk/education/churchill-era/exercises/germannaval-threat-pre1947/.
80 Another option would have been to emphasize torpedo and gun boats, which Tirpitz did build in large quantities. The French were experimenting at the time with this style of Navy under the Jeune École doctrine, so it would have represented another imitative route for Tirpitz. However, its ability to meet the Kaiser's intent may have been limited. Building a navy around these smaller boats was more akin to a coast guard style navy with limited expeditionary capability and would have difficulty supporting global colonization.
An alternate naval technological emphasis for the Germans was the submarine.
Unlike a battleship technology strategy, which was an imitative acquisition approach, a submarine-centric naval technology strategy would have been taking a developmental acquisition approach and would have hidden from Britain's two-power rule. A German navy consisting primarily of submarines with battleships, cruisers, and other smaller ships in a secondary role may have been able to provide Germany a measure of naval power against Britain with less threat of an arms-race or international instability.
In the mid-to-late 19th century, multiple countries were developing operational submarines, but none had chosen to make undersea warfare a technological emphasis. In the Hunley was lost at sea after the attack and the Confederates destroyed much of their naval records at the end of the war. 
82
The lack of dedicated attention worldwide to submarines may have allowed Germany an edge. Germans were not ignorant in submarine construction. Referred to in German as an
Unterseeboot [under-sea-boat] and shortened to U-boat, the Germans built an experimental submarine in 1850. The early submarine sank and did not at least initially inspire confidence in the technology. However, it did manage to create interest when it was found and recovered later in 1871. 
83
84
Earlier in their development, they purchased several of the first self-guided torpedoes, later either copying or creating their own design. 
85
The trend was soon highlighted.
The first significant demonstration of torpedo capability happened at Port Arthur in 1904 when a group of small Japanese torpedo boats snuck into the port at night and, using torpedoes, sank or damaged a large portion of the Russian Pacific Fleet. 86 Greatly depleting Russia's naval capability in the Russo-Japanese War (1904-1905). Later naval actions in WWI showed torpedoes to be particularly effective. In particular one German Submarine, the U-9, sank three British cruisers in one afternoon in the fall of 1914. 
87
But could a submarine-centric navy still meet Tirpitz's desire for a political lever? It is certainly possible. The Royal Navy's largest fear from the German Imperial Fleet was a "bolt from the blue"-a sudden attack on the British fleet using torpedo boats or submarines. 
88
87 Colin Fraser, "The Dawn of the Submarine: U-9 Sank Three British Cruisers in 90 Minutes," War History Online, October 9, 2017, https://www.warhistoryonline.com/world-war-i/three-cruisers-livebaitsquadron-sunk-german-u-9-m.html.
88 Showell, The U-Boat Century, 24.
of success. 
89
The following analysis deduces characteristics of technology strategy from the observed and suggested alternative strategies in the German case study. The sections below organize the characteristics into relationships, strategic forms, and pitfalls. Key highlights are the tightly coupled doctrinal, organizational, and technological relationships, the presence of a Quality-at-the-Margins strategic form, and the presence of a Comparison Trap pitfall and stratagem-all of which may serve to guide future technology strategists in studying, formulating, and executing technology strategy.
The exploration of Tirpitz's strategy highlighted two system-level relationships. As
predicted by the Beyerchen model explained in Chapter II the way the navy chose to wage war and its organizational design were tightly linked. These elements of doctrine and organization both affected, and were affected by, technology decisions.
(1) German Naval Doctrine Tirpitz's choice of battleships as a deterrent seemed to be significantly influenced by the recent (1890) publishing of Alfred T. Mahan's book, The Influence of Sea Power Upon
History. Mahan's study of naval history concluded that the growth of the British empire was due to its ability to use battleships in decisive battles to gain "command of the sea." 
90
There also appeared to be an evolving organizational growth from Tirpitz's choice to emphasis battleships. Battleships were expensive, significantly slower, and meant for deep water battles. Their large size and slower speed meant that they also required a fleet of other ships for scouting, supplementing, and providing protection from torpedo boats (a technology that terrified turn of the century sailors). Therefore, a support fleet of additional ships where designed and built to protect and aid the primary battleships. Resulting in the organization around the battleship that included not just cruisers, but an additional fleet of scouts, submarines, torpedo boats, naval airships, and the new class of torpedo boat hunters called destroyers. As Tirpitz's technology strategy was executing, his organizational structure was changing with it.
Thus, the chosen technology influenced the way the German Navy was organized and, reciprocally, the way the fleet was organized influenced the chosen technology. Just as in the German doctrine, there is a tight connection between technology and organizational change. While the technology decisions remain the larger focal point of this analysis, all three of the elements appear to be moving or changing as a result of one another.
Tirpitz's technology strategy took on a unique form based on his strategic intent.
Because Tirpitz was building an imitative fleet of battleships but wanted to avoid provoking Britain into a preventative attack, he intentionally chose to maintain an inferior number of ships. This Inferior Ratio strategic form was an intentional decision meant to create the strategic effect of reducing his posture from an offensive one to a deterrent one. However, Tirpitz also wanted to ensure, if the Navy was engaged, that it stood a significant chance of victory despite its numerical inferiority. To this end, Tirpitz sought to build an imitative navy 95 Steinberg, Yesterday's Deterrent, 217.
of inferior quantity but higher quality in weapons, armor, and optics. Thus, Tirpitz merged an Inferior Ratio strategic form with an emphasis on quality to create a Quality-at-the-Margins strategic form. Tirpitz's Quality-at-the-Margins strategic form was a direct use of technological decision making to attempt to achieve strategic objectives and as such was an ideal example of this work's ideation of technology strategy. The form's failure to reach its intended end however, suggests that the future use of it may require substantial modification or a different end-state match.
Considering why Tirpitz may have chosen an imitative battleship strategy as well as why he may have ignored the alternative developmental submarine strategy, leads to the suggestion of the Comparison Trap pitfall. Tirpitz need to ensure that Britain knew (or at least suspected) that Germany possessed a capable navy. Deterrence was Tirpitz's principal goal, but deterrence requires an enemy to have some gauge of your capability and thus an imitative approach seems appropriate. By modeling his navy after Britain, Tirpitz could ensure his enemy knew he was of sufficient power to give him a deterrent capability, but he could also intentionally appear numerically inferior as to not provoke a preventative attack.
Unfortunately, Tirpitz miscalculated and when WWI started, Germany was left with a navy of inferior size that it was hesitant to engage directly in a naval war with Britain. As a result, the High Seas fleet contributed little to Germany's war effort in WWI. This may have been due to a poor adherence to the "doctrinal implications" of Tirpitz technological decisions or because Tirpitz never expected to go to war with his deterrent fleet and was therefore unsure of its capability. 
96
If you model yourself after your opponent, they are aware of your capability, and your deterrent threats may have more legitimacy. But beware, deterrence can fail, and you will be playing by the rules the opponent knows well. However, if you model yourself in a new or different pattern than your opponent, they may underestimate you.
The Comparison Trap stratagem above, alludes to the natural tendency to mirror another's military when attempting to deter them, especially when that military is the leading power in their domain. However, deterrence has a shaky history in military studies and very often mirror imaging turns to arms-racing.
Analysis of the Tirpitz case suggests that the choice of battleships contributed to the arms-race more greatly than a navy built around another technology such as submarines.
Ironically, Tirpitz's technology strategy was specifically designed to avoid an arms-race.
Unfortunately, the Inferior Ratio strategic form still provoked the Royal Navy into reacting and failed to deter Britain from joining the war against Germany. Contributing to the strategic failure was that the battleship was the Royal Navy's gauge of power and placing battleships in the North Sea clouded Germany's claim that its navy was simply for colonial aspirations.
Why then choose battleships? It is possible that Tirpitz's belief in the Mahanian doctrine is what caused such a dedication. It is also possible that an arms-race was simply unavoidable, and Britain would have eventually responded to any German increase in naval power. However, it seems much less likely for the Royal Navy to respond if it was permitted to bask in its own magnificent dreadnought-battleships while the German Navy pursued an offsetting advantage that would not be known until it was needed. The continual adherence could also be due to a Comparison Trap-the allure to mimic an opponent to ease comparison-because relative power was the primary concern. Tirpitz could have leaned toward an imitative technology strategy of his opponent because it allowed him to easily keep track of the difference in parity. In a submarine-centric navy, Tirpitz may have had as much difficulty gauging his naval power as his rival did-a very uncomfortable position in a deterrent-based strategy.
While Tirpitz looks unfavorable throughout most of this study, it is notable that his fleet did perform well at the one and only large-scale sea battle in WWI. Despite being outnumbered in dreadnoughts class battleships at Jutland, the German fleet sunk three battlecruisers, three heavy cruisers, and eight destroyers-while losing significantly less German ships and sailors. 
98
Unfortunately, Jutland did not change the strategic balance or break the blockade. Yet, what if the High Sea Fleet had gone into battle in 1914 and prevented the British Expeditionary Force from getting to and reinforcing France? The Schlieffen Plan may have succeeded.
Thus, the true error may have been to fail to use the battle fleet in 1914. By 1916, a tactical victory could not have a true strategic effect. 
99
While the goal of this case study is simply to observe technology strategy's characteristics, this example does suggest technology strategy formulation should closely consider the implications of an arms-race. The Anglo-German naval arms-race was expensive for Germany and was a major contributor to the outbreak of WWI. While it is dangerous and irresponsible to attribute anything as dynamic or politically involved as an arms-race to a singular cause, this analysis certainly suggests a strong link between technology strategy choices made and either the avoidance or the initiation of an arms-race. 
Case Study Two explores the United States' emphasis of nuclear weapons and its relationship to the nuclear arms race. While the U.S. was the first nuclear power, the original aim was to prevent others' acquisition of nukes, not to deliberately start an arms race.
However, after the United States' use of nuclear weapons in WWII the Soviet Union quickly pursued a nuclear program of its own. While they may not have been able to prevent the arms-race, the United States' continual emphasis of nuclear weapons and long-range delivery capability intensified the race. Just as in Case Study One, the outcome suggests a close tie between technological choices and the strategic environment. By examining the U.S.
technological choices and their outcomes, this study discovers further characteristics of technology strategy and lends further strength to the importance of technology strategy.
The atmosphere inside the Truman Whitehouse at the end of the 1940s was tense.
Truman had two significant challenges-nuclear proliferation and communism. The The seeds of totalitarian regimes are nurtured by misery and want. They spread and grow in the evil soil of poverty and strife. They reach their full growth when the hope of a people for a better life has died. We must keep that hope alive. 
101
102
The U.S., however, would have a significant problem matching the Soviets' military power. By all conventional measures the Soviet Union was superior; attaining conventional parity would be difficult. Following WWII, the U.S. had rapidly and according to some, "wastefully" downsized its military forces in an effort to "bring the boys home" and back to work. 
103
104
Truman needed a way to counter Soviet aggression and the spread of communism at a low cost and with a smaller army. He turned to nuclear weapons. Later falling under the banner of atomic-diplomacy Truman periodically would place nuclear weapons or deliver platforms in key locations in order to deter Soviet or communism actions. This policy frequently included forward staging in Britain and Berlin with limited deterrent success. In 1950, Truman's atomic-diplomacy showed its real failure when North Korea, aided by China and the Soviet Union, crossed the 38th Parallel. The U.S. was either unwilling to use or unsure of the effectiveness of atomic weapons in such a war. As a result, the Korean war looked very much like a conventional military response under the guise of police action.
Maxwell Taylor, a strong opponent of primary reliance on nuclear weapons, would later write:
An outstanding impression from the operations in Korea has been the ineffectiveness or inapplicability of many of our modern weapons to the requirement of the Korean type of limited war … we denied ourselves the use of special weapons [i.e. atomic weapons] for a variety of reasons, some military, some political … the fact that we deliberately abstained from using them is a reminder that we may do so again in future situations. 
105
107
108
U.S. It is not sound to become permanently committed to military expenditures so vast that they lead to practical bankruptcy … But there is no local defense which alone will contain the mighty land power of the Communist world.
Local defenses must be reinforced by the further deterrent of massive retaliatory power. 
116
117
120
125
126
127
128
129
130
But the expansion into all the new technologies in order to maintain an edge over the Soviet Union was expensive. In 1960, U.S. expenditures on defense had grown to $47 billion, an almost 28 percent increase from the $34 billion budget Eisenhower had hoped for under the New Look. 
131
By the end of the 1950s the failure of nuclear weapons to deter conflict was long past evident. Proxy wars and conflicts such as Vietnam (1945-1975), the First Taiwan Strait Crisis (1954-1955), the Algerian War (1954-1962), the Congo Crisis (1960-1965), and several others, represented undeterred limited wars between the U.S. and Soviet Union.
Highlighting the fallacy of this approach, General Maxwell Taylor wrote that continuation Taylor would later lead a shift in U.S. strategy. In contrast to an overwhelming focus on nuclear weapons, Taylor's Flexible Response strategy called for a more balanced approach and would later be adopted by the Kennedy administration. Despite the failure, there is still a great deal to be learned from the U.S.'s deliberate choice of a technological emphasis to achieve a strategic affect.
The following analysis deduces characteristics of technology strategy from the U.S.
case study. The U.S. case suggests the presence of two unique strategic forms: Big Bet and Technology-in-Being. The case also suggests two technology strategy pitfalls: Iceberg and Opportunity Cost. Just as in the previous case, the provided analysis and vocabulary may serve to guide future technology strategists in studying, formulating, and executing technology strategy.
The early U.S.-Soviet nuclear arms-race highlighted two forms of technology strategy. The first form described the national-level strategy of the U.S. that took a big bet 132 Taylor, 40-41.   133 General Taylor was not the only author to push for a adaptable approach. In his work, Robert Osgood also stated, "The...experience of the last decade indicate that America's over-all strategy should be the containments of the Communist sphere of control by our readiness to oppose aggression with a variety of means under a variety of circumstances." see Robert E. Osgood, Limited War: The Challenge to American Strategy, 5th ed. edition (Chicago: Univ of Chicago Pr, 1957), 235.
on nuclear weapons to achieve the desired strategic effects. The second form describes how the U.S. Air Force combined nuclear weapons, delivery capability, and an alert status to create a technology-in-being effect. The Big Bet and Technology-in-Being strategic forms are discussed below.
(1) Big Bet
The New Look's nuclear-focused strategy took on an almost singular capability and type of response. As General Taylor later noted, the singular focus was betting that all future wars would be nuclear and the threat of all out nuclear war would deter all lesser conflict. 
134
(2) Technology-in-Being
The U.S. technology strategy's form created a dominant weapon capability that was able to exert a technology-in-being effect on the Soviet Union. Just having a larger nuclear arsenal would not provide the U.S. the deterrence it required. They also needed to be able to deliver the nuclear weapons to target with high confidence. Thus, the U.S. sought to maintain a clear superiority in nuclear delivery capability compared to the Soviet Union.
To support the overall Big Bet strategy on nuclear weapons, the Air Force built a bomber force of greater quantity and quality than the Soviet Union. Doctrinally, the U.S. Air Force also developed an alert posture "with the goal of having 30 percent (later 50 percent) of its 
Analysis and may do so unevenly, thereby more greatly favoring either defensive or offensive pursuits. 
141
142
ODT proposes two variables to describe the relationship between offensive (advancing) forces and defensive (non-advancing) forces. As defined by Robert Jervis in 1978, the "two key variables in ODT are (1) the offense-defense balance … whether it is 'easier' to take territory or to defend it, and (2) offense-defense distinguishability … whether the forces that support offensive missions are different from those that support defensive missions." 143 Interplay of these two variables predicts the stability of the international security environment.
The OD balance (often referred to as the balance) is the ratio of the efficiency of using a technology offensively versus defensively. 
144
146
147
The way technologies interact to create greater efficiency in strategies complicates ODT because many technologies can aid both offensive and defensive pursuits. However, ODT maintains that there are principal characteristics of technologies that align them to support either offense or defensive strategies more efficiently. The identifying of offensive (or defensive) technological characteristics is among the most critical and controversial components of ODT.
(1)
Offensive Technology Characteristics
The principal strength of the offense lies in its ownership of the initiative. The initiative allows the offense to determine the time and place of the fight. In contrast, the defense is, by nature, reactive to the actions of the offense. 
148
147 Karen Daneu, "The P-51 Mustang as an Escort Fighter: Development Beyond Drop Tanks to an Independent Air Force" (Fort Belvoir, VA: Defense Technical Information Center, April 1, 1996), vi, https://doi.org/10.21236/ADA330888. 148 Clausewitz, Howard, and Paret, On War, 357.  favor offensive strategies. 
149
Exploitation of the initiative requires the offense to concentrate forces effectively where the defense is weak. Because the defense is almost always reactive, the movement of the defense trails the offense. The defense recognizes this delayed movement and often must disperse its forces or estimate where the offense is likely to attack to ensure sufficient counter-forces are positioned. Therefore, assuming that the defense has not correctly estimated the offense's movements, the offense will be able to concentrate and attack before the defense can concentrate its forces. Assuming both sides are using the same technology, to stay balanced the defense must have a greater amount of the same technology.
As a tactical example, assume two sides are equipped with only a single tank. The tank brings a high degree of mobility, enabling it to stand as a defensive guard along an entire front (i.e., patrolling). However, while its mobility enables it to patrol the front, because the defensive does not own the initiative, there is no guarantee that the tank will be at the location at which the offense chooses to battle. Alternatively, because the offense determines the place of battle, it can assure itself that its tank will be at the battle. Thus, a highly mobile asset can benefit both sides, but in a symmetrical match the defense requires more of the asset due to the efficiency loss in distribution. 
150
151
The principal strength of the defense lies in its goal of preservation and denial.
Whereas an offensive action must achieve an objective, such as seizure of land or destruction of a key element, the reciprocating defensive action is to prevent the attacker from achieving their objective-what Clausewitz referred to simply as "preservation" and "denial." 152
Technologies that increase military capability against a concentrated and/or maneuvering opponent are defensive-leaning technologies. Increased capability against concentrated or maneuvering forces requires increased range, accuracy, rate of fire, targets per strike, and/or probability of kill. Collectively, these elements are referred to as firepower. 
153
At the strategic level, offensive technologies enable the delivery of forces, weapons, or information from the "homeland to a theater of operations or between theaters" more efficiently than they prevent a defending force from denying these operations. 
157
Notably, the organizational and doctrinal uses must also embrace the offensive capability. For instance, the U.S. carrier strike group, a strategic-offensive tool is both organized and doctrinally aligned around the nuclear-powered carrier. Other countries possessing aircraft carriers, such as Japan, have not embraced nuclear energy as the source of propulsion and tend to utilize their carriers in more defensive postures. Thus, technologies that support delivery of military capability from the homeland to the target zone are strategically offensive, but their absolute nature may take further analyzation of the country's developmental decisions and alignment with doctrinal and organizational choices.
At the operational level technological advances enabling the movement, sustainment, and positioning of forces, weapons, or information prior to battle, benefit the offensive. Conversely, technologies that enable the "detection of action, assessment of the threat, decision on response and instruction dissemination" benefit the defense. 
158
First, strike and movement operations were coordinated through radios inside the tank and aircraft enabling flexibility, rapid force concentration, and close air support. 
159
161
162
163
The tactical-level deals with exploitation of battlefield advantages. Tactical offensive-favoring technologies increase the ability to move under fire and survive, whereas tactical defensive technologies slow mobility and deny territory. The design and uses of the first tanks at the Somme and Cambrai in WWI fit the tactical offense definition. These early tanks served as large moving walls of steel for infantry troops to shoot from and shelter behind when advancing on the enemy line. However, unlike the later Blitzkrieg operations, the WWI use of tanks received little doctrinal development or organizational support and these technologies maintained only their tactical level influence.
Tactical-level defensive technologies are designed to slow mobility or deny territory.
Often these technologies are designed for low cost and minimal maintenance, such as barbed wire and landmines. In the case of WWI, these mobility-slowing defensive technologies were part of the reason tanks were developed. The heavy armor and metal tracked propulsion of tanks negated the mobility slowing effects and helped restore movement to the battlefield. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the OD balance at each level of war and optimize technological decisions based on the technology's intended use and within their expected context. Often, the same technology contributes to the balance in different ways depending on the level of analysis. In the P-51 drop-fuel-tank example above, the increased cost of using aircraft over long ranges made them more efficient in a strategic defensive; however, at the tactical level, fighter-type aircraft employed in close air support missions served as highly maneuverable fires platforms that were difficult to defend against with common ground forces. Thus, at the tactical and even operational level, fighter aircraft tend to be offensively more efficient and at the strategic level defensively more efficient. 
164
The chief difference between the two cases is the organizational and doctrinal integration of the tank. This type of switching in the balance from strategic to tactical is common, may be dependent on organizational or doctrinal choices, and should be considered when building a technology strategy.
In addition to the balance, ODT's other variable is the ability to distinguish between offensive and defensive postures, also referred to as distinguishability. As alluded to in Chapter III, an arms-race or other hostile actions are often the result of fear of an opponent's increased capability and/or unknown intentions. A country building numerous fortifications and fixed artillery sites along its border is less likely to alarm its neighbor than a country that sends several tank battalions to patrol its border. While in both cases the state may have defensive intentions, the use of tanks in a defensive posture is not as easily distinguishable due to the mobile nature of tank technology. Many common technologies in use today similarly suffer from this lack of distinguishability, including aircraft and naval vessels. The firepower of these air and naval technologies gives them strong defensive characteristics, while their maneuverability grants them strong offensive characteristics. Whether they are 164 It is worth noting that the effect of the aircraft on the OD balance at the operational level may simply be a matter of design choices or even commanders' payload specifications. Aircraft operating in a defensive posture are likely to choose external fuel tanks for increased loiter time instead of extra bombs and missiles, whereas a fighter on a tasked strike or air interdiction mission is likely to favor more bombs and missiles. more efficient at one or the other may be discernable only through in-depth, often classified, knowledge of the technology. Along these same lines, technologies that are either inherently or designed to be neutral will place similarly increased emphasis on how they are employed.
Neutral technologies are likely to become increasingly prevalent, and distinguishability of posture more important, as weapons, delivery, and information technologies begin to merge.
(i.e., smart weapons and autonomous drones)
A technology strategist would be wise to consider the apparent offensive or defensive nature of a chosen technology and how it may affect international stability. In the next section, the Tirpitz case study from Chapter III illustrates ODT. As the section explores the predictive tenets of ODT, consider that the German battleships' deep-water capabilities and position in the North Sea gave the Tirpitz strategy unmistakable offensive characteristics, sparking not only an arms race but contributing to a war-despite Tirpitz's stated intent to create a naval fleet to deter war.
Proponents of ODT claim that the two variables mentioned above-offense-defense balance and the distinguishability of offensive or defensive posturing-predict the stability of the international environment by estimating the value actors place on attacking or waiting to be attacked. In "Cooperation Under the Security Dilemma," Robert Jervis offers the matrix shown in Figure 
6
The critics of ODT raise several arguments of relevance to a strategist building a technology strategy. While many critics of ODT accept the premise of an OD balance, they argue that it is 1) difficult to draw a clear distinction between offensive and defensive weapons; 2) states and actors often struggle to correctly evaluate the balance and 3) that the OD balance and distinguishability variables are far less important variables in predicting international stability compared to other elements, such as politics and economics. 
166
The difficulty of classifying weapons as offensively or defensively dominant is among the most controversial of the theory's components. Some technologies are clearly polarized by their nature to one end of the scale. Such as the clearly immobile and firepower laden Maginot Line (defensive). However, most technologies can exist on a spectrum that, while initially on one end of the scale, can be affected by tradeoff decisions in development and how the technology is utilized. Indeed, most of the distinction arguments against the applicability of ODT contend that the application of a technology, as opposed to its characteristics, primarily determines its offensive or defensive nature. 
167
166 Lynn-Jones, "Offense-Defense Theory and Its Critics," 671-72.
167 Lynn-Jones, 672-673.
168 Jervis, "Cooperation Under the Security Dilemma," 202.
For instance, the French conceived of tanks as a defensive weapon designed to protect the infantry. As such, they favored firepower and thick armor in development at the expense of speed (see Figure 
12
169
170
171
172
Correctly perceiving the current or future state of the OD balance has historically proved difficult. Jack Snyder's article "The Cult of the Offensive" builds on the work of Barry Posen and Stephen Van Evera to show how militaries continually lean toward offensive strategies even when presented with evidence of a defense dominance. 
176
The failure to perceive the disparity led to Waterloo-like charges across battlefields strewn with barbed wire, blanketed with machinegun fire, filled with poison gases, and cratered by artillery barrages. The over eight million resulting deaths illustrates the difficulty and importance of analyzing the balance.   Adaptation may be a change of strategy or development of technologies to shift the balance. Although developing the technology to shift the balance takes time and even with a high-level of technological readiness rapid development requires significant support. Such was the case in WWI, where the tank enabled the escape from the trenches, but its development and implementation took over two years when the supporting technologiesthe internal combustion engine and caterpillar tracks-were available prior to the war. 
180
181
182
The resulting oscillation between perception and actual balance shown in Figure 
7
A common argument against ODT, is that the OD balance is a lesser causal variable in predicting conflict compared to other variables such as political aims. In his book War and the Engineers, Keir Lieber concludes that "political and military elites tend not to shape their strategies on the basis of military technology but rather to view the utility of the new technologies through the lens of their current strategies." 183 Similarly, Colin Gray states "Governments, not weapons, make war." 184 Proponents generally acknowledge these arguments and are quick to point out that ODT variables are not causal variables of conflict, they are stability predictors. Any theory attempting to predict the cause of a conflict would certainly need to consider political, domestic, and social variables. 
185
The challenges to ODT's predictive power do, however, highlight the most important technology strategy takeaway from the theory-a strategist may need to employ a strategy that defies the technological state of play due to any number of political, military, or social factors. Ideally in a defense-dominant system a military would avoid offensive actions.
However, due to other causal factors, a military strategist may predict a conflict against the balance in the future. In this instance, the strategist's ability to show the disproportionate cost of one strategy over the other may enable a more persuasive argument to decision makers, 
The continuing growth of information systems poses a challenge for ODT.
Information systems are difficult to label as defensive or offensive because the traditional elements of firepower and mobility are rarely apparent in these systems. Even in the pure information domain (i.e., the cyber domain) while operations themselves are often easy to differentiate, the base technologies such as computers and network systems, are difficult to characterize and are very much context dependent.
The incorporation of information systems into weapon systems similarly confuses the distinction of offense and defense characteristics of these technologies. For instance, networked smart weapons are now capable of arming, disarming, changing targets, and flight patterns while in flight. 
187
Even on their own, the effects of the development of information technologies is undeniable. In WWII, the Allies breaking of the Japanese codes, enabled precise targeting of Japanese submarine and surface ships greatly reducing their offensive advantage without benefiting firepower. Similarly, the development of ULTRA allowed the Allies to decode German messages and greatly increased their information advantage. 188
186 An excellent example of this situation is the tensions between Taiwan and China from a U.S. perspective. China's development of long-range missile technology and additional A2/AD technologies has shifted the balance strongly in favor of the tactical defensive. U.S. ships coming to the aid of Taiwan would be highly vulnerable to Chinese missile attacks. Yet, China has made numerous statements on its intent to retake Taiwan. Under current conditions U.S. support of Taiwan would be fighting against the OD balance.
187 Thomas Newdick and Joseph Trevithick, "The Age of Swarming Air-Launched Munitions Has Officially Begun with Air Force Test," The Warzone, 2021, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/ 38604/the-age-of-swarming-air-launched-munitions-has-officially-begun-with-air-force-test.
188 "War of Secrets: Cryptology in WWII," National Museum of the United States Air Force, accessed April 21, 2022, https://www.nationalmuseum.af.mil/Visit/Museum-Exhibits/Fact-Sheets/Display/ Article/196193/war-of-secrets-cryptology-in-wwii/.
More recently, a U.S. war game against an adversarial China showed an undesired effect of information system reliance. When asked how the U.S. information-networkdependent offensive strategy fared, Gen John Hyten stated, "It failed miserably." 
189
The mixed results suggests that the effect of information systems may be best described as positive and negative exponents, able to increase advantages in one application but decrease them in another depending on their application and the level of reliance placed on them. Much more research and thought are required; however, enough is clear to state that the increasing incorporation and development of information systems will create exponential increases in the capability of offensive and defensive systems. But these advantages may wax and wane with the adaptation of the enemy and there is a distinct possibility that the same information technology that gives an army its advantage also makes it vulnerable.
Most examinations of the OD balance focus on its ability to predict traditional armed conflict among states. However, this simplistic definition of stability may overlook a strong relationship between the balance and the character of conflict. The word conflict is chosen instead of war, because the character of war implies an examination of directly accountable hostilities which are becoming increasingly rare. By contrast, the character of conflict is broader and simply describes the means and ways nations or states use to inflict cost on one another. The character of conflict has changed over time and these changes have often occurred under a strong defensive balance.  (Washington, DC: Potomac Books, 2002), 10-12. Taber's perspective is insurgents are strategically offensive and tactically defensive. Inversely the counterinsurgent is strategically defensive and tactically offensive. The technological component is not discussed directly by Taber, but this author's own experience notes that insurgencies maximize the use of commercial communication and information technologies to fight a narrative warfare and exploit mistakes by the counterinsurgents. A notable example is the use of social media to show dead non-combatants and make claims that the counterinsurgents killed innocents. This had the effect of forcing the counterinsurgents, the U.S. in this case, to utilize lower yield, less effective weapons and take less risks, and therefore less shots, when engaging combatants for fear of collateral damage. In essence, the insurgents exploited information technologies to reduce the effectiveness of the U.S. firepower and technological superiority.  
, 1946-2017 196
Distilling the above examination of ODT, two key questions fall out that can aid in building a technology strategy. These questions serve as starting points in defining the 
The following vignette explores how the French evaluated the OD balance throughout the 1920s and 30s and how this evaluation affected their military preparations.
The examination finds that the French perception of defense dominance had significant effects on their doctrine, organization, and technology decisions. The results of the Battle of France suggests that the French incorrectly evaluated the balance; however, their early preparation and devotion to their perception for almost two decades, provides an excellent case study for technology strategy characteristics.
The rapid defeat of France in 1940 is a well-studied curiosity in military history. It is indeed perplexing that France and the British Expeditionary Forces (BEF) would lose so quickly. After the Great War, France was the first to turn their attention to preparation and maintained a constant focus on military development while others spent much of the 1920s devoted to economic issues. France, expected a coming war with Germany. As Robert  202 For an informative summary of the German Blitzkrieg tactics from a techno-strategic integration perspective see Carter, "Techno-Strategic Integration." 133-144  (3200 to 2500), were quickly surrounded resulting in the capture of over a million troops and the capitulation of France. 
203
How could such a disaster have happened? Timing and luck play into any conflict, and it is certainly possible that the Germans got lucky. The Germans had good fortune to find a location at the town of Houx on the Meuse River that could be crossed without alerting the French and without constructing a bridge. 
204
205
206
defense, a belief that depended on the Germans fighting the war that France wanted to fighta defensive war in an offensive dominant world.
Analysis of the French doctrinal evolutions from the end of WWI until 1940 shows that the French believed that maintaining superiority in firepower was the key to victory. 
207
Gustave Gamelin failed to "understand the true potential of armor" and De Gaulle's ideas were rejected both in the military and in the larger French government.
213
The dominant French belief in firepower and assumption of a static OD balance supported the development of an innovative, but largely regarded as slow and ineffective, warfighting concept they called "methodical battle."
214
215
216
The French focus on firepower, defense, and methodical battle had significant effects on their technological development choices. Among these decisions three areas of pursuit were unique to the French belief. The most prominent example is perhaps the expensive, impressive, but largely ineffectual Maginot Line. The system of fortification absorbed as a majority of French resources but played a limited role WWII. Similarly, the French dedicated much time and effort to the development of tanks and produced nearly the same number of tanks as the Germans. However, the French envisioned an unimaginative use of their tanks and developed them in ways that reduced their capabilities. Finally, the French's disastrous aircraft development ideas based on building a slow, clunky, and wholly incompetent multiplace de combat (multipurpose) aircraft, resulted in years of poor spending and a fleet of aircraft that were obsolete nearly from the moment they were built. Indeed, the French technology strategy suffered greatly from the devotion to an inaccurate view of the state of the balance and internal dogma.
The idea for the system of fortifications eventually called The Maginot Line originated in a paper written by Marshal Henri Pétain. The paper titled "Note au sujet de l'organisation défensive du territoire" [Note on a Defensive Organization of the Country] stated that "Modern defense systems … can no longer be anything else than battlefields for armies, pre-arranged in times of peace." 217 Greatly influenced by his experiences in WWI, Pétain believed that wars would continue to resemble "one continuous frontier battlefield" much as they did in the western fronts of WWI. 
218
The Maginot Line was neither a wall nor even a continuous line. It was a system of fortifications with gaps designed to channel an attacking army. In the gaps between fortifications the French planned to station "interval troops" equipped with heavy firepower to meet any attacking Germans. Figure 
9
9
9
222
223
Figure 
10
Most notably, none of the main fortifications contained any specifically designed or dedicated anti-aircraft weaponry. The fortresses relied on deep placement underground with narrow turrets reaching the surface for protection. But, while these perhaps provided protection for the occupants, it did not allow the Maginot Line to attack the enemy aircraft. 
225
226
225 Kaufmann and Kaufmann, The Maginot Line, 142.   226 Greg Baughen, The Rise and Fall of the French Air Force: French Air Operations and Strategy  1900-1940 (Stroud: Fonthill Media, 2018), 66, 70. Baughen also notes however, that years later when Pértain is brought out of retirement and put in charge of all air defense issues, his views on the utility of air power seemed to change but his opposition to an independent Air Force did not.
on Eben Emael in Belgium). 
227
228
While the French believed tanks were vital to future warfare, they envisioned the tank as one cog in the methodical battle machine. The 1921 version of the French doctrine placed the employment of tanks under the subject of Infantry and regarded the tank as a supporting instrument. In his review of their doctrine in 1921, Captain B.H. Liddell Hart remarked that "this assignment to a purely auxiliary role scarcely seems in accordance with the principle of economic distribution of force, when the speed of the latest types of tanks is (sic) taken into consideration." 
229
230
231
11
232
In the French Air Force, the shortage of resources due to heavy spending on the Maginot Line, global depression, and rebuilding efforts led to a technology strategy that suffered from frequent changes in emphasis. The French were constantly searching for the perfect and most efficient use of airpower which resulted in a diverse and wholly inadequate Air Force in the 1940 campaign. As Greg Baughen explains, "the French Air Force failed in 1940, not so much because it was stuck in the past, but because it had been seduced by radical and unproven theories on the way air power would develop in the future." 235 Over-devotion to two theories ultimately spelled disaster for the French Air Force. The first was the belief in the decisive nature of long-range bombing, The second was the misdirected and sustained pursuit of a wholly incapable all-purpose aircraft that the French called the bombardement, combat and renseigneme design.
The theory that war could be won by long strategic bombing alone was birthed from the writing of Command of the Air by Guilio Douhet. His writing increased friction on the proper use of airpower among the French leadership, who were already attempting to settle disputes over the usefulness of an independent air force. Douhet's writing alarmed citizens and politicians on the vulnerability of cities to German long-range bombers. This alarm led to proposals and heavy requirements for fighter type aircraft to protect major cities as well as the development of long-range bombers to threaten German cities as a measure of deterrence. While the Air Ministry tried to develop the new requirements, the Army remained focused on the primacy of the infantry and felt that, while the bombing threat was significant, the primary role of airpower should be to support the infantry in reconnaissance and artillery spotting roles. They continued to battle for their own dedicated aircraft for reconnaissance and artillery support missions, which they felt was the most important role of an air force. 
236
237
greater, and French casualties far fewer, if the Air Force had concentrated on supporting the artillery." 238 These disagreements among priority roles would continue to plague the French and ultimately lead to constant design changes.
In the early 1930s, the French Air Ministry decided to address the disagreements by creating an aircraft that could accomplish all roles. The Air Ministry's multiplace de combat specifications called for a bombardement, combat and renseigneme (reconnaissance) (BCR) plane that would be "ultra-modern, fast, maneuverable, powerfully armed twin engine [and]   … equally capable of artillery observation, army reconnaissance, tactical bombing, strategic reconnaissance, long-range bombing, escorting, and interception." 
239
13
240
241
The French thinking remained fixed on the balance and ideas of the past. Both the employment of new technologies and their prioritization in development were based on the historical observation that superior artillery firepower would create a static continuous front.
But their assumption was incorrect, that balance had shifted from defense to offense.
The advancement of tank and aircraft technologies firmly shifted the balance to offensive and the French defensive mindset in technological development was a poor fit. The creation of a well-armed and continuous front along the entire extent of the eastern border was not fiscally possible nor politically acceptable. Politically, a full extension of the line may have signaled to the Belgians that the French were abandoning them to their fate. 
251
Which lead to the conclusion that Germany would attack likely attack through their shared border near the Alsace-Lorraine region (where the Maginot Line was built) or through Belgium as they had in WWI. This large expanse was a great deal of territory to cover under a "pre-arranged" battlefield concept. 
252
254
Similarly, the French Air Force suffered from misdirected priorities. They invested much of their resources into the development of aircraft supporting a mission not aligned with how Germany intended to fight. In the 1940 campaign, Germany virtually ignored French cities and focused its resources on attacking the troops along the front. The French fought hard but were outnumbered in key areas due to over-allocation of French aircraft for protecting cities that were never attacked and piecemealing out to individual army units to act as scouts.
The dispersion of aircraft resulted in little air resistance to the German drive through the Ardennes Forest despite scouts detecting the convoys driving with their lights on after dark. 
255
256
Exploration of France's technology strategy reinforces previously observed relationships between technology, organization, and doctrine but also notes the existence of a guiding way-of-war paradigm. The case study also highlights new forms of technology strategy and suggests two additional pitfalls and corresponding stratagems. Key highlights include the identification of a triad of strategies necessary for achieving a desired paradigm.
Additionally, two forms of technology strategy are identified as well as the crossover-point pitfall. The below sections further explore these observed characteristics.
The French case provides further confirmation of the overlapping relationship between doctrine, organization and technology (DOT), but also identifies the presence of a guiding way-of-war ideation or paradigm. The French developed the doctrine of methodical battle due to their belief that technological progress had made firepower the governing principle of war. Their doctrine led to organizational decisions on how and where to place their tanks and aircraft. As the aircraft and tank technologies developed, the French adapted their doctrine and organization although they continued to remain fixed on the primacy of firepower and validity of methodical battle. In this way, technology, doctrine, and organizational principles all exerted a continual pushing and blocking effect on one another.
The interlocking nature of these three elements agrees with the observations seen in Chapter III and supporting literature and suggests that technology strategy exists as part of a triad of strategies that includes organizational design and doctrinal development (sometime referred to as emerging doctrine). The following chapter further explores the DOT relational triad concept.
Notably, the French belief in the superiority of firepower seemed to function as a centralizing way-of-war paradigm in DOT decisions. As the previous analysis shows, the superiority of puissance de feu was based on the premise that a future war would be a followon version of the Great War. But the validity of paradigm was largely unchallenged, allowing the supremacy of the firepower ideation to become an unchallengeable axiom that continually affected DOT decisions. 
257
258
A brief diversion into Germany's approach to war shows similar hints of militaries guiding their DOT decisions based on an internally accepted paradigm on the way war is fought (or will be fought). Following WWI, the reconstituted German General Staff under Chief of Staff Hans von Seeckt established various committees to examine the lessons learned from the war. Among the top questions asked of these committees were "What new guidelines have been developed from the use of new weaponry in the war [and] which new problems put forward by the war have we not yet found solutions." 259 Thus the Germans began their analysis of WWI searching for new uses for technology and solutions to previous problems.
The perspective of Germany as the conquering force (i.e., to be on the offensive) certainly influenced these solutions. To the Germans, slow movement and execution of the Schlieffen Plan contributed to their Failure in 1914 to quickly take Paris and capture the French government. New transportation and delivery technologies in WW1, such as the railroad, had enabled France to quickly move forces from its eastern front and confront the German army.
The Germans in turn as it was slowed from the North as they moved beyond their own railheads and faced the unexpected effects of the retreating Belgians tearing up their own tracks. Therefore, Germany's failure in 1914, and again in 1918 was due to both insufficient German speed and France's use of technology to rapidly concentrate forces. Through this lens, it is fairly logical to see how Hans von Seeckt's committees developed a theory of victory that stressed fast and rapid movement designed to capture the enemy's key industry and government before they could assemble an army. Thus, one of the primary outcomes of the German reflections on WWI was not how to fight that war better but how to avoid that warthe answer was "Operation ist Bewgung" [war is movement]. 
260
261
The tradeoffs made in development of technologies such as armor instead of speed in tanks, and machine guns instead of speed in the BCR aircraft, also gave the technology strategy a defensive characteristic. These observations suggest that both the chosen technology and the strategists' tradeoff decisions dictate the form of the technology strategy, and these can and should be influenced by an evaluation of the OD balance.
The second form seen in the French technology strategy was a Big Bet on the Maginot Line. The dense system of fortifications stood as both a deterrent for invasion and a symbol of national pride. Its three billion Franc cost is staggering considering the global economic depression that affected France through much of the interwar period. Many of the early discussions justifying the building of the Maginot Line were based on the limited conscription time of French soldiers, small number of professional soldiers, and the close proximity of the French industrial regions in Alsace-Lorraine to the German border.
Following the Great War, the French people and government were unwilling to maintain a large standing army capable of rapidly meeting a German invasion force. While the French generally acknowledged that a fortification could not hold forever, they felt that a system of fortifications could hold back the Germans while a sufficient conscription army was assembled. Thus, the Maginot Line represented a Big Bet technology strategy with the French investing billions of francs and military resources into a system of fortifications, hoping that the Maginot Line would deter a German invasion, stop an invasion, or at least delay them while a larger army was assembled.
The third form of technology strategy was not observed directly in the French case, but its presence is undeniable as the Germans appeared to intentionally pursue a balanceshifting technology strategy. The Germans intentionally invested in highly mobile technologies and developed tactics and doctrine in response to the defense dominance of WWI to overturn the balance. 
262
263
The French case study suggests two possible pitfalls and corresponding stratagems:
Crossover Point and Opportunity Cost. The mobility-reducing effects of the technical tradeoffs made in the French technology strategy, suggest that there may be a Crossover Point pitfall where decisions made in development can shift a technology from offense to defense dominant (and vice versa). As previously stated, many technologies naturally lean toward offensive (i.e., tanks) or defensive (i.e., artillery). However, the dominant features of the technology may be intentionally (or unintentionally) reduced to provide more rounded or even unneeded capabilities. 
264
As explored previously, design tradeoffs are common and, if done correctly in sync, are based on the overall intended use or employment strategy. But it is possible that a strategist setting developmental requirements or choosing designs may convert an inherently offensive technology into a defensive one (or vice versa). Doughty's explanation of France's 1930s
263 It should be noted that the Germans were not the only ones to invest in this way and even they did not immediately realize the capability of a fully mechanized force. However, their early decision to bring mobility back to war, guided their DOT decisions. See Murray and Millett, Military Innovation in the Interwar Period, 34-48.
264 An example of an "unintentional" approach to the Crossover Point is the disastrous Bradley Fighting Vehicle design history portrayed in the humorous movie "The Pentagon Wars" and typically used to illustrate the dangers of scope creep. Originally conceived as a fast scout and troop transporter, numerous individuals and agencies interceded during the design and approval process adding requirements, such as increased armament and ammo stores, that all but eliminated the ability of the vehicle to scout and transport troops. "The Bradley Fighting Vehicle," A. James Clark School of Engineering, University of Maryland, accessed March 1, 2022, https://user.eng.umd.edu/~austin/enes489p/lecture-resources/ BradleyFightingVehicle-Scenario.pdf. discussions on the "proper design of a tank to be used in a defensive role" highlights technological designs hovering around the Crossover Point:
[General] Maurin discussed three major alternatives, the first being what he called the "tank solution," or using the [already designed and built but slow and lightly armored] B-1 tank. The second, an armored self-propelled cannon that resembled the tank destroyers of World War II, would have a 75mm cannon mounted on the chassis of a D-1 or D-2 tank [another already designed and built light tank]. The modified turret containing the 75mm cannon could be quickly removed and replaced with the standard turret of the D-1 or D-2 tank … and would supposedly enable the new vehicle to be converted quickly into an offensive weapons system. The final solution … was a towed turret, mounted on four wheels and carrying a 75mm cannon. The moveable "turrets" could be towed into defensive positions by tractors and moved to other positions once the battle was over. According to Maurin, the best solution was placing a modified turret on the D-1 or D-2 chassis 
265
Eventually the French did continue to develop tanks along more traditional lines, but the early 1930s discussion illustrates how strategists can quickly find themselves trying to fit a square peg into a round hole. The tank was likely not the appropriate base technology for Maurin's objective. The presence of an OD Crossover Point pitfall suggests that technological decisions should be approached with a primary (firepower or mobility) characteristic in mind as a starting place for choosing the base technology. Leading to the Crossover Point stratagem:
Avoid wasting time and resources trying to convert a piece of equipment into something against its nature. Instead, choose equipment and technology already closely aligned with your primary intended capability and then use tradeoff decisions in development to enable any secondary capabilities.
Another technology strategy pitfall suggested by the French case is the Opportunity Cost pitfall. The high cost of the Maginot line drained time, money, and political clout from other areas of the French defensive plans. By choosing to build the Maginot Line, the French were simultaneously choosing to withhold investments in other areas, such as a larger and more diverse air force. The Opportunity Cost pitfall reminds the strategist that technological pursuits require definitive direction and guidance. To avoid wasting precious few resources, technological decision making needs to remain strategically, doctrinally, and organizationally aligned. Leading to the intuitive Opportunity Cost stratagem:
A technology strategist's constant enemy is scarcity. There will never be enough resources to pursue all possible technological solutions. Thus, each decision to undertake a technological pursuit is also a decision to forgo another.
The OD balance during WWII was offense dominant. The coming of age of tanks and aircraft, combined with the further development of radios led to a rapid increase in battlefield mobility and tipped the OD balance toward the offense. But France wrongly perceived a defensive balance. This incorrect perception affected its technological decisions, doctrine, and the way the military was organized. France had a greater total number of tanks and aircraft, but their decision to develop and employ them in a defensive fashion against the balance meant that greater numbers were not enough. The highly mobile German army could quickly organize and concentrate forces at France's weak points.
Could France's strategy have worked if they had more time? Possibly. When the German units fought the French in Belgium, where France was fighting the way it was designed, France did remarkably well. But Germany was determined to move to France's weakest points and France simply did not have a large enough army or enough fortifications to cover all entry points. Suggesting that to employ under their defensive doctrine and organization against a more mobile enemy in an offense-dominant environment, the French needed more than they had-more tanks, more aircraft, and more fortresses to ensure they could meet any German assault at any location. The economic costs of which would have been astronomical and likely unreachable. Looking forward, it appears more feasible, if not simply more economical, for a technology strategist to focus on correctly predicting the OD balance.
This chapter explored how offense-defense theory may guide a technology strategist.
Standouts among these observations included ODT ability to predict how emerging and standing technologies may affect the economic feasibility of offensive and defensive strategies. While history shows that the OD balance is difficult to predict, a nation that successfully determines the balance and aligns its technological, doctrinal, and organizational elements to the matched strategy, can achieve a certain measure of capability over a comparably equal nation who invests in the opposing strategy.
The French case study explored the connection between a nation's evaluation of the OD balance and its technological decisions. While the French incorrectly evaluated the OD balance, its technology strategy generally aligned with their evaluation of the balance. Their error, while not the only variable in their Strange Defeat, certainly hampered the French's ability to adapt to the changing conditions when Germany brought mobility back to the battlefield. 
266
The exploration of ODT and the French case both served as excellent studies in this work's larger objective of understanding technology strategy. Further strength was found for the interconnected relationship between doctrine, organization and technology, suggesting that technology strategy exists as part of a triad. Also identified were several unique forms of strategy, including, Defense Dominant, Big Bet, and Balance Shifting. Finally, there was the unique Crossover Point and the Opportunity Cost pitfalls that may serve to guide a strategist in technological decision-making. In the following chapter, the observations identified in Chapters II, III, and IV are compiled and analyzed to provide the first formal answer to the question: What is Technology Strategy?
The beginning of wisdom is to call things by their proper name.
-Confucius
In its proper form, military technology strategy is the term applied to a deliberate To aid in succinctly communicating the concepts in this work to its desired audience (i.e., so this chapter alone can serve as a standalone summary), this chapter briefly repeats many of the ideas and analysis in previous chapters. As such, in its entirety, this chapter composes an answer for "What is Technology Strategy?"
The primary purpose of this section is to merge the observations of the previous chapters and U.S. military doctrine to define the external framework of technology strategy (i.e., where it fits in the military system). In observation, technology strategy formulation followed a natural progression. The strategies in the case studies started with an envisioned way-of-war paradigm which informed the creation of a warfighting concept. From the warfighting concept, specific capability requirements were derived (although often with shortcomings), and technological, organizational, and emergent doctrinal strategies were created to realize the required capabilities (not always successfully). 
267
270
The national-level nuclear weapons emphasis similarly influenced institutional level DOT decisions for the Air Force, Army, and Navy. Organizationally, the Air Force created Strategic Air Command to manage the requirements of ground alert and eventually air alert nuclear forces. Technologically, the emphasis on nuclear weapons meant that the range and payload of bombers were also developmental priorities. Similarly, in the Navy, the submarines that could carry ballistic missiles received the highest attention, and, in the army, Generals fought desperately for ownership of the ballistic missile and anti-ballistic missile programs to ensure the Army maintained a role in the United States' new way of war. 
271
The last step observation suggests technology strategy conforms to a preconception but it should be noted that technological feasibility is (or should be) a consideration for decisions-makers at the conception of their warfighting concepts. For instance, Tirpitz would later state that he dismissed submarines because they lacked deep water capability.
If truthful, Tirpitz at least considered the technological possibility, although in his case he came to incorrect conclusion and ignored that he could have made deep-water a design requirement, thereby accelerating the pace of U-boat development. 
272
In the final case, the French conceptual paradigm was the superiority of puissance de feu [firepower]. From the puissance de feu paradigm the French built the pre-arranged battlefield warfighting concept. 
273
Interestingly, the French case best highlights how a technology strategist should question the guiding paradigm. An inaccurate, or poorly formed paradigm, can lead to a poor warfighting concept and technology strategy decisions. The French formed their firepower paradigm based on an inaccurate view of the future of warfare drawn from the ostensible lessons of WWI instead of analyzing the changing technological environment.
As the emerging technology changed the strategic environment, the French failed to alter their paradigm. The stagnant paradigm then led to the creation of an even more divergent warfighting concept that then led the French to pursue capabilities poorly suited to the war that was to come. Although incorrect, the French case further confirmed the paradigm-tostrategy flow structure.
Further, telling of the importance of the paradigm-to-strategy flow, was that the Germans' victory over the French in 1940 was based on an antithesis-maneuver. The German Operation ist Bewgung [operation (read as war) is movement] led to the development of Blitzkrieg-a warfighting concept that required rapid force movement and coordination capabilities. The derived capabilities were met technologically through fastmoving tanks, tactical bombing aircraft and radio coordination. Organizationally, the concept's capabilities required armor-based Panzer divisions and a tactical-aircraft-focused Luftwaffe. Doctrinally, the Germans supported their lightning war concept by developing new methods of decentralized execution, increasing their ability to move rapidly and exploit new initiatives. While the outcome was positive in the German case and negative in the French case, the observed and repeated flow from paradigm, to concept, to desired capabilities, to DOT decisions is clearly crucial to the external structure of technology strategy and provides an identifier for where the observations in this paper integrate into the military system.
The paradigm-to-strategy flow identifies technology strategy as an enabler of a future warfighting concept(s). Military processes focused on enabling future military  While the examples shown are not all successful in achieving their strategic goal, the intent here is to simply show where they were formulated. Identifying this basic structure (paradigm-to-strategy flow) can help future researcher's better analyze where a breakdown in the strategy may have occurred. For example, Tirpitz's chosen technology strategy (Battleships over Submarines) may have been incorrect to meet the intent, the U.S. may have had right paradigm (efficiency through deterrence) and warfighting concept (Massive Retaliation) but the wrong context by trying to apply it to all forms (general and limited) of war; and the French may have misjudged the OD balance and latched onto the wrong paradigm (superiority of firepower and defense). components can thus be thought of as a core part of the DOTMLP-FP consideration and implementation step within the larger concept development process.
By positioning DOT strategies in this central location and identifying their connection to the overall strategy, it creates a deliberate point to question DOT decision making against strategic intent. For instance, in Tirpitz's failed technology strategy, it is suggested that the Mahanian influence likely limited Tirpitz's envisioning of any technology other than Battleships that would deter British intervention into German empire building. The influence was likely strong enough that the entire Risk Fleet concept was envisioned with battleships from the beginning. By deliberately adding in the creation of DOT strategies, it gives the strategist pause to focus on the connection between the DOT decision and strategic intent. A pause may have helped Tirpitz realize that submarines or even a more balance fleet may have better achieved his strategic intent.
Interestingly, while this work has focused on the primary technology used to meet the required capability, reflection on the observed cases and U.S. doctrine highlights that each warfighting concept derived capability often requires an array of DOT pursuits. The grouping of all DOT triad components and their DOTMLPF-P counterparts needed to achieve a derived capability, can be thought of as a capability portfolio. The principal benefit of viewing technology and its accompanying DOT strategies, in this manner, is it keeps the technological decisions linked to strategic purpose and their necessary organizational and doctrinal innovations. Figure 
19
The answer is yes. Just as in any strategy, technology strategy exists at multiple levels and the strategic end and emphasized technology are the characterizing elements at each level. Recall from Chapter II that technology strategy is concerned with the emphasis on acquisition of particular weapons, transportation, and information systems to reach a strategic end state. At the portfolio level, the emphasized technology and strategic ends may be different than at the concept or institutional level.
For instance, in Figure 
19
Army's approach to developing the M1 tank involved an incremental advancement process across multiple horizons. The M1 Abrams was designed to be a fast-moving heavily armed tank equipped with a 120mm main cannon. However, the 120mm cannon technology needed further development and budget constraints prevented dual development of both the M1 tank and the 120mm cannon. As a solution the army designed the M1 to accept both the 105mm and 120mm cannon. The 105mm was an existing technology and allowed the tank to reach readiness in a shorter time horizon. In turn, the 120mm cannon was moved to a technology strategy at a further horizon where it was eventually developed and added 287 Often referred to as commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) procurement 288 No intent here to downplay the key role of human intelligence and the hard work of the analyst merging the intelligence. All were important to successes in ISR targeting.
to the M1 tank. 
289
The internal components of technology strategy consist of the strategic forms and the technological acquisition approaches. The first section discusses the different forms or templates of technology strategy. The second section recaps the three types of acquisition approaches from Chapter II and introduces a fourth approach, innovative, discovered in reflection of the case studies.
The previous chapters observed multiple ways in which a technology strategist may shape technological decisions. These observed forms of technological strategy can be categorized by their principal driving strategic factors. This section recounts and discusses the observed forms and categorizes them into risk versus efficiency, parity driven, and offense-defense balance archetypes of technology strategy. By grouping in this way, the archetypes allow for extrapolation of other possible forms of technology strategy. These old and new forms may provide future technology strategists with basic templates for achieving desired strategic ends, maximizing capability, and aid in additional analysis of historical technology strategies.
The U.S. nuclear arms race and the French Maginot Line introduced the Big Bets form of technology strategy as a way of accepting large risk, knowingly or unknowingly, with the hope of increased efficiency. The relationship between risk and efficiency is thus the first proposed archetype of technology strategy and allows for derivation of additional forms. The following discussion reviews the observed strategic forms, proposes a risk vs.
efficiency spectrum, and derives several additional strategic forms.
In the Big Bets form, a military puts a significantly large trust in a particular technology but incurs a large risk in that failure of the technology to achieve its end state (deterrence, defense, coercion, superiority in battle, etc.) has potentially disastrous consequences. However, if the bet pays off, it may also represent the most focused and economically efficient way for a warfighting concept to achieve its strategic ends or for a singular portfolio to achieve its desired capability. Both the U.S. and French cases seem to suggest that the positives of such a strategy may have blinded the decision makers to the risk incurred. The United States' grand strategic big bet in nuclear superiority failed to fully achieve its deterrent strategic end and, as the limited war deterrence failed, spending continued to increase. Similarly, the bet made by the French on the Maginot Line failed to fully achieve to achieve a comparably big payoff in defense compared to the amount of resources devoted to its construction.
In application, the Big Bet form of technology strategy often appears to be unwise-but context always matters. While the Big Bets strategies in this exploration have  together. 
290
For instance, at the warfighting concept level, the German Blitzkrieg concept depended on the integration of tactical aircraft, fast-moving tanks, and integrated radios for coordination. Three distinct capability portfolios with technological, organizational, and doctrinal requirements. If any of the portfolios failed to meet their capability requirement (due to failure in any of the DOT strategies), Blitzkrieg may not have worked.
At face value, a Fecta form appears to be a larger risk than betting on a singular technology and is probably an unwise strategic form without risk mitigation. In the German case, the radio coordinated movement and attack of aircraft and tanks that we now call Blitzkrieg, evolved after the technologies were already demonstrating readiness to meet technology strategy. 
293
294
While more research is required, there is enough historical and present-day evidence to show that risk and efficiency tradeoffs are strong influencers of technology strategy forms. When these tradeoffs become the dominant factor in choosing a technology strategy, the risk versus efficiency spectrum may prove to be a useful tool for a technology strategist.
In the Tirpitz and Cold War examples, a desire to achieve a perceived measure of parity with another military strongly influenced the form of the technology strategies. In reflection, these forms may be limited to the conceptual and grand strategic levels but may observations of how strategists may be influenced by their position on a notional parity spectrum.
In the Tirpitz case, Germany pursued a marginally inferior navy in quantity (twothirds policy) of battleships but chose to close the perceived gap in inferiority by stressing higher quality in armor, weaponry, and optics in their development. Similarly, in the 1950s, the U.S. Air Force sought to maintain a clear superiority in nuclear delivery capability compared to the Soviet Union. The U.S. felt this would build a perception of overwhelming dominance and exert a Technology-in-Being influence. In both cases, each entity paid close attention to the quantity (the physical number of emphasized technology) and the quality (how effective the technology was at accomplishing its role) of their technology compared to the other entity. Regardless of the overall strategic effectiveness of either strategy (neither of which fully worked), there is a unique manipulation of the quality and quantity variables that may be useful in characterizing imitative strategies under parity seeking conditions.
If technology strategies among two or more militaries are largely imitative, meaning that the primary technological emphasis and practices (warfighting concepts) are similar (i.e., both build a navy around battleships), then one can imagine that a perception of parity is achieved when the quantity and quality of their technology is within some small measure of even. However, as one or both measures of quality and quantity move from approximating equality then one entity moves toward superiority and the other toward inferiority.
At the extremes, the perceived capability of a military is probably the most accurate.
For instance, a military that is inferior by an overwhelming margin in both quantity and quality is most certainly inferior in the context in which that technology strategy applies.
On the other end, a military with a significant margin of superiority in both quality and quantity is likewise clearly superior in that area. Unfortunately, quality and quantity are far from being the only measures in the capacity to execute a desired warfighting concept.
Other factors such as training, terrain, esprit de corps, etc., play a significant role in determining military capability. The farther from the extremes, the less dependence one can place on quantity and quantity manipulation. Figure 
21
Figure 
21
21
295
Bearing this caution in mind, Figure 
21
The quantity balancing contributed to deterrence stability. Key to both Quantity-at-the Margins and Quality-at-the-Margins forms is their relatively close distance to parity. If the technology strategy is less concerned with the appearance of inferiority or superiority, then the strategy requires different classification since the strategic intent is different. 
296
Further characterization of the Follower Form should involve the outcome of the strategy. For instance, Vietnam has continued to reinforce its coast guard capability in response to China's unfounded nine-dash-line claims. 
298
299
300
Further research is likely to uncover a great number of militaries who have undertaken the Follower or other parity-driven forms of technology strategy.
A final observation that Figure 
21
21
The United States' Massive Retaliation highlights the incumbent approach, as they were focused on achieving the most-bang-for-the-buck-a fiscally conservative ideation.
Conversely the Soviet Union, as the challenger, emphasis on ballistic missiles to achieve surprise and "frustrate" an attacker by striking their home shows an inherent deterrent to preventive war. 
302
Chapter IV introduced offense-defense theory as a method to explore and characterize technology strategies. Through the ODT lens, the Defense Dominant and Balance Shifting strategic form descriptors were observed. The following discussion categorizes these forms under the OD Balance archetype, recaps the observed forms, and extrapolates additional forms.
In the French case, the preference for firepower over mobility defined a Chapter IV also suggested the presence of a third type of strategic relationship with the balance called Balance Shifting. In the 1920s, German military leaders intentionally looked to develop and employ technologies that would overcome the defensive stalemates of WWI. As opposed to the French, the Germans built and employed an Offense Dominant Shifting grand technology strategy, intended to change the way war would be fought in the future. 
304
305
The strategic archetypes and forms discussed in this section are summarized in Figure 
22
304 Note, a distinction on whether a military is following a shift or intending to cause a shift may not be easily made. One can argue that Germany was not intending to shift the balance, but simply following the trend of a naturally shifting balance. Tanks and aircraft were already beginning to shift the balance by the end of WWI see Murray and Millett, Military Innovation in the Interwar Period, 40-43. Similarly in the modern context, current pursuits for low-cost autonomous weaponized drones threaten to again shift from a defensive to offensive balance, yet the developments in the base technology of small drones and automation is not driven strictly by military purposes. Whether a military is intending to cause the shift or follow the shift may be more discernable by the approach the military uses to pursue its strategy-i.e., imitative or developmental. A developmental approach to a shifting strategy may suggest that the military intends to cause the shift in the balance.  
As noted in Chapter II, a technology strategist's approaches to acquiring technological capabilities can be categorized as imitative, developmental or monitoring.
The imitative approach copied the technological capabilities and practices of another military. The developmental approach invented new technologies and/or practices to meet capability requirements. Finally, the monitoring approach utilized standing technology and practices to meet capability needs with some expectation of incremental improvements.
Each of these approaches is useful in describing the procurement methods of individual technologies or inspiration for technological emphasis inside a strategy or capability portfolio. However, a fourth type of approach is revealed in reflection that was not deduced in Chapter II. A nation may wish to innovate on current or purchased technology.
The innovative approach combines the imitative and developmental approaches. A nation may choose to modify the quality of their own technology by incorporating foreign components. The French Air Force took this approach in its acquisition of foreign engines including the British Merlin engines and the Spanish Hispano-Suiza engines. 
306
To easily convey and increase applicability of the concepts in this study, the internal and external structural characteristics of technology strategy are arranged in a graphical taxonomy. The taxonomy provides visual connections of the new vocabulary terms to the strategic structure in a way that allows examination of case studies and quick conveyance of future technology strategy components. Figures 23 and 24 summarize the structure and characteristics of technology strategy observed and deduced in this thesis. To aid future researchers, the accompanying explanation of the taxonomy briefly repeats some of explanation given in previous sections, providing a summary that can be reviewed quickly.
Following the figures, the first formal answer is provided to the question: "What is Technology Strategy?"  In the taxonomy, the acquisition approach level identifies the way the strategy will acquire the technology used to meet the capability portfolio requirements. These choices have a strong effect on the form of the strategy and can even affect the ability of the warfighting concept to meet its strategic end. Despite being at the bottom of the proposed hierarchy, in observation, the desired approach to technological acquisition is often the first decision and can shape the entire technology strategy.
Tirpitz's decision to deter the Royal Navy with an imitative approach, naturally gravitated the entire strategy toward a parity-based form. In Figure 
24
Notably, early in Tirpitz's technology strategy, he utilized a monitoring approach for his steam engines, realizing later that they too needed updating to maintain a quality edge. Adding distinction to the monitoring approach, Tirpitz was in a position to influence development of steam engines but chose not to early on. The capability and decision to maintain a specific course it key to identifying a monitoring approach. The strategic form and approach levels form the "meat" of technology strategy and the primary focus of the technology strategist.
The strategic form level is an explanatory level that describes the way in which the strategist meets the technological requirements of the capability. These are the templates of technology strategy and bear a similarity to the way one might think of types of strategies such as a Fabian delaying strategy. A strategy's form is shaped by the approaches utilized in acquisition of its technological components and how the emphasized and supporting components work together to achieve the capability within the concept.
In the Tirpitz case study, the primary or emphasized capability portfolio was the deterrent force in the North Sea. However, underlying this desired capability was the strategic intent to avoid an arms-race or entice Britain into a preventive-attack. To this end, Tirpitz chose to build a force that was of lower quantity but superior quality giving the technology strategy a distinct form based on quality and quantity manipulation that this thesis called Quality-at-the-Margins. Technology strategy taxonomy thus has a form level that describes the strategy by the way the technologies are acquired and put together to reach their desired capability.
At the capability portfolio level each technological pursuit is grouped according to its purpose in the warfighting concept and synchronized with the other elements of the DOT triad. The technological strategy in each capability portfolio is described by the form in the layer beneath it. There is only one strategic form per capability portfolio although there may be multiple capabilities and forms per concept. In the Tirpitz Risk Fleet warfighting concept, there were two distinct capabilities. The first focused on building the battleship fleet as a deterrent. 
307
The warfighting concept level shows the connection between the paradigm and concept and organizes technological pursuits by their strategic end in the grand strategy (i.e., how the technology will create effects in the strategic environment). The warfighting concept is how the military envisions war being fought in a particular context and how that military will fight it (i.e., Mosaic Warfare or AirLand Battle). Case study analysis suggests that militaries with multiple warfighting concepts at this level are more adaptive and better able to support grand strategic goal(s). Tirpitz had two warfighting concepts, the Risikoflotte [Risk Fleet] and Kreuzerkrieg [Cruiser Warfare]. In theory, each derived from different paradigms on how conflict would be fought in that particular context. Notably, 307 It should be noted that this deterrent failed almost immediately given Britain's early entry into WWI. So, while the process seeks to inform us, the strategy itself has clear shortcomings. the primary concept was Risikoflotte and Tirpitz frequently disregarded the Kreuzerkrieg' s colonial defense focus as a poor use of the navy. 
308
This pursuit of a conceptual understanding of military technology strategy began with a literature review that produced a relatively simple description. In the review, it was noted that the term technology strategy is often applied to technology choices in acquisition A technology strategist's constant enemy is scarcity. There will never be enough resources to pursue all possible technological solutions. Thus, each decision to undertake a technological pursuit is also a decision to forgo another.
The remaining three sections, suggest additional stratagems that seem appropriate in reflection but require further research and analysis.
The research for this thesis suggests a possible relationship between technology development and the character of war. Suggesting the possible stratagem:
In the relationship between technology and the character of war, technology is an independent variable, and the character of war is a dependent variable.
While such a simple explanation ignores the certainty that many, if not an undefinable number, of variables are also present, it does clearly identify that technology should not be developed or pursued in the hope of being better prepared for the current or past types of warfare. Instead, the technology strategist should remain concerned with how the character of war is changing, will change, or if truly strategizing-how the technology strategist wants it to change. Questioning assumed constants and analyzing trends was perhaps the strongest lesson taught by the French case presented in Chapter IV. In the author's own experience, the same lesson is echoed by the US' eroded military edge caused by the vexing distractions of the Global War on Terror for the last twenty years.
Historically, specialization is expensive, but sacrificing specialization for efficiency has a poor record. Many technology strategists have attempted to develop singular technologies that accomplished a large array of military missions. Such a mindset technology strategies as the management of investments designed to maximize military capability.
As I reflect on the knowledge gained from the research in this work, I offer in conclusion that a technology strategist would be wise to maintain the ruthless investor mindset of Maxwell Taylor, continually reevaluating the applicable military capability of every technological investment. This mindset worked for him, and for the United States, at a critical time in the Cold War. Such a mindset is just as necessary today, amid challenges ranging from competing great powers to rogue states and terrorist to insurgent networks.
4 1 Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities, Everyman's Library ; No. 102 (London: Dent, 1906), 1. 2 John Frederick Charles Fuller,
of focus and resources, a strategy for every conceivable piece of technology, even if directly related to war, is unrealistic. Similarly, in a seminal work on how to form a military technology strategy, authors' Possony and Pournelle, express worry about overly broad technology strategies. They state, "a technological 'center of gravity' must be chosen … research in unrelated fields is good insurance … but no one spends the major part of his budget on insurance to the detriment of his own plans."
of focus and resources, a strategy for every conceivable piece of technology, even if directly related to war, is unrealistic. Similarly, in a seminal work on how to form a military technology strategy, authors' Possony and Pournelle, express worry about overly broad technology strategies. They state, "a technological 'center of gravity' must be chosen … research in unrelated fields is good insurance … but no one spends the major part of his budget on insurance to the detriment of his own plans."
however, cases exist (such as Blitzkrieg) where the new emphasis on currently owned but non-emphasized technology qualify as technology strategy under this definition. These cases specifically, highlight how previously owned technologies can be grouped and emphasized (along with appropriate doctrinal and organizational adaptation) to create significant technological change. The interplay of technologies suggests that any examination of technological decision making could benefit from a simple categorization of military technology. Since technology shaped to military purpose is the primary concern, the theories on war by authors such as Carl von Clausewitz, Baron Antoine-Henry De Jomini, J.F.C. Fuller, and Trevor Dupuy inspire three basic categories: weapons, transportation/delivery systems, and information systems. These categories can serve to organize the examination of intricate technology strategies where technologies are emphasized as groups such as Blitzkrieg (tanks, aircraft, radios) or in 1950s U.S. Cold War case study in Chapter III. 40
incoming Eisenhower administration's new strategy was not very new; it is better described as a clearer articulation of the previous emphasis on nuclear weapons. The administration campaigned on, and later enacted policy, based on fiscal conservation and responsible use of military forces. To downsize the military and still possess the ability to rollback communism, the administration continued the deterrent based foreign policy built on the threat of nuclear punishment. After a speech by Secretary of State Dulles, the policy was dubbed the doctrine of Massive Retaliation and was very much a rehashing of many of Truman's policies. To accompany the rehashed doctrine, Eisenhower also created The New Look plan for the armed forces. The plan included changes to organizational structure and technological emphasis that refined the services to the nearly singular purpose of nuclear deterrence. Under Eisenhower, technology strategy, organizational design, and doctrine were addressed with a reasonably clear, although misguided, direction. As Thomas C. Schelling would later note, utilizing nuclear punishment as a form of deterrence against anything but "all-out, indiscriminate, society destroying, war…was in decline almost from its enunciation in 1954."
incoming Eisenhower administration's new strategy was not very new; it is better described as a clearer articulation of the previous emphasis on nuclear weapons. The administration campaigned on, and later enacted policy, based on fiscal conservation and responsible use of military forces. To downsize the military and still possess the ability to rollback communism, the administration continued the deterrent based foreign policy built on the threat of nuclear punishment. After a speech by Secretary of State Dulles, the policy was dubbed the doctrine of Massive Retaliation and was very much a rehashing of many of Truman's policies. To accompany the rehashed doctrine, Eisenhower also created The New Look plan for the armed forces. The plan included changes to organizational structure and technological emphasis that refined the services to the nearly singular purpose of nuclear deterrence. Under Eisenhower, technology strategy, organizational design, and doctrine were addressed with a reasonably clear, although misguided, direction. As Thomas C. Schelling would later note, utilizing nuclear punishment as a form of deterrence against anything but "all-out, indiscriminate, society destroying, war…was in decline almost from its enunciation in 1954."
122  
122  
130 "Timeline of Computer History," Computer History Museum, accessed January 8, 2022, https://www.computerhistory.org/timeline/computers/. 131 Taylor, The Uncertain Trumpet, 21. of
aircraft able to launch within 30 minutes of notification, which
aircraft able to launch within 30 minutes of notification, which
Said another way, "the balance is … the amount of resources that a state must invest in offense (or defense) to offset an adversary's investment in defense (or offense)."
Said another way, "the balance is … the amount of resources that a state must invest in offense (or defense) to offset an adversary's investment in defense (or offense)."
159 Carter, "Techno-Strategic Integration."131 160 Ernest R May, Strange Victory: Hitler's Conquest of France (New York: Hill and Wang, 2001), 87-88.
182 Winston S.
182 Winston S.
185 For an excellent response to this criticism see Lynn-Jones, "Offense-Defense Theory and Its Critics," 686. suggest
192    
192    
219 May, Strange Victory, 390.   220 Bloch, Strange Defeat, 390.  
U.S. doctrine provides a time structure to force development strategies that can aid in understanding how technology strategy may be applied. U.S. Joint Doctrine Note 2-19 identifies three types of force developing strategies based upon the time that they expect to meet their end state. They are employment, development, and design strategies. 285 Each of these strategies focuses on achieving the desired warfighting concept or evolutionary version of the desired concept in a specified time range. Employment Strategies focus on achieving the warfighting concept, and the capabilities required to execute it, in the immediate-to-three-year time horizon; Developmental Strategies are focused in the twoto-seven-year time horizon; and Design Strategies are focused on the five-to-fifteen-year time horizon. 286 The doctrinal time-based method of strategy classification can thus be used to better classify technological strategic pursuits. 288 While Employment Strategies like the surveillance aircraft example, are more likely to require imitative or innovative approaches using available technologies, Developmental or Design Strategies may provide the strategist more options to pursue other approaches and strategic forms. It is the responsibility of the technology strategists to determine how to meet the capability in the timeline desired.
The heuristic case study approach is ideally suited for the broad nature of this exploration. See Harry Eckstein, Regarding Politics: Essays on Political Theory, Stability, and Change (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 143-47.
Leo Tolstoy, Anna Karenina (Modern Library, 1949).192   
Carl von Clausewitz, Michael Howard, and Peter Paret, On War (Princeton, N.J: Princeton  University Press, 1976).177
Carter,. Saying a technology is "old" is probably worthy of explanation beyond the scope of this paper. For our purposes, old simply means it had been employed for military purposes prior although in other ways and in other forms.
Herman Kahn, "Twelve Nonissues and Twelve Almost Nonissues," Hudson Institute, accessed December 10, 2021, http://www.hudson.org/research/2213-twelve-nonissues-and-twelve-almost-nonissues.
Robert Jervis, "Cooperation Under the Security Dilemma," World Politics 30, no. 2 (1978): 170, https://doi.org/10.2307/2009958.
see Arquilla, "A Study in Technology Strategy," 146 and; Bernard Brodie, Sea Power in the Machine Age, 1st ed. (Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 1941), 292 and; Steinberg, Yesterday's Deterrent, 142-43.
see Edwin Palmer Hoyt, Kreuzerkrieg: The Gripping Story of the German East Asia Cruiser Squadron in World War I, 1st edition (New York, NY: World Publishing Company, 1968).
"Recommendation for Assistance to Greece and Turkey, Truman Address to Congress 12 March
John C Sparrow, History of Personnel Demobilization in the United States Army, DA Pamphlet 20-210 (Washington, D.C.: Department of the Army, 1952), 265, https://history.army.mil/html/books/104/ 104-8/CMH_Pub_104-8.pdf.
Taylor, The Uncertain Trumpet,[16][17]. A book that is sharply critical of the New Look
Audra J. Wolfe, Competing with the Soviets: Science, Technology, and the State in Cold War America, Johns Hopkins Introductory Studies in the History of Science (Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013), 20-21.
"Castle Bravo," Atomic Heritage Foundation, accessed May 22, 2022, https://www.atomicheritage.org/history/castle-bravo.
"Historical Snapshot," Boeing, accessed January 6, 2022, https://www.boeing.com/history/ products/b-52-stratofortress.page The B-52 could fly up to 50,000 feet well above the anti-aircraft guns available in the early 1950s. However, the Soviet Union was working on early versions of surface to air missiles. Most notably they would introduce the SA-1 and SA-2 in 1955 and 1957 respectively. These high altitude air defense systems would continue to challenge the U.S. ability to deliver nuclear weapons. See; "S-25 SA-1 Guild," GlobalSecurity.org, accessed January 9, 2022, https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ world/russia/s-25.htm and; "V-75 SA-2 Guideline," GlobalSecurity.org, accessed January 9, 2022, https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/russia/v-75.htm.
"Sputnik: 60 Years of the Space Age," The European Space Agency, accessed May 22, 2022, https://www.esa.int/About_Us/ESA_history/Sputnik_60_years_of_the_space_age.
Roy E.Licklider, "The Missile Gap Controversy," Political Science Quarterly 85, no. 4 (1970): 603, https://doi.org/10.2307/2147598.
Later analysts note that there was never a significant missile gap as the U.S. was firmly ahead of the Soviet Union in missile technology and this is better stated as a missile gap scare see Licklider, "The Missile Gap Controversy."
Robert S. Hopkins, III, Bruce Blair, and William Burr, eds., "How the Strategic Air Command Would Go to Nuclear War," National Security Archive, Cold War: General Nuclear Strategy and Weapons, 2019, https://nsarchive.gwu.edu/briefing-book/nuclear-vault/2019-02-25/how-strategic-air-commandwould-go-nuclear-war.
136 This approach's namesake is from the naval strategy known as a fleet-in-being where, a naval fleet stays in port but, because of its continual existence, forces the opponent to fear and guard against
it.137 Fuller, Armament and History, 21.   
DARPA, "Advancing National Security Through Fundamental Research," DARPA, accessed January 9, 2022, https://www.darpa.mil/about-us/advancing-national-security-through-fundamentalresearch.
George H. Quester, Offense and Defense in the International System (New York, NY: John Wiley  and Sons Inc., 1977), 3.
Note that this example is used under the "all other things considered equal" assumption. The interplay of technologies and van Creveld's "solids and gaps" observation alters this pure example and will be discussed later. It is also worth noting with the provided example that the use of the tank and aircraft to enable the highly effective Blitzkrieg tactics throughout WWII is often cited by ODT proponents as proof that mobility technologies tipped the OD balance toward the offense.
"Fact Sheet: Normandy Landings,"
Whitehouse.gov, June 6, 2014,
"The Hundred Days Offensive," National WWI Museum and Memorial, accessed April 21, 2022, https://www.theworldwar.org/learn/about-wwi/hundred-days-offensive.
The advances in heavy artillery and the cumbersome but high fire rate of the Maxim machine gun used throughout WWI are frequently used as examples to illustrate the defensive nature of that war.
Source: Jervis, "Cooperation Under the Security Dilemma," 211.
Robert A. Doughty, The Seeds of Disaster: The Development ofFrench Army Doctrine, 1919-39,  Stackpole Military History Series (Stackpole Books, 1985), 151.
As the case study will later note, some visionary French thinkers such as Charles DeGaulle did think through armored maneuver warfare, but their ideas were rejected.
Jeffrey A. Gunsburg, "The Battle of the Belgian Plain, 12-14 May 1940: The First Great Tank Battle," The Journal of Military History 56, no. 2 (1992): 207-44, https://doi.org/10.2307/1985797.
Murray and Millett, Military Innovation in the Interwar Period,[42][43]. See alsoErnest May,  Strange Victory and Lloyd Clark, Blitzkrieg.   
Gunsburg, "The Battle of the Belgian Plain, 12-14May 1940," 243.   
Quoted in.May, 404.   
Adapted from Yoav Gortzak, Yoram Z. Haftel, and Kevin Sweeney, "Offense-Defense Theory: An Empirical Assessment," The Journal of Conflict Resolution 49, no. 1 (2005): 76.
Chris Dougherty, "Confronting Chaos: A New Concept for Information Advantage," War on the Rocks, September 9, 2021, https://warontherocks.com/2021/09/confronting-chaos-a-new-concept-forinformation-advantage/.
Doughty,  The Seeds of Disaster: The Development ofFrench Army Doctrine, 1919-39, 5.   
Alvin D. Coox, "General Narcisse Chauvineau: False Apostle of Prewar French Military Doctrine," Military Affairs 37, no. 1 (1973): 16, https://doi.org/10.2307/1986565. 16.
Robert A. Doughty, "De Gaulle's Concept of a Mobile, Professional Army: Genesis of French Defeat?," The U.S. Army War College Quarterly: Parameters 4, no. 1 (July 4, 1974): 33, https://doi.org/ 10.55540/0031-1723.1064.
Doughty, The Seeds of Disaster: The Development of French Army Doctrine, 1919-39, 4.    
Doughty, 116.    
Doughty, 115.   
Stolfi, "Equipment for Victory in France in 1940," 14.    
Baughen, The Rise and Fall of the French Air Force, 254.   
Baughen, 17.    
William L. Shirer, The Collapse of the Third Republic: An Inquiry into the Fall of France in 1940 (Burlington, VT: Da Capo Press, 1994), 586.
Sterling, Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors?, 
Rowe, The Great Wall of France;, 24.   
Bernard Brodie, War and Politics: A Major Statement on the Relations Between Military Affairs and Statecraft by the Dean of American CivilianStrategists, 1st. edition (New York: Macmillan, 1973),  325.   
Doughty,  The Seeds of Disaster: The Development ofFrench Army Doctrine, 1919-39, 141.   
Baughen, The Rise and Fall of the French Air Force, 190.    
John Arquilla, Why the Axis Lost: An Analysis of Strategic Errors, 2nd ed. (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2020), 47.
see Bruce I. Gudmundsson, Stormtroop Tactics: Innovation in the GermanArmy, 1914-1918  (West Port, Conn.: Praeger, 1995). 171-173   
Doughty,  The Seeds of Disaster: The Development ofFrench Army Doctrine, 1919-39, 152.   
an ode to an original work on the subject by the French Patriot Marc Bloch see. Strange Defeat: A Statement of Evidence Written in 1940 (New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company, 1999).
The relationship between an operational concept and required capabilities was identified to me in an email conversation with Mr. Richard Hencke at Headquarters Air Force A-5. It was after this conversation on the current process that I noticed and expanded on a similar relationship in the historical case studies. That expansion I refer to as the paradigm-to-strategy flow. Richard Hencke, "NPS Student Research," July 30, 2021.
Chester J. Pach Jr., "Dwight D. Eisenhower: Foreign Affairs," Miller Center, October 4, 2016, https://millercenter.org/president/eisenhower/foreign-affairs.
Refers to the navy's Polaris submarine and the army's Zeus missile program
Arquilla, "A Study in Technology Strategy."   
Rowe, The Great Wall of France;, 24.   
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Guidance for Developing and Implementing Joint Concepts, A-6.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 11.
The dash annotates that policy is outside of the military domain. Although it is considered because policy restricts concept development/realization or alternatively, concept development/realization may identify gaps in policy
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Guidance for Developing and Implementing Joint Concepts, A-3.
A modern example of this is the US's carrier strike groups that contain multiple types of ships, but the carrier is the emphasized technology and capability supported by others.
U.S. Army website Videos, "Investment Strategy Approach to Modernizing across DOTMLPF" (2 of 6), 2014, 3:59, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t7FEApVMl48.
In horse racing, a trifecta bet is when the bettor places a bet on which horse will place first, second, and third in the race. All three horses must finish in the chosen place for the bettor to win.
Tirpitz was afraid to risk the Risk Fleet in the opening phase of the war -when its tactical efficiency would have had the greatest strategic effect. See Arquilla, "A Study in Technology Strategy."
"Russian / Soviet Doctrine," Federation of American Scientists, 2000, https://nuke.fas.org/guide/ russia/doctrine/intro.htm.
Baughen, The Rise and Fall of the French Air Force, 145.   
As a result, France entered the 1940 campaign with a poorly prepared Air Force that never had to chance to contest for command of the skies
David H Berger, 38th Commandant's Planning Guidance, Commandant's Planning Guidance (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Marine Corp, 2019), 5, https://www.hqmc.marines.mil/Portals/142/ Docs/%2038th%20Commandant%27s%20Planning%20Guidance_2019.pdf?ver=2019-07-16-200152-700.
I wish to express my deepest appreciation to my wife, who has read every word of this work, for her patience through yet another attempt to extend my reach beyond my grasp: If I have achieved anything over the last ten years, it has been because of your neverending support. "Too." I also wish to extend my gratitude to 
Dr. John Arquilla
LTC Kelly McCoy
Thank you." xviii THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
IV was effective against the French armor, leading one analysist to conclude that "fewer than 8 percent of [the German] tanks-50…out of 674-were really effective in tank versus tank combat."
Figure 
11
233
Stolfi's work in Equipment for Victory in 1940, compares the average capability of the French and German tanks on the northeastern front. Figure 
12
233 Sebastien Roblin, "France's Monstrous Char B1 Tank Ate Hitler's Best Tanks for Breakfast," The National Interest (The Center for the National Interest, November 20, 2017), https://nationalinterest.org/ blog/the-buzz/frances-monstrous-char-b1-tank-ate-hitlers-best-tanks-23277.
What Was the Actual Balance?
Considering the Germany's rapid victory, utilizing an offensive strategy driven by tank and tactical aircraft, one assumes France may have been better served by pursuing an offensive mindset in technological, doctrinal, and organization preparations. By most accounts this assumption holds true. The French Maginot Line, while impressive, was incredibly expensive, costing over 3 billion francs (~$13 billion U.S. in today's dollars). 
249
Examining the military expenditures per GDP of France and Germany in Figure 
15
The jack-of-all-trades (but master-of-none) approach to technology may provide a country a reasonable result when facing an inferior opponent but can result in disaster when facing a peer or near-peer opponent.
The French developed the BCR as a jack-of-all-trades aircraft to increase efficiency but ended up with an aircraft only mildly capable at any role at the time it was designed, and completely ill-suited as technology advanced. We will build one force … optimized for naval expeditionary warfare in contested spaces, purpose-built to facilitate sea denial and assured access in support of the fleets. That single purpose-built future force will be applied against other challenges across the globe; however, we will not seek to hedge or balance our investments to account for those contingencies. 
311
Because a technology strategist's primary role is to enable future capabilities through resource investment in various portfolios, it is useful to think of a strategist's role as an investment manager. However, the strategist will often compete with a variety of interests that may not share the same strategic goals. Comprise is often necessary but too much concession and the strategy may lose focus. The investment mindset aids the technology strategist by focusing the strategy on balancing the inputs-resources and time-to optimize the value of the output-applicable military capability. Suggesting a possible Ruthless Investor stratagem:
A technology strategist's job is to convert resources into applicable military power. Just as a successful financial investor must remain focused on the goal of creating wealth, so must the technology strategist ruthlessly divest from pursuits that do not produce capability applicable to strategic goals.
Keeping the connection between technological decision making and the desired strategic outcome, as well as ensuring technical investments bring capability to those goals is a strategist primary concern. A technology strategy that achieves a capability that does not support the warfighting concepts' intent is a poor strategy. This failure may not even lie in the technology strategy but in the concept itself.
In the Cold War case study, Maxwell Taylor recognized that continual investment in nuclear weapons and delivery technologies were no longer providing the applicable capability that the concept envisioned. He discovered that the Massive Retaliation warfighting concept was failing because decision makers were apprehensive (for both practical and ethical reasons) to support nuclear weapon use except in extremis. Therefore, rendering the nuclear weapons useless in their ability to deny, seize or destroy in all but the most literal self-defense or general war applications (i.e., limited war was not deterred).
Taylor's push for technologies supporting Flexible Response was a call for the scaling back on some areas of investment and adding investments in other areas that would increase military capability when deterrence or coercion from nuclear weapons failed. In other words, Taylor was advocating for investing in multiple warfighting concepts that gave the military various capability to apply force in other contexts. Therefore, we can think of