# ID: b67dd6b345e5476c8e0228f216578c78
# Title: Fire for Effect: Calling for a More Potent Energy System
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2008.0
# Fulltext:
The United States and its allies depend heavily on energy for their way of life and key capabilities in warfare. The current energy system has served us well for nearly 100 years, but is now shifting out of our favor and is creating strategic liabilities and tactical vulnerabilities. Our leaders are becoming increasingly concerned about these issues, but most of the attention is focused on alternative sources for the civilian economy. Some of these alternatives may not be suitable for expeditionary military forces deployed in distant theaters of war.
This inquiry employed a confluence of technical and logistical analysis with an assessment of the strategic and political environment. This study not only examines what is technically and physically possible, but examines the way the energy is used, where it comes from, how the military distributes it, and how that impacts the range of desirable choices.
These conditions create an opportunity for the military to fundamentally change the way it uses energy and make comprehensive changes to the way we sustain deployed forces. Rather than merely introducing an adequate substitute for oil, or using less of it, we should transcend our current energy system and unshackle our forces from the lethargic, vulnerable logistics infrastructure. Renewable power generation systems could immediately alleviate the largest single fuel burden for deployed ground forces, particularly remote outposts. Meanwhile mobile, tactical nuclear power generation could provide for all other ground energy needs, such as electrically powered or hybrid ground vehicles. This would eliminate bulk fuel requirements for ground systems, while water recycling and use of local resources would alleviate bulk liquid distribution requirements. This would reduce or eliminate our reliance on predictable lines of communication associated with delivering fuel to the last muddy mile, facilitate greater resilience, operational flexibility, agility, innovation and greater focus on strategic objectives. It would also save countless lives.
The United States depends heavily on energy for many of our key advantages that provide for our prosperity and security. The hardest systems to change are ones perceived to be successful. The current energy system has served us well for well over 100 years, but is now shifting out of our favor, particularly when it comes to petroleum-based energy. Many of our leaders are becoming increasingly alarmed about our ability to access to this energy or the consequences, conflicts with our other priorities or costs of accessing them. While the nation examines alternatives sources of energy, some of these alternatives may not be suitable for deployed military forces.
This presents an opportunity for the military to examine the entire logistics infrastructure and the associated costs and risks. It should not use less fuel or merely replace oil, but transcend the current energy system. This is particularly true for ground forces. While they only consume about 15% of U.S. military energy, they impose the greatest indirect costs and risks associated with distributing fuel to the last muddy mile. Unshackling ground maneuver forces from ground lines of communication and large logistics bases and infrastructure would facilitate enormous operational flexibility, agility and innovation. It could also save countless lives on future battlefields and lead to greater focus on strategic objectives rather than housekeeping overhead.
The US and its allies have an opportunity to break out of a system that was once a major source of our advantages and fueled our prosperity, but is rapidly becoming a liability and a strategic vulnerability. However, the greater the perception that a system is successful, the harder it is to reform when conditions change. 
1
4
Various perspectives shape energy choices, including sustainability, security, moral values, cost, and environmental impact. The US military must explore these options and ensure that strategic, operational and tactical requirements are satisfied for alternative sources to maintain or improve efficacy on the battlefield. This is not simply a technical, supply, or acquisition issue-one must also examine the system and anticipate second and third order effects on the strategic level, as well as impacts on readiness and capabilities at the tactical level.
Moreover, leaders at all levels must understand and consider the relationship of energy in the way we plan for and execute logistics and the contemporary operating environment. It will also facilitate a better understanding of the energy system in relation to other environmental variables in the operating environment. 
5
6
7
8
5
6
7
8 "The Role of Fischer-Tropsch Fuels in the US Military," a 30 August 2006 briefing by William E. Harrison III for the OSD Assured Fuels Initiative, slides 6 and 7 cites statistics aggregated from the DESC 2004 Fact Book, the 2005 DOE Annual Energy Review and fuel usage for other major fuel consumers demonstrating the Department of Defense is indeed the largest fuel consumer, with American Airlines tying the US Air Force at 3.2 billion gallons. Other large fuel users are the other major airlines and air cargo carriers. Lt. Col. Michael J. Hornitschek posits in his 17 February 2006 War Without Oil: A Catalyst for True Change that as the single biggest fuel consumer in the US and possibly the world, that the DoD possesses the market clout and ability to work with cutting edge technologies to catalyze transformation in the civilian energy sector (pages 1, 49, 56, 67, and C-3). He asserts that the large, monolithic DoD market and budget could act as a catalyst to transform energy usage in the civilian economy by developing and smoothing out high risk technologies. Examples he used were aircraft and jet engines, both of which debuted in the military and spread to the civilian economy after the technology compatible with oil may not solve the constraints of an emergency unless it can produce sufficient quantities to completely offset imports for the entire economy. Contractors producing the replacement fuel would sell it for market price and would make it subject to same price volatility of imported oil in a crisis. 
9
Finding an acceptable source is only part of the problem. Erstwhile acceptable civilian sources of energy may not be feasible to deploy and distribute on the battlefield. The military employs energy in more diverse and demanding environments and circumstances than mainstream civilian users, and therefore have unique requirements. Civilian infrastructure is static, and even the transportation system relies on fixed facilities, roads, bridges, and fueling stations. The military often operates in harsh, austere environments and must deploy an expeditionary, mobile infrastructure to be able to function. This is amply demonstrated by the aerial insertion of 1 st Infantry Division's Task Force 1-63 Armor in support of 173d Airborne Brigade into Northern Iraq in 2003. This inquiry will re-examine that scenario, and substitute several other concepts for our current fuel distribution system to investigate the feasibility of alternate fuels and the potential for similar operational concepts with different logistics models. matured, became more reliable, and became more affordable. Motor vehicles, nuclear power, and numerous medical breakthroughs were catalyzed by the military and adopted for civilian use. Finding number 3, page 4 of the January 2001 Defense Science Board Task Force on Improving Fuel Efficiency of Weapons Platforms More Capable Warfighting Through Reduced Fuel Burden (Washington, DC) was not so sanguine. It said that DoD's market share was not enough to drive the market, but demurred that DoD does have a role in testing, certification, and demonstration of fuel technologies. The current logistics system was designed for linear battles with large rear areas for enormous logistics bases, and secure lines of communication for thin-skinned logistics vehicles to operate out of contact with the enemy. Fuel is normally the single largest commodity on the battlefield with mechanized or aviation-equipped forces. Fuel management receives enormous attention in combat because it is the biggest impediment constraining operations and most frequently causes forces to culminate prematurely, with numerous documented cases in recent history. 
10
11
11 ISO shipping containers, the beds of regular trucks, flat beds, and so forth can move most other commodities. Specialized tankers are required to move fuel to contain the liquid cargo. Moreover, these tankers cannot be used interchangeably for other bulk liquid cargo, such as water, and must be certified regularly to verify they are capable of hauling fuel without contaminating it. At the lower tactical level, some units employ a recently fielded fuel container which can be hauled with an ordinary Palletized Load System (PLS) type truck, but one still requires a number of these the tanks, which are only good for this one activity, and that activity cannot proceed without them in the right place and time.
logistics system is critical to reforming the force to fight these wars. 
12
12
13
Can the US military change its energy system to reduce its dependence on lines of communication while maintaining or improving efficacy on the battlefield? To answer this, we must examine acceptable sources, delivery, and how users employ energy. Rather than merely substituting one fuel for another, changing the energy system may have synergistic effects on other aspects of logistics and warfighting functions that will enhance combat effectiveness, security, and operational flexibility. The military requires energy sources capable of projecting into expeditionary theaters of operation, performing in the full range of operating environments, and reasonable costs to facilitate repetitive training. This inquiry will focus on the ability of an energy source to reduce or eliminate the need for deliveries to deployed forces.
Engineers and scientists are making enormous efforts to develop new energy technologies, and political decisions are rapidly changing the landscape of this topic by making choices that affect the range of acceptable choices. Corporate laboratories are developing trade secrets that are not publicly available, nor is the inside information on ongoing political decisions or intentions. This study will only examine options feasible in the near future and will refrain from deep future "blue-sky" technology. 14 It will also refrain from classified sources, which may narrow the research, but will promote wider availability of the results for implementation.
Experts still hotly debate many of the energy and environmental issues discussed here, such as climate change and Hubbert's Peak (also known as Peak Oil theory), which predicts the 14 Examples of "blue-sky" technology include orbital solar power stations beaming energy down using microwaves, as found in Army Logistician January-February 2007 article "Energy on Demand," by Dr. Keith Aliberti and Thomas L. Bruen. Another example involves on-board nuclear power plants for individual vehicles. Both of these are featured in Asher H. Sharoni and Lawrence D. Bacon's January-February 1998 Armor Magazine article, "The Future Combat System (FCS): A Satellite-fueled, Solarpowered Tank?" eventual failure to increase oil production followed by a decline. 
15
Moreover, the world energy system is a complex adaptive system, which impedes understanding this problem and precludes easy solutions. This dynamic system is comprised of intelligent actors with their own interests, perspectives, and perceptions of the status and relationships of the system, and the nature and dynamics of those relationships are subject to change spontaneously or in response to other actions in the system. 
16
For example, Saudi Arabia's real petroleum reserves are a closely held secret.
17
15
/Hubbert/1956
/Hubbert/ /1956.pdf;.pdf;
Internet;
Accessed 30 April 2008. 16
The first section of this inquiry explores the importance of energy to national power and why particular sources matter to deduce the relative importance of petroleum compared to other energy sources and its strategic liabilities. It will examine the prevailing schools of thought shaping, influencing and constraining energy choices, particularly for military forces and other organizations beholden to taxpayers. Next the inquiry will shift to the tactical vulnerabilities intrinsic in the current expeditionary fuel delivery and distribution system. It will examine a selection of replacement fuels and options for their suitability in military operations. 
18
Energy is fundamental to the quality of our lives. Nowadays, we are totally dependent on an abundant and uninterrupted supply of energy for living and working. It is a key ingredient in all sectors of modern economies….Many things have changed the shape of the world we know and live in today. But underlying them all is an abundant and relatively cheap supply of energy. This fact underpins all of our economic activities as well as our leisure pursuits. The American way of life, our economy and our key advantages in war are predicated upon the intensive use of energy. The economy is an instrument of national power in its own right, and is a critical element in the United States' ability to shape the global system. 
20
Economic power can be virtually unlimited, unthreatening in nature, and attract others willingly into our system. 
21
Sustainable military superiority requires a strong, prosperous economy with reliable, continuous, inexpensive access to energy. In the classical Realism school of international relations, a strong economy drives technical innovation, business practices, and the ability to sustain a nation in a protracted struggle with long-term qualitative and quantitative advantages over rivals. More directly, the material wealth of the nation provides tools and manpower for the military.
Energy directly predicates nearly all of our advantages in warfare at the tactical level as well. In a long struggle with economic constraints or energy shortages, the military may face restrictions on training that would be deleterious to readiness. Affordable energy facilitates frequent, tough, realistic training with our equipment, which produces confident and competent warriors who are instinctively familiar with their equipment and tactics. It also refines and drives doctrine, technological development as lessons are learned off the battlefield. For example, US Air Force combat pilots normally fly about 200 hours a year to maintain proficiency, and the average Army brigade combat team annually conducts a rotation through one of the combat training centers. 
23
24
25
24
26
27
Hornitschek also noted that the risk to omnipresent contractors and the civilian logistics infrastructure is under appreciated, and would cause even further erosion of capabilities and advantages. 
28
26
27
28 Hornitschek,
War Without Oil: A Catalyst for True Transformation,
President George W. Bush, 2006 State of the Union Address 29
Oil is often called the lifeblood of our economy-the indispensable commodity that keeps commerce humming and America on the move. But, in today's world, our dependency on foreign oil and the way we use hydrocarbons is a major strategic vulnerability, a serious threat to our security, our economy and the well being of our planet.
Of course, many Americans have gotten this point, and it's true that the call for energy independence is now coming from an amazingly diverse coalition of interests. From farmers and businesses, military leaders and CIA officials, scientists and Evangelical Christians, auto executives and unions, and politicians of almost every political persuasion, people are realizing that an oil future is not a secure future for this country.
Senator 
Barack Obama 31
Representative 
Steve Israeli 32
33
1
Each group struggles with internal conflicts as well, as parties within take different perspectives on the same priority, as different portions of a lens refracts light differently. Coherent patterns at the correct focal length of a properly shaped lens produces a clear image, and combinations of lenses, in a telescope for example, make clear images of objects when the various lenses are properly focused together. Likewise, the more the system coincides with the interests of these five constituencies, the more likely it will be adopted, especially when it comes to government funding. The spectra and clarity of our petroleum based fuel system are shifting out of favor for the US as depicted by the expanding breach between production and consumption, representing strategic liabilities.  The prism differentiates the different ways we use energy, such as transportation fuels, electrical power, heating, etc. from the available acceptable choices. The second set of lenses depicts desirable characteristics for transportation fuels, which currently provides the vast majority of US military energy. The military logistics system must ship these fuels to forward deployed locations, usually by ship and then by tanker truck to the user. For ground combat forces, these trucks must run the gauntlet of enemy fire and efforts to disrupt coordinated delivery to combat forces. Not only are these fuels used for vehicles and aircraft, but also for heating and power generation as well.
Comprehending the whole system systemically reveals the strategic liabilities and the tactical vulnerabilities of the current system. It also aids in envisioning systems that coherently align strategic aims and perceptions of the major constituencies with tactically favorable systems.
Failure to satisfactorily articulate changes to a replacement energy system to these major constituencies will result in resistance, and failure to address the unique tactical requirements of deployed military forces will result in increased risk.
This theme focuses on sustainable resources because of concerns about resource exhaustion. People in this camp emphasize efficient practices and renewable energy supplies, such as wind and solar, although other fuel sources with longer projected availability, such as coal will satisfy others in the interim. 
35
37
38
39
37
3
38
39
40
43
2
44
45
Even if oil supplies do not begin to dwindle anytime soon, there are serious perceptions of increasing problems obtaining reliable, open, and fair access to energy. Energy security for the United States really means access to oil because domestically available resources largely meet the electrical power generation and most other energy needs. 
46
46
47
48
47
48
3
51
52
53
53
Concerns are arising over increasing geo-political concentration of oil resources in areas of the world with political uncertainties, volatile relations, or governments that do not share our values. 
54
55
The 56 Fatih Birol, chief economist at the International Energy Agency referred to this as the "eve of a new world energy order," as worldwide demand skyrockets, but only about six countries can increase supplies. Nearly all of the output growth will come from Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, UAE and Russia. 57 Richard N. Haas, President of the Council on Foreign Relations listed the empowerment of energy producers by our oil imports as the biggest single factor hastening the end of American influence 2008. Installation and infrastructure electrical power and heating composed the remaining 16%. Deployed Army and Marine Corps forces derive all of their heating and electrical power from petroleum, in addition to mobility. The Navy relies on petroleum less because of its nuclear powered submarines and aircraft carriers, except the USS Kitty Hawk. However, even the nuclear powered carriers rely on deliveries of petroleum-based fuel for their aircraft every three to five days. in the world. 
58
59
60
59
60
[Online] available from http://www.cceia.org/resources/transcripts/5416.html; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008. He stated that 40% of Russia's budget comes from oil and gas revenues, and that Putin wanted to use those revenues to modernize Russia's industrial base. He also stated that Russia longed for its former influence over the CIS and its world power status, and that they are indeed using their oil and gas leverage to coerce their neighbors, such as Ukraine, Georgia and Belarus. He also gave statistics showing that Germany is more reliant on Russia than Europe overall, and that they were going to use their rotation in the EU Presidency to try to influence Russia into greater economic and political interdependence with Europe by insisting they honor their contracts, etc. However, both the Europeans and the US has been consistently outflanked by Russia in making pipeline deals, and they continue to employ their energy supplies to coerce their former satellites. See the International Herald Tribune articles "Russia signs deal to bring natural gas pipeline through Bulgaria," "Putin's trip is next step in Gazprom's march West," "Russia signs Central Asian pipeline deal," "Russia and West compete for Central Asian gas-and Russia is winning," and "Ukraine accuses Russia of applying political pressure in gas dispute." The Economist had several podcasts, including its 16 November 2006 Europe.view entitled "The Sorrows of Belarus," about how Russia drastically increased Belarus's gas supplies after they leaned Westward politically, as they did with Ukraine after the "Orange Revolution." Other Economist podcasts with more information include "The fog of the 'new cold war,'" and 10 April 2008's Certain Ideas of Europe "Pipelines and pipedreams," which interviewed Alexandros Peteresen, Program Director of the Caspian Europe Center in Brussels. Feigenbaum et al, authors of the book Pipeline Politics in the Caspian Sea, conducted a 13 February 2007 interview on the Council for Foreign Relations podcast Inside CFR Events that discussed the intense competition with Russia over control over gas and oil resources and pipelines out of the region, and their Russia and others are also using oil money against us in a more indirect way, through funding their weapons development, such as the new Topol-M Intercontinental Ballistic Missile, Su-30 fighter aircraft, and numerous other weapons projects. These projects have coincided with resurgence in aggressive military actions as well. 
62
63
64
66
67
Unilateral concern for energy security runs counter to some of our other prevalent foreign policy traditions. One such tradition holds that free trade is not only good for our prosperity, but fosters stability and democracy. 68 President Bush stated in the 2006 State of the Union Address "America rejects the false comfort of isolationism" and reiterated the commitment to liberty worldwide. 
69
70
71
68
69 Bush, 2006
70
71
72
73
74
72
73
6
This group perceives a tension between our need natural resources and our ability to promote democracy and good governance worldwide. They contend our need for oil compromises our values and leads us to treat authoritarian regimes that do not share our values with deference, which drives cynicism about our motives and perceptions of exploitation around the world. 
75
76
4
79
80
81
82
The Nixon administration created the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and one of its key directives was reduction of the detrimental environmental impact of our society, especially from our use of energy and our industries. Some members of this theme self-identify as "Greens," environmentalists, or conservationists, and continually seek to reduce the human aforementioned temptations. impact on the environment, with emphasis on clean sources of energy. Concerns about climate change increasingly focus on carbon-free sources of energy. 
83
84
83
84
87
86
87
88
To this group, the economics and convenience of an energy source are paramount. 
89
90
91
92
89
93
The primary purpose of an army-to be ready to fight effectively at all timesseemed to have been forgotten…. The unwillingness of the army to forgo certain creature comforts, its timidity about getting off the scanty roads, its reluctance to move without radio and telephone contact, and its lack of imagination in dealing with a foe whom they soon outmatched in firepower and dominated in the air and on the surrounding seas… GEN Matthew B. Ridgeway's assessment of the U.S. Army in the Korean War 
94
Civilian equipment often has a shorter replacement cycle than the majority of military systems.
Electric cars could handle short trips, such as commuting and shopping as battery technologies mature. Biodiesel or cellulostic ethanol could ease this transition or possibly displace gasoline for long trips while battery-powered vehicles handle the short trips. 
95
96
Meanwhile, military energy systems must deploy an off-road mobile expeditionary energy system into an austere environment filled with hostile actors trying to disrupt and destroy it. Consequently, these systems must be robust, resilient, portable, take up a relatively small footprint, and emit a low signature, while the systems they support are energy intensive by nature.
This energy system must be able to perform in the full range of operational environments where it could potentially deploy and work with the whole suite of tools it needs. Ideally, a change in this energy system would leverage existing investments in equipment and infrastructure or at least allow for a gradual transition through normal equipment attrition. It must be reasonably safe and convenient to handle to facilitate distribution and use on the battlefield. It must also be reasonably affordable to allow for repetitive realistic training.
The system must have a good energy density to allow for mission payloads, rather than fuel tanks to dominate carrying capacity. The greater the energy density, the lower the requirement for support vehicles and their commensurate support infrastructure to distribute the fuel. Energy density measures the amount of energy contained in a fuel per unit mass or unit volume. While biodiesel or synthetic fuel made from coal would be practically indistinguishable in this manner, ethanol would increase the number of tankers and storage containers required by 60% and reduce vehicle range by 40% because of its lower energy density. 
97
97
5
Groups of these blivets are pejoratively referred to as "bag farms," which cover a large expanse of terrain, and are vulnerable to artillery and mortar fire and render the infrastructure immobile.
The increased size also expands the size of the perimeter, which increases requirements for force protection. This led one observer in Vietnam to remark that logistics was "the tail that wagged the dog." 
99
100
6
7
8
104
105
106
104
10
108
2004-2005. 109
Moreover, once the fuel reaches the area of operations, these deliveries go through hostile territory, over easily predictable land routes on a rhythmic, pulse-like predictable schedule.
Currently the highest costs accrue from delivery by predictable ground lines of communication.
The current distribution system adds hidden costs to tactical fuel, including delivery. 
110
111
6
It is quite possible [this lack of transport helicopters] has cost limbs, if not more, because we have had to sustain [resupply troops in remote areas using vehicles] on the ground. That has produced a risk that would be reduced if we could take helicopter flights. It does not take a military tactician to know this. We have mitigated the risks. Losses have been reduced, but not yet to zero. While Canada's senior logistician in Kandahar, Lt. Col. John Conrad added: "The convoys are now in harm's way almost daily because supplies have to follow the infantry and we have had to send those supplies by land…" 112 While the availability of helicopters for other coalition partners have eased casualties by avoiding ground lines of communication, aerial re-supply is not always feasible, especially with the quantities involved supporting mechanized forces. The current fuel system was designed for large-scale, echeloned linear battle with large, secure rear areas in well-developed theaters. Although our enemies have always planned to disrupt our tactical energy system, these threats would only manifest during an actual outbreak of hostilities and did not materialize within the career span of most soldiers. The threat was generally localized in the zone where the enemy wished to penetrate, and was otherwise supposedly within the ability of logistics units to mitigate. 
113
114
112
113 Doctrine emphasized dispersion and mobility to mitigate artillery fire and logistics units were expected to fight off "level 2" threats comprising of a squad sized enemy unit or smaller. Convoy commanders drilled also their drivers for reaction to artillery, ambush, and enemy aircraft. Lawrence Martin describes Soviet Operational Maneuver Groups (OMG) on page 90 of NATO and the Defense of the West (New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston 1985), as does Shimon Naveh in In Pursuit of Military Excellence: The Evolution of Operational Theory (Portland, OR: Frank Cass Publishers 1997) on 167, 173 and 194. Naveh's description of these units emphasizes their role in creating operational shock (udar) in an enemy system, particularly by disrupting logistics, C 2 , etc. This involved Spetsnaz attacks and artillery interdiction into rear areas, as well as echeloning forces to create a breach for follow-on forces to penetrate deeply. Saddam Fedayeen during Operation Iraqi Freedom and now any of a number of insurgent groups are continuously and pervasively in "the rear area." Irregular warfare in Vietnam emphasized direct fire ambushes that led to greater armament on convoys, some known as "gun trucks," as well as convoy escorts of armed and armored vehicles for protection. These counter-ambush tactics led to Iraqi insurgents changing to the IED, and the subsequent counter-IED effort. For more on the evolution of "gun trucks" and convoy security, see the Combat Studies Institute publication Circle the Wagons: The History of US Army Convoy Security by Richard E. Killblane (Global War on Terrorism Occasional Paper 13, Combat Studies Institute, Fort Leavenworth, KS 2005) 114 56% of the US casualties in Iraq for 2008 have been caused by Improvised Explosive Devices according to an Associated Press article entitled "U.S. military statistics in Iraq war." Additionally, wars as adversaries will reasonably conclude that it is more advantageous to them to employ asymmetric attacks and irregular warfare than directly confront US combat forces. 
115
116
Fuelers and other line haul assets at progressively higher echelons carry increasing capacities but also lose their cross-country mobility, tying them to roads.
The purpose of a combat patrol is to perform a task with a purpose aligned with the strategy for winning. Logistics patrols are not about achieving the strategic objective, they are about sustaining and enabling the force that does. In doing so they present vulnerabilities and targets for insurgents and may instead contribute to the problem. Leaders carefully plan combat patrols specifically to create or shape opportunities to win tactical victories that align with the strategic objective and take all the time they need to do it. These are literally about the journey, not the destination. Combat forces in non-linear battles seize the initiative on the offense, and move capriciously and unpredictably.
Logistics patrols in contrast are the opposite. They are a means to an end and the soldiers on these patrols must avoid enemy contact and deliver their supplies to the destination intact.
They normally cannot digress and are not equipped to divert to exploit opportunities and have much less patience with "distractors." They need to get it over with as fast as possible, deliver the supplies, prepare for the next delivery, and are less apt to carefully observe an area for threats and opportunities to further the strategic objective. Logistics patrols by nature take place with a pulse-like rhythm, which make them predictable and even more vulnerable. They are continuously on the defensive and the enemy has the initiative. LTC Marian Vlasak noted that insurgent forces employ lean operations which lead to resilient lines of communication that are hard to interdict, whereas heavy use of logistics and the resulting heavy use of vulnerable supply convoys siphoned off combat power to protect them. 
117
6,
7
Logistics vehicles, especially fuel trucks, cannot effectively benefit from all the advances in protection available to other types of patrols, and use of armored vehicles for other types of patrols increases their vulnerability. Security vehicles and weapons are nearly useless after fuel trucks are already damaged. Armoring fuel trucks reduces their payload, which increases their fuel consumption and requires more fuel trucks to deliver more fuel with a net increased risk.
The use of fuel-thirsty heavy armored vehicles to protect soldiers doing other missions, such as the pervasive use of the MRAP (Mine-resistant ambush protected) vehicles, and other heavily armored trucks may reduce the risk for forces that use them, but they correspondingly increase the net risk by increasing fuel requirements. 
118
118 Roxana Tiron's 24 July 2007 article "Firm guards niche in armored vehicles" in The Hill said that 72% of the lifecycle costs of the MRAP classes of vehicles goes into maintaining and sustaining the vehicles. On capital costs in vehicle purchases worth $4 billion, over $10 billion will be spent on fuel and maintenance. The fuel consumption is 5-10 miles per gallon, depending on which of the three categories examined. Retired General Jack Keane criticized their poor off-road performance as well as their support requirements. Senator Lindsey Graham also worried about the lifecycle costs, but added that such costs were preferable to military families losing a soldier. While the MRAP class vehicles' innovative blast deflecting design and usage of materials have demonstrably saved lives in combat, they may increase risk elsewhere. The fuel costs they are citing only count the fuel itself, and not the delivered costs, the costs of the associated infrastructure, or the risks to soldiers delivering the extra fuel. Nor does this account for the added tactical risks associated with greater reliance on roads, which canalize vehicles and puts them into the situation to be attacked more frequently in the first place. aside, it has usually been cheaper and quicker to field new anti-tank weapons than to upgrade a tank force against the new weapon. 
119
Locally procuring fuel averts the need to deliver it, but presents potentially severe risks to military forces by putting them at the mercy of the supplier. 
120
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) sponsored several "Grand Challenge" competitions to test autonomous robot vehicles in a variety of terrain types in part for this purpose. 
121
122
123
124
Grand Challenge event was held in the Mojave desert and involved traversing a course revealed to the teams at the last minute by global positioning system waypoints. The robots had to analyze the terrain and determine the best way to reach these waypoints without human intervention. The second event was held at the former George Air Force Base in Victorville California. The robots not only had to follow the prescribed route, but also had to obey all traffic regulations. Six contestants successfully finished the course.
Moving fuel to deployed forces has proven to be a high risk operation. Reducing operational fuel demand is the single best means to reduce that risk, but DoD is not currently equipped to make informed decisions on the most effective way to do so. 126 Finding number 1 of the 2001 Defense Science Board Task Force on Energy More Capable Warfighting Through Reduced Fuel Burden stated "Although significant warfighting, logistics and cost benefits occur when weapons systems are more fuel-efficient, these benefits are not valued or emphasized in the DOD requirements and acquisition processes. When buying new weapons, DOD placed performance as its highest priority and seemed to overlook how fuel efficiency could result in improved performance. Furthermore, when developing new systems the department did not seem to take into account how the fuel use of a particular system could have far-reaching effects on the total force (e.g., a system's logistical requirements may create a vulnerable delivery chain)." The design of the M1 tank held performance in a mobile defense against a Soviet invasion in Western Europe paramount, with little regard for efficiency. Lawrence Martin's NATO and the Defense of the West: An Analysis of America's Fire Line of Defense, page 39-40 recounts various NATO defensive strategies, and yields insight into the design rationale of the M1. As NATO strategy evolved, it became more determined to blunt a Soviet invasion at the border and resist penetration into Germany as much as possible. Strategy evolved from the "Fallback" plan, in which most of West Germany acted as a delaying zone and its Western border as the main defensive line, to "Tripwire" to "Active Defense" until finally the "FOFA" (Follow-on Force Attack) placed the defensive belt on the Eastern border with disruption zones within East Germany. The M1 is an extremely mobile and effective tank, but its 70-ton weight makes it very difficult to deploy by air, and its fuel consumption requires an enormous supporting logistics infrastructure to follow it on the battlefield. For example, the C5 Galaxy, the largest, most powerful cargo aircraft in the US inventory, can only airlift one M1 tank at a time. Similar problems emerged again with the deployment of Task Force Hawk to Albania for intervention in Kosovo, in part due to the enormous infrastructure to support the deploying units. Storm could have started 20% earlier, from six months to five had the M1 tank been 50% more efficient and required correspondingly less fuel assets. 
127
128
129
130
130
131 Mobilizing these forces is a politically sensitive issue, especially during election cycles. Task Force Ironhorse, led by the 4 th Infantry Division, deployed for Operation Iraqi Freedom before its Reserve and National Guard assets were mobilized. The Task Force originally planned to land in and transit across Turkey to attack Iraq from the North. (Fontenot, On Point, pages 41, 52, and 68) LTC Bryan Imiola, the Division Support Operations Officer created a plan to build "Task Force Log" to mitigate against the lack of logistics infrastructure and the bulk of the fuel assets required to shuttle fuel forward to combat units. Task Force Log was an amalgam of all the fuel tankers and supply vehicles from the entire division, and this unit was slated to be among the first to deploy. 1-10 Cavalry Squadron and the 1 st Brigade Combat Team were the lead elements, and kept their organic fuel assets. All other combat units would get their logistics assets back once they arrived and once the reserve component fuel assets arrived.
Throughout the Cold War we refined and optimized the system for sustaining a massive force in a mobile defense, but within a well-developed theater. At the end of the Cold War we began to emphasize expeditionary capabilities and began to focus on deployments into austere environments, especially after Desert Storm. Despite virtually unlimited supplies of fuel support from Saudi Arabia, fuel constraints delayed the start of the war and forced units to prematurely culminate. 
132
The primary means to increase efficiency is to reduce vehicle weight, which would also have the added benefit of speeding deployment of equipment and make aerial insertion more feasible. Weight drives fuel usage for ground vehicles, and armor constitutes 20% of the weight of a typical combat vehicle. 
133
defense systems, such as the Israeli Trophy Active Protection System (APS) can vastly improve crew protection by intercepting warheads before they reach the hull.
User conservation such as careful mission planning, fuel usage tracking and reduction of time spent idling could yield immediate efficiency gains. 
134
Military platforms may not glean all the benefits of a hybrid drive train that a civilian car does, but hybrid or electric drive trains would offer many compelling advantages. 
137
136
137
138
138
139
140
Electric drives also allow much greater flexibility in designing the vehicle layout.
141
139
140
We need to reform the entire logistics structure to adapt to conditions on the modern battlefield, not just substitute one fuel for another. Improving efficiency is the most important step in reducing logistics demands, as previously discussed. However, improved efficiency could actually lead to increased energy demands and logistics burden by facilitating greater range and http://www.time.com/time/2002/inventions/tra_hywire.html; Internet; Accessed 2 April 2008. See also Joan Ogden's "High Hopes for Hydrogen." Scientific American (September 2006) 94-101. operations that are more energy intensive. 
143
Electrically propelled ground combat vehicles powered by locally produced energy sources could solve this problem, although they appear to be a classic disruptive innovation.
Clayton Christian warned that disruptive innovations usually do not appeal to the core users of a current technology, and may initially perform less well than the established technology, and hence may lack support of the core users and stakeholders. However, the current technology overshoots the needs of some users, or they find features desirable in the disruptive technology, such as cost, size, or convenience. 
144
145
145
The low power density and shorter range of batteries or hydrogen for fuel cell powered vehicles would indeed be a disadvantage if these were shipped along the same lines as we currently ship fuel. The real advantage of such systems would come from producing the energy locally, near the point of consumption, obviating the need to transport it far. Although this study emphasized transportation fuels, power generation emerged as the largest single land user of fuel in wartime, consuming about 357 million gallons, or 34% of the Army's fuel per year. 
146
147
148
146
147 Generator fuel consumption rates are from page 44 of the 2008 Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on DoD Energy Strategy. Military tanker trucks delivering fuel to units usually have a 5,000-gallon capacity, but only fill them up to a maximum of about 3,800 gallons when traveling crosscountry, or up to 4,200 gallons on improved roads due to expansion and sloshing during movement.
Palletized Loading System (PLS). These carry fold out wind turbines and solar arrays with battery packs inside to attenuate lulls. 
149
150
149 These systems actually come with any combination of wind, solar, micro-hydro, battery backup, and diesel generation capabilities desired by the customer. Skybuilt Power manufactures them in the form of any standard ISO container, including 10', 20' and 40' and provide from 500 watts to 1,500 kilowatts. Some models also provide climate controlled living, working, or equipment space. Skybuilt also provides suitcase-sized packages for man-portable applications, as well as a small trailer. 
150
151 US soldiers often carry 13 kilograms of batteries on a 24-hour mission according to Dr. Max Donelan, assistant professor of kinesiology at Simon Fraser University in an interview on CBC Radio's Quirks and Quarks entitled "Energy Brace" on 9 February 2008. [Online] available from http://www.cbc.ca/quirks/archives/07-08/feb09.html; Internet; Accessed 28 April 2008. Page 44 of the Defense Science Board 2008 Energy Task Force report stated that dismounted soldiers' battery loads are often 15-20% of their total load. This highlights the logistical strain of delivering batteries or fuel for generators to recharge batteries at the lower echelons in modern infantry combat. Dr. Donelan also noted that some of the units he studied took extra batteries in lieu of food due to their importance on the battlefield. A sample of devices carried by US soldiers include night vision goggles, global positioning systems, radios (small squad radios and larger man-pack radios for contacting higher echelons, calling for fire support, etc.), and sighting devices for weapons. Dr. Donelan designed a knee brace, which generates five watts of electricity, enough to charge ten cell phones, when the user walks. If it works, Dr. Donelan's device could provide electrical power when units are in motion, whereas solar and wind generation could provide power at outposts and other positions. Hydrogen fuel cell powered vehicles would have the added benefit of alleviating yet another major logistics burden-water delivery. Hydrogen fuel cells emit pure water as their only byproduct. Hydrogen has serious drawbacks. For starters, it is not a natural resource and must be made using another energy source, like electricity. The main obstacle derives from storage and transportation because it is very diffuse. Although hydrogen fuel cells are expensive, chiefly due to the use of platinum as a catalyst, this up front cost could be mostly recouped by recycling the materials from worn out fuel cells. Hydrogen could be produced through hydrolysis of local water, but would still require an energy source to split the water. Without a breakthrough in hydrogen storage, military vehicles could carry the hydrogen as a cryogenic liquid, but this would be more dangerous and bulky to carry than conventional kerosene fuel. Producing the hydrogen locally and avoiding higher echelon ground lines of communication would be the only justification for this approach. However, a gallium-aluminum alloy devised by Dr. Jerry Woodall could produce the hydrogen on board the vehicle as needed. Dr. Woodall discovered that a gallium facilitates complete reaction of aluminum with water, which releases hydrogen as it strips the oxygen away from the water. 
153
154
156
155
156
157
158
160
159
4
160
Such a system could provide assured energy to the end user without the need for an elaborate and fragile theater distribution system with the commensurate monumental efforts to secure long ground lines of communication. Besides the lives saved by obviating the need for security and logistics patrols not directly related to the strategy, the power available could make other protection innovations practical, such as the Mobile Tactical High Energy Laser (MTHEL). 
161
162
The Phalanx uses a high-speed 20-millimeter cannon to shoot down incoming projectiles, whereas the MTHEL uses a high-powered laser. MTHEL proved capable of hitting the targets successfully, but power generation and heat dissipation issues plagued its mobility on the battlefield. 
163
164
165
heat and a catalyst to form synthetic fuel from a carbon source and hydrogen. Step 1: Carbon (usually coal) and steam to make Synthesis Gas ( Syngas)
Step 2: Syngas and extra hydrogen make hydrocarbons and water  166 This process is similar to the Fischer-Tropsch process employed by Germany in World War II and the South African company SASOL. The US also experimented with the process in 1947 to offset the need for imported oil, but oil at the time was more economical. The OSD Assured Fuels project is reexamining the process to assure access to fuel and catalyze civilian production, which is currently economical at $35 a barrel, whereas petroleum is over $100. (Harrison, "The Role of Fischer-Tropsch Fue;s in the US Military" and Barna, "OSD Assured Fuels Initiative") These processes are also known as coal-to-liquids (CTL) or coal liquefaction. The Fischer-Tropsch process coal and steam at high heat and temperature in the presence of a catalyst to make methane and carbon dioxide. The process continues to employ heat and pressure to form the methane into hydrocarbon chains. The Bergius process differs by using hydrogen, rather than water to react with the carbon source, so the process itself does not produce carbon dioxide and all of the carbon source feeds the process rather than siphoning off to produce energy. However, the hydrogen and heat for the Bergius process must be produced by some energy source, and in this case it could be a forward deployed nuclear plant, solar thermal, wind turbines, etc. producing it from local water. This would avoid the enormous carbon dioxide production problems endemic to the Fischer-Tropsch process. The 20 June 2007 Washington Post article by Sholnn Freeman entitled "Coal-to-Liquid Provision Stalls" cites carbon emissions as a key reason why congress declined to support building coal-toliquid plants, nor mandate production quotas for synthetic fuel in the 2007 energy bill. The Bergius process's lower carbon dioxide production compared to the Fischer-Tropsch process would make it more palatable to the political leadership and would preserve more of the feedstock as fuel, reducing input requirements. See Figure 
14
168
169
169
170
Computer controlled fabrication devices could reduce requirements for class IX repair parts. These fabrication devices can produce increasingly complex items at ever decreasing prices and required expertise. These use a variety of methods to use raw materials to make complex objects. Some work like three-dimensional ink-jet printers, which form a mold out of plastic to cast metal, while others work directly with powdered metal. Some produce circuit boards. These systems could potentially fabricate many repair parts on the battlefield. 
171
The Army has fielded numerous precision-guided munitions (PGMs), such as the Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System (GLMRS), the Excalibur guided 155-millimeter artillery shell, and even guided mortar rounds. These will greatly reduce large caliber ammunition burdens on the battlefield, and consequently on ground re-supply, as they reduced ammunition requirements for aircraft. PGMs greatly enhanced the effectiveness of munitions, producing the same effect with much less ordnance. This reduction in ammunition requirements further diminishes the reliance on re-supply and makes aerial delivery even more feasible.
The Joint Precision Air Drop System (JPADS) makes better use of aerial re-supply by guiding parachutes carrying supplies exactly where required without risking cargo aircraft to ground fire. This greatly improves the reliability and flexibility of heavy airlift by vastly improving delivery precision, and the delivering aircraft can remain at an altitude immune to ground fire. Heavy aircraft can deliver mass loads anywhere on the battlefield with this system so ground and air forces are not tied to airfields capable of handling the delivery aircraft. Nor does this put low flying and expensive rotary wing assets at risk. Some cargo aircraft can land at austere landing strips, but are far more susceptible to accidents and damage, such as sand ingestion in engines. Moreover, even airfields capable of landing a particular aircraft often can only handle a certain number of them on the ground at a time as they unload and orchestrate takeoffs and landings. JPADS could feasibly provide delivery for nearly everything except bulk liquids.
The US military can eliminate dependence on ground lines of communication for deployed ground vehicles and substantially reduce deliveries for aviation assets by improving efficiency and employing renewable energy systems and tactical nuclear power to exploit local water and waste sources for fuel and drinking water. With vulnerable battlefield bulk liquid distribution eliminated, air delivery could provide nearly everything else. The remaining commodities, such as ammunition, do not lend to the pyramid effect exhibited to fuel. A single, simple platform can distribute all the remaining commodities, which are generally much safer to handle and resistant to enemy fire than fuel. 
172
Ground forces could immediately eliminate its single biggest fuel requirement by fielding renewable energy power systems rather than diesel powered generators. These generators consume 357 million gallons, or 34% of its deployed ground fuel requirements, the equivalent of 257 5,000-gallon fuel tanker loads of fuel a day at the last delivery leg. These systems are movable by standard distribution platforms, are just as mobile as standard diesel generators, and possibly more mobile when also considering if living and work space requirements they can provide. They are also potentially far more mechanically reliable than equivalent diesel generators. These systems are essential for the distributed energy needs of a deployed force dispersed over a wide area. Moreover, these systems could drastically improve the sustainment of combat outposts and other remote installations, particularly in alleviating battery requirements for ubiquitous electronic devices.
The Future Combat System, Joint Light Tactical Vehicle and other vehicles employ modular hybrid electric drives, which can supplant the diesel power plant with fuel cells or batteries as their technology matures. Improved fuel efficiency itself, particularly eliminating vehicle idling will drastically reduce fuel requirements.
173
are currently expensive and have shortcomings. 
174
Woodall's method of using aluminum to produce hydrogen on board vehicles from local water would yield similar delivery requirements to each tactical vehicle similar to the current fuel system with no delivery requirements from higher echelon units. Additionally, this system would alleviate water purification and delivery, facilitate a single battlefield distribution platform, and the aluminum fuel would be much safer to carry than petroleum fuels. Tactical nuclear power would also break down the biggest barrier to defending against enemy artillery and rocket fire.
Distributed renewable power systems and portable gas-cooled nuclear reactors could empower the US military to escape dependence on secure lines of communication and grant far more creative, flexible use of operational maneuver. Moreover, these systems would liberate the US military from budget volatility of fuel expenses from unanticipated changes to operational tempo or fuel costs and would reliably provide continuous, uninterruptible supplies of fuel so the military can perform its mission under any circumstances. This system would also reduce the logistical footprint required to sustain deployed forces, facilitating more rapid deployments with a much higher proportion devoted to combat missions. This would further reduce costs in casualties and equipment because maneuver forces move capriciously and unpredictably in contrast to predictable, road-bound and soft skinned logistics vehicles.
The military should exploit the modular nature of the electrical power trains on its upcoming generations of equipment to use the most advantageous power plant for the operating environment, while continually improving fuel cell and battery powered versions. Conventional diesel engine powered versions may initially perform better under classic, linear battlefield environments and can provide a useful transition while fuel cell and battery powered systems mature and improve. However, the electric drive trains will immediately scale across the full spectrum of operations and operational environments more readily and effectively than conventional drive trains can adapt to non-linear and austere environments. Mobile nuclear power generation at the brigade level or below will allow them to operate in even the most austere environment without reliance on ground resupply. Conversely, they could employ local grid-supplied electricity in more permissive environments if it was more economical and congruent with the mission. This could further reduce the investment required in the most expensive portions of the system, and reserve them for less permissive or more austere operating environments. It may also catalyze electric vehicle technology in synergy with the developing civilian market. Units should be created to experiment, train and develop tactics for employing them, as disruptive innovations often offer unanticipated new capabilities for which they were not originally intended. The performance and risks of the entire system should be examined and compared to get a true appreciation of the costs and performance of these systems and to prepare for long term, sustainable operations as petroleum availability wanes. Lighter, more efficient combat vehicles with reduced logistical infrastructure and with organic power production capability could deploy much more quickly to more austere environments and facilitate much more resilient, versatile and flexible application of combat power. 
The submarine is not an honest weapon. It suggests the foot pad, the garrote, and the treacherous knife dug in an opponent's back when he is off guard.
Sir Archibald 
Hurd, 1902 176
For example, German U-boats wreaked havoc on supplies intended for Britain, causing severe problems for their war effort. Although the US has not faced a determined attempt to interdict its sea lines of communication since World War II, this should not result in complacency, as Allied Navies in the Interwar period lapsed in their anti-submarine warfare skills. Naval warfare experts are increasingly concerned about the proliferation of high quality quiet diesel-electric submarines. They are also concerned about a new development using fuel cells, known as Air Independent Propulsion (AIP), which enjoys significant advantages over 
175
176 Page 227 of Military Innovation in the Interwar Period, in a segment written by Holger Herwig. This section details the innovation in the German submarine corps in the interwar period, and the loss of the British and American Navy's anti-submarine warfare institutional knowledge from World War I. Similarly today many countries are deploying asymmetric naval weapons capable of interdicting sea lines of communication.
diesel-electric submarines. AIP uses fuel cells to power the submarine while submerged, which gives greater endurance and quieter running than conventional diesel-electric subs. 
177
178
187
188
189
187
188
189
190
193
18
194
In contrast, nuclear powered ships and submarines have virtually unlimited range. This includes all US submarines and all but one aircraft carrier, which will be replaced with a nuclear carrier. However, carriers must refuel every three to five days to supply their aircraft, whereas the only limiting factor for submarines is food. Some Naval officers informally interviewed for this study cited some reasons why some US Navy warship designs use gas turbines rather than nuclear power. 
195
196
197
198
199
(Carrier On Board 196
197 Some of this is attributable to latent resentment of the policies and influence of the late Admiral Hyman Rickover, who was the father of the nuclear Navy and was renowned for his assertive leadership style and technical prowess. Rod Adams interviewed the author of the book The Rickover Effect: The Inside Story of How Adm. Hyman Rickover Built the Nuclear Navy in Atomic Show episode 14. Rickover's style, insistence of tightly controlling all things nuclear, and the closed nature of his elite, selected nuclear acolytes within the Navy caused a backlash among other Navy officers and their relationships with their engineers. With regard to response time, this refers to the ability to change power levels quickly. Older nuclear technology required more time to build up steam than for a gas turbine to spool up to produce more power.
Delivery) could feasibly fly much of the remainder aboard. Therefore, fuel delivery to the fleet drives most of the external costs for the operation of naval vessels and drives operational risk because of the asymmetric threats to the tankers. The US Congress recently mandated the use of nuclear power on all new vessel designs of cruiser or larger, which will greatly reduce US Navy vulnerabilities on their sea lines of communication. 
200
201
Since all carriers and many of the larger ships will be nuclear powered, the US Navy should explore powering their aircraft and Unmanned Underwater Vehicles (UUVs) with hydrogen rather than petroleum based jet fuel. The reactors on these ships provide tremendous amounts of energy for around 20 years without refueling. The nuclear reactor in the ship could produce the hydrogen from seawater on demand and compress it into a cryogenic liquid. 
202
Moreover, NASA and the US Air Force tested hydrogen on jet engines and noted its superior 199 CRS study, Navy Nuclear-Powered Surface Ships, page 16 
200
201
206
207
208
207
209
213
214
Rural Reconstruction and Development conducted this project, which used a small wind turbine to drive an ozone water purifier. Bergey Windpower Case Study "Parwan District, Afghanistan: Ozone Based Water Treatment System" [Online] available from http://www.bergey.com/Examples/Afghanistan.html; Internet; Accessed 5 April 2008. Marine Corps MG Zilmer ordered 183 renewable energy systems to provide electrical power at many forward locations in the Anbar province to reduce fuel delivery risks. Page 58 of the 2008 Defense Science Board study suggests they successfully provided remote power. While these systems had a higher acquisition cost, the lifecycle costs were lower even without counting the cost of fuel deliveries.
19  
19  
43
Some of the studies cited here, such as USAF Lt. Col Hornitschek's "War Without Oil," and the studies conducted by the DoD Assured Fuels Initiative are good exceptions.
Hornitschek, War Without Oil, The military would presumably not own the alternate fuel source in this case, and would have to purchase the fuel in competition with the market. Unless the substitute fuel makes up a very large percent of the fuel market, it will not command prices, but will follow the dominant component driving the price of the commodity. Even if the contractors can produce the fuel at the current price of $35 a barrel, they cannot be compelled to sell it for less than the market value of equivalent fuel as driven by petroleum prices.
Defense Science Board, Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on DoD Energy Strategy, 2008, page 11
A 27 February 2008 Air Force Link article "Pilot reaches 1,000 combat hours flown" quotes USAF Lt. Col. Andy Uribe as saying US Air Force fighter pilots ordinarily get 200 flight hours per year, or 350 in times of combat. [Online] available from http://www.af.mil/news/story.asp?id=123087914; Internet; Accessed 1 March 2008. In comparison, GlobalSecurity.org cited a Defense Intelligence Agency report that Chinese and Indian fighter pilots-both relatively well equipped militaries compared to many, each get around 100 flight hours per year. "People's Republic of China: People's Liberation Army Air Force." May 1991 via Globalsecurity.org [Online] available from http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/1991/plaaf-ch21.htm; Internet; Accessed 25 April 2008. Furthermore, a DefenseTech.org article on the combined US-India fighter exercise, COPE 2005 suggested the Indian fighter pilots' flight hours were much higher than their neighbors. (Christian Lowe, "India 1, USAF 0," Defensetech.org,
June 2004 [Online] available from http://www.defensetech.org/archives/000976.html; Internet; Accessed 15 April 2008. While part of this is due to maintenance costs, fuel costs make up a very large part of it. Page 5 of Representative Steve Israeli's Next Generation Energy Security Plan says that an F-16 fighter can consume 23 gallons of fuel a minute, illustrating the energy intensity of US military equipment. [Online] available from http://israel.house.gov/uploads/nextgen.pdf; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008.
Senator Barack Obama gave a speech at Chicago, Illinois on 3 April 2006 entitled Energy Independence and the Safety of Our Planet. Transcript-[Online] available from http://obama.senate.gov/speech/060403-energy_independ/; Internet; Accessed 10 April 2008.
Consumption gap graph courtesy of John Winslow, US Department of Energy, from Energy Information Agency (AEO 2004) Reference Case Scenario
Fatih Birol, Chief Economist at the International Energy Agency, in "World Energy Outlook 2007: China and India Insights," Council on Foreign Relations, Inside CFR Events podcast, 27 November 2007 [Online] available from http://www.cfr.org/publication/14888/world_energy_outlook_2007_rush_transcript_federal_news_service. html; Internet; Accessed 20 April 2008.
Birol, World Energy Outlook; Former Ambassador David Manning, "Energy: A Burning Issue for Foreign Policy," 13 March 2006 podcast of address to the Freeman Spogli Institute of International Relations, Stanford University [Online] available from http://fsi.stanford.edu/events/energy_a_burning_issue_for_foreign_policy/; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008; and Robertson, Oil Production Prospects, Council for Foreign Relations podcast.
Manning, "Energy: A Burning Issue for Foreign Policy," podcast of address to the Freeman Spogli Institute of International Relations, Stanford University
Defense Science Board, Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on DoD Energy Strategy, 2008, page 11.
Manning, Energy: A Burning Issue for Foreign Policy
Birol, World Energy Outlook. David Manning echoed these concerns in Energy: A Burning Issue for Foreign Policy
Page 9 of the Closing Keynote Address of the University of Chicago International and Area Studies Petroleum: Prospects and Politics symposium by Venezeulan Ambassador Bernardo Alvarez Herrera. ([Online] http://chicagosociety.uchicago.edu/petroleum/proceedings.html; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008); Robertson (vice chairman of Chevron), Prospects for Future Oil Production, cited increasing shares of oil production going to states and state owned oil companies as part of the problem for oil companies trying to meet increasing production targets. Fatih Birol's World Energy Outlook 2007, and David Manning's Energy: A Burning Issue for Foreign Policy (19:50) also discussed the role of state owned companies in constraining production available to the world market.
For example, Russia resumed bomber incursions into others' airspace, ("RAF intercepts eight Russian bombers as Putin provokes West", 7 September 2007, Michael Evans and Tony Halpin, The Times). "Russia Could 'Point Warheads' at Ukraine" in the 13 February 2008 article in Der Speigel demonstrates the response to their attempt to join NATO. Other issues include the revision of school textbooks blaming the West for provoking the Cold War, repudiating the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty limiting conventional forces on the Russian border, and threatened non-renewal of treaties on nuclear weapons.
This includes Russian sales of the state of the art S-300 air defense system to Iran and Syria, according to the 26 December 2007 International Herald Tribune article by the Associated Press entitled "Russia to supply Iran with new air defense system, defense minister says."
The moderator or another member of the panel for the Council on Foreign Relations 9 October 2007 Inside CFR Events podcast for Mead's God and Gold: Britain, America and the Making of the Modern World mentioned this during the discussion.
The map from FreedomHouse.org illustrates their 2006 ratings of world freedom. Green indicates FREE, yellow indicates PARTLY-FREE, and Purple depicts NOT-FREE. The red bars overlaid on the map indicate the 2006 exports for the top 14 oil exporters, with a strong correlation to NOT-FREE ratings.
Auty, Sustaining Development in Mineral Economies: The Resource Curse Thesis; Jeffrey Sachs, Natural resource abundance and economic growth; Bernard Lewis, Crisis of Islam page 131 discusses the Rentier State, where rather than taxation leading to representation-along with demands for accountability, transparency, and competent government, a state that derives its revenues from natural resource profits inverses the relationship-no taxation leads to no representation, and instead leads to corruption, authoritarian rule, and the tendency to spend on "white elephant" projects. Thomas Friedman takes this logic a step further with "The First Law of Petro-politics" in the May/June 2006 issue of Foreign Affairs by drawing a direct correlation between oil wealth and authoritarian regimes. The 21 December 2007 Council on Foreign Relations podcast "The World Next Year" with Michael Moran and Daniel Franklin (Executive Editors at CFR and The Economist respectively), elaborated on this by discussing how states with strong democratic institutions and civil society, such as Norway and Canada, can absorb oil wealth without this effect, whereas countries such as Russia lack structures capable of resisting the
This was the focus of the 23 November 2006 Economist Europe.view podcast, "Paying the Piper," which highlighted Gazprom's failure to re-invest in infrastructure and the long term implications for their production. [Online] available from http://www.economist.com/media/audio/europeview231106.mp3; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008. For more on Russia's revisionist history, see the Economist articles "Lights, Camera, Different Ending" (14 February 2008) and "America's Russia Problem" (19 December 2007).
Tom Parfitt's 21 December 2006 Guardian article, "'Father of all Turkmen' dies aged 66" covers the aftermath of the death of Saparmurat Niyazov, a.k.a. "Turkmenbashi." He ruled Turkmenistan capriciously through the benefit of oil and gas revenues, which he used in numerous quirky and bizarre projects.
Jevon's Paradox, named for 19 th Century British economist William Stanley Jevons, describes this phenomenon. He first expressed this phenomenon of demand elasticity in a book entitled The Coal Question about soaring English consumption of coal after improved, more efficient models of steam engines designed by James Watt superseded the original models designed by Thomas Newcomen. This increased efficiency afforded a wider range of industries access to a cost effective power source, and a net national surge in coal use. Likewise, the Economist observed in the article "CAFÉ Society" that while US automobile powertrains have steadily improved in efficiency, the average fuel economy has plummeted since the 1970s oil crisis due to increased weight and luxuries. Looking at this in other commodities, Detrich Dörner used vignettes in The Logic of Failure: Recognizing and Avoiding Error in Complex Situations(New York: Basic Books, 1997)  to test subjects on their ability to grapple with complex problems, including one involving food and birth rates in a fictitious African country. Some of the wellmeaning participants massively increased their food output in an unsustainable manner, which led to a population explosion and subsequent collapse. Paradoxically, increased efficiency could well lead to increased, rather than decreased net consumption.
  94 GEN Matthew B, Ridgeway, The Korean War (New York: Da Capo Press, 1967), page 88.
The Toyota Prius and other hybrids have proven themselves on the road since 1997, and some users have modified them into Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEV) to provide a greater share of their mobility from cleaner, cheaper, more efficient grid power. General Motors and others experimented with electrically powered cars, such as the EV1. Currently at least three manufacturers will release electrically powered cars to the commercial market, including the General Motor's Volt, Aptera, and the Tesla Roadster, as well as a factory-built PHEV version of the Prius. The National Renewable Energy Lab's report "A Look Back at the U.S. Department of Energy's Aquatic Species Program: Biodiesel from Algae" suggests 2% of the land area in the US, including non-arable land, could meet all transportation fuel needs. This study suggested raising a specific species of algae on an area flooded with bracken water in the desert Southwest known as the Salton Sea.
David Daggett of Boeing Corporation, Robert Hendricks from NASA, Rainer Walther from MTU Aero Engines and Edwin Corporan from the Air Force Research Labs wrote the 2007 article "Alternate Fuels for use in Commercial Aircraft," discussing the parameters and difficulties involved in finding sustainable and feasible alternatives to jet fuel.
Class IIIB (bulk fuel) distribution on a notional linear battlefield from Figure 6-1 Student Text 63-1: Division and Corps Logistics U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS: 1 July 1997.
LTG John H.Hay, Jr. in Vietnam Studies: Tactical and Material Innovations, (Washington, DC:  Department Of The Army, 1974), page 151, referring to the enormous logistics effort to support combat operations leading to siphoning combat power to protect logistics assets.
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine released a study entitled "Sleep Deprivation Affects Moral Judgment" on 2 March 2007 which suggests better sleep results in better leadership decisions and a more patient, wise, and effective counter-insurgency force. [Online] available at http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2007/03/070301081831.htm; Internet; Accessed 5 March 2008.
Forward operating base and camp locations for Multinational Forces, Iraq, available via Globalsecurity.org [Online] available from http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/facility/iraq-maps.htm; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008.
31 May 2007 Joint Security Station and Combat Outpost slide from Multi-National Corps Iraq via Globalsecurity.org.
Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on DoD Energy Strategy "More Fight-LessFuel" Defense Science Board Task Force, 2008 Section 4.2, page 50   
Facility map from GlobalSecurity.org.[Online]  available from http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/facility/afghanistan.htm; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008. Currently, 75% of all supplies and 40% of vehicular fuel supplies travel over land through Pakistan. Recent concerns over stability in Pakistan forced logisticians in Afghanistan to consider alternates, all of which involve airlift. The 15 November 2007 International Herald Tribune article "Pentagon making plans in case Pakistan unrest disrupts Afghan war supplies." Note also that US access to Uzbekistan was closed in 2005 after the US protested when Uzbek government troops fired on protesters. This is another dimension of the conflict in the current system between the moral dimension and practical needs.
Pages 35 and 36 of The United States Army in Afghanistan: Operation Enduring Freedom (Dr. Richard W. Stewart, US Army Center for Military History October 2001-March 2002) discussed having to resort to "wet wing" operations--draining fuel from aircraft to deliver fuel--during Operation Enduring Freedom.
Operational Leadership Experiences in the Global War on Terror, "Interview with MAJ Joseph Rawlings," Combat Studies Institute, Fort Leavenworth, KS, May 2006, pp 8-9
Both the 2001 and 2008 Defense Science Board reports on energy cited the vulnerabilities and costs of delivering fuel in their findings and recommendations, and asserted that DoD does not fully appreciate these risks, costs and externalities, nor their impact on effectiveness.
David M. Herszenhorn wrote a 19 March 2008 article in the International Herald Tribune entitled "$600 billion? $5 trillion? Costs of the Iraq war are hotly disputed." The article discusses the assertion by Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz that the war in Iraq's long-term costs are between $3 trillion and $5 trillion. The Congressional Budget Office set it more like $1 trillion to $2 trillion.
Nagl and Yingling "Restructuring the US Military," Inside CFR Events podcast; and Krause, Square Pegs and Round Holes
David Kilcullen, Counter-Insurgency in Iraq 2007: From  Theory to Practice. [Online] available from http://www.mcwl.usmc.mil/Counterinsurgency%20in%20Iraq%20theory%20and%20practice2007.ppt; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008. T.E. Lawrence neutralized the far more powerful and advanced Turkish Army regulars with a ragtag guerilla band by threatening their land lines of communications. LTC T.E. Lawrence, expounds upon this in "Evolution of a Revolt," Combat Studies reprint of the 1920 article in the UK Army Quarterly and Defense Journal.
Kenneth Macksey, Tank Versus Tank: The Illustrated Story of Armored Battlefield Conflict in  the Twentieth Century (London: Grub Street, 1999), pages 94 and 106 discuss historical examples of how fielding bigger or more powerful guns is cheaper and easier than fielding tanks with sufficient armor to protect against it, especially without sacrificing mobility and mechanical reliability.
Operational Leadership Experiences in the Global War on Terror, "Interview with MAJ Joseph Rawlings," Combat Studies Institute, Fort Leavenworth, KS, May 2006, pp 8-9
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) Website, [Online] available from http://www.darpa.mil/grandchallenge/index.asp; Internet; Accessed 28 April 2008. The first DARPA
Page 48 of the 2008 Report of the Defense Science Board highlights the thriftiness and utility of unmanned vehicles on the battlefield.
Fontenot, On Point, page 230  said that placing the 173d Airborne Brigade into Northern Iraq posed an insurmountable challenge to the Iraqis. However, adding TF 1-63 also posed an almost insurmountable challenge to US Army and Air Force logisticians to sustain it, particularly the 10,000 gallon per day fuel requirement.
JPADS (Joint Precision Air Drop System) employs global positioning system guidance to steer parachutes. These systems range in a variety of sizes and users can program them to land in specific coordinates en route to the drop zone. US Army Natick Soldier Systems website [Online] available from http://www.natick.army.mil/soldier/media/fact/airdrop/JPADS_ACTD.htm; Internet; Accessed 28 April 2008.
The General Motors Hy-Wire prototype demonstrated that electric or fuel cell powered cars can allow far more design flexibility with their "skateboard chassis." All power train components reside in the flat chassis, upon which the body is built without the need for a hump in the middle for the transmission or drive shaft. The engineers can focus on the function of the vehicle without constraints of drive-shaft positioning, etc. Time Magazine "2002 Best Inventions: Hy-Wire Car" [Online] available from
A 15 August 2007 press release from BAE systems entitled "BAE Systems Unveils Hybrid Electric Drive System for Future Combat Systems" discusses the Future Combat System hybrid drive train and highlights the plan to initially use diesels with the ability to power them with fuel cells later. A 4 March 2008 Defensetalk.com article covering MG Charles Cartwright's session at the Association of the United States Army Land Warfare Symposium entitled "Hybrid-Electric Future Combat Systems to Roll on Line" also highlights this and other features. Moreover, Oshkosh Trucks offers a hybrid electric version of its ubiquitous HEMTT (Heavy Expanded Mobility Tactical Truck) series [Online] available from http://www.oshkoshdefense.com/defense/products~a3~home.cfm; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008.
See the discussion on Jevin's Paradox in the section on the Cost theme of energy selection. Jevin's Paradox holds that more efficient use of energy or resources can foster greater consumption. Lower cost affords greater consumption or use of a resource for new purposes. Maneuver warfare favors intense, agile movement on the battlefield, so efficiency gains would logically translate into greater speed and operational reach, not necessarily lower energy consumption.
Clayton Christianson, The Innovator's Dilemma: The Revolutionary Book That Will Change the Way You Do Business (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1997), page xvi.
Skybuilt Power website, http://www.skybuilt.com/schematic.htm
Assuming a diesel-hybrid would only run when needed, and run at the peak point on its power curve for maximum efficiency, diesel engines are about 40% efficient. The hydrogen produced per unit mass for this process is about one third of the equivalent mass of gasoline, or slightly less for JP-8. However, fuel cells are commonly about 50% energy efficient, making them at worst 17% efficient for a given delivered fuel mass compared to the peak of 40% achieved by conventional engines and fuels. Nevertheless, conventional engines rarely run at their peak efficiency band, and their efficiency varies widely below their optimal performance and normal automotive gasoline engines used in automobiles achieve 12-15% efficient use of the energy in gasoline. Military engines also currently spend 50-80% of their time idling at 0% efficiency. Therefore, since fuel cells and batteries only produce power as required, they can likely yield a net parity or reduction in delivered fuel mass despite the lower energy density of their fuel. See the sample power curve on Figure11. The concept of well-to-wheel efficiency compares the "mileage" of electric vehicles, to conventionally powered vehicles. This compares the energy expended extracting the energy source, refining it, delivering it to the vehicle, and finally, the efficiency of the vehicle itself in converting the energy into motion. The Watt podcast, episode 46 makes several comparisons between standard vehicles and electric vehicles, demonstrating the total energy advantage of electric vehicles. [Online] available from http://www.podtrac.com/pts/redirect.mp3?http://media.libsyn.com/media/thewattpodcast/tWW46-2006-02-19_48kbps.mp3; Internet; Accessed 2 May 2008. In this case, the inherent efficiency of the electric drive generally overcomes the penalties imposed by lower energy density.
Rod Adams, The Atomic Show podcast Episode 71
The Army employed a number of static nuclear reactors to power installations, but also had portable reactors in Sundance, Wyoming; Camp Century, Greenland; McMurdo Sound, Antarctica and the reactor aboard the USS Sturgis, formerly a World War II Liberty Ship named the USS Kiwi. The Sturgis offset the need for hydroelectric power to the Panama Canal and hence saved water to facilitate 2,500 more ships per year to transit the locks. The other reactors powered remote stations with an uninterruptible supply of power. See the 1996 Atomic Insights Volume 2, Issue 5 "MH-1A: First Nuclear Power Barge," by Rod Adams [Online] available from http://www.atomicinsights.com/aug96/MH-1A.html; Internet;
Page 190-191 of the 2005 United States Army Weapons Systems book discusses the MTHEL program and its milestones.
The 22 January 2008 Defense Industry Daily story "Phalanx CIWS: The Last Defense, On Ship and Ashore" discusses the Phalanx CIWS, and its evolution to include land-based protection against mortars, rockets and artillery. Other names for this system include C-RAM or Centurion.
MTHEL is also referred to as Skyguard or Nautilus. The current design resides in three tractor trailors and costs $3,000 per shot, largely due to the energy required to power it. The Mobile Tactical High Energy Laser system has proven it can interdict incoming artillery shells, but requires enormous quantities of power, which makes it currently impractical to move around the battlefield. Large bases in Iraq and Afghanistan employ Phalanx Close In Weapons Systems (CIWS) to protect against low-level attacks of this kind, but can be overwhelmed by large barrages. Unexploded outgoing 20mm rounds from this system can also harm the surrounding population and generate resentment and animosity.
The last time a US Army brigade was seriously threatened in combat was 1950 during the Korean War, as chronicled by numerous works, including East of Chosin: Entrapment and Breakout in Korea, 1950 by Roy Edgar Appleman. However, rocket fire destroyed the tactical operations center of the 2 nd Brigade Combat Team of the 3 d Infantry Division on 7 April 2003 during Operation Iraqi Freedom, resulting in serious disruption to the command, control and sustainment of the brigade during a critical moment in a combat operation. See Thunder Run, pages 158-176 by David Zucchino, or pages 355-360 in On Point for details on the missile strike and the struggle to mitigate the disruption to the ongoing combat operations. US Army doctrine currently mitigates the risk of enemy artillery fire against valuable logistics
2008 Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on DoD Energy Strategy, page 44
A 26 February 2007 article from Cornell University by Bill Steel entitled "Low-cost, homebuilt 3-D printer could launch a revolution, say Cornell engineers" ([Online] available from http://www.news.cornell.edu/stories/Feb07/fabber.ws.html; Internet; Accessed 10 May 2008) interviewed Hod Lipson, professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering about the Fab@Home project. Many universities have used these machines for years and the project aims to reduce the cost to about $2,300 to reduce costs of computer controlled fabrication devices to empower ordinary people to perform rapid prototyping or small scale manufacturing in their homes.
Although some vehicles spend a portion of the time spent idling to power sensors, communications and other electronics, this "hotel load" usually constitutes a tiny fraction of the power produced at a vehicle's minimum idle speed, wasting the remaining power produced by the engine. Even then the engine operates at its least efficient portion of its power band (see Figure11).
The JASON report, pages 38-39 cited cost and durability for hydrogen fuel cells. Cost is primarily derived from the use of platinum as a catalyst, which could be recouped through recycling materials from older fuel cells. Using room temperature hydrogen from the aluminum production method rather than cryogenic hydrogen would improve durability.
An International Herald Tribune article entitled "U.S. military officials wary of China's expanding fleet of submarines" by David Langue, written 7 February 2008, recalls when a Chinese Song class submarine surfaced within torpedo range of the USS Kitty Hawk in late 2006.
Harrison, Air Force Research Lab "The Role of Fischer Tropsch Fuels for the US Military, slides, 5 and 6, primary source from the DESC Factbook.
Harrison, Air Force Research Lab "The Role of Fischer Tropsch Fuels for the US Military, slide 6, primary source from the DESC Factbook.
Blackwell, Department of Defense: Reducing Its Reliance on Fossil-Based Aviation Fuels 23-28. Examples of better flight management involve more direct flights, less fuel dumping before landing, fewer aircraft rotations, etc.
Rod Adams, a former US Navy nuclear engineering officer stated in Episode 71 of The Atomic Show that the reactor itself on a nuclear submarine is about the size of a small office desk. The CRS study, Navy Nuclear-Powered Surface Ships, page 5, states that for larger ships, such as aircraft carriers, nuclear plants save considerable space on these ships by obviating the need for fuel storage.
Nuclear submarines currently produce their oxygen for the crew using this method, except they jettison the hydrogen. Adams, Atomic Show, episode 37.
A Bergey Windpower published a case study about a wind power project in the Parwan district of Afghanistan. Empower Associates, UNICEF, the New Zealand government, and the Afghan Ministry of
In contrast, the US electricity rate average is 8.91¢ per kilowatt-hour according to a Nebraska state energy site [Online] available from http://www.neo.ne.gov/statshtml/115.htm; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008 Former US ambassador to Afghanistan Ronald Neumann talked to the Center for Strategic and International Studies on 31 May 2007. ("Statesmen's Forum: Ronald Neumann, former U.S. ambassador to Afghanistan." Center for Strategic and International Studies podcast. 31 May 2007 [Online] available from http://media.csis.org/podcast/070531_neumann.mp3; Internet; Accessed 30 April 2008) Hehighlighted the importance of electricity and considered it crucial for Afghanistan's development. This price is probably quite a bargain given the circumstances, since Iran heavily subsidizes its fuels, so Iranians can buy it very cheaply. The 3 September 2007 Economist article "A Fuel Pinch" states that Iran's refineries produce 44 million liters of gasoline a day, while Iranians buy 75 million liters a day, resulting in gasoline imports of over $5 billion a year. The government imports the fuel at 50¢ a liter, and recently raised the price it charges its citizens from 9¢ to 12¢ a liter. Enterprising Iranians are buying up cheap fuel and selling it for a profit in neighboring countries. This black market business increases demand and strains the ability of Iranian refineries to keep up, resulting in Iran actually importing this huge quantity of refined petroleum products from abroad.
In the book Three Cups of Tea: One Man's Mission to Fight Terrorism and Build Nations…One School at a Time. (New York, NY: Viking Penguin 2006), Greg Mortenson describes his organization's method of supporting local villagers build schools in their communities in Pakistan. The Central Asia Institute has been building these schools in Pakistan and Afghanistan since the 1993. The villagers built the schools, and therefore had a stake in defending and maintaining them.
In States, Ideologies and 
Social Revolution: A Comparative Analysis of Iran, Nicaragua
Shah of Iran
GEN Petraeus
Commander of Multi-National Forces, Iraq
Ambassador Ryan Crocker
Figure 
5
98
5
They often form logistics bases at this distance for this purpose, also known as forward operating bases, or FOBs, which appear at about every 150 kilometers of tactical depth. These
Figure 
16
180
181
Aircraft constrain the range of acceptable substitutes much more than other systems. 
183
185
186
183
Harrison "The Role of Fischer-Tropsch Fuels for the US Military," slides 24-28. David Daggett of Boeing Corporation, Robert Hendricks from NASA, Rainer Walther from MTU Aero Engines and Edwin Corporan from the Air Force Research Labs wrote the 2007 article "Alternate Fuels for use in Commercial Aircraft," discussing the parameters and difficulties involved in finding sustainable and feasible alternatives to jet fuel. 
184
18
185
186
203
204
Improved fuel safety would alleviate damage control concerns compared with the storage of thousands of gallons of kerosene aboard ship, which can potentially lead to disasters like the USS Forrestal incident. 
205
203
204
205
Renewable energy would also be very valuable in infrastructure development in humanitarian aid and especially counter-insurgency operations. Restoring the critical services, such as electrical power is a crucial component of a successful counter-insurgency campaign. 
210
Electrical power is a pre-requisite for most, if not all of these to function. For example, many medical supplies require refrigeration, as do food supplies. Lighting facilitates school work beyond normal daylight hours, and also assists with security. Electricity pumps and purifies water, as well as disposal and processing of sewage. Insurgents attack the grid and centralized power stations, and other portions of the infrastructure to undermine the government for failing to provide these things. 
211
212
210
211