# ID: b7c4b5e2be634fca8458990fc3224d3d
# Title: The challenges of adopting a culture of mission command in the US Army
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
While the US Army has ostensibly embraced mission command doctrine, it has failed to live up to many of its central tenets. It unevenly practices mission command and has been unable to fully institutionalize its principles. Mission command, like its Prussian-German predecessor Auftragstaktik, is a cultural phenomenon that requires a very specific set of characteristics to function effectively. There are noticeable cultural barriers that are prohibiting the full adoption of mission command in the US Army.
A breathless, decade-long pace of operations superimposed with environmental pressures, constrained budgets and resources, dramatic reductions in force structure and personnel, and major social and technological changes are affecting the organizational culture of the US Army. Internal organizational tensions stemming from competing value systems also threaten the institutionalization of a culture of mission command. The decentralized system of organizational control employed in Iraq and Afghanistan is fundamentally at odds with peacetime procedural control that favors more centralized control and less risk. Likewise, the development and implementation of high-end information technology creates a paradox for mission command.
Introduction "Curiously enough, the individual is usually so deeply immersed in his culture that he is scarcely aware of it as a shaping force in his life. As someone has remarked, 'The fish will be the last to discover water.' People who know no other cultural patterns but their own tend to regard them as God-given and intrinsically right." -James C. Coleman
The US Army's wartime experience in Afghanistan and Iraq inspired a renewed emphasis on the principles of mission command. The complex and widely distributed character of the wars reinforced the distinct advantages of fostering initiative and empowering junior leaders in a decentralized environment. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, General Martin Dempsey, underscored the importance of the command philosophy, "Mission command must be institutionalized and operationalized into all aspects of the joint force, our doctrine, our education, our training and our manpower and personnel processes." 1 Since 2012, the Army has gone to great lengths to instill the core principles of mission command throughout the force using senior leader strategic communications, doctrinal revisions, and by aligning curriculums across the Army's training and education system. An integrated suite of doctrinal publications, rolled out as 'Doctrine 2015', emerged in 2012. The topic of mission command became the centerpiece of conferences, white papers, and leader development strategies in an effort to inculcate theory into practice. But, despite a pervasive communications program and significant emphasis by senior leadership, legitimate questions remain about whether or not the basic premises of mission command are embedding into the institutional culture of the US Army. The Army's current philosophy of mission command is a descendant of the German concept of Auftragstaktik. Auftragstaktik, loosely translated as 'mission tactics' or 'mission orders', came into mainstream military lexicon after World War II to describe a uniquely German decentralized-style of command. The principles of Auftragstaktik have evolved logically and naturally since the conquests of the Prussian warrior-king, Fredrick the Great. Auftragstaktik channeled the aggressive posture and legendary discipline of the Prussian army. As the battlefield grew increasingly dense and complex, the Prussians responded by decentralizing authority and responsibility and allowing greater subordinate freedom of action. They placed heavy emphasis on initiative and empowerment to take full advantage of rapidly changing conditions.
Auftragstaktik is not simply a doctrine, but a cultural phenomenon that requires a specific organizational culture. The cultural characteristics took many years to mature and congeal, but have led to a highly effective and adaptive military organization.
The adoption of mission command and its recent doctrinal resurgence in the US Army has proven problematic. The US Army has unevenly embraced the cultural characteristics required for the effective practice of mission command. Its organizational culture is impeded by internal organizational tensions and it faces some challenging and unique environmental pressures. The US Army, like the rest of the US military, is undergoing significant strain owing to a variety of factors. A breathless, decade-long pace of operations superimposed with budgetary pressures, constrained resources, changing missions, and dramatic reductions in force structure and personnel are affecting the organizational climate of the US Army and may well have a longer term impact on its underlying culture. Fourteen years of war have exacerbated longstanding institutional tensions between initiative and discipline, centralization and decentralization, and authority and individual responsibility. All of these factors affect the US Army's ability to inspire and motivate a generation of combat seasoned junior leaders who are accustomed to operating with autonomy. It further calls into question whether the US Army has the right organizational culture required to effectively institutionalize mission command.
The military culture that evolved organically in the Prussian and German army to successfully support Auftragstaktik invites further examination. Why did a decentralized system of command advance naturally and become so deeply ingrained in the German army? What cultural characteristics led to a successful decentralized style of command? Can we apply these lessons to the problems that the US Army currently faces with mission command? Are there cultural impediments to mission command?
Cultural research is inherently difficult and subjective. Culture is a complex and multifaceted phenomenon that offers few clear, direct, and simple explanations. But, the field of organization theory assists by providing a useful framework in which to define and analyze the components of a culture. This study begins by exploring the concept of organizational culture and articulating a vocabulary for a meaningful cultural analysis within a military organization.
Classifying and categorizing the distinctive features of military culture provides the basis for a conceptual framework. A survey of Prussian and German military history from the late eighteenth century to the mid-twentieth, identifies the influential leaders, theorists, and major events that shaped the evolution of Auftragstaktik. These factors help populate a conceptual model to account for the key features of a military culture that promote a decentralized system of command. The final analysis will then investigate why mission command in the US Army is not congruent or well aligned with the model.
The study suggests that the forces impeding the institutionalization of mission command overshadow the forces that support it. This monograph is not intended as an indictment of the US Army's capacity to exercise mission command, nor to question the broader utility of a decentralized command system. Rather, it confirms that the journey toward realizing mission command in the US Army is not is over. The pragmatic objective of this project is to assist the senior leadership of US Army in identifying cultural impediments so that they can continue to shepherd the process of adoption and adaption and ensure that mission command is thoroughly institutionalized.
Military historians and analysts have traditionally focused on organizational features like quality of leadership, equipment, training, personnel systems, and doctrine when assessing and analyzing the effectiveness of military forces. More recent scholarship leverages the concept of military culture to illuminate another important facet of military institutions and organizations. 
2
3
2 There are a few different scholarly approaches to examining military culture that cover several academic disciplines. A review of multiple approaches can be found in Stephen J. Gerras, Leonard Wong, and Charles D. Allen, "Organizational Culture: Applying a Hybrid Model to the US Army" (Monograph, US Army War College, November 2008), 3-24. A unique study of US service culture can be found in Carl H. Builder The dominant reason that cultural research in this field is so appealing to senior military leaders is the strong linkage between a military organization's culture and its effectiveness.
Military culture has played a crucial role in the effectiveness of military organizations throughout history. It is intuitive that highly successful organizations usually have strong and vibrant organizational cultures, but historian Williamson Murray believes that culture may also explain and predict traits beyond military performance. For Murray, "Military culture may be the most important factor not only in military effectiveness, but also in the process involved in military innovation, which is essential to preparing military organizations for the next war." 4 Thus, any discussion about the US Army's success or failure to institutionalize mission command must begin with a general understanding of culture and how best to assess the cultural foundations of an organization. Since there is a no broadly accepted method to examine military culture, one must turn to the related field of organizational culture for insights on ways to analyze, assess, and change culture.
The study of organizational culture evolved as a branch of organizational theory that offered sociologists, anthropologists, and organization researchers a means to explain and predict the behavior and attitudes of organizations. Other theories in the field take structural or systems approaches that interpret organizations as purely rational and goal-oriented which are best understood through an examination of their goals, structures, regulations, and decision processes.
Organizational culture theory, however, contends that there are more powerful forces motivating and directing a group's behavior, though these forces may be largely invisible and unconscious. 5 4 Williamson Murray, "Does Military Culture Matter?" Orbis 45, no. 1 (1999): 27. 
5
Most organization theorists maintain that organizational culture is a critical variable to ensure effectiveness and long-term performance. 
6
7
It is easy to appreciate a commonsense notion of 'culture,' but the term's abstract and ubiquitous nature makes it somewhat elusive and difficult to precisely define. 
8
6
7 Schein,
Organizational Culture,
[8]
[9]
9
10
12
13
It conveys a sense of identity to employees, provides written and often unspoken guidelines for how to get along in the organization, and helps stabilize the social system that members experience. 
14
15
11 Schein,
Organizational Culture,
14.
16
The concept of organizational culture is not completely monolithic; within a large organization there may be a host of competing subgroups that maintain unique characteristics and preserve their own distinctive identity. Organizational theorist Mary Jo Hatch asserts that task interdependence, reporting relationships, occupational identities, proximity, and levels of interaction among members help to shape levels of cohesion within an organization and are catalysts for subculture formation. 17 Although the underlying assumptions of the larger organization's culture serve as the foundation of these subcultures, within each subgroup there is localized consensus on the values and beliefs that make their identity distinct from others.
Subcultures can be an asset or a liability to an organization. When a subculture enhances the dominant values of the overall culture, the organization benefits; in contrast, if the subculture denies the values of the overall culture, the organization is weakened.
Theorists offer several conceptual models for assessing and analyzing organizational culture. Schein's simple, qualitative framework for examining the elements of organizational culture remains the most durable. 
18
16
17 Gerras, Wong, and Allen, "Organizational Culture," 8-10. Mary Jo Hatch, Organization Theory (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 176. 18
an iceberg (see Figure 
1
19
1
20
Artifacts can also be structures and systems that are subtle and less tangible. Personnel management systems, decision-making paradigms, professional education programs, communication techniques, and the use of technology are also types of artifacts that help make up a culture.
The climate of an organization also represents an important cultural artifact. The two terms, "culture" and "climate" are frequently used interchangeably, but there are distinct differences between them. Culture refers to implicit, often indiscernible aspects of organizations; climate refers to more overt, observable attributes of organizations. Culture includes core values and shared interpretations about how things are; climate includes individualistic perspectives that are modified frequently as situations or leaders change. 
21
22
21
22 Schneider,
Organizational Climate and Culture,
78.
23
24
25
Schein describes an organization's Underlying Assumptions as the essence of organizational culture and its deepest layer. These assumptions are derived from a shared understanding about solving problems a specific way that has unconsciously become taken for granted as the only way to solve similar problems. These assumptions are typically so well integrated in the organizational dynamic that they can be hard to recognize from within an organization. They reflect a certain understanding of cause and effect relationships and may ascribe to a worldview. 
26
27
1
29
For example, if leaders represent an organization as "Family First," but fail to produce policies in the eyes of its members that support this claim, trust is eroded and effectiveness diminishes.
Competing values may encourage behavior not congruent with official declarations. 
30
Another cultural impairment is found in the paradoxical nature of strong cultures.
Organizations with extremely tight knit cultures can find that their assumptions are so pervasive and accepted that they are seldom examined. This characteristic can hinder organizational learning, stifle innovation, or prevent an organization from adapting to its environment. Chris Argyris coined the term 'double loop learning' to describe an error and correction process that is important to organizational learning in rapidly changing an uncertain contexts. This process involves questioning, re-examining, and re-evaluating norms and basic assumptions. 
31
Lastly, as previously mentioned, competing subcultures within an organization can threaten the adhesiveness of an organizations culture. In particular, when the value systems of a subculture begin to work against the value systems of the larger organization, the organization is weakened. 
30 Shamir,
Transforming Command,
22. 31 Schein,
Organizational Culture,
31
The uniqueness of military society, a rigid hierarchical structure, and a shared history immersed in stories, traditions, and ritual, among other factors, contribute to the distinctive culture observed in most military organizations. Figure 
3
32
33
33
34
35
Military organizations are deeply steeped in tradition, constituted by a plethora of symbols, rituals, and practices that give meaning to their uncommon profession of war and to the sacrifices of individuals that the profession maintains. 
36
37
3
37
: Schein,
Organizational Culture,
[25]
[26]
[27]
Pierce,
Organizational Culture,
7;
Gerras,
Wong,
and Allen,
"Organizational Culture,
" 3;
Shamir,
Transforming Command,
22;
Snider,
"An Uninformed Debate,
" 5. 38
The US Army espouses seven 'Army Values' to guide member behavior and promote the ideals that it believes are most appropriate. This is a concrete example of the second layer of organizational culture, "Espoused Values and Norms" (see Figure 
3
39
3
39
Strategic leaders perform an important role in organizations by creating, preserving, molding, or transmitting culture. 
40
42
43
Where a gap between "theory in use" and "espoused values" (the things we say we stand for vs. 
40
41
42 Department of the Army, Army Doctrinal Publication 6-22, Leadership (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), 11-6. the things we actually stand for) generates dysfunction, or when elements of culture have maladapted, leaders must identify and promote cultural change. 
44
45
1
3
Auftragstaktik was the product of specific Prussian and German historical circumstances and conditions. The term describes key aspects of a unique and influential military culture that is closely associated with the dominant tactical and operational performance of the German army on the battlefields of World War II. 
46
44 Shamir,
Transforming Command,
23. Schein,
Organizational Culture,
11. 45 Winslow,
Army Culture,
12;
Schein,
Organizational Culture,
12;
Shamir,
Transforming Command,
xx. 46
47
48
Auftragstaktik requires a high degree of mutual trust and the unwavering commitment of every soldier to understand his role and fulfill his duties. These tenets were assimilated into German military culture over a span of 130 years, beginning with the devastating Prussian defeats at Jenaduring World War II. See Martin Van Creveld, Fighting Power: German and US Army Performance 1939-1945 (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1982), 163. In his final analysis, Van Creveld described the German army as a, "superb fighting organization. In point of morale, élan, unit cohesion, and resilience, it probably had no equal among 20 th century armies." For alternate historian viewpoints see: Williamson Murray, War, Strategy, and Military Effectiveness (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011); Robert M. Citino, The German Way of War: from the Thirty Years' War to the Third Reich (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2005); and Gordon Craig, The Politics of the Prussian Army: 1640-1945 (New York: Oxford University  Press, 1955). 
47
Frederick the Great was the last successful commander in history able to exert near total control over every aspect of his army. In order to fully leverage Frederick's genius, his command style demanded exacting discipline that turned his army into a machine of single mind and purpose. 
49
49
50
51
Generations of future Prussians would seek to repeat Frederick's rapid, decisive victories. 
53
51 Shimon Naveh, In Pursuit of Military Excellence: The Evolution of Operational Theory (London: Frank Cass, 1997), 33. 
52
53
Further, the rigid structure that provided the backbone for the Prussian Army's discipline was reinforced by extreme social stratification that separated the aristocrats from the rank and file.
The Prussian command structure based on hierarchy and strict obedience relied on iron-fisted discipline and the coup d'oeil of the commander. It was successful only under the control of a genius and was bound to fail when the social and political climate changed, as the French Revolution would demonstrate a few years later. By the beginning of 19th century, the Prussian Army proved unable to adapt.
The Impact of Napoleonic Warfare
The modern era of warfare unfolded in the shadow of the French Revolution. The social and political upheaval in France at the turn of the century eliminated feudal and aristocratic structures and changed the character of war. A surge in nationalism and the mass conscription policies of the levee en masse swelled the ranks of the French Army with citizen-soldiers that shared a common cause. Commanded by another military genius, Napoleon Bonaparte, the French La Grande Armée, brought over a million men under arms and demonstrated operational prowess as the scale of warfare dramatically expanded on European battlefields. 
54
54
55
56
57
58
The King of Prussia, Frederick Wilhelm III, appointed Major General Gerhard von Scharnhorst to head a Military Reorganization Commission after the Treaty of Tilsit in 1807 to study the reasons for his army's defeat and make recommendations for change. The committee and most of its members were typical officers of the Prussian Army, poorly educated aristocrats, but in Colonel August Niedhardt von Gneisenau, Scharnhorst found a kindred spirit. 
59
57
58
60
61
Scharnhorst made the commission the center of a new campaign to modernize the country's military with initiatives that reformed nearly every aspect of the Prussian Army including manpower policies, unit structure, doctrine, weaponry, and its professional education system. The commission placed a priority on reinvigorating the training practices and education systems as a prelude to larger institutional changes. The Berlin Military Academy, renamed the Kriegsakademie in 1810, became the centerpiece of the Army's education system; graduation from the institution became a prerequisite for service on a strengthened Prussian General Staff.
Selection to the academy became stricter, written exams were introduced, and cadet schools began accepting middle class applicants.
would later become Chiefs of the Prussian General Staff. 
60
The Infantry Drill Regulations of 1812 abolished the set-piece conduct of battle and, at least for the more senior Prussian officers, the qualities of initiative and independent action became more important. 
62
63
64
65
66
63
64
65
66 Shamir,
Transforming Command,
35
67
imponderables. 
69
He believed that war is in the realm of human activity and governed by human emotion, friction, chance, and uncertainty. Thus, war is an art rather than science, requiring flexibility and rapid decisions. 
70
70
71
The basic principle of decentralized command had become embedded in Prussian military culture by the middle of the 19th century. It was not until Field Marshal Helmuth von Moltke's thirty-one year tenure as the Chief of the General Staff of the Prussian Army (1857-1888), however, that the principle was developed into a rational theory, adapted to modern technology, and enforced as official doctrine. 
72
73
74
72
73
74
75
76
77
His influence resulted in several generations of critical thinking German officers who developed an advanced operational approach to command.
Moltke was a disciple of Clausewitz and embraced his basic axioms about imponderables and decisiveness. Moltke saw no certainty in war and prepared Prussian and German commanders 
75
76
77
to cope with friction and uncertainty. "Strategy," he famously wrote, "is a system of expedients."
Commanders could never hope to have complete and timely understanding of the battlefield; flexibility was paramount since "no plan survives contact with the enemy's main body." 
78
"Commanders of units to be committed must receive definite tasks (auftrage) but not be limited in the choice of means to accomplish them." 
80
78
79
80
81
well, and multiplies his own tasks to such an extent that he can no longer fulfill them completely." 
82
This further affirmed and institutionalized Auftragstaktik and stipulated that commanders should give subordinates general directions of what were to be done, allowing them freedom to determine how to do it. The approach, it was felt, would stimulate the development of the "thinking leader" who was used to making tactical judgments in his own right. 
83
The institutional debates and reforms at the turn of the 19 th century allowed the Germans to further embed some of the key principles of Auftragstaktik into their doctrine before World War I. 
84
85
83
84
85
86
They promoted and encouraged new tactics from their junior officers and NCOs and found a promising solution in small, highly trained assault squads called Strosstrupps (Shock Troops).
Squad leaders were trained to take the initiative within the framework of their commander's intent and seize opportunities that presented themselves. Employed on a large scale in 1918, these specially trained units were extremely effective at infiltrating and penetrating front lines, though the German High Command proved unable to fully exploit them for strategic effect.
German trend of progressive decentralization and highlighted their cultural propensity for learning and innovation. Whereas Moltke institutionalized a form of Auftragstaktik for the benefit of his senior commanders, the expansion of these principles to the enlisted ranks during World War I demonstrated that initiative, empowerment, and individual responsibility could prove decisive on the modern battlefield. 
87
86
87 Shamir,
Transforming Command,
49.
1939-1942. 88
89
88
of the whole…a strict adherence to a decision can lead to error. The art of leadership is recognizing when a new decision is required." 
90
91
1. War is an art, a free and creative activity founded on scientific principles. It makes the very highest demands on the human personality. 2. The conduct of war is subject to continuous development. New weapons dictate ever-changing forms. Their appearance must be anticipated and their influence evaluated. Then they must be placed into service quickly. 3. Combat situations are of an unlimited variety. They change frequently and suddenly and can seldom be assessed in advance. Incalculable elements often have decisive influence. One's own will is pitted against the independent will of the enemy. Friction and errors are daily occurrences. 
92
93
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
The German commitment to the principles of Auftragstaktik leading up to World War II represented a conscious effort to maintain at all costs that which was believed to be decisive to the conduct of war: mutual trust, a willingness to assume responsibility, and the right and duty of 
94
95
96 Ibid.,
[23]
[24]
97
98
As a cultural phenomenon, Auftragstaktik proved susceptible to environmental pressures and internal organizational strains during the war. There were specific reasons for its decline.
First, Germany witnessed a steady decline in combat effectiveness as mounting casualties necessitated lower recruitment standards and shorter periods of training. Second, micromanagement increased as the German High Command became more and more involved in operational details as the war progressed. Hitler proved to be a supreme commander who intervened not just in operational details, such as placement of reserves, but who regularly sent directives to lower tactical units about deployment of their light mortars or their anti-tank guns. 
99
97
98
99
Perhaps the final death knell of Auftragstaktik in World War II came on January 6, 1942 when General Franz Halder, the army Chief of Staff, sent a set of directives in which he stressed that it was time for a stricter system of command based firmly on Hitler's will. He felt that the decentralized system of command had done serious damage to the German position. It was time for clear and unambiguous orders, he told them, "The duty of soldierly obedience leaves no room for the sensibilities of lower headquarters." 100 Auftragstaktik: The Basis of a Modern German Command Philosophy Though the cultural attributes necessary for Auftragstaktik were virtually extinguished in the upper echelons of the Wehrmacht during World War II, they were never institutionally forgotten. Almost as soon as the Bundeswehr was established in 1955, Auftragstaktik was reinvigorated as its chosen philosophy of command. 101 German AR 100/100 describes the modern concept, "Auftragstaktik is the pre-eminent command and control principle in the Army. It is based on mutual trust and requires each soldier's unwavering commitment to perform his duty… the military leader informs what his intention is, sets clear achievable objectives, and provides the required forces and resources. He will only order details regarding execution if measures that serve the same objective have to be harmonized, if political or military constraints require it. He gives latitude to subordinate leaders in the execution of their mission." 102 100 Citino, The German Way of War, 302-305. 
101
102
The use of Prussian and German historical context to build a cultural model for US mission command is certainly imperfect. Though Auftragstaktik is often idealized, in fact it was unevenly practiced and proved susceptible to environmental pressures, institutional tension, and the occasional vagaries of leader behavior. Undercurrents of class conflict and social tension created unhealthy factions within the Prussian officer corps. 
103
Despite its inadequacies, the cultural phenomenon of Auftragstaktik still provides useful insight into the characteristics required for modern mission command. The Prussians and Germans systematically developed a decentralized command system into a comprehensive theory and integrated it into doctrine and practice. They did so in a manner more vigorous, thorough, and deliberate than any other military and were rewarded by tactical and operational excellence.
Auftragstaktik evolved organically over a long period of time and endured several phases of critical examination and adaptation. Its journey is relevant as we explore why mission command is has failed to take firm root in US Army culture.
Enriching the framework of organizational culture found previously discussed with qualitative analysis from the evolution of Auftragstaktik, one can create a model representing the normative cultural dimensions of mission command. The model provides a way to for leaders to visualize and think through this complex phenomenon. Given that no current analytical example exists in academic or doctrinal literature, this model should provide a more comprehensive and thoughtful means to reflect on the often-cited 'culture of mission command' in the US Army. Assumptions about the nature and character of war are rooted in Clausewitz's belief in decisive action and his concept of imponderables.
• War is fundamentally a human endeavor.
• Uncertainty is inherent in war.
• Decisive action is required to exploit fleeting opportunities.
Assumptions about the nature of command and role of commanders:
• Commanders must exercise independent judgment.
• Commanders must assume great risk willingly.
• Commanders have an inherent responsibility to develop and mentor subordinates.
• Commanders must value organizational learning.
Assumptions about the Subordinates:
• Subordinate leaders possess the requisite independent judgment to act responsibly. They are often in better command of the facts on the ground.
• Subordinate leaders must understand and operate within the framework of Commander's intentions. An organization will embrace certain values and subscribe to a set of beliefs because its underlying assumptions promote and support those norms. In the case of mission command, there are three categories of beliefs that arise from the underlying assumptions. Some of these may be observable and espoused in doctrine, while others may be concepts that are embedded and internalized by the organization.
• Every situation in warfare is unique. There are no universal prescriptions.
• Humans are more important than technology and weaponry.
• Organizations must rapidly learn, adapt, and innovate to adjust to changes in the environment.
• Commanders must tolerate mistakes and failures in the execution of their orders.
• Commanders must learn to live with chaos rather than seek to control it.
• Commanders must make timely decisions.
• Decision will be made with imperfect and incomplete information.
• In situations requiring independent decisions, the Commander has the latitude, but also the duty to act.
• Inaction and omission are worse than errors in judgment.
• Subordinates must be willing to take risks and take the initiative.
• Subordinate freedom of action is required to take advantage of rapidly developing situations.
• Responsibility must be linked to authority.
• Rigorous training, professional education, and leader development processes ensure shared understanding about employment of doctrine and tactics.
• It is appropriate to modify or abandon assigned tasks if you can still meet the broader intent of the Commander.
• Critical review of operations and training essential to learning.
Artifacts. Every facet of an organization will produce observable artifacts that represent its culture. Artifacts from a well-aligned culture of mission command might include:
• Technology that supports rapid decision-making.
• Social architecture that fosters relationships between senior-subordinates. • Clear communication. Short, concise orders and clear expectations.
• Acceptance of risk and responsibility.
• Strong emphasis on empowerment and delegation.
• Places value on learning. Formalized process to critically examine and improve organizational process and outcomes.
Mission command in US Army doctrine is formally defined as the "exercise of authority and direction by the commanders using mission orders to enable disciplined initiative within the commander's intent to empower agile and adaptive leaders in the conduct of unified land significant doctrinal debate about adopting a concept akin to Auftragstaktik in the US Army. 
108
109
111
Shamir,
Transforming Command,
[101]
[102]
[103]
[104]
[105]
[106]
[107]
[108]
[109]
[110]
[111]
110
111 Department of the Army, ALDTF, 16-17. The US Army uses survey instruments like the CAL Annual Survey of Army Leadership to assess leader effectiveness in demonstrating principles of mission command philosophy and the extent to which operational climates in units are organizations are supportive of mission command. Specifically, they are concerned with whether Army leaders understand and practice the mission command philosophy. In this survey, each of the six principles was analyzed: 37% believed that their headquarters could build cohesive teams, 46% encouraged mutual trust, 47% provided clear commander's intent, 49% particularly surprising. Typically, senior leaders view their unit climates as more supportive of mission command than do leaders at lower levels. 
112
The failure of the Army's practices to match its proclaimed beliefs is a source of common frustration among mid-grade and senior leaders. 
113
114
Army leaders further continue to default to detailed command, despite encountering few occasions requiring this method. The combined effect of these actions actively undermines the allowed disciplined initiative, and only 37% believed that headquarters underwrote prudent risk in garrison operations.
112 Josh Hatfield, Ryan Riley, Tyler Freeman, John Fallesen, and Katie M. Gunther, 2013  Center for Army Leadership Annual Survey of Army Leadership (CASAL): Main Findings. CAL Technical Report 2014-01 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Center for Army Leadership, 2014), 46. This is true particularly with regard to job latitude, learning from honest mistakes, and empowerment to make decisions. Junior NCOs hold the least favorable perceptions about these factors within the working environment. 
113
114
118
119
120
121
In Prussia and Germany, the emergence of Auftragstaktik serves as an example of a complete cultural transformation. It was precipitated by an organizational crisis that ensued in the Prussian army after defeats at Jena and Auerstadt. The devastating losses undermined the belief in the previous system of command, forcing new leaders, like Scharnhorst and Gneisenau, to introduce new methods that improved organizational performance. Members of the Prussian army attributed the organization's success in the Wars of German Unification to these new methods. In essence, the Prussians gradually learned and validated a new set of underlying assumptions as they effectively practiced Auftragstaktik.
The adoption of mission command in the US Army was more imitation than cultural reform. There have been relatively few periods of institutional circumspection about the desired system of command for the US Army. Mission command was viewed as a 'best practice' and adopted as part of broader institutional and doctrinal reforms. 
122
Army culture is increasingly coming under pressure from a variety of external sources that challenge the important cultural elements/conditions essential for effective mission command. Across the board, evidence suggests that morale and readiness across all of the US armed forces are suffering as a result of declining budgets, fiscal uncertainty, force reductions, high operating tempo, and resource constraints. Though senior defense leaders are sensitive to the scope and magnitude of the problems, a political solution seems to be beyond their grasp. The Army may face unexpected cultural consequences in the long term.
Budgetary realities are adversely affecting the key trust relationships that are central to a functioning culture of mission command. Military officials are plagued by uncertainty in defense planning and budgeting, coupled with sharp reductions in almost every category of defense spending. Senior Army leaders face the same challenges as the rest of the Department of Defense (DOD) and have to make difficult choices on how best to spend available resources for training and operations, procurement, modernization, personnel compensation and benefits, health costs, maintenance costs for facilities, and operational contingencies. Perhaps the single largest contributor to the high level of uncertainty in the defense budget is the Budget Control Act of 2011 (BCA).
The BCA set budget caps for defense, and these caps were automatically reduced upon the failure of a congressional committee to produce an alternative for deficit reduction. 
123
124
126
125
March 23, 2015, 22. 126
127
128 Tan, "Leaders," Army Times, 23. life. 
129
130
131
A culture of mission command requires strong trust relationships between leaders and the led. A commitment to mission command requires a deliberate investment in highly trained and soldiers to meet its end strength goals. 
133
134
As US Army boards seek to identify and retain its best and brightest members, policy changes have unmasked previously concealed records, unfavorable documentation, and older evaluation reports. 
135
133
135
Research groups studied the morale and retention problems in the US Army and broader US military in the late 1990s and early 2000s. 
139
140
Commanders who fear that their subordinate's mistakes would jeopardize their own success will reflexively practice micromanagement. 
141
Currently, some personnel management practices do not seem to match the US Army's stated values about people.
The culture of mission command in the US Army faces additional external pressures from a unique combination of social, political, and technological forces. Society is enmeshed in a major social transformation, driven in part by, and deriving much of its character from, the amazing advances in technologies of information. The rate of technical change in processing, organizational culture was becoming less attractive when compared to the changing organizational culture of business -which was moving to flatter organizations, with more individual autonomy, more opportunities for advanced education or 'retooling one's career, and greater possibilities for career advancement. storage, bandwidth, and sensing is staggering.
142
143
144
145
146
The ability for millions of people to communicate with each other in near instantaneous fashion is a power never before seen in human history. 
148
149
150
151
152
There is no doubt that there are greater demands for public scrutiny, transparency, and accountability in public life as a result of the social and technological developments. While the democratization of information is positive in many respects, it can strain the culture of mission command. Almost every action a soldier takes can be broadcast into living rooms or onto digital devices in real time, and political and senior military leaders must answer for those actions immediately. The pressure on senior leaders to prevent incidents or to take action immediately is 
151
152 Kasperson, et. al., "The Social Amplification of Risk," 184. Information flow becomes a key ingredient in public response and acts as a major agent of amplification. Attributes of information that may influence the social amplification are: the volume of information in the media, the degree to which information is disputed, the extent of dramatization of the outcome in the media, and the symbolic connotations of the information. One of their case studies included the Three Mile Island nuclear accident and the subsequent fears in communities serviced by modern nuclear reactors.
particularly acute, compelling a desire to want to control everything. This tendency also finds expression in direct interference with the operational and tactical leadership on the ground and act as a drag on decentralized operations. 
153
Cultural tensions exacerbated by years of war have created alarming mismatches between beliefs and practices in the US Army. These tensions are at the heart of a nuanced understanding of culture described earlier in the study. As Schein points out, "Not all cultural assumptions are mutually compatible or consistent with each other. If we observe inconsistency and lack of order, we can assume that we are observing a conflict among several cultures or subcultures." 
154
4
153
154
The US Army has long struggled to find a balance between the efficiency of institutional hierarchy and centralized bureaucracy on one hand, and the effectiveness of decentralized initiative and operations on the other. The second tension emanates from the role and function of information technology in the US Army. An organization's ability to tolerate uncertainty is related to its beliefs about the strengths and limitations of technology. In both cases, artifacts stemming from one belief system clash directly with the espoused value system.
At the heart of tension within US Army culture is the style and preference of management and organizational control. Every military organization must adopt structures and set in place mechanisms to shape and control the behavior of its members. 
155
156
Author James Q. Wilson described military organizations operating in a garrison environment as "procedural bureaucracies." 157 Procedural organizations are agencies where outputs but not outcomes can be observed. Commanders are able to observe or monitor the daily activities of subordinate units with relative ease. Operations and training can be tracked, and the personal conduct of soldiers remains visible. Both high achievement and misconduct among unit members can be easily identified. But ultimately, commanders in garrison cannot measure the accumulation of directives passed down, data calls sent out, and new requirements generated by the Army." 
163
164
165
163
164
165
The US military has developed and fielded some of the most sophisticated sensor, communications, and information management technologies available in the world. In fact, highend technology is a key artifact of the US Army's cultural identity. It sees technology as one of its significant competitive advantages. 
166
The rapid growth of information technology has not only changed the way the US Army fights, but the way it demands, collects, and manages information. 
167
169
170
171
172
An organizational culture that promotes high-level decision-making erodes opportunities for organizations to learn. If cultural learning is to occur, organizations must be allowed time and space to reflect on their experience. Leaders that are task saturated and afraid to make mistakes 170 Gregory Fontenot, "Mission Command: An Old Idea for the 21 st Century," Army Magazine 61, no. 3 (2013): 64. 
171
172
will not be able to learn during execution when scrutinized by multiple echelons of headquarters.
The pace of operations and expectation for immediate answers dampens capacity for organizational learning.
There is no doubt that technology has enhanced operational and tactical capabilities of the US Army. The possibilities associated with emerging technologies remain significant.
However, senior leaders must acknowledge the tradeoffs and competing values inherent in the use of advanced information technology. Leaders must carefully avoid the connotation that effective mission command is reliant on high-end technology. 
173
174
Mission command is a system of command that emphasizes the centrality of the commander and the decentralization of capability and authority. Mission command demands and facilitates initiative at all levels to exploit opportunities on the battlefield. It empowers leaders to exercise their own judgment in pursuit of their mission while remaining aligned to a common framework through a disciplined adherence to their commander's intent. Mission command doctrine is predicated on high-levels of trust in a subordinate's ability to operate without 
173
174
Yet, while the US Army has ostensibly embraced mission command doctrine, it has failed to live up to many of its central tenets. It unevenly practices mission command and has been unable to fully institutionalize its principles. Mission command, like its Prussian-German predecessor Auftragstaktik, is a cultural phenomenon that requires a very specific set of characteristics to function effectively. There are noticeable cultural barriers that are prohibiting the full adoption of mission command in the US Army.
The Prussian army was the first to organize a system of decentralized command into a coherent theory and comprehensive doctrine and place it into operation with successful results.
By adapting the core principles of Auftragstaktik into their military culture, the Prussians and Germans were able to transcend the unique personal styles of commanders and individual unit traditions. Battlefield victories and military dominance reinforced a military culture that was able to withstand environmental pressures and crosscurrents from competing cultural values. Prussian and German Chiefs of Staff, like Gneisenau, Moltke, and Seeckt, understood the nature of warfare and devised a system of command best suited to meet the challenges of their day. An organization's culture helps explain and predict both member and organizational behavior. When there are problems in an organization's culture, it is important to examine the alignment between its supporting elements: the underlying assumptions that provide its intellectual foundation, the beliefs and norms that guide member behavior, and the artifacts that signify the culture. In Auftragstaktik, the Prussians and Germans were able to produce and maintain a well-aligned culture in a way that US Army has not been able to reproduce with mission command.
Several factors shape US Army culture in a manner that impedes the effective institutionalization of mission command. First, mission command did not evolve naturally in the same sense that Auftragstaktik developed in Prussia. The adoption of mission command in the US Army did not emerge from the necessity of geo-political circumstances, but rather from a perceived need to improve performance. It lacked a precipitating crisis or a catastrophic failure and has lacked inertia to overcome pre-existing cultural tendencies. Second, significant environmental pressures are shaping the character and behavior of the US Army. Budgetary and resource constraints, the reduction in force structure and size, and the information revolution are examples of political and social forces that are undermining key cultural characteristics of mission command. Finally, internal organizational tensions stemming from competing value systems also challenge a culture of mission command. The decentralized system of organizational control employed in Iraq and Afghanistan is fundamentally at odds with peacetime procedural control that favors more centralized control and less risk. The cognitive tension between expectations and reality creates friction for the organization. Likewise, the development and implementation of high-end information technology creates a bit of a paradox for mission command. The technology generates a set of behaviors and effects that contradict assumptions and beliefs essential for mission command.
The fundamental problems with mission command in the US Army can be traced to the second and third layers of culture and an inability to embed suitable beliefs and assumptions.
Changing a culture can be difficult and time consuming. Strategic leaders shoulder the burden for shaping the culture of mission command in the US Army. When the gap between espoused theory and reality generates dysfunction, leaders must identify and promote cultural change. Failure to do so will continue to erode trust, reduce effectiveness, and stifle innovation.
Martin Dempsey, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mission Command White Paper (April 3,
2012), 1.
Adams, "Military Doctrine and the Organization Culture," 18.    
Schein, Organizational Culture, 14. Cameron and Quinn, Diagnosing and Changing  Organizational Culture, 21. Adams, "Military Doctrine," 18.   
Cameron and Quinn, Diagnosing and Changing Organizational Culture, 18. The authors contend that this is the most widely accepted definition of organizational culture.
Cameron and Quinn, Diagnosing and Changing Organizational Culture, 19.    
Cameron and Quinn, Diagnosing and Changing Organizational Culture, 19.    
Schein, Organizational Culture, 22.   
Pierce, Organizational Culture, 7.    
Pierce, Organizational Culture, 12.   
Pierce, Organizational Culture, 7.    
Don M. Snider, "An Uninformed Debate on Military Culture," Orbis 43, no. 1 (Winter 1999): 3.
Pierce, Organizational Culture, 7.   
Gerras, Wong, and Allen, "Organizational Culture," 10.   
Schein, Organizational Culture, 17.   
Antulio J. Echevarria, "Neo-Clausewitzianism: Freytag-Loringhoven and the Militarization of Clausewitz in German Military Literature before the First World War" (PhD diss., Princeton University, 1994), 27. Clausewitzian themes generally fell into four categories: the uses and limitations of theory; the impact of psychological and moral forces on war; the importance of striving for a decision by battle; and the superiority of a strategy of annihilation over all others.
Citino, The Path to Blitzkrieg, 13. "If the troops know that the leader lives for them and shares their joys and sorrows, they will willingly give their all to achieve success, and will bear up under setbacks."
Steven E.Clemente, For King and Kaiser!: The Making of the Prussian Army Officer,  1860-1914 (New York: Greenwood Press, 1992), 15-20. Clemente offers insightful analysis on the impact of class conflict in the Prussian army.
Citino, German Way of War, 9. Citino believes that the Prussians favored "quick and lively" wars.
James Q Wilson, Bureaucracy (New York: Basic Books, Inc, 1989), 16.    
Van Creveld, Fighting Power, 9.    
Shamir, Transforming Command, 65.   
Shamir, Transforming Command,[101][102][103][104][105][106][107][108][109][110][111]. Shamir summarizes the intellectual debates that occurred in the 1970s and 1980s.
Todd Harrison, "Chaos and Uncertainty: The FY2014 Defense Budget and Beyond," CSBA, October 2013, 2. Harrison provides a thoughtful analysis of the long-term impacts of Sequestration.
Under rules passed by Congress in 2011, defense spending will be reduced by about $40 billion in fiscal 2016 unless lawmakers can amend the 3-year-old Budget Control Act.
The Military Times conducted the survey in July and August of 2014. Results were published in a series of articles in December of 2014. No service specific survey instrument has been published by the US Army or any other organization to refute or support the Military Times data to date.
Hope Hodge Seck, "A Worsening Morale Crisis," Military Times, accessed March 10, 2015, http://www.militarytimes.com/longform/military/2014/12/07/americas-military-a-forceadrift/18596571/?sf34440316=/. "Active-duty troops reported a significant drop in how they rated their overall quality of life: Just 56 percent call it good or excellent, down from 91 percent in 2009. The survey, conducted in July and August, found that 73 percent of troops would recommend a military career to others, down from 85 percent in 2009. Troops reported a significant decline in their desire to re-enlist, with 63 percent citing an intention to do so, compared with 72 percent a few years ago. In 2009, 87 percent of active-duty troops who participated in Military Times' survey rated their pay and allowances "good" or "excellent." This year, the figure was just 44 percent. When asked how quality of life might change over the next several years, 70 percent of respondents predicted it would decline further."
Department of the Army, Army Training and Leader Development Panel Officer Study (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office), 2003.
Army Training and Leader Development Panel Officer Study, 
Nelson, "Auftragstaktik," 31.   
Robert Axelrod and Michael D. Cohen, Harnessing Complexity (New York: Basic  Books, 2000), 23.
Lee E. Bokma, "Strategic Communication for Tactical Leaders," (MMAS, Fort Leavenworth, KS, June 2010), 2. Bokma offers four basic characteristics of the modern information environment: ubiquitous and interconnected; faster and less durable; constantly changes; unregulated and empowering.
Dubravac, Shawn, Digital Destiny: How the New Age of Data will transform the way we Work, Live, and Communicate (Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing, 2015), xxi. In 2011, 35 percent of Americans owned a smart phone; by early 2015, nearly 70 percent owned one. Dubravac suggests that the rapid market penetration of these devices illustrates the transformative effect the technology is having on our society.
Clay Shirky, "The Political Power of Social Media," Foreign Affairs (Jan/Feb 2011): 1.
Shirky, "Political Power of Social Media", 6. Shirky highlights political action in Tunisia.
Weinstein, Inside Rebellion, 130. Economists describe the challenge of control as the "principal-agent problem" because it highlight the need for a principal (that is, the owner of a firm or the leader of an organization) to set in place a system of incentives or constraints so that an agent (a worker or member of a group) will perform exactly as the principal expects.
James Q.Wilson, Bureaucracy,[158][159]Outputs' consist of the work the members of an organization do on a day-to-day basis. 'Outcomes' reflect how the world changes because of the outputs.
Wilson, Bureaucracy,[163][164] 
Wilson, Bureaucracy,[165][166][167][168] 
Statement by McHugh and Odierno, Hearing. "We must acknowledge that today's high technological, All Volunteer Force is much different from the industrial age armies of the past."
Barno, "Lying," 4.   
Gerras, "Lying," 17. "Ethical fading occurs when the moral colors of an ethical decision fade into bleached hues that are void of moral implications. Ethical fading allows us to convince ourselves that considerations of right or wrong are not applicable to decisions that in any other circumstances would be ethical dilemmas. This is not so much because we lack a moral foundation or adequate ethics training, but because psychological processes and influencing factors subtly neutralize the 'ethics' from the ethical dilemma. Ethical fading allows Army officers to transform morally wrong behavior into socially acceptable conduct by dimming the glare and guilt of the ethical spotlight."
Barno, "Lying," 4. Barno's  remarks are validated by survey data in CASAL 2013 and by CPTs participating in the CSA's Solarium conference in 2014.
Studies Program, 
Advanced Military Studies Program. 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release
operations." 
104
105
106
107
104
105 ADRP 6-0, 2-1. well-equipped units that are capable of operating independently. A sustained inability to attain expected levels of readiness or training may lead to a cynical view on the part of members about the institution's standards and may erode confidence in institutional leadership. It also erodes trust on the part of senior leaders that units are capable of effective decentralized operations. The current fiscal and budgetary environment creates additional dissonance in the human dimension of the Army's organizational culture. It places senior leaders in the unenviable position prioritizing operational funding over family programs. The budgetary realities simply may not meet member expectations and align with the US Army's stated goals about supporting families.
The current budgetary climate jeopardizes the key trust relationships essential for mission command and there is mounting evidence of declining trust and confidence in policymakers and senior military leaders.
For the third time since the end of the Vietnam War, the US Army is in a postwar drawdown. Largely the result of the budgetary pressures previously discussed, over the last three years the Army has cut the active component by 80,000 soldiers, inactivated 13 brigade combat teams and is in the process of eliminating three combat aviation brigades. 
132
132
Research on downsizing in industry indicates that low morale, unhealthy competitiveness, and reduced initiative are common during and after downsizing, often resulting in diminished organizational effectiveness or productivity. 
136
137
137 Don M. Snider and Gayle L. Watkins, "The Future of Army Professionalism: A Need for Renewal and Redefinition," Parameters 30, no. 3 (Autumn 2000): 5-20. 
138
Cultural artifacts in procedural organizations include standard operating procedures (SOPs), systems, structures, processes, and policies that guide, shape, or constrain day-to-day behavior.
While deployed in wartime, military organizations fall into a category Wilson denotes "craft organizations." A craft organization consists of operators whose activities are hard to observe but whose outcomes are relatively easy to evaluate. 
158
After nearly fourteen years of continuous combat and cyclical deployments, the US Army finds itself at a strategic inflection point. It is neither fully at war, nor fully at peace. It does not cleanly resemble an army at war or an army of preparation. In fact, the US Army exercises organizational control in a hybrid manner that encompasses the cultural characteristics of procedural and craft organizations, shifting back and forth as the situation requires. Wilson's two  