# ID: b81c73ca627948aeb7c11669046b7872
# Title: The Expeditionary Advanced Base Operation Challenge with Marine Corps Infantry Firepower
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing
Page Table 
1
After almost two decades of war in the Middle East, that arguably stagnated Marine expeditionary thought, the MOC strives to revitalize its services mindset to waging warfare in the 21st century. Among the MOC's many initiatives, it calls for the Marine Air Ground Task Force (MAGTF) to execute EABO with a force capable of seizing and defending terrain and able to conduct offensive action in support of sea control. 
2
3
As the service reorients its forces and mindset from the desert to the Pacific to fight contested beachheads from the sea, it is refamiliarizing itself with MEU amphibious operations 
If we are ignorant of the changing face of war, we will find ourselves unequal to its challenges.
--MCDP 1, Warfighting
The purpose of this paper is to explore and renew, within the conceptual space of the MOC, emphasis and debate on the necessity of developing enhanced Marine Corps infantry armament for survivability and lethality to fulfill its role in the "contact" layer of the EABO concept. As the AY18-19 Gray Scholars cadre experienced during wargaming elements of this mission set, gaps exist within the infantry arsenal to fulfill its role in completing this task. With the understanding that fire and maneuver are symbiotic, this discussion will visit opportunities to speed up the application of fires to enhance the utility of infantry and its role in EABO.
Moreover, we will explore the historical stagnation of infantry firepower to emphasise it's slow evolution to its current state of unreadiness to meet future requirements. As political and military leadership turnover churns the ebb and flow of strategic vision and operational concepts, the infantry lethality debate risk fading to the next shiny object. If this interest is allowed to recede, the EABO concept, as outlined in the MOC, will be difficult to validate in its current form and must be revisited. 
Long-term strategic competitions with China and Russia are the principal priorities for the Department, and require both increased and sustained investment, because of the magnitude of the threats they pose to U.S. security and prosperity today, and the potential for those threats to increase in the future.
-2018 National Defense Strategy
The United States is in a strategic tug-of-war of great power competition with China and Russia. In part, this competition involves a technology race to create more capable military hardware, software, and systems. 
7
8
The DoD budget is at an all-time high. Soon the American taxpayer will demand a peace dividend and cuts to the DoD budget will quickly follow.
Although historical reference from the Marine Corps island-hopping campaign in the Pacific during World War II, and its establishment of advanced bases, could inform warfare analysis here, the application would loosely apply because there is little precedent for how small distributed infantry formations will execute the EABO concept as outlined in the MOC.
Therefore, this concept will primarily advocate for the evolutionary need for more lethal organic infantry weapons, specifically antiarmor, and renew emphasis on fire support as an opportunity to fill the capability gap. Moving forward we will assume a ship-to-shore capability exists either surface, subsurface, or air that can insert an EABO force, at the ranges required, to seize terrain for lodgment within a contested environment. Depending on the method of insert, a level of local air superiority is implied. Here, we will also assume, that this disaggregated foot mobile EABO force will have the ability to digitally C2 its unit. Because this is a light force, force protection will be enhanced through mobility, surprise, and signature management.
Lastly, the definition of Artificial Intelligence (AI) evolves as rapidly as the next new shiny concept, therefore must be defined. The use of the term here will infer a system that can use components of human reasoning and machine learning (ML) to solve complex problems. 10
There are many ideas for the use of AI and ML in the military to aid processes and decision making, although interesting to explore with further research, is beyond the scope of this paper. 11
Because the definition and applications of AI are predominantly in the eye of the user, to not limit the imagination of the reader, the discussion that follows will introduce AI as a decision aid to optimize staff processes to enhance fire support.
Fire Support Opportunity During wargaming the EABO concept with jammed intermittent fire support, a significant problem the planners faced was the rifle company antiarmor capability was substantially overmatched against enemy armor. For Marine Corps infantry to execute EABO successfully, in the interim without a sufficient antiarmor weapon, there is an opportunity to pursue and advance a functional concept to shorten the fires kill chain. To do so, we must first focus on the fires agency that ties the support to the supported. The communication construct of the Fire Support Coordination Center (FSCC) relies on voice as its primary method to receive friendly position reports and target information from observers. This location data is typically plotted using charts and darts to deconflict air and surface fire support missions. Once fires   
13
So, how exactly would this speed up the fires approval chain through the FSCC? What if the FSC had at his or her disposal the ability to immediately know all friendly locations, accurate target location, surface danger zones, weapons engagement zones, and geometries of every weapon system on the battlefield? Think real-time Common Tactical Picture (CTP) that fuses intelligence, with the air-ground picture. Furthermore, what if the FSC was provided the optimal weapon to target match and firing agency with the best geometries and ordnance to prosecute the target? That information would exponentially speed up the fires approval process and be a game  The current state within a FSCC has the Air Officer, Fire Support Officer, mortar FO, and the FSC sucked into radios with intermittent yelling and plotting of fire mission information. Now imagine an FSCC with all the personnel mentioned above huddled around one screen. This screen provides a fusion of all sensors on station, displays full-motion video and images of the target, the location of everything known within the battlespace, and provides the optimal firing solution to engage an imminent threat or high payoff target. Concurrently, this information is sent to the firing agency and the maneuver force nearest the proposed effects. The FSC merely has to validate the information and approve the fire mission. Battle damage assessment is then recorded by sensors, cataloged, packaged, and provided to the FSCC and applicable commanders and intelligence personnel. AI would discriminate between what information is useful to whom based on billet, mission, and proximity to the target within the battlespace. A human would remain in the loop providing the ultimate approval to prosecute a target.
There is no maneuver without fires and fires only supports maneuver if timely and accurate. Fires accuracy is improved through better guidance and target location systems.
Responsive fires continue to rely on the proficiency of the FSCC, firing agencies, and reliable communications. AI integrated into the current, and future communication architecture would enhance reporting, reduce the kill chain and decision cycle, and improve situational awareness across the battlefield. This would greatly enhance the timeliness of fire support and ultimately improve the lethality of Marines executing EABO. For example, imagine a rifle company executing EABO, dispersed from its higher FSCC, with only organic weapons, but has aviation on station. This force comes into contact with an enemy armor unit, and due to lack of antiarmor capability, requires immediate fire support. The Fire Support Team Leader (FiST), with a couple of clicks on a tablet, is presented an optimal firing solution, also viewed by the company commander and FSCC, that is immediately approved and sent to the aviation platform for prosecution. This approval process should take less than a minute with additional time on the back end required, before effects on target, for the aviator to line the aircraft up within the approved final attack headings.
Although a significant proponent, the crux of the infantry lethality problem is not tied solely to fire support. The root cause of the problem is that a small force, distributed over great distances executing EABO, cannot defend themselves, at range, against enemy armor. Before we address this threat, we will first take a look at the evolution of the Marine Corps infantry arsenal, then explore its overmatch against China's armor through wargame observations of the EABO concept.
A Look at Infantry Lethality Historically, when choosing its infantry arsenal, the Marine Corps had to negotiate a balancing act between the triad of cost, portability, and firepower. The past two decades of war have done little to improve infantry firepower, with development and procurement focused on gadgets and gear to protect the warfighter conducting counterinsurgency operations. During this time, Marine aviation captured the limelight regarding cost and capability with the introduction of the MV-22, F-35B, CH-53K and performance upgrades to the H-1's. This stagnation within the infantry community is changing. The MOC has set the pace and azimuth of march towards innovation within the service and reaffirmed the primacy of combined arms and maneuver warfare.
Furthermore, the CCLTF is directed to analyze manpower, training, equipment, and doctrine to seek solutions that allow small combat formations to better exploit the operating environment by creating an overmatch against the enemy. These initiatives have shifted focus towards infantry lethality and its inherent capability gaps in the organization and firepower needed to win the future fight. Although there are ongoing weapons experimentations, due to the lack of maturation of a capable fieldable system, they will not be discussed here. Therefore, the central question is, do the current infantry weapons systems, used and battle-tested for decades, provide the maneuver company the needed firepower to fight and retain terrain against a peer competitor within the A2/AD bubble? If not, how does this lack of firepower factor into the Marine Corps strategic calculus for conducting EABO? A preliminary answer seems to exist in the available crew-served weapons (CSW) that reside within a rifle company.
Since World War I, with the introduction of the Browning automatic rifle, organic infantry firepower has centered around CSW's such as mortars, machine guns, and rockets. 
15
The rifle has not been a dominant weapon on the battlefield since the machine gun was introduced during the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05. 
16
Small formation capability gaps within the EABO construct emerge when evaluating the existing infantry arsenal in the context of a future fight that involves an infantry company operating independently with available organic firepower. Of note, Marine Corps Force (MCF) 2025 eliminates the assault section and reduces the machinegun squad from nine to eight to create structure for 15-man rifle squads. This reduction naturally reduces firepower but creates capability with the squad system operator. The solution to the firepower reduction is the reintroduction of the M4 Carl-Gustaf recoilless rifle and will be discussed later.
serve as the general-purpose machine gun within the U.S. arsenal. The M240G, similar in function and employment as the M60, was an improvement with better reliability and a more extended max effective range. The M240G provided an adjustable rate of fire with a gas plug and a spare barrel that could be rotated to avoid overheating.
The Marine Corps replaced the M240G with the M240B that allows only one gas setting, therefore, restricting the rate of fire from 550-650 rounds per minute. Classified as a medium machine gun, the M240B fires a 7.62mm round, weighs in at 25.6 pounds, and has a max effective range of 1,800 meters. The preceding nomenclature attempts to highlight the versatility and firepower of the M240B, but with an ammo can of 200 rounds weighing 16 pounds, the mobility needed by an air assault company can soon be strained. Moreover, much like the M224A1, the small caliber round provides some utility against light armored vehicles and firing final protective fires against troops in the open, but would be overmatched against a mechanized force counterattack from China's Type-59 Main Battle Tank.
The rifle company has several rocket options available for antiarmor and bunker busting firepower. Individual riflemen can employ the M72 Light Anti-Armor Weapon (LAAW) and the AT-4. Developed in the 1950s to provide the infantry a cheap and disposable antiarmor capability, the 66mm LAAW is the predecessor to the 84mm AT-4. Although the AT-4 replaced the LAAW, it was reintroduced to service during Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom due to its versatile ammunition and the lack of an armored threat. With an effective range of 200 meters and the ability to fire-from-enclosure with anti-structure ammunition the LAAW has evolved to meet the needs of the warfighter on the current battlefield but was not designed to address a peer armor threat. 
19
Within the rifle company, the CSW rocket option resides in the MK153 MOD 0 Shoulder-Launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW) carried by the assaultmen. Fielded since 1984, it was designed as a bunker buster, for use against light armored vehicles out to 500 meters, and can penetrate 21-23 inches of cold rolled homogenous steel. 
20
The M1 Carl-Gustaf originated with the Swedish Army in 1948 evolving to the M3 version used by U.S. special operation in the late 1980s. The current M4 is an 84mm recoilless rifle that weighs 15 pounds, is 39 inches long, and proclaimed to be a game-changing weapons system due to its mobility, sights, and ammunition. 
21
22
23
How will a foot mobile infantry company, with existing CSW systems, be able to bring enough firepower to the fight to seize and retain an advanced base when supporting arms are limited or denied?
In the short term, until a revolutionary weapon system is developed, infantry formations will need reliable access to a responsive fire support system that can reach back through the antiaccess bubble to pull maritime and air component fires when needed. Until this is achieved, the air assault rifle company faced with the daunting mission of seizing an advanced base will be reliant on 20th Century firepower incapable of providing both mobility and lethality against peer armor formations consisting of ZTD-05 Light Amphibious Tanks and Type-59 Main Battle Tanks.
The GCE, at the edges of the Marine Air Ground Task Force's (MAGTF) operational range, is unable to generate the combat power necessary to execute its current (or future) tactical system and win against a hybrid, near peer threat. Such operational distances result in an infantry-only GCE, lacking mobility and lethality, divorced from the combined arms system within which it is designed to operate, entirely reliant upon air and naval fires and resources. This reliance creates significant risk to mission and to force when the air and maritime domains are contested and long distances (100NM +) negatively affect turnaround times, sortie rates, and the generation of ground combat power.
To test components of the EABO concept, Marine Corps Tactics and Operations Group (MCTOG) planned and executed a wargame using a battalion-sized expeditionary force to seize an advanced base held by an enemy with the ability to reinforce with a mechanized infantry battalion. MCF 2025 force structure and capabilities were used to identify surfaces and gaps within this forces ability to execute EABO. The results of the wargame generated numerous findings, but relevant to this writing, the lack of an organic antiarmor capability for the rifle company inserted on the first wave via assault support aircraft posed a significant gap for the planning team to overcome. Due to the long-range nature of the air assault and the challenges this presented for agencies to delivery of fire support, further necessitated the need for the rifle company to own organic antiarmor and fire support capability that could provide a solution to enemy armor.
During the summer of 2017, MCTOG conducted the Future Wargaming Series (Air Assault). The purpose of the wargame was to test elements of current and future battalion level and below organizational structure and capabilities to seize an Expeditionary Advanced Base via vertical assault. 
24
One of the outcomes of the wargame was to identify shortfalls in the air assault forces weapons capability to execute this task.
During execution, the air assault force was required to rapidly seize and retain terrain,  Initially, the friendly force was able to seize the airfield but was subsequently challenged in repelling the enemy armor counterattack. It became apparent that the friendly force lacked mobility, firepower, and resiliency with organic combat support to survive and win against a mobile armor force. The inability to create a tactical advantage, even with experimental concepts, resulted in high casualties for the friendly force directly correlated to their inability to and optics managed by a C2 system that could speed up fires approval. 
28
The MOC hypothesizes that the EABO force should be able to establish a FARP and assist with sea control. In the Ellis Group wargame the EABO was successful in utilizing ACE and LCE enablers to establish revolving FARP's within two hours. Creating FARP's, up to eleven in some instances, was not difficult for the students, but determining how to sustain them proved challenging. During the scenario, a Maritime Platoon construct was created that essentially put squads and platoons on maritime footing. The Maritime Platoon utilizing MWC's could employ an asymmetric strategy to assist the Navy with sea control. This strategy involved the use of surprise, hit-and-run tactics, and ambushes to impose costs on littoral threats. 
29
Due to the lack of a CTP among all players and the long-range and max ordinate of the HIMARS, integrating clearance of fires with the aviation and maritime components was difficult.
In summation, this table-top wargame highlighted how tactical level cost imposition could be achieved, and whole of government levers pulled to maximize the lethality of the MEU executing EABO. Although not a focus, the group struggled to validate key components of EABO; specifically, how to sustain the FARP and integration of long-range missiles to facilitate the Navy with sea control. 
30
Vehicle with an autocannon that has an effective range of 2,500 meters. They also have the ZTD-05 Light Amphibious tank with a 105mm rifled gun with a range of 2,000 meters and the Type-59 Main Battle Tank with a 100mm rifled main gun that can fire out to 1,500 meters. 
31
As the reader will note, the most lethal organic antiarmor capability an EABO force has is the M4 Carl-Gustaf. With a direct fire range of 1000 meters, no top-down attack profile option, and the ability to penetrate 20 inches of armor, this system will quickly become overwhelmed against mechanized forces and does very little to aid with sea control.  ). Since ITB will soon no longer train anti-tank assaultmen to employ the SMAW, the 0351 combat instructor structure would transition to teach students this new weapons system. There would be no implications for additional personnel within an infantry squad because the 0311 rifleman that employs the AT-4 would be trained to employ this antiarmor weapon. Parallel efforts should be pursued to source an all-weather optic that is lightweight and capable of supporting the weapon at max effective range. The largest impact of this weapon is its implication for doctrine, if any, in assisting the Navy with sea control. It would be premature here to address those concerns without a fieldable system with clearly defined, tested, and validated specifications to evaluate its impacts within the maritime domain.
The MOC laid out a vision to focus the Marine Corps on the future fight while emphasizing its role as an expeditionary force in readiness capable of contributing to the Navy's mission. The EABO concept within the MOC is a large check the infantry is challenged with cashing for the MAGTF and is the origin of much wargaming and MEU testing over the last several years. What we have learned is distributed operations within a contested environment strains the reliability of existing C2 architecture and its ability to provide fires to support maneuver units. In the absence of fire support, infantry formations are severely overmatched against an enemy EABO force with armor. The root cause of this overmatch is a large portion of the current Marine Corps infantry arsenal has its genesis from needs derived from the two World
Wars. These needs were to combat German tactical infantry and armor formations. The CSW's of today do not provide the necessary penetration at the company level leaving the unit unequipped in firepower to combat future high-intensity combat. 
32
Team Comparative Analysis ..............................................................................19 Introduction
Matthew Cox, "Marines May Practice Attacking Enemy Ships from Shore in Upcoming Exercise," last modified 15 Mar
2019, https://www.military.com/daily-news/2019/03/15/marines-may-practice-attacking-enemy-ships-shoreupcoming-exercise.html 2 Headquarters US Marine Corps, (U) Concept for Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations in Support of the Navy Concept for Distributed Maritime operations and the Marine Corps Operating Concept, Washington, DC: Headquarters United States Marine Corps, March 2019.
: 
Dr. Benjamin Jensen
Dr. Nathan Packard ~~==-='----=-=-="""---------------The Expeditionary Advanced Base Operation Challenge with Marine Corps Infantry Firepower
Author: 
Major James Dee
United States Marine Corps
An air assault company capable of seizing an advanced base lacks the organic firepower needed to hold key terrain against a peer adversary. The first evidence for this claim resides in the indirect fire assets available, the 60mm mortar. The M224A1's ancestry can be traced back to the M2 60mm mortar used in World War II that had limited range and ammunition options.
The M2 eventually evolved to the M224A1 to provide increased range at a lighter weight and serves as a rifle company's primary indirect firepower. This system can be fired in conventional mode with bipods and base plate or in a handheld mode that significantly reduces accuracy. The complete mortar system weighs 35.4 pounds, but when employed in the handheld it weighs in at a mere 16.6 pounds. The M224A1 can fire at a rapid rate of 30 rounds per minute and a sustained rate of 20 rounds per minute while providing a maximum effective range of 3,500 meters. 
17
18
Although the 5.56mm Infantry Automatic Rifle (IAR) is employed by fire teams, the primary direct fire capability in a rifle company is derived from the M240 medium machinegun.
Manufactured by a different company, its lineage originates with the M60 that predates the Vietnam War. The M60 and the M240 were developed during the 1950-60s and continue to generate external fire support to cover the internal firepower gap. The wargame determined "if proposed operating concepts require greater operational reach, then the problems specifically highlighted in this wargame, and other problems indicated or implied, require solutions before the GCE and MAGTF can execute Littoral Operations in Contested Environments (LOCE) and EABO in support of a naval campaign." 27 Numerous solutions were recommended, but relevant here, a more lethal antiarmor weapon and reliable fused-fire support architecture could have significantly increased the survivability of the EABO force.
The Marine Corps Warfighting Lab (MCWL) provided the venue for students from the Command and Staff College (CSC) to test various concepts for EABO within the "contact" layer of a contested environment. Using innovative methods of force structure and capabilities to arm and insert ground units, the Blue Team was able to rapidly establish bases to receive aviation elements. The challenge for the Blue Team, without a real-time CTP among all players, was the integration and clearance of aviation and HIMARS fires to support sea control.
During the fall of 2018, the AY18-19 Gray Scholars met weekly at the MCWL and worked with the Ellis Group to test emerging technologies within the EABO construct. In part, these enabling concepts, some derived from the imagination of the students, were used to enable the EABO force to establish a FARP within the A2/AD bubble to extend the operational distance and resiliency of the MEU. This wargame differed from the MCTOG wargame in that the method of insert was not limited to an existing aviation platform and could leverage other shipto-shore connectors such as the Maritime Water Craft (MWC). These MWC's were outfitted with capabilities such as Weapon Platform (RiWP) turret, a Long-Range Precision Fires (LRPF) missile, 30mm Bushmaster Canon, and Coyote launchers. In addition, the MWC had sensors