# ID: b89e36aefc90464a9af5d5f6784a157f
# Title: Focusing America's National Powers
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2006.0
# Fulltext:
Current efforts to focus and integrate America's national powers are entwine with parochialism and a lack of coordinating, enforceable directives. The National Security Counsel (NSC) should modify its efforts to take full advantage of all sources of power to ensure national security by first establishing the NSC/Deputies Committee as the element mandated to manage the
Chapter I -Introduction I-4 of peaceful material that can be used militarily. Though this has always been the case, globalization has made it more difficult to manage dual use material. One example of this is a space-launch vehicle that can be turned into a ballistic missile; another example is the use of a commercial nuclear plant as a weapons facility. 
10
11
12
Acquiring weapons for the defense of Muslims is a religious duty. If I have indeed acquired these weapons, then I thank God for enabling me to do so. And if I seek to acquire these weapons, I am carrying out a duty. It would be a sin for Muslims not to try to possess the weapons that would prevent the infidels from inflicting harm on Muslims. 
13
Chemical and biological weapons also threaten US security. Countries, in no particular order, that are believed to have an offensive chemical capability include Egypt, Iran, Israel, Libya, Syria, China, North Korea, Taiwan, Burma, and Vietnam. 
14
War is nothing but a duel on a larger scale. Countless duels go to make up war, but a picture of it as a whole can be formed by imagining a pair of wrestlers. Each tries through physical force to compel the other to do his will; his immediate aim is to throw his opponent in order to make him incapable of further resistance. War is thus an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will. 17
The origins of most security problems are not limited to military developments, and the solutions to security problems are rarely limited to military actions. 
18
19
21
Chapter II -What is War? II-2   Greek battles between heavy infantry of the classical period and what could be termed "sport warfare." One city would form an "army" and proceed to threaten another's agricultural productivity. Upon recognizing this threat, the offended city would quickly respond "in the form of heavily armed and armored farmers filing into a suitable small plain…where brief but brutal battle resulted either in concessions granted to the army of invasion, or a humiliating, forced retreat back home for the defeated." 
22
As warfare progressed technology allowed men to become more efficient in killing each other. Theories of warfare also grew to accommodate man's willingness to kill each other in ever greater numbers. Giulio Douhet professed, "The prevailing forms of social organization have given war a character of national totality -that is, the entire population and all the resources of a nation are sucked into the maw of war." 
23
24
25
Chapter II -What is War? II-3 result was a synchronization all forces to create a significantly greater joint combat power than if each Service had been employed individually against the same enemy.
The law revised and clarified the DoD operational chain of command and JCS functions and responsibilities to provide for a more efficient use of defense resources. 
26
Prior to GWNA, no single individual or agency had overall responsibility for joint doctrine. The GWNA made the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff singularly responsible for "developing doctrine for the joint employment of the armed forces." In turn, this 1986 law generated directives that amplified these new joint doctrine responsibilities given to the Chairman.
While the Department of Defense was still grappling with these changes, Operation DESERT STORM proved GWNA had improved the responsiveness of DoD in Focusing America's National Powers Chapter II -What is War? II-4   meeting the needs of the SECDEF and President. During the march of US forces into Iraq, the systematic destruction of Saddam Hussein's integrated air defense system underlined this fact most clearly. From the opening shots fired by Army attack helicopters to the close cooperation of Navy, Marine, and Air Force jammers to mislead Iraqi radar operators, the air capabilities of the four services were closely synchronized to achieve synergistic effects. At the same time maneuver forces supported air operations by forcing the Iraqi military to move or be defeated.
In another attempt to achieve greater synergy joint doctrine has introduced "Effects Based Operations" (EBO). EBO was born from the concept of effects based targeting. It is a developing concept that attempts to fully integrate all elements of national power.
EBO is defined as using power and influence to create certain desired outcomes at the strategic, operational, or tactical levels of war. Essentially, EBO focuses on achieving desired effects in order to ultimately attain national objectives. A key factor is that the desired effects are identified first, and then the appropriate instruments, military or otherwise, are applied to achieve the desired effect. Physical destruction, or the use of the military, is not necessary to achieve the national endstate but may still be a desired effect.
The primary purpose of kinetic forces is to attempt to break the coherence of the enemy's war-making and war-fighting capability by taking actions that deny, disrupt, or destroy the his centers of gravity (COGs). According to Joint Publication (JP) 1-02, COGs are the enemy's "characteristics, capabilities, or sources of power from which a military force derives its freedom of action, physical strength, or will to fight." 
27
Chapter II -What is War?
As EBO is further refined one can see a potential trend in the future philosophy or doctrine toward employing all other elements of national power more efficiently to achieve national security and moving away from the inherent violence in war. However, as events in today's Iraq show, bloodless wars to bend the enemy's will seem to still be a long way off.
The Department of Defense (DoD) continues to force old ways of doing business into a new view of future military needs. The April 2003 DoD Transformation Planning Guidance (TPG) is essentially focused on "the fight" and better ways to utilize technology to defeat adversaries rather than embracing other sources of power. It is a myopic view of the world through a singularly DoD lens, disregarding the fact that US security depends upon many factors beyond DoD control. According to Col Hammes in The Sling and the Stone, DoD has asked, "How do we apply technology to become dominant in future wars' instead of, What will future war look like?' 'How do we recognize it as it develops?' and 'How do we respond to it?'" 
28
29
The TPG acknowledges US advantages in conventional combat but does not address how to employ the military when threatened by other means. DoD has simply looked for greater ways to leverage technology and use it more creatively to kinetically
Chapter II -What is War? II-6 defeat any adversary who decides to threaten the US in open combat. Col Hammes calls large-scale, force-on-force, combat "third generation warfare," and argues future warfare will continue in the form of "fourth generation warfare," where initially weak political movements eventually are able to defeat powerful nations. 
30
He stated that "…to win one hundred victories in one hundred battles is not the acme of skill. To subdue the enemy without fighting is the acme of skill." 
31
Defending our Nation against its enemies is the first and fundamental commitment of the Federal Government. Today, that task has changed dramatically. Enemies in the past needed great armies and great industrial capabilities to endanger America. Now, shadowy networks of individuals can bring great chaos and suffering to our shores for less than it costs to purchase a single tank. Terrorists are organized to penetrate open societies and to turn the power of modern technologies against us. 
32
33
Still, after WW II the US believed it could fall back into its old ways of isolationism. Americans believed that with an economy no longer in the grips of a major depression and the strength of a nuclear capable military, a peace dividend was possible.
The money the Defense Department used to wage war could be better spent on peaceful endeavors; and, it was. For fear of Europe's and Japan's possible move towards communism, the US was able to rebuild them due to its thriving economy. This economic strength combined with a nuclear capable military shoved the US into the leadership role as the protector of the free world.
Two superpowers emerged out of WW II -the US and Soviet Union. Eastern (or Soviet Union) ideology, communism, challenged Western (or US) ideology, democracy.
The US had what was initially thought to be a significant edge in military strength because III-2 it was the only country with nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union quickly closed this gap and detonated its first atomic bomb in 
August of 1949. 34
Given the economic and military strengths of the US, this did not seem likely. Then Mao Tze-tung's Chinese communist party overthrew China's western friendly government.
The French found themselves overwhelmed by communist supported forces in Indochina.
In 1950 communist backed North Korea attacked South Korea, also a pro-western country.
The US quickly realized that its nuclear forces could not be used against a nonnuclear capable country. First, the US only had a limited number of warheads. They were reserved for the defense of Europe against an anticipated Soviet attack through the Fulda Gap. Second, the Vietnam and Korean conflicts were not total wars. As a result, it was This national strategy of containment worked against the Soviet Union. The United States after WW II did not withdraw into isolationism as it traditionally had done after previous wars. Nor did it attempt to "roll back" Soviet power, as John Foster Dulles advocated. To a large extent, each succeeding administration after Truman's adopted a variation of Kennan's containment policy. 
36
The national security strategy (NSS) of September 2002 maintained that great struggles against great armies are no longer the greatest threat to the United States. 
37
39
40
41
1. Champion aspirations for human dignity for all people everywhere, 2. Strengthen alliances to defeat global terrorism, 3. Work with others to defuse regional conflicts, 4. Prevent the use of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), 5. Support global economic growth, 6. Expand development by opening societies, 7. Work with other centers of global power, and 8. Transform America's national security institutions. 42 9. The 2006 NSS added: "Engage the Opportunities and Confront the Challenges of Globaliztion." 
43
Gone are the days when the US could conduct surrogate wars against the Soviet Union in some far off land, such as Vietnam and Afghanistan, leaving it in ruin to fend on its own. Gone are the days when the US could topple a Soviet friendly tyrant and replace it with a pro Western tyrant. The US must support broken countries, nations, and even ideologies to prevent the growth of anti US sentiment thus preventing the germination of
Chapter III -A Strategy to Secure America's National Interests III-5 terrorism. According to the NSS, cultures, nations, and states that embrace human dignity will be freer, more just, and more tolerant. To protect its national interests the US must foster the development of lasting allies by using all sources of national power to work within a foreign culture and imbed the US's ideals "…that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness." 
44
The authors of the NSS know that the US cannot stand alone and defeat global terrorism. It must unite with like minded friends and allies to create a synergy of strength to rid the world of this evil. Together with its friends and allies, the priority is to disrupt and destroy terrorist organizations with a global reach. The NSS states that the US will use national and international power to conduct direct and continuous action against these terrorists. Additionally, to protect its way of life, the US will identify and destroy the threat before it reaches its borders. Probably most importantly, the United States Government (USG) will work with friends and allies so that terrorism is viewed in the same light as slavery, piracy, or genocide. If this gains acceptance the international community will work together against terrorism. Additionally, the global war on terrorism is a fight for democratic values and way of life. Consequently, the US will not discern a difference between a terrorist and one who aids terrorists. The two are one in the same.
The US and those who support America will deal with both in the same manner. 
46
The US must concentrate efforts to defuse regional conflicts if it is to protect its own interests. By doing so, it will avoid "explosive escalations and minimize human suffering," 47 both of which can strain relations the US has with regional and global allies.
Regional conflicts can "rekindle rivalries and create horrifying affronts to human dignity." 
48
Rogue states, undeterrables, terrorist organization, Muslim extremists, and nonstate powers who hate the West and everything it stands for would love to obtain WMD.
Their efforts on 9/11 demonstrate they will use WMD if and when they obtain this capability. These groups have a smaller stake in global stability. They lack traditional instruments of state power and therefore seek unconventional weapons such as WMD to compensate. Due to the fact that they are weaker in terms of military or economic might, they are less susceptible to traditional deterrence methods, which in turn support their efforts to develop unconventional arsenals. 
50
given the actions they have taken against their own people and their support for global terrorism, tens of thousands of people could die if any type of WMD is acquired.
Chapter III -A Strategy to Secure America's National Interests
Consequently, the US must be prepared to stop these "rogue states and their terrorist clients before they are able to threaten or use weapons of mass destruction…" 51 through proactive counter-proliferation efforts, strengthened nonproliferation efforts, and effective consequence management. The US cannot afford to react after the fact. WMD are too great a threat to wait for their use and then react. The US must take preemptive action to counter a WMD threat. It must do so by building better intelligence capabilities, coordinating closely with allies and transforming the military to ensure rapid, precise, and decisive results. 52
An economy based on free trade and an unencumbered market is "the best way to promote prosperity and reduce poverty." 
53
As stated in number 2 above, the US cannot go it alone. It does not have the money, the forces, or at times the staying power. Together with coalitions, free nations throughout the world can benefit from this same strategy. The US will do all it can to strengthen its relationship with its close allies such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, and Europe. Additionally, this NSS calls for cooperative trading and defense institutions such as NATO and ASEAN to strengthen themselves so as to play a larger role Focusing America's National Powers Chapter III -A Strategy to Secure America's National Interests III-9   in self-and collective-defense. Finally, the US will cultivate its relationships with potential great powers such as Russia, China, and India to benefit in trade, security cooperation, and other overlapping interests such as this war on terrorism. The US knows that its security is strengthened through coalitions of the willing. It also knows that it "must develop active agendas of cooperation lest these relationships become routine and unproductive." 57
The world has changed since the fall of the Soviet bloc. If the US continues to prepare for the last war, it will not be prepared for the next. It must transform to meet the current threat. In particular, the US military must transform so that it can "…defend the homeland, conduct information operations, ensure US access to distant theaters, and protect critical US infrastructure and assets in outer space." 
58
Chapter III -A Strategy to Secure America's National Interests
The enemy has changed. The US now faces adversaries such as terrorists, rogue states, undeterrables, non-state actors, and religious extremists. The NSS works to unite and transform not just the military, but also all elements of national power to focus against the current threat. In an effort to apply America's national sources of power the NSS calls for efforts to shape the environment to prevent emerging threats. It does this by emphasizing the protection of human dignity, strengthening alliances, defusing regional conflicts, preventing the use of WMD, supporting global economic growth, opening societies, and working with other centers of global power. Finally, the NSS calls for the transformation of America's national security institutions such as the IC, DoD, and DoS.
The military source of national power needs to be deemphasized to allow diplomatic, informational, and economic sources of power to be more effective. The US cannot afford to wait until things go bad before using all of its powers in a synergistic way to protect its security. Given today's undeterrables, it must use all means possible to avoid being attacked. It is more cost effective to prevent a war than it is to carry it out and then rebuild. To do all of this, the diplomatic, informational, and economic sources of power must be empowered to work alongside as an equal partner with the military.
In the quote above Clausewitz identifies a nation's tools to persuade another.
These tools are commonly referred to today as a nation's sources of power. He states that war is a paradoxical trinity and the first of these -violence, hatred, and enmity -concerns itself with the people of a nation. The second -chance and probability -is the domain of the commander and his army or the military. The third -subordination as a policy -is developed and pursued by the government. 
61
In an effort to impose one nation's will over another, all sources of power must be maximized in order to achieve the desired ends, which is national security. In the past, a nation's powers have been identified as residing in diplomacy, informational, military, and
Chapter IV -National Powers IV-2 economic, 63 commonly referred to as DIME. When properly synchronized, DIME will utilize all other sources of power the nation has (see Figure 
IV-1
64
Another source of power a nation wields is its culture. Culture, as a tool, is intangible.
However, once a nation or state assumes a culture similar to that of another, the two become more alike and often interdependent. As a result, their differences would be minimal and war would generally be counterproductive.
By far, the most important and most influential source of power is economic. A state's economic capability is directly related to its ability to produce -for example, a profit, an infrastructure, or a military. A state's goals, to include security, are largely met based upon its economic capability. Armies are built, alliances are developed, and cooperation is facilitated based upon the ability of a state convert its resources to needed goods and services, for example oil to energy, fertile ground to crops, and armies to defense. States that lack resources or the ability to convert them often do one of two things -cooperate with other nations or go to war to obtain them.
Chapter IV -National Powers IV-3 It is, ultimately, access to the world's scarce resources and the ability to obtain them -food, energy, and minerals -that determines a state's economic strength. Nations and states have gone to war to increase their economic base. Germany and Japan attacked nations during World War II to obtain vital resources. In 1990, Iraq, through the use of force, annexed Kuwait and gained control of its oil. The United States feared that Iraq, with its fourth largest military in the world, would expand beyond Kuwait and, as a result, control much of the oil in the Middle East. As a result, the US initiated Operation Desert Storm and, with over 500,000 forces, defeated Iraq's army, pushing it out of Kuwait back into Iraq. 
66
Chapter IV -National Powers IV-4 ability to defend its interests either through direct economic actions or the augmentation of another national power. A state's direct economic capability as an instrument of national power can be utilized as either a carrot or a stick. In either case it is crucial to the force planner and strategist to incorporate this source of power within security strategies and campaign plans. In doing so, a state can sway a potential advisory or gain access to scarce resources through aid, trade, or investment. For example, according to the September 2002 NSS, the United States, in an effort to secure its national interests, intends to "ignite a new era of global economic growth through free markets and free trade." 
67
68
69
70
There are, however, several issues that make the use of economic sanctions more difficult. For one, it is dealt out based on the needs of the sanctioning state and not
Chapter IV -National Powers IV-5 necessarily based on an infraction. For example, the US withheld MFN status from the Soviet Union and enforced strict controls on exports with the potential for military use.
On the other hand, it did not impose any sanctions on Japan for unfair trade policies. 
71
73
Still another perceived issue is that sanctions hurt the sanctioning and supporting states' economy as well, especially in today's globalized market. A state that cannot trade loses access to outside services and scarce resources. Corporations and markets, as a result of globalization, are becoming intertwined. The international economy and the political environment it supports are becoming mutually dependent. Globalization is the
Chapter IV -National Powers IV-6 "process of creating worldwide, interdependent markets operating with little regard for state boundaries or the traditional understanding of sovereignty." 
74
There are several reasons why globalization has created interdependent markets.
The first of these is states have significantly increased their international trade. As a result they "feel the effect of the international system much more heavily than they did forty years ago." 75 A trading partner whose economy has moved in a large way up or down can significantly impact the global market, especially if its trade is in scarce resources such as oil.
Another cause of interdependency is that there is an increase in capital flow. The financial systems today, due to the fact that money can be transferred instantaneously with the stroke of a computer key, often hinge on the stability of another state's system. The larger economies will have a greater impact on smaller ones as markets fluctuate up or down. For example, if the US's economy falls, the world could be pushed into a depression. If Indonesia's economy collapses, then a company like the Nike Corporation may have to move money to India to increase shoe production that Indonesia can no longer sustain. The result is a large amount of capital withdrawn from or infused into a country can either strengthen or weaken its economy in a short period of time.
A third reason globalization has increased interdependency deals with economic production. No longer is an entire product researched, engineered, developed, produced, and assembled in one country. International trade today is "not merely the exchange of one nation's products for another's but the exchange of products representing work done in ten, twenty or even thirty countries." 76 A car cannot be looked at as German, British, or
Chapter IV -National Powers IV-7 American. In fact, parts are produced in dozens of countries and assembled under one company name, which may or may not be where it is headquartered.
A final reason for interdependency is in the area of policies and procedures. States are beginning to bind together to determine how intellectual property, patent laws, or environmental norms will be enforced. 
77
78
When nations relate with other nations there is give and take. The greater a need the greater one gives or takes. This can often lead to antagonistic, short-or long-term, situations. It is the diplomat who attempts to mitigate antagonism and still bend the other nation's will to meet his nation's needs.
There are several views as to what is meant by diplomacy. One perspective is that it is the "peaceful conduct of relations among political entities." 
79
Chapter IV -National Powers
Instant global communications have given non-political entities the ability to interact with the people of other nations as well as other nation's organizations. Examples of these are groups such as Doctors Without Borders, the International Red Cross, and Greenpeace, not to mention organizations that promote terrorism. Diplomacy today is not just relationships between governments and government agencies. A better definition of diplomacy would be "all those elements of national power which peaceably advance and defend one's national interests." 80 Additionally, diplomacy does not just include diplomatic professionals, but also all the other governmental, non-governmental, and private officials. 
81
82
Government-to-public is an effort at winning the hearts and minds of the people of a nation, state, or non-state entity through non-coercive methods. This will hopefully prevent the requirement for military action. Or, if military action must take place, the road to stability will be much shorter if public diplomacy is effectively used. It is this difficult task that all diplomats, governmental or otherwise, should strive to achieve at all costs.
Chapter IV -National Powers
For one, it is more cost effective to persuade than to destroy and rebuild. If non-coercive methods fail, lives lost can never be recovered. Finally, if this effort fails, years and often centuries can be filled with conquest, violence, destruction, terrorism, and an untold loss of life as has been witnessed to this day between democratic and communist nations, Protestants and Catholics, Jews and Muslims, and Christians and Muslims. Public diplomacy, or communicating directly with a foreign nation's public, is a key governmentto-public mission that will peacefully bend others to American's will. This should be an ongoing mission, prior, during, and after any coercive activity.
Another form of diplomacy outside of the professional diplomat arena, is militaryto-government. There are military attachés assigned to embassies assisting foreign nations and armies to understand the US military. Additionally, DoD is providing military assistance with training, military sales, and, of course, traditional military operations such as self defense, peacekeeping, and peacemaking. Also outside of the State Department are federal agencies such as the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Commerce, and the Central Intelligence Agency. 
83
84
Information is defined as knowledge, data, or facts. 
86
87
During war, information management or IO (information Operation) at the operational level and below is just as crucial. IO's primary purpose involves the "actions taken to affect adversary information and information systems while defending one's own information and information systems." 
88
89
Chapter IV -National Powers
This truly impacts the entire civil/military command and staff. IO targets include, but are not limited to civilian, military, social, and cultural leadership; civil infrastructure; military infrastructure; and weapons systems. Key to information operations is what should or can be presented. The United States and its western friends and allies operate within a specified set of rules. Within these rules it is expected that they tell the truth, if necessary, to the detriment of operations, rather than to lie about a topic to gain an advantage or even to protect forces. Often times the enemy, especially insurgents and terrorists do not have to abide by these same rules. As a result, the enemy can present untruths via the media, word of mouth through the internet and email, and through general operations that can significantly impact operations from the tactical level of war to the national strategic level. In order to win the information battle these perceptions need to be nullified by well planned and executed information operations by commanders at all levels, focused on defeating the enemy's centers of gravity and protecting friendly centers of gravity.
Chapter IV -National Powers IV-13   This is not to say that deception or propaganda is not permitted. Deception is defined by JP 1-02 as "those measures designed to mislead the enemy by manipulation, distortion, or falsification of evidence to induce the enemy to react in a manner prejudicial to the enemy's interests." 90 Propaganda is "any form of communication in support of national objectives designed to influence the opinions, emotions, attitudes, or behavior of any group in order to benefit the sponsor, either directly or indirectly." 91 These types of operations should be thoroughly planned, wargamed, and executed. However, should the US or its partners be caught conducting these types of operations, the media as shown that it will use it against them. The use of deception, propaganda, or untruths needs to be justified and incorporated within operations in order to mitigate media manipulation.
The protection of friendly information, the exploitation of enemy information, and the guiding of national and international perceptions, when properly used, is a very important source of power. The lack of a well conceived and implemented information campaign plan can lose wars and negatively impact national security. A good information campaign plan can significantly increase the chances of winning wars and protecting national security (see Figure 
IV-2
Chapter IV -National Powers IV-14 If a state acts independently, regardless of who it affects that nation will most likely have little international support in its endeavors. Perception is reality and reality is based upon information obtained on a particular subject.
The main purpose of the military is to fight and win any war the state requires of it.
The US Department of Defense through the National Military Strategy (NMS) gives strategic direction to the military. It identifies the overarching military objectives which in turn determine capabilities needed to achieve the objectives. In other words, the NMS in a broad way identifies the requirements needed to achieve the ways and means to protect the US. It is guided by the President's National Security Strategy (NSS) and it implements the Secretary of Defense's National Defense Strategy (NDS).
Chapter IV -National Powers
During the Cold War the pervasive threat against the United States was the Soviet Union. It was envisioned that war with the Soviet Union would be fought force-on-force in a high intensity environment with a good probability that nuclear weapons would be used. This war would have most likely taken place in Western Europe. However, it did not happen and the Cold War ended with the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991. Since that time a wider range of adversaries has emerged. According to the NMS, the current types of threats the US may face are:
• Traditional. These are threats posed by states employing recognized military capabilities and forces in well-understood forms of military competition and conflict. • Irregular. Threats from those employing "unconventional" methods to counter the traditional advantages of stronger opponents. • Catastrophic. Threats involving the acquisition, possession, and use of WMD or methods producing WMD-like effects (referred to as WMD/E). • Disruptive. Threats coming from adversaries who develop and use breakthrough technologies to negate current US advantages in key operational domains. 
93
94
Chapter IV -National Powers
warfare -strategic, operational, and tactical. A second consideration is that the COCOM must develop plans to achieve the objectives simultaneously. Lastly, the COCOM must not assume that a well developed defense will deter all threats and achieve the national objectives. This requires the COCOM to have "a posture of anticipatory self-defense, which reflects the need for prepared and proportional responses to imminent aggression." 
95
96
A campaign plan is a six-phased process. Many of these phases may be conducted concurrently. The six phases of a campaign plan are as follows:
• Phase 0 -Shape, prevent, prepare
The military should not be the sole source of power to achieve any one or all of these phases. All of America's sources of power would work better as a team and therefore should be utilized to the fullest to protect the US against aggression, prevent conflicts or surprise attacks, and prevail against any aggressor. Other sources of power sould lead a particular phase while the military conducts a supporting role. Additionally, Phase 0 should be a continuous effort, conducted regardless of which other phases have been implemented or are ongoing.
******
Chapter IV -National Powers
In the National Strategy for Combating Terrorism, additional sources of national power are law enforcement, financial, and intelligence. 99
Terrorism has become a primary threat against the security of the US. Add to this transnational crime such as narcotics, money laundering, economic espionage, and the trafficking of weapons of mass destruction. As such, the lines between criminal behavior and terrorism and the lines between domestic and international threats are blurring.
Within the US law enforcement is the frontline of defense. Officers "walk the beat" twenty-four hours a day; seven days a week. Consequently, they are a key source of power in the protection of national security. Though, historically, it has been investigative and prosecutorial in nature, law enforcement agencies are moving towards prevention.
Initiatives such as the Counterterrorist Center (1986), National Drug Intelligence Center Key to all of this is that law enforcement has been set up to protect the freedoms Americans have determined to be the rights of all mankind. Unfortunately, these freedoms are impediments in preventing terrorist acts. Brent Scowcroft, former National Security Adviser, once said, "The safest place in the world for a terrorist to be is inside the United States…As long as [terrorists] don't do something that trips them up against our laws, they can do pretty much all they want." 
102
Law enforcement needs support national security without the US losing its identity as the strongest and freest nation in the world.
Chapter IV -National Powers
Finance by definition means (1) "control of the money" and (2) "the money necessary to do something, especially a project." 103 As a source of power financial processes fund the United States with the money to purchase all that it needs, from governing to peaceful endeavors to war making. It also allows nongovernmental organizations to exert the influence they want to apply to foreign countries, foreign organizations, and domestic governments and organizations. Without finance nothing happens.
Also, the more money a government has, the more it can directly influence foreign governments. During the past fifty years the US has spent trillions of dollars on foreign aid alone. 
104
Additionally, there is a cycle that finance contributes to. It gives individuals the ability to purchase goods and services they otherwise would not be able to if they could only buy with money on hand. This fuels the economy by creating a greater demand.
Greater demands increase production and service. The increase in production and service creates a requirement for more jobs. This creates more people with the finances to purchase more goods and services. Ultimately, this procedure of financing for goods and services increase the wealth of the nation.
The more people, companies, and the government spend the stronger the economy becomes. A strong economy allows the government to purchase a mightier army, a greater diplomatic force, and more information gathering tools. Indeed, the more money a government has the greater it can add to its arsenal of sources of power. Intelligence identifies gaps in available information about the environment and the opposing forces, government, or industry and uses intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (IRS) resources to fill those gaps and reduce uncertainty and risk to US decision makers. Intelligence reduces uncertainty, but it cannot eliminate it entirely.
Additionally, the Intelligence Community (IC) has finite resources and capabilities.
Consequently, in the probable event that the IC cannot obtain the exact information needed, it looks for indications and warnings that are unique to the type of information needed. For example, if the President needs to know if Iran is producing nuclear weapons, the IC may not be able to obtain a nuclear warhead with made in Iran on it. The IC would then look for nuclear weapons grade materials needed to develop the weapon that is being bought by and sold and shipped to Iran. The transfer of funds, selling, and the shipment of weapons grade material are all indicators that Iran may be producing nuclear weapons.
With this information in hand, the President can then apply national sources of power against Iran to conform to his will.
whether or not to act upon the obtained information. If so, with what powers (diplomatically, militarily, economically, etc.) and when and where will action be taken.
Intelligence is the driving force behind campaigns. Without it justification for action is limited. Frederick the Great said, "One should know one's enemies, their alliances, their resources and nature of their country, in order to plan a campaign." 106
Clausewitz introduced his theory of the paradoxical trinity of violence, hatred, and enmity in his book "On War." Violence referred to the people of a nation or state.
Inherent in the people must be the passion for war or, like a missing leg of a three-legged
Chapter IV -National Powers IV-22 stool, the nation at war will fall. Clausewitz further states that when developing war plans this paradoxical trinity must be taken into account -the armed forces, the country, and the enemy's will. Of these, the armed forces may be destroyed and the country occupied however, war cannot be "considered to have ended so long as the enemy's will has not been broken." 
107
To subjugate the American military even more so than in many other countries, "the Armed Forces of the United States operate in a democratic political context that enables the American people to express their views and preferences about the employment of military forces." 
108
Probably the most powerful offensive source of power takes the form of culture-toculture. US culture is reaching out to all corners of the globe via tourism, corporate embrace American ideals and culture and adopt them as their own, intolerance and war will be minimized.
America's national powers are plentiful. They include the traditional diplomatic, informational, military, and economic sources, otherwise known as DIME. However, as addressed above, sources of power lie elsewhere as well, in nontraditional sources such as law enforcement. The war on terrorism has caused law enforcement to become more and more relied upon as the lines between criminal activities and war blend together. Finance provides the money for a stronger government and nongovernmental organizations.
Finally, the cultural source of power is the most influential of them all. If a nation or state adopts a similar culture to that of the United States, that is self-governing with a market economy, wars will be fought via trade rather than with armies. Until this happens, though, the US must focus and synchronize all of its sources of power to achieve the same objective -protecting the security its people and their way of life. 
V-1
National security includes the defense of the US of America, protection of our constitutional system of government, and the advancement of US interests around the globe.
The ability of the United States to influence events to its advantage worldwide depends in large measure on the will of its citizenry, the vitality of its societal institutions, the strength of its relations with like-minded multinational partners, and the effectiveness of the Government in employing the instruments of national power. 
114
The President Eisenhower (1953-1961) established the position of Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, which still exists. 
117
The board was chaired by the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs. Its purpose was "to gather the policy views of each of the key cabinet departments on critical issues," 118 review the issues, and identify points of disagreement.
Chapter V -Current Interagency Security Process
These points were not to be watered down, but spelled out for debate by the NSC and resolved by the President. 
119
Additionally, seldom does any Principal's original position survive the entire process;
most issues belong to the Department of State or the Central Intelligence Agency; and, politics does not drive decisions. Also, the NSC meets to determine the direction the US needs to take on a particular issue. Once a direction is determined, responsibility is assigned to a principal member to resolve. USJFCOM has subsequently proposed that the JIACG's scope be increased to "integrate campaign planning efforts at the strategic and operational levels and throughout all US government agencies." 133 It will be lead by a senior executive service or equivalent and integrated into the planning and operations section of the combatant commander's staff. 
134
135
136
• Participate in theater strategic engagement, deliberate, crisis action, transition, and reconstruction planning and operations.
Chapter V -Current Interagency Security Process
V-8
• Inform the combatant commander and the joint task force of civilian agency campaign planning, sensitivities, and support requirements, capabilities, and limitations. • Inform civilian agencies of the combatant commander's and the joint task force's operational requirements, concerns, capabilities, and limitations. 
137
• Replace any civilian agency staff officer currently assigned to the combatant commander's staff or bypass any existing civilian agency lines of authority and communications. • Provide civilian agency concurrence to internal Department of Defense staffing actions. • Interfere with existing memorandums of understanding and agreedpractices for requests for assistance and other formalized interagency request processes. • Challenge or replace the statutory and presidential-directed relationships for developing, implementing, or executing US national security and foreign policy. 138
Integration of security at the national level is a process directed by the President of the United States. It varies from administration to administration based upon the President's needs, policies, and desired operational design. The National Security Council System is the tool the President uses to focus America's national powers. Today it primarily addresses long-term issues such as Chinese expansionism, the North Korean threat to South Korea, and the Iranian nuclear program. Issues that require direct action are generally assigned to a US agency or department to resolve. As a result, problems are often stovepipped and, as a result, the process does not effectively synchronize all sources of national power.
At the strategic and operational level of policy implementation, the NSC directed that combatant commanders implement the JIACG concept to integrate national powers. 139
Chapter V -Current Interagency Security Process
This advisory element encourages habitual collaboration to ensure interagency understanding. Additionally, the JIACG is to integrate campaign planning throughout all US government agencies. The bottom line is that the JIACG is an advisory element and is not directive in nature. It will not bypass any existing civilian agency lines. 
140
Current efforts to focus and integrate America's national powers are wrought with parochialism and a lack of coordinating, enforceable directives. They have dissimilar, and "sometimes conflicting goals, policies, procedures, and decision-making techniques, which make unity of effort a challenge." 143 When asked how healthy the interagency process was a senior general in the Army stated that it was in need of major surgery.
Another senior officer, also requesting to remain anonymous, essentially stated that nothing in the process is accurate and that there were no policies that direct how to conduct the interagency process.
America has a poor history of coordinating its actions, integrating its strategies, and synchronizing policy. 
144
Another way of saying this is that the ends, means, and ways for protecting America's way of life should not be developed individually by each of the country's national powers. Likewise, Congress should fund involvement in national security issues beyond day-to-day operations conducted by each source of power. The ways or tools may be different for each source of power, but the funding should be available to obtain the tools needed to achieve the common endstate established in the NSS. Additionally, each source of power should develop a national strategy which states not only how it will support the NSS, but also how it will be synchronized and nested with all other sources of power. For example, the DoS should have a similar strategy as DoD's National Defense Strategy; and, they should be nested. The NSC should review and comment on these agency or department strategies to ensure they fulfill the needs of the NSS.
Currently, according to General Goodall, retired US Air Force, the NSS does apply to other government agencies. However, application of it beyond DoD "receives little or no visibility in budget priorities, and therefore, the resource allocation process. This in turn results in little or no effort in budget execution." 146 Finally, this unifying element for policy, budgeting, and planning should have the authority to tell the government's various
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating VI-3 agencies to get the job done. The agencies should not be able to choose to cooperate or not when it comes to national security matters.
The NSC should be responsible for synchronizing national powers through a The NIACG would be the lead for developing the interagency ends and ways.
Additionally, the NIACG would provide legislative and budgetary recommendations/ solutions to the President through the NSC/PC where shortfalls appear. They would review agency strategies for feasibility and compliance with the NSS. Additionally, the NIACG would be responsible for ensuring that national powers are synchronized within campaign plans. To do this they would develop doctrine similar to JP 5-00.1. It could be called the Interagency Publication 5-00.1, Interagency Doctrine for Campaign Planning.
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating
The six-phased campaign plan should be a civil-political-military (civil-pol-mil)
plan. It would be the tool to focus, nest, and synchronize US powers for complex contingency operations. Currently, according to Joint Publication 1-02, a campaign plan is a "series of related military operations aimed at accomplishing a strategic or operational objective within a given time and space." 148 It should be redefined to a series of related operations utilizing national powers to accomplish a strategic or operational objective within a given time and space. The campaign plan should not be a tool solely used by the Department of Defense. Nor should it be viewed as a product to be refined and implemented once a crisis has developed. It should be implemented immediately upon approval so that Phase 0, Shaping, follows a preplanned design. Like DoD's adaptive planning process, it should be routinely reviewed for currency.
No one source of power should be proponent for the entire campaign. The responsibility for each phase should be as follows: Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating
From Joint Publication 1 149
The NIACG would identify the need for a civil-pol-mil campaign plan to be written by the regional level element. It would then review all of these plans for feasibility, accuracy, and supportability. They would ensure that all appropriate sources of power were included in the development of the plan. Plans with major shortfalls would be returned to the regional interagency element for correction. Minor issues would be noted and forwarded to the PC for final approval and funding recommendations. Issues that remain after the regional element has reworked the plan would be addressed by the NSC/PC; the NSC/DC would resolve issues the NSC/PC could not. The NSC/DC would approve and endorse all civil-pol-mil campaign plans and return them to the regional interagency element for implementation.
At the regional level the NSC/DC has approved the implementation of a Joint Interagency Coordination Group (JIACG) as part of the combatant commander's staff. Its principal duties are to synchronize the counter terrorism effort. As stated in Chapter 5, USJFCOM has proposed that the JIACG's scope be increased to "integrate campaign
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating VI-6 planning efforts at the strategic and operational levels and throughout all US government agencies." 150 According to USJFCOM, they would be responsible for formulating, articulating, advocating, and implementing "the combatant commander's policies, priorities, programs, and procedures for interagency engagement." 151 This is too myopic in scope. There should be a JIACG at the combatant command or regional level, however, not as part of the COCOM staff. The JIACG should be a subordinate element of the NSC so that neither one source of power (in this case, the Military) nor one particular phase of the campaign plan (in this case, Phase III, Conflict Domination) becomes overriding and receives greater emphasis over all other phases. The JIACG's primary duties should be to synchronize and nest of all sources of power by developing campaign plans to meet NIACG endstates.
USJFCOM has recommended that the JIACG be managed by an SES and staffed by twelve people with strong interagency backgrounds. This is insufficient. It should be staffed and alternately lead by people from DoD and DoS. The staff should be organized similar to the way General Eisenhower organized his staff during World War II, which is to say that if there is a DoD person in charge, there must be a DoS person as the deputy and vice versa if somebody from DoS is the lead. The personnel would not be permanently stationed within the JIACG, but rotated as DoD and DoS currently rotate their personnel. The purpose of these requirements is to ensure that the JIACG is manned by personnel who have a vested interest in their parent agency and that the parent agency has a vested interest in the success of JIACG.
Additionally, there needs to be a means to ensure that interagency thinkers and planners are not punished for working outside of their parent organization. Interagency
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating VI-7 planners should be rewarded and promoted equally with their State, Joint, and Service brethren. Beyond DoS and DoD, all other sources of nation power would have positions within the JIACG's plans section. They may be temporary or permanent positions, depending on regional needs.
As stated in chapter V, there are no directives or procedures that direct unity of effort across the agencies at the strategic or operational levels. The National Interagency
Coordination Group should ensure that these directives are developed for implementation by all sources of power, NSC and below. Currently, DoD joint publications espouse doctrine which integrates all national powers. For example, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Henry H. Shelton in his introduction of JP 3-0, Doctrine for Joint Operations, states that the "overarching concepts and principles contained in this publication provide a common perspective from which to plan and execute joint, interagency, and multinational operations." 152 Unfortunately, the publication further states that the "Doctrine and guidance established in this publication apply to the commanders of combatant commands, subunified commands, joint task forces, and subordinate components of these commands." 153 Joint publications are DoD documents and apply only to the military at the combatant command level and below.
The Department of State needs to establish regional authorities similar to the COCOMs, less NORTHCOM. This would aline DoS with DoD and would support a seamless operational planning process. These regional authorities would be able to speak for and commit DoS to regional or operational campaign plans. Of course, the NSC through the NIACG approves these plans. Once a campaign plan is approved, it should
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating VI-8 become the mandate of all appropriate sources of power to fund and support.
Additionally, Phase 0 should be implemented upon approval.
According to the US Joint Forces Command Fact Sheet "Joint Interagency Coordination Group (JIACG)," the JIACG is to address the gap that lies between the civilian and military campaign planning processes. 
154
• Participate in theater strategic engagement, deliberate, crisis action, transition, and reconstruction planning and operations.
• Participate in regional exercises to validate the feasibility, acceptability, and suitability of established campaign plans.
• Participate in regional exercises to train or maintain the expertise to support established campaign plans.
• Require the combatant commander's planning staff to wear two hats -one as JIACG planners and the other as COCOM planners.
• Require the regional DoS planning staff to wear two hats -one as JIACG planners and the other as DoS planners.
• Inform the combatant commander of operational requirements, concerns, civilian sensitivities, support requirements, and capabilities and limitations.
• Inform the regional DoS authority and other interagency partners of operational requirements, concerns, military sensitivities, support requirements, and capabilities and limitations.
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating VI-9
• Develop regional/operational campaign plans to meet NIACG established endstates.
• Require DoS and DoD personnel to assume the lead in planning assigned phases of the campaign plan.
• Establish memorandums of understanding for requests for assistance between agencies.
The JIACG will not infringe on the combatant commander's responsibilities, nor will it supersede current civilian authorities. To that end, the JIACG would not:
• Replace any civilian agency staff officer currently assigned to the combatant commander's staff or bypass any existing civilian agency lines of authority and communications.
• Provide civilian agency concurrence to internal Department of Defense staffing actions.
• Provide concurrence to internal Department of State staffing actions.
• Challenge or replace the statutory and presidential-directed relationships for developing, implementing, or executing US national security and foreign policy.
• Preclude COCOM or DoS operational planning beyond that required by the NSS, NDS, or NIACG.
Focusing America's national powers will come at some cost. For one, it may put a non-elected person into a potentially very powerful position. One person, with all of this authority, may abuse it and put the United States more in harms way than with the current process. Another issue is that this will come at a higher cost to the taxpayer. Congress
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating VI-10 will have to find a way to significantly increase the capability of DoS and other sources of power. Unless they cut spending for the Department of Defense to fund others, programs outside of national security will have to be reduced. If DoD is cut, will the military still be able to succeed against the most dangerous scenario against the US -total warfare with a country like China? Is the US willing to reduce the "M" in DIME in favor of policy that aims to prevent all warfare? Another possible risk is that this may increase the overall bureaucracy by adding another layer of government and make the national security even less efficient.
These issues, and most likely several others, must be addressed before the implementation of this "new way of operating." However, they are a small price to pay for an even greater return on national security. In the end, the more nations and states that embrace human dignity, self-governing democratic institutions, and market economies the less likely the military will be the power of choice to impose another's will. An interdependent secure world of nations and states will have evolved whose people will be created equal and endowed with certain unalienable rights; among them would be life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
Change will not happen quickly. It will take longer, or might not happen at all, if it is forced or the culture is non-receptive. On a wall of the library at the Joint Forces Staff
College is a quote from then Gen Dwight D. Eisenhower: "Separate ground, sea, and air warfare is gone forever. If ever again we should be involved in war, we will fight it in all elements, with all services, as one single concentrated effort." Yet this single concentrated, joint effort is still not as instinctive in the US military as combined arms
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating VI-11   operations is at integrating artillery, armor, engineering, etc into plans and operations within Army and Marine Corps planning. Interagency synchronization needs to be as instinctive as combined arms operations. To get there, interagency, along with joint, combined, and coalition synchronization should be marketed, sold, and accepted as the required methods for planning the employment of all national powers as its doctrine is developed and implemented. DoD, seeing at least the need for interagency cooperation, has attempted to force the process by placing it into military doctrine. For example, JP 3-0 states that the "intrinsic nature of interagency coordination demands that commanders and joint force planners consider all instruments of national power and recognize which agencies are best qualified to employ these elements toward the objective." 
155
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating
The following are a few additional concerns that need to be addressed to fully synchronize and nest national powers: to (i.e., "go native" in) the country of assignment rather than to assume a DoD character. 
157
On the military side, arrogance, probably wanted and needed, permeates DoD.
The military believes it can do anything it sets its mind to do. This should change at least at the operational and strategic level so the military integrally believes it can do anything kinetic and needs the other sources of power to achieve the national endstate. During a briefing by a DoS official to an audience that was predominantly DoD officers from major to colonel it was suggested by a civilian audience member that the endstate of DoS was the same as DoD's. There were several voices from the military officers indicating that this was not true. This needs to change. In fact, according to the briefer, State and DoD seek the same endstate abroad, namely stable democratic partners who are allies advancing common interests.
If sources of power are not united, they may work against each other, work in opposite directions, or conduct redundant operations squandering limited resources.
Within DoD planning is a sought after skill. Planning drives the process -from force structure to employment of capabilities to national security strategies. However, the approach DoD often takes is to "treat warfare as a near autonomous activity, all but separate from its political purposes and consequences it is applied within DoD, would not necessarily be directive in nature. Evolution and transformation will infuse new processes, which will change or modify doctrine.
The third subject which should be addressed is planning. A common planning process establishes a means to identify all required actions and all required supporting actions it takes to meet an objective. The planning process will ensure that nothing is overlooked to include Department capabilities and limitations and opposing capabilities.
Gaps in capabilities can be filled by higher or accepted as risks. Finally, most plans will not survive much longer after implementation. But, they are a means to focus on an agreed upon endstate, identify gaps in resources and intelligence, and a point that can be deviated from as long as all involved understand the purpose that must be achieved.
The 
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating
Since civilians embedded within a large portion of America's national powers and government they should be required sign a contract prior to employment with a government agency which states that they will, if requested, deploy to hazardous duty stations. Those who deploy should be given all the honors, rights, and protection military service members receive as a result of deployments -tax-free pay, recognition for support of the country, access to DoD facilities, etc. Additionally, prior to employment they should be made fully aware of oath taking to serve the nation, and that this means that they will selflessly work to ensure that the national security requirements established by the leaders appointed above them are met to the fullest of their capability. This could and would if required mean deployment to hostile zones. Also, leaders must understand be held responsible for the lives of those appointed below them and that negligent actions will be held against them.
Lieutenant Colonel Frank Hoffman, USMCR (ret.), Research Fellow at the Center for Emerging Threats and Opportunities, describes the US as a one-armed Cyclops. By this he means that the military source of power "has been developed, resourced, and honed at the expense of other elements of national power." 166 As a result, the US is assuming risk in its ability to synchronize and use to their fullest extent all other sources of power.
Consequently, for the US, when issues become too difficult, or seemingly out of control, the power of choice to persuade or shape the issue at hand is the military. This projects a bullish or brutish image to the rest of the world. The US must empower its other strengths
Chapter VI -A New Way of Operating VI-19 not just to be better received, but to obtain a synergistic effect of all powers. The US must only use its military strength when all other options have failed.
Funding is another area the US has taken on a large risk. If an issue is not foreseen, monies are not readily available within DoS. According to a briefing presented by a DoS official to the Joint Forces Staff College, State has very little in the way of contingency funds, either at the embassies or in Washington. Sate must go to Congress for approval for additional funds when needed. This process can easily take more than 18 months because of the budget cycle. A lot can happen in two years. Funds are available for the military should an unforeseeable issue arise. Contingency funds need to be available to DoS so they can quickly address a difficult issue and hopefully prevent it from escalating to a military issue.
As stated earlier, current efforts to focus and integrate America's national powers are wrought with parochialism and a lack of coordinating, enforceable directives. The NSC needs to modify its efforts to take full advantage of all sources of power to secure America's way of life by first establishing an NSC/DC as the NIACG whose mandate is to manage the interagency process. The NIACG should use the six-phased campaign plan as the tool to coordinate and synchronize all capabilities. It would do this by identifying and approving campaign plans written by regional JIACGs. It also must ensure that interagency doctrine is developed to achieve unity of effort by establishing common thought, purpose, and understanding to guide actions to meet required objectives. The NSC should also develop JIACGs to coordinate and synchronized national powers at the regional or combatant command level. The JIACGs should be manned by all sources of
Since the fall of the Soviet Union the challenges that face the United States have significantly changed. The US is the only superpower. With this status comes the responsibility to be patient, to extend helping hands, to foster the good in international relations, and to sacrifice, often with its own blood, to protect those in need as well as its own security. Also, a burden that comes with this status is envy from much of the rest of the world. Many want what the US is perceived to have, which is freedom and riches.
Additionally, in competition for the world's resources, many would like to see the US humbled. However, there is no other nation that can stand toe-to-toe and challenge the US. Consequently, those who endeavor to attack the US have had to change tactics and attack using unconventional means such as terrorism. As a result, the US needs to develop tactics to meet this threat.
The difficulty with changing tactics is that, even with the vast resources of the United States, its coffers are finite. As a result, intelligent and insightful decisions need to be made as to how best to protect US interests and defend against future threats. These are political decisions. To start with, the nation's political leaders need to define the threat.
Will the most likely future threat be similar to Napoleon's conscripted million-man army, to the hundreds of thousands raised by the North and South during America's Civil War, to the millions who fought during WW I and WW II, or to the hundreds of thousands who fought during the Gulf War in 1991? Or will the future threat be similar to the army that George Washington raised to fight the British during America's Revolutionary War, or the North Vietnamese when they fought the US, or similar to Osama bin Laden's attack of the US on September 11, 2001? The answer to this question will determine the type of military force the US needs to develop.
Chapter VII -Conclusion
Another question that should be given some thought is what exactly is war?
Clausewitz said that war is an act of force to compel the enemy to do the other's will. So, do wars have to be kinetic? Wills can be compelled using diplomacy or finance or with key intelligence. So, the answer to what is war and the answer to what is the future threat can focus America's leaders in determining what strategy to take in order to protect national security. This, in turn, will determine which capability or source of power is necessary to best obtain capitulation of the enemy.
The September 2002 National Security Strategy essentially defined the current threat as terrorists, rogue states, non-state actors, and religious extremists. A significant method in addressing these threats is to shape the environment to prevent their emergence.
As such, the NSS attempts to unite and transform not just the military, but also all elements of national power to focus against these actors. All of America's sources of power -for this paper: military, information, diplomacy, law enforcement, intelligence, finance, economic, the will of the people, and America's culture -need to unite and synchronize their efforts to support the NSS.
To synchronize the sources of power America's political leaders first need to empower them with the capability to not only support each other as required, but also to lead as necessary to bend or shape an aggressor's will in favor of the United States.
Secondly, America's political leaders should require and fund the means necessary to synergize these powers through synchronization and nesting. At the national level, the NSC should be responsible for achieving this synergistic effort through a National Interagency Coordination Group (NIACG). The NIACG would be staffed by the deputies of the principal members of the NSC. They would be responsible for approving and  (1979-1982), the Intelligence Center and School (1983-1987), and the 25 th Infantry Division at Schofield Barracks, HI (1987-1990). While in the active reserves he served in the 128 th Military Intelligence Battalion (CEWI) (1990-1992); the 28 th Infantry Division, G-2 Section (1992-1996); the 628 th Military Intelligence Battalion (CEWI) (1996-1997); the 683 rd Military Intelligence Battalion (Linguist) (1998-1999); and the 10 th Battalion, Command and General Staff Officer Course (1999-2003). In 2003 he volunteered for active duty at the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA). Shortly after that he deployed to Qatar in support of the Iraq Survey Group (2003-2004). In 2005 Mr.
Kabana was hired by the DIA. Upon graduation from the Joint Advanced Warfighters School, Mr. Kabana will be assigned to DIA's Defense Joint Intelligence Operation Center (DJIOC).
suited for growth, advancement, and innovation through its entrepreneurial spirit. As a universal nation it is generally made up of socially mobile, ethnically mixed, racially tolerant people who are not averse to taking risks. Intel was invented by a Hungarian, Google by a Russian, and Yahoo by a Taiwanese.
suited for growth, advancement, and innovation through its entrepreneurial spirit. As a universal nation it is generally made up of socially mobile, ethnically mixed, racially tolerant people who are not averse to taking risks. Intel was invented by a Hungarian, Google by a Russian, and Yahoo by a Taiwanese.
Each President has his own methods to manage the office. Therefore, the NSC is flexible enough to be molded to meet the needs of the President's efforts involving national security.
Each President has his own methods to manage the office. Therefore, the NSC is flexible enough to be molded to meet the needs of the President's efforts involving national security.
As a result of the September 11, 2001 attacks on the United the President created, in the NSC's image, the Homeland Security Council Organization to coordinate homeland security-related matters. Members of the Homeland Security Council (HSC) include the President,
This is somewhat of a simplification of the campaign plan. Not all phases start and end cleanly. For example, Phase IV can begin while Phase III is ongoing. Once offensive operations have moved through an area, Phase IV should be immediately implemented to ensure a quick transition to Phase V. Additionally, there will be diverging efforts within and outside of each source of power during each phase. For example, Phase 0 DoS's main effort, supported by other sources of power, should be to shape a state in a non-threatening, non-kinetic manner. DoD should support DoS's effort, also in a nonkinetic manner but it also should be shaping the environment should Phase III be required.
Carl von Clausewitz, edited and translated by Michael Howard and Peter Paret, "On War," Everyman's Libray, p. 83.
Michael E. Brown, ed., "Grave New World: Security Challenges in the 21 st Century," Georgetown UniversityPress, 2003, p. 5.   
Yoram Dinstein , "War, Aggression and Self-Defense," Cambridge University Press, p.
Department of Defense, Joint Publication 1, Joint Warfare and the Armed Forces of the United States, 14 November 2000, p. I-5 & 6.
AGENCY 
NAME(S)
AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Science Degree in Joint Campaign Planning and Strategy
Joint Forces Staff College or the Department of Defense
NSC/Deputies Committee
Joint Interagency regional level
Campaign Planning
VII-3 implementing interagency campaign plans. They would also ensure that the endstates of all campaign plans meet those established by the NSS. Additionally, the NIACG should ensure that interagency doctrine is developed to achieve common thought, purpose, understanding and direction. Within this doctrine the NIACG should identify the current six-phased campaign plan as the tool to synchronize all national powers. At the regional level, a Joint Interagency Co ordination Groups should be established. The JIACG would be subordinate to the NIACG with primary duties of synchronizing and nesting all sources of power by developing campaign plans to meet the goals established by the NIACG and the NSS. The JIACG should be manned with planners from the COCOM staff as well as from DoS and other powers. The JIACG should close the gap that currently lies between the civilian and military campaign planning processes. To that end, it should:
• Participate in theater strategic engagement, deliberate, crisis action, transition, and reconstruction planning and operations. • Participate in regional exercises to validate the feasibility, acceptability, and suitability of established campaign plans.
• Participate in regional exercises to train or maintain the expertise to support established campaign plans. • Require the combatant commander's planning staff to wear two hats -one as JIACG planners and the other as COCOM planners. • Require the regional DoS planning staff to wear two hats -one as JIACG planners and the other as DoS planners. • Inform the combatant commander of operational requirements, concerns, civilian sensitivities, support requirements, and capabilities and limitations. • Inform the regional DoS authority and other interagency partners of operational requirements, concerns, military sensitivities, support requirements, and capabilities and limitations. • Develop regional/operational campaign plans to meet NIACG established endstates.
• Require DoS and DoD personnel to assume the lead in planning assigned phases of the campaign plan. • Establish memorandums of understanding for requests for assistance between agencies.
Chapter VII -Conclusion
In the end, it will be the American populace that determines how to best protect national interests by electing the leadership that employs their will. However, at the present time, America's national powers are wrought with parochialism and a lack of coordinating, enforceable directives. It would be criminal to allow status quo to continue.
It should not take another catastrophic event such as 9/11, or worse yet, a WMD event that might destroy an entire city before the US implements change. These NIACG and JIACG recommendations will synchronize and nest all national powers in an attempt to shape the enemy towards America's will, save lives and money in attempting to prevent kinetic war, and, if war is necessary, quickly resolve it and move efforts to continue shaping the environment towards representative governments with market economies.