# ID: b8b7b2640a194c5282f0dc7ffc10566c
# Title: Deficiencies in Indian Joint Operations
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
Henry Cartagena, USA, 44 pages. India's influence as a global power is increasing and this trend is likely to continue for the foreseeable future. For all of its great potential, India faces serious impediments to its military modernization and joint operations capabilities because of the way its military is structured. Evaluation of India's doctrine and recent operational experience assessed with respect to their adherence to the Indian principles of war illustrates India's limited capability to conduct joint operations. Specifically, India demonstrated critical planning deficiencies in joint operations during the 1987-90 Indian Peacekeeping Operation in Sri Lanka and the 1999 Kargil War because it failed to adhere to the Indian principles of cooperation, flexibility, security, and intelligence in both case studies. These deficiencies limited India's military effectiveness during the joint operations analyzed; further, evidence indicates that the Indian military has not taken appropriate steps to resolve these deficiencies. The study concludes with identification of means by which India's government could improve its military's joint warfare capability. These findings offer insight to future planners responsible for monitoring India's regional posture and developing campaign plans to deal with potential contingencies involving the Indian military.
Failure comes only when we forget our ideals and objectives and principles.
-Jawaharlal Nehru India's influence as a global power is increasing and this trend is likely to continue for the foreseeable future. Analysts predict that India's population will exceed China's by 2022, and studies reveal that India's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased each year for the last three years, during which time China's GDP steadily decreased. India consistently ranks as the world's largest arms importer in its quest to modernize its military and exert its influence as a regional hegemon in South Asia. It conducts joint military exercises with the United States, United Kingdom, France, Russia, Australia, and many of its Asian neighbors. India remains relatively stable despite external threats from Pakistan and China, both of which possess nuclear weapons, and internal threats from Muslim and Marxist insurgent groups. 
1
2
3
4
5
up of segregated regiments. The caste system was a traditional form of Indian social class hierarchy, amplified and institutionalized by the British Raj in its administration of India. The segregated regiments worked under British officers and alongside the British military to defeat any threats to British power in India, and not in the service of the Indian people. This colonial history and the struggle for independence, successfully accomplished by the political party called the Indian National Congress or simply Congress, made the Indian elites very suspicious of military power, which resulted in a subservient and disjointed military. 
6
7
Nehru also discouraged public speeches by senior military officers and retired officers. 
8
1
9
The principles of war according to Indian joint doctrine, particularly intelligence, security, flexibility, and cooperation, enabled a normative and empirical analysis of two case studies on past Indian military operations involving two or more services. The Sri Lankan case study also highlights additional deficiencies in the Indian principle of selection and maintenance of an aim, as well as in the principles of war according to US joint doctrine, particularly restraint and legitimacy. This study tests India's adherence to its own principles of war relevant to this analysis and demonstrates how particular principles of war found only in US joint doctrine reveal additional issues in the conduct of Indian joint warfare. 
10
11
12
10
11 JP 3-0, I-1. 
12
13
Air Force doctrine contains a different but complementary definition: "joint operations imply an amalgamation of the strengths of each service to produce a singular synergistic effect, which is greater than the sum of the single service parts." 14 This analysis will primarily rely on Indian Army and Air Force definitions of joint warfare, and the principles of war outlined by Indian Army doctrine, but will also introduce criteria from the principles of war and the common operating precepts from US joint doctrine to evaluate India's joint warfare capability. 
15
15 JP 3-0, I-3. 
16
There are significant differences between the Indian and US militaries' principles of war.
India's selection and maintenance of aim is practically identical to the American principle of objective, and India's cooperation is similar to America's unity of command. US doctrine does not include intelligence in the principles of joint operations. The Indian doctrine does not include the principles of restraint, perseverance, and legitimacy, but the US military added these principles of war in order to recognize their significance in military operations other than war.
Restraint and legitimacy played an important role as criteria in this analysis of the deficiencies in Indian joint operations. Restraint limits collateral damage and prevents the unnecessary use of force. This principle of restraint and the Indian principle of flexibility both emphasize appropriate action. The US doctrine in JP 3-0 states that the purpose of legitimacy is to maintain legal and moral authority in the conduct of operations based on the various perceptions of interested audiences. 17 These US-specific principles serve as important evaluation criteria in the case study analysis below, because they reveal that Indian military operations in both case studies were deficient by both US and Indian military doctrine on joint operations.
The two case studies for this analysis consist of India's peacekeeping operations during the Sri Lankan Civil War from 1987 to 1990 and the Kargil War of 1999. These case studies provide examples of the Indian military's experience employing air, ground, and naval capabilities to achieve strategic objectives across the range of military operations. The cross-case analysis identifies the consistencies and inconsistencies in India's use of joint warfare principles.
This study reveals deficiencies in India's past efforts at joint warfare operations, and demonstrates that the Indian military has not taken steps to resolve these deficiencies effectively.
The conclusion highlights the major findings of this paper and identifies means by which India's government could improve its military's joint warfare capability. These findings will serve as 17 JP 3-0, Appendix A. useful insight to future planners responsible for monitoring India's regional posture and developing campaign plans to deal with potential contingencies involving the Indian military.
Sri Lanka is strategically important to India because of its proximity (see Figure 
2
18
19
19
21
20
21 Edgar O'Balance, The Cyanide War: Tamil Insurrection in Sri Lanka 1973-88  (London: Brassey's, 1989), 93; Bullion, 122-23.  In October 1987, the Indian Army lost the support of the Tamil population, which initially welcomed its forces, but withdrew support after the Indian Army failed to demonstrate restraint by attacking Jaffna during Operation Pawan. 
22
23
24
25
26
27
The security of IPKF operations faced significant difficulties with the loss of Tamil support, and this provided the LTTE with advantages to conduct a counterinsurgency against the IPKF, illustrating the importance of the principle of security. 28 27 Bullion, 127-28; O'Balance, 106-7; Smith, 24-25. 
28
29
However, once the IPKF arrived and perceived as representing the interests of the Sri Lankan regime, the LTTE directed its resistance efforts against the IPKF. The Indian troops contended with a complex situation and with the difficult objectives to disarm the Tamil militants, maintain law and order, and create the conditions for the devolution of political power to the northeast. The increased use of military coercion resulted in less Tamil empowerment, which had been India's original political aim, along with maintaining Sri Lanka's non-aligned posture toward the West.
IPKF operations mandated by India's civilian masters resulted in a loss of influence with the Tamil community and Sri Lankan government. 
30
The Indian government and IPKF faced difficulties throughout the Sri Lankan campaign because of a failure in planning to incorporate the principles of war as defined in Indian doctrine, as well as by the US doctrine for joint operations. These included deficiencies in the principles of restraint, legitimacy, intelligence, flexibility, security, and cooperation both within the military, and between the military and the governments of India and Sri Lanka. They also indicated a lack of focus on the selection and maintenance of an aim or choice of objectives, the achievement of which increases the likelihood of attaining enduring results. This combined with a failed effort to accurately understand, visualize, and describe the true political aims of the LTTE and Sri Lankan government, resulted in not meeting the Indian political and military aims initially set. 
31
30
The Kargil War or Indo-Pakistani War of 1999, between India and Pakistan, known in the Indian military as Operation Vijay, occurred when Pakistani troops and Kashmiri militants occupied positions on the Indian side of the Line of Control, near the strategically located Kargil District, in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir (see Figure 
3
32
43
44
43 Kanwal,
[3]
[4]
Swami,
[11]
[12]
Kargil Review Committee,
[249]
[250]
45
46
48
49
49
The Indian military overcame tremendous obstacles in obtaining its victory in Kargil; including many deficiencies in its conceptual planning for joint warfare-deficiencies that created significant problems for Indian military operations. While India, under Vajpayee, carefully selected and maintained its political aim and military objective of removing the intruders from the Kargil area, it lacked suitable intelligence before and during the early stages of the conflict. A lack of cooperation between military and civilian defense and intelligence organizations hampered the ability to develop effective plans to defend contested Indian terrain.
The Indian Army's focus on counterinsurgency operations in Kashmir led to issues adapting to operations against Pakistani military forces, demonstrating the importance of the principle of flexibility. Deficiencies in the principles of intelligence and cooperation created difficulties adhering to the principle of security because General Musharraf gained an unexpected advantage by placing the Northern Light Infantry in the Kargil Mountains. The Kargil Review Committee Report issued after the war made it clear that India suffered a spectacular surprise due to these deficiencies in intelligence and cooperation. This resulted in the Indian military adding intelligence to its doctrinal principles of war, alongside cooperation, five years after the war.
The Indian military fought its first truly televised war in Kargil and met the criteria for success in the areas of restraint and legitimacy, two principles of joint warfare in US doctrine.
India's careful selection and maintenance of its political aim and military objectives included clear restraint, by not crossing the Line of Control on the ground or in the air, and by not escalating the conflict at sea. Despite applying restraint, the success of the Indian Air Force and 51 Kargil Review Committee, 253-55; Swami, 26-27.  Army at Tololing and Tiger Hill created the legitimacy that India needed at home and abroad. This led to the pressure that forced Pakistan to abandon its incursion.
By neglecting the principles of cooperation, security, flexibility, and intelligence, individuals and organizations in Kargil and New Delhi created vulnerabilities that Pakistan exploited in its quest to gain advantages in Kashmir. India's government also learned a great deal about the limitations of nuclear deterrence in preventing conventional conflict with its enduring rival. The Kargil Review Committee made clear, but politically and institutionally difficult, recommendations on improvements necessary in intelligence and cooperation within the military and in civil-military discourse. 52 52 Rajesh M. Basrur, "The Lessons of Kargil as Learned by India," in Asymmetric Warfare in South Asia; The Causes and Consequences of the Kargil Conflict, ed. Peter R. Lavoy (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 315.
A comparison of Indian joint warfare during operations in Sri Lanka and during the Kargil War demonstrates consistent deficiencies in planning due to a neglect of particular Indian principles of war. In both conflicts, the Indian security establishment displayed poor cooperation, lapses in security, limited flexibility, and a dysfunctional application of intelligence. The threeyear counterinsurgency operation in Sri Lanka suffered from more contradictions with the Indian principles of war. The shorter Kargil War revealed improvements only in the Indian principles of selection and maintenance of aim or objective, and in the US principles of restraint and legitimacy.
Cooperation between civilian and military partners is essential to achieve the overall aim.
Even before Partition, the British East India Company and the British Raj prevented cooperation between elements of the military to diminish threats to their power. This legacy continued after Partition with Nehru's decision to accept Lord Mountbatten's recommendation for the exclusion of the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces from the Cabinet. In Sri Lanka, the IPKF operated under the command of the Overall Force Commander (OFC), but the Indian Air Force and Indian Navy commanders held the same rank as the OFC. The Field Marshal of the Army also communicated directly with subordinate commanders in the IPKF, further undermining cooperation in the IPKF. The Sri Lankan government under President Jayawarene also placed limits on cooperation with IPKF because of pressure from the Sinhalese majority. During the Kargil War, the various intelligence agencies in the Indian government followed a hierarchal reporting structure that inhibited cooperation. This led to a lack of awareness by the military and other intelligence agencies of changes in Pakistan's order of battle on their side of the Line of Control, prior to the intrusion by the elements of the Northern Light Infantry disguised as Jihadist militants. By violating the principle of cooperation, the Indian security establishment also set the conditions for the violation of the principle of intelligence.
The addition of intelligence as an Indian principle of war came about five years after the Kargil War because of the recognition of its importance in warfare at all times. In Sri Lanka, the LTTE enjoyed the support of the Tamil population and the IPKF found it difficult to collect actionable battlefield intelligence against the LTTE. The IPKF compartmentalized intelligence, which diminished its value to future military operations. The LTTE also practiced the tactics of avoidance through ambushes and the use of land mines that made it difficult for the Indian Army  The IPKF in Sri Lanka faced difficulties with the US principles of restraint and legitimacy because the LTTE blended into the Tamil population it aimed to protect. In the Kargil War, the Indian military demonstrated restraint by not crossing the Line of Control or escalating the conflict with Pakistan at sea. This display of restraint by the Indian military contributed to the legitimacy of the operation in the Kargil district as perceived within India and the international community. Prime Minister Vajpayee presented India as a victim of aggression by Pakistan and as a responsible nation that prevented escalation by limiting its objective to the expulsion of the intruders. Once again, the principles of war, as demonstrated by restraint and legitimacy, became increasingly difficult to uphold in a counterinsurgency operation. 
53
Bullion,
Kadian,
Rizvi,
[58]
[59]
Lavoy,
191. 54
55 Malik,
[358]
[359]
The US Principles of Joint Operations 59 1. Objective. The purpose of the objective is to direct every military operation toward a clearly defined, decisive, and achievable goal.
2. Offensive. The purpose of the offensive is to seize, retain, and exploit the initiative.
3. Mass. The purpose of mass is to concentrate the effects of combat power at the most advantageous place and time to produce decisive results. 4. Maneuver. The purpose of maneuver is to place the enemy in a position of disadvantage through the flexible application of combat power. 5. Economy of Force. The purpose of economy of force is to expend minimum essential combat power on secondary efforts in order to allocate maximum combat power on primary efforts. 6. Unity of Command. The purpose of unity of command is to ensure unity of effort under one responsible commander for every objective. 7. Security. The purpose of security is to prevent the enemy from acquiring unexpected advantage.
8. Surprise. The purpose of surprise is to strike at a time or place or in a manner for which the enemy is unprepared.
59 JP 3-0, A-1-A-4.
Charles Riley, "This Country Will Have More People Than China by
2022," CNN Money, July 30, 2015, accessed August 17, 2015, http://money.cnn.com/2015/07/30/news/ economy/india-china-population; World Bank, "GDP Growth (Annual %)," accessed August 17, 2015, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG; Stephen P. Cohen, India: Emerging Power (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2001), 96; Sumit Ganguly and Paul Kapur, India, Pakistan, and the Bomb (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010), 27-28. 2 Air Marshal Narayan Menon, "Downhill from Kargil," Indian Defence Review, July 25, 2013, accessed March 5, 2016, http://www.indiandefencereview.com/print/?print_post_id=1745.
V. P.Malik, Kargil: From Surprise to Victory (New Delhi: Harper Collins Publishers  India, 2006), 120-121; Rajesh Kadian, India's Sri Lanka Fiasco: Peace Keepers at War (New Delhi: Vision Books, 1990), 137.
Wilkinson, 4-5; Jaswant Singh, Defending India (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1999),  64-65.    
Wilkinson,[20][21] Singh,[96][97] 
Wilkinson, 103.   
Ibid.,  
104; Kargil Review Committee, From Surprise to Reckoning: The Kargil Review Committee Report (New Delhi: Sage Publications, 1999), 258.
Alan Bullion, India, Sri Lanka and the Tamil Crisis  
1976
-1994
Kadian,[29][30][31] David Little, Sri Lanka:  The Invention of Enmity (Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace Press, 1994), 90-92.
Dagmar-Hellmann Rajanayagam, "The 'Groups' and the Rise of Militant Secessionism," in The Sri Lankan Tamils: Ethnicity and Identity, ed. Chelvadurai Manogaran and Peter Pfaffenberger(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994), 193-95.   
Kadian, Sardeshpande, 
Bullion, Kadian, Sardeshpande, 46; 213.   
Sumantra Bose, Kashmir: Roots of Conflict, Paths to Peace (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003), 141.
Sumit Ganguly, The Crisis in Kashmir: Portents of War, Hopes of Peace (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 8-9.
Charlotte P. Nicholson, The Kashmir Powder Keg (New York: Nova Science Publishers, 2002), 3-5; C. Christine Fair, Fighting to the End: The Pakistan Army's Way of War (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014), 150-51.
Peter R. Lavoy, "Crisis-management Strategies," in Asymmetric Warfare in South Asia; The Causes and Consequences of the Kargil Conflict, ed. Peter R.Lavoy (New York:  Cambridge University Press, 2009), 191; Swami, 10-12.    
Kargil Review Committee, 104; Swami,[23][24] 
Colonel Gurmeet Kanwal, Heroes of Kargil (New Delhi: Indian Army Headquarters, 2002), 3-4.
Swami,
[10]
[11]
Pravin Sawhney, The Defense Makeover: 10 Myths that Shape India's Image (New Delhi: Sage Publications, 2002), 319; Kargil Review Committee, 93-94; Nuclear Weapon Archive, "Kargil Review Committee Report," accessed March 5, 2016, http://nuclearweaponarchive.org/India/KargilRCB.html.
The author greatly appreciates the patience and encouragement provided by my wife, 
Emy Love Casiple-Cartagena
58 Indian Army Doctrine Part I, 23-24.