# ID: b8c8fbe157784fe893ab6f19c2ea0b5d
# Title: National Security Implications of Space-Launch Innovation
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
However as is the case with the oceans and cyberspace, Space is not free of military activities and its perceived status as a global commons is being challenged.
Since the 1960s Space has been 'militarised' with satellites used for a broad range of military purposes, including intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR), communications, missile early warning and nuclear detection, meteorology and geodesy, and precision-navigation and timing (PNT) through systems like the US Global Positioning System (GPS) network.
The growth of other states' military space capabilities continues to gather pace, providing similar capabilities for US allies and foes alike.
Space has become a vital 'centre of gravity' because access to space is essential in ensuring an ability to wage modern network-centric information-based warfare.
In 2014, Brian Weeden of the Secure World Foundation published a seminal report, 'Through a Glass, Darkly -Chinese, American and Russian Anti-Satellite Testing in Space', which highlighted Chinese and Russian development of anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons.
There is broad consensus that traditional view of Space as a global commons is increasingly challenged.
Space is becoming 'contested and congested', as space transitions from militarisation to 'weaponisation'.
The Obama Administration's policy which emphasized promoting legal norms against space weaponisation, backed by greater space situational awareness capability, has not prevented the development of increasingly sophisticated space weapons capabilities by China and Russia in particular.
The growing risk of space debris further adds to a complex and challenging operational environment.