# ID: bc7646d80132479bb39fbc3610821776
# Title: Multinational Force Integration: The ROK Army's Integration with the US Army in the Vietnam War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
The key to the Koreans' success is the individual ROK soldier. He is undoubtedly one of the best soldiers in the Free World. Tough, aggressive, well disciplined, patient, persistent, and thorough, he keeps his equipment in top condition and responds almost instinctively to orders and instructions. One veteran US officer, who has served with the US infantry units in three conflicts, called him "the epitome of a soldier, almost faultless.
MAJ Ronald R. Rasmussen, "ROK Operations in Central Vietnam" Military Review 1
On 9 August 1966, 9th Company, 3d Battalion, 1st Cavalry Regiment of the Republic of Korea's (ROK) Capital Infantry Division, led by their company commander, Captain (CPT) Lee, returned from a two day long combat patrol back to their tactical assembly area, designated as Landing Zone 27 Victor (LZ 27V) with no significant contact from enemy forces. 
2
Battalion, 69th Armor Regiment had stayed behind to secure LZ 27V while 9th Company executed patrols along the Cambodian-South Vietnamese border in the Pleiku provinces attempting to engage in battle with the North Vietnamese Army (NVA) and Viet Cong (VC) units operating within the area with no success. The ROK soldiers were exhausted but relieved to finally be back to their secured defensive positions in LZ 27V to rest and refit from the long and treacherous patrol through the hot and humid dense jungle near the Cambodian border. CPT Lee's company along with the rest of ROK combat forces operated alongside of American and South Vietnamese forces since their arrival back in September 1965 as part of US President 1 Ronald R. Rasmussen, "ROK Operations in Central Vietnam," Military Review (January 1968), 54. MAJ Ronald Rasmussen served as an infantry officer with the 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile) and the I Field Force that operated next to the ROK forces in the II Corp Tactical Zone in Vietnam. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
As the battle progressed through the night, the NVA intensified the volume of fire with heavy automatic machine gun fire, mortars, rocket propelled grenades, and recoilless rifles along with multiple frontal assaults at different areas of the perimeter attempting to penetrate the defensive lines with no success. 
9
The battle ended at approximately 6:00 A.M. with surviving enemy forces withdrawing. 
11
7 Carland,
Combat Operations,
298. 8
10 Ibid., 340.;
Carland, Combat Operations, 297-298. Francis J. Kelly, Vietnam Studies: U.S. Army Special Forces 1961
-1971
(Washington, DC: Center of Military History, 2004), 14-22, 96-99. 11 Carland, Combat Operations, 299.
12
We embrace our responsibilities for underwriting international security because it serves our interests, upholds our commitments to allies and partners, and addresses threats that are truly global … It also requires a global security posture in which our unique capabilities are employed within diverse international coalitions and in support of local partners. 
13
14
15
16
This study examines how the US Army integrates foreign armies into multinational operations, using the ROK Army's integration into US-led combat operations during the Vietnam War to explore some of the keys to success. The US Army's success in integrating ROK forces during the Vietnam War resulted from the creation of mutual trust and confidence between the two forces, feelings that were the product of MACV's approach to command and control, intelligence sharing, and the incorporation of ROK forces into the planning and execution of combat operations at the tactical level. 17 While MACV made key decisions that facilitated the integration of the ROK Army, the level of cooperation and coordination between the ROK Army and US forces in Vietnam was also underpinned by a two-decades long relationship between the two militaries.
The benefit resulting from multinational operations is not just determined by the number of participants but how participants are incorporated into a coalition structure and integrated into planning and operations. Sir Lawrence Freedman, British military theorist, described the significance in creating a coalition to conduct multinational operations and achieve strategic victory. In his book Strategy: A History he argued, "When it came to victory, what mattered most was how coalitions were formed, came together, and were disrupted."
18
19
The US Army expects that it will routinely operate as part of a multinational force. Field Manual (FM) 3-16, The Army in Multinational Operations highlights the significance of 
17
21
22
23
21 ADRP 3-0, 1-1. Unified land operations describes how the Army seizes, retains, and exploits the initiative to gain and maintain a position of relative advantage in in sustained land operations through simultaneous offensive, defensive, and stability operations in order to prevent or deter conflict, prevail in war, and create the conditions for favorable conflict resolution. front with partners around the world who join to confront and defeat threats to international security and peace. 
24
25
The ROK Army employed 48,500 combat troops in the same period and, by the end of the war, contributed over 324,000 Soldiers total. 27 By comparison, in January of 1967, Australia was the 
vi,
vii.
28
29
This study focuses on a single coalition partner-the ROK Army-and its integration into military operations in the Vietnam War from 1965-1967, employing three criteria from the US Army's current doctrine guiding the conduct of multinational operations, FM 3-16, The Army 28 Blackburn, Mercenaries and Lyndon Johnson's "More Flags," 130; The American War Library, "Vietnam War: Allied Troop Levels 1960-73," last modified December 6, 2008, accessed September 27, 2015, http://www.americanwarlibrary.com/vietnam/vwatl.htm. Although the author compares troop contributions between ROK and Australia (with New Zealander troop contributions), Australian forces nonetheless fought valiantly continuing to serve and die in the Vietnam War up to the end of the war demonstrating their commitment to the coalition. 
29
FM 3-16 provides the US Army a doctrinal foundation for the conduct of multinational operations consisting of 168 pages of detailed guidance. Although it is not directive in nature, the FM provides broad guidance and a check list for commanders and staffs in developing solutions to create an effective fighting force concerning planning, preparing, and executing multinational operations. The ROK Army was chosen for this study due to its contribution of the largest quantity of forces above all troop contributing nations in the More Flags program during the Vietnam War, which created a series of challenges for the US Army to address. Along with the ROK Army's contribution Vietnam, the military cooperation between the two countries dating to just after World War II makes this case of integrating ROK forces particularly interesting.
Section one examines types of multinational cooperation and methods of organization.
Three short case studies on American involvement in multinational operations in World War I, World War II, and Operation Iraqi Freedom illustrate the ways in which command of multination forces can be exercised. Given war's nature as an inherently political exercise, the establishment of command structures for multinational forces must include political as well as military considerations. While the three different command structures examined in these three casesparallel, unified, and lead nation-may reflect the political concerns of the participants involved, none of them are necessarily a barrier to close cooperation or integration. However, understanding these different organizations is essential to appreciating differences in the authorities associated with each, and with potential obstacles to integration. The World War I case study, an example of parallel command, is of particular interest because it is through this type of arrangement that the United States coordinated with, rather than commanded, ROK Army forces in the Vietnam War. This section also defines and describes terms associated with coalition warfare-multinational operations, multinational forces, alliances, and coalitions-using the definitions provided in current US Army doctrine. These terms are often used interchangeably, though each has a very specific meaning. Clarifying this terminology and the command structures used to guide multinational operations provides a framework for understanding the fundamental aspects of multinational operations found in the case study.
Section two examines the historical context of the Vietnam War starting with America's military advisory role to the ARVN in 1955 then escalating into combat operations in 1965. The US Army operated with small teams of advisors under the Military Advisory Assistance Group, Vietnam (MAAG) with nearly 700 advisors. Each team's responsibilities were to train and mentor the ARVN in their operations against the Vietminh, later known as the Viet Cong. This role changed with the US Congress' passage of the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin Resolution evolving America's role to combat operations transitioning Military Advisory Assistance Group, Vietnam to Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (MACV). During this transition and escalation, the US Army required and received additional help from other nation's armies to increase the size of the coalition to include the ROK Army. The integration of the ROK Army to secure key locations and participate in combined operations presented the US Army and ARVN with opportunities to transition from defensive to offensive operations. The ROK's entrance not only presented opportunities but also challenges as a significant third party contributor in the America's effort in the Vietnam War. MACV faced the challenges of incorporating the ROK Army into command and control structure that was politically and militarily acceptable, share intelligence in a manner that would not violate national policy, and conduct planning and execution of combined military operations.
Section three examines the command and control relationship between MACV, I Field Force, and the ROK Army. Unlike the desired lead nation command structure, the US Army has grown accustom to in recent coalitions, in Vietnam the US had to settle for a parallel command structure. The ROK Army did not allow itself to be officially subordinate to MACV or subsequent headquarters, which presented a unique challenge of incorporating the ROK Army in a manner to achieve unity of effort. Examining command and control (C2) requires analyzing the command structure established to provide oversight of coalition forces, assessing the coalition's ability to achieve unity of effort, and exploring issues of interoperability between the ROK Army and the US Army's higher HQ. 30 FM 3-16 highlights the importance of establishing C2 as the foundation for any multinational force. It emphasizes, "A successful multinational operation establishes unity of effort, if not unity of command. The success of a multinational operation begins with the authority to direct operations of all assigned or attached military forces." 
31
Section four examines intelligence sharing between MACV, I Field Force and ROKFORV. MACV understood the critical nature of intelligence sharing within the multinational force to combat not only the North Vietnamese Army but also the Viet Cong guerrillas operating in and around local population centers. MACV developed policies to ease the burden of intelligence classification restrictions imposed on it and its subordinate headquarters to downgrade and release intelligence without violating US national policy. FM 3-16 highlights the 30 FM 3-16, 2-1 -2-4. 
31
Section five examines the combined US-ROK-ARVN operation in Operation Irving. 
33
34
33 FM 3-16, 5-1 -5-6. 
34 Carland,
Combat Operations,
[260]
[261]
36
The final section concludes the analysis with implications for the US Army in future operations as well as with existing shortfalls and a recommendation for future editions of FM 3 16 tied to the lessons of the ROK's integration in Vietnam. This study demonstrates that the United States Army has had success in integrating multinational forces into US-led operations and that the case of the ROK Army in Vietnam provides a suitable case for study. The US was able to establish a high level of mutual confidence between US and ROK forces because of the approach taken by General Westmoreland and MACV to establish a command structure that respected individual national interests and develop trust through intelligence sharing. This confidence bolstered an existing strong relationship between the two militaries, but more importantly, fostered a level of integration that allowed effective planning and execution of major operations to take place despite the lack of direct command authority. As such, the effectiveness of the ROK Army's integration highlights issues or lingering challenges with command and control, intelligence sharing, and coordination in military actions when integrating a foreign army in American military operations. knowledge of partners, team building, patience, and trust.
There is only one thing worse than fighting with allies, and that is fighting without them.
-Sir Winston S. Churchill 37
The terms coalition, alliance, partnered nations, allies, coalition forces, coalition partners, and multinational forces used interchangeably of when referring to non-US forces that take part of a United States-led military operation. 
38
39
38
39 US Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 3-16, Multinational Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2013). As it states on page i, JP 3-16 is the joint United States doctrine "to govern the activities and performance of the Armed Forces of the United States in joint operations and provides the doctrinal basis for US military coordination with other US Government departments and agencies during operations and for US military involvement in multinational operations." This document is broad in nature set for strategic and operational level of focus with multifaceted military and non-military organizations. The author chose FM 3-16 for this paper due to its focus on ground forces at the operational to tactical level. coalition or alliance." 40 This is a generic all-encompassing definition that informs the reader that the US military is partnered with one or several foreign military forces in executing combat and non-combat operations and this partnership is either in an alliance or coalition. Likewise, multinational force implies the US military is simply partnered with two or more foreign militaries in either an alliance or coalition.
The terms alliance and coalition give the specificity to the type of relationship between militaries in multinational operations. FM 3-16 defines alliance as "the relationship that results from a formal agreement between two or more nations for broad, long-term objectives that further the common interests of the member." 
41
42
Germany appeared unbeatable at the time, defeating the Soviet army in every battle. Churchill needed the United States to become involved in the alliance to pool military resources in a unified strategy to defeat Axis powers. Once the United States became involved in the Second World War in 1941 and allied itself to Great Britain, Russia, and other supporting nations, it became a 40 FM 3-16, 1-1. This definition is the same in JP 3-16. 
41
part of the Allied Powers, known as the "United Nations" following a joint declaration published in 
January, 1942. 43
1
44
45
47
48
49
50
47
48
49
50
Command (CENTCOM). 51 FM 3-16 describes a lead nation command structure as "one nation has the lead role and its C2 dominates. Normally, the lead nation is the country that provides the largest number of forces and resources for the operations…The lead nation determines the appropriate C2 procedures and works closely with the other national contingent." 
52
52 FM 3-16, 2-3. In addition to the lead nation command structure is the necessity for appropriate level of liaison personnel to the lead nation headquarters to develop and maintain unity of effort in coalition operations.
The CFLCC command and control (C2) framework consisted of the U.S. Army V Corps and the I Marine Expeditionary Force (I MEF), along with the British 1 st Armoured Division serving directly under I MEF. 
53
55
Parallel command structures, which are an alternative to the lead nation structure, are the least preferred type. Unlike integrated and lead nation command structures, where there is a unity of command exercised through the authority of a single commander, a parallel command structure is formed when contributing nations are reluctant to grant total control of their forces to the lead 
53
54
55
3
57
58
59
57
58 Ibid., 8-9.
59 Mark E. Grotelueschen, The AEF Way of War: The American Army and Combat in World War I (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 11-12. 
60
He organized and trained two new army groups under the AEF, totaling over two million troops, before committing American forces in mass to cooperate alongside the Allies in large-scale offensives. 
61
62
63
64
61
62
63
64
Understanding the type of command structures used in multinational operations is important because these structures define both the types of command authorities associated with each partner and the degree of formal cooperation within the partnership. From December 1943 until the end of World War II, the Allied Powers operated within an alliance that used the integrated command structure of SHAEF to achieve the strategic objective of defeating the Axis Powers and re-establish global stability. In the initial invasion of Iraq in 2003, the United States formed a coalition with a lead nation command structure to defeat the Iraqi military, topple the Saddam Hussein's regime, prevent the proliferation of WMD, and establish a democratic USfriendly country in the Middle East. In World War I, the United States was part of an alliance using a parallel command structure, with an Allied Supreme Commander coordinating military operations to defeat the Central Powers and re-establish global order. These types of multinational forces and command structures are not mutually exclusive but mixed and matched depending the political and military objectives of its member nations.
What is crucial is achieving unity of effort towards the agreed upon strategic objective by partnered nations. In the Vietnam War, the ROK army decided that it would not participate in the US lead nation command structure as it had in the Korean War. As with the AEF during World War I, Korea's national and military leadership wanted the ROK army to be its own separate and distinct force. They saw their first major expeditionary operation since the nineteenth century, as a means to gain international prestige and domestic pride, and as a way to payback the United States for its contribution to the Korean War. 
65
In any assessment of the Koreans' contribution in South Vietnam, it must be underlined that they provided the man-to-man equivalent of the Americans in the Southeast Asian country. In other words, every Korean soldier sent to South Vietnam saved sending an American or other allied soldier. The Koreans, who asked for very little credit, have received almost no recognition in the US press and it is doubtful if many Americans fully appreciate their contribution in South Vietnam.
In its early campaign in South Vietnam, the US Army found its role expanding. Starting in 1955, the Military Advisory Assistance Group, Vietnam (MAAG-V) was in charge of small teams of military advisors with the maximum force strength of 692 embedded with the Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVAF). 
67
68
66
67
71
72
73
authorizing the buildup and employment of conventional forces in South Vietnam. 
74
The US Army expanded its role into combat operations replacing MAAG-V with the creation the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (MACV) with a combat troop strength of 184,000 and rising annually. 
75
76
77
78
74
75
76
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
81
82 Ibid.,
18,
22,
31,
67,
95,
117.
84
Taekwondo teaching team of ten officers, and a construction support group of 2,416 engineers and transportation troops called the "Peace Dove Unit." 85 On June 21, 1965, the South Vietnamese government made an official request to South Korea, at the behest of the US government, for the deployment of ROK combat troops. 
86
87
88
86
87
88
89
In early 1965, additional divisions were needed to secure the coastal plain of the II Corps Tactical Zone (II CTZ) to free US and ARVN forces to conduct operations inland towards the Central Highland. 
90
91
Korea's non-combat forces, which began arriving in mid-1964, were not to fire unless attacked, could not fire on or pursue the enemy outside their assigned area, and were prohibited from acting against civil demonstrations unless authorized by a Vietnam army liaison officer. 
92
93
However, the South Korea government declared that non-combat ROK units could not accept 90 HQ, USMACV, "Command History 1965," 44. 
91
92
93
control by any national authority other than the United States and used the precedent that the initial non-combat ROK units were placed OPCON to General Westmoreland's MACV. 
94
95
In May 1965, Johnson administration officials negotiated with South Korean officials from President Park's administration for Korean combat units consisting at a size of a regimental combat team of 4,000 troops, and later expanded the requirement to include a ROK division of 20,000 troops. 
96
97
98
94 Larsen and Collins Jr.,
Vietnam Studies,
123. 95
Cosmas,
MACV,
[343]
[344]
[345]
Mercenaries and Lyndon Johnson's "More Flags,
" 47,
53.
Korea and Vietnam, (Seoul: Ministry of Public Information, Republic of Korea, 1967), 11. 98 ROK, Korea and Vietnam, 11-12;
Blackburn, Mercenaries and Lyndon Johnson's "More Flags," 47-50. President
From September through November 1965, ROK forces began to flood into South Vietnam under the initial control of MACV to manage their force flow, the consolidation of units, combat equipment and supply distribution, and finally, assignment to their tactical areas of responsibilities. This initial deployment included the ROK Capital Division, the 2 nd Marine "Blue Dragon" Brigade, and their support units, totaling 18,904 troops altogether. 
99
100
99 Larsen and Collins Jr.,
Vietnam Studies,
128,
131.
101
102
103
104
General Chae however, asserted that on the grounds of national sovereignty and prestige, he could not formally place his combat troops under Westmoreland's operational control, though 
101 Carland, Combat Operations, 46-50;
HQ, USMACV, "Command History 1965," 72;
Cosmas, The Joint Chiefs of Staff and the War in Vietnam, 301, 302. 102
Alliance, 1953
-2013, 43. 103 Ibid., 65. 104 Ibid., 34,72. Ramsey III, OP 18, 5-7.
105
106
107
108
105
106
107
Larsen and Collins Jr.,
Vietnam Studies,
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
109
4
110
109
113
114
5
113
114 Reginald Hathorn, Here There Are Tigers: the Secret Air War in Laos and North  Vietnam, 1968-69 (Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 2008), 16-21. The ROK corps HQ has responsibility of the Capital Division and 9 th Division. Its areas encompasses the central coast of II CTZ, from Phan Rang to Qui Khon.; Larsen and Collins Jr., Vietnam Studies, 138. LTG Chae decided, in addition to the creation of the ROK corps HQ in Nha Trang, to establish the Republic of Korea Forces, Vietnam (ROKFORV) HQ in Saigon that was USMACV equivalent on August 1966. ROKFORV had responsibilities of all ROK military forces in Vietnam in terms of navy, army, air force, marines, and civilian logistics contractors. I Field Force was responsible for the II CTZ in its entirety and even though ROK divisions and logistics units operated in zone, it had no official command authority over them. This created a potential problem of duplicating operations or worse, fratricide. These issues were mitigated through the close proximity of the HQs and embedded liaison officers that allowed for continuous coordination of operations between the two organizations. Embedded liaison officers were a key asset to both HQs because they facilitated continuous dialogue to coordinate the logistics required to sustain ROK ground forces in conducting operations as well as actual tactical matters. 115 LTG Larsen's I Field Force was organized in parallel command structure with that of LTG Chae, whose responsibilities equaled a corps commander in planning and executing operation throughout II CTZ with US and ARVN units (see figure 
6
116
117
118
119
The Korean corps and I Field Force were closely tied in Nha Trang. Each of the related staff section of both corps were in continuous contact with one another through a combination of telephonic communication, secure radio teletype, tactical radios, liaison officers and translators, 117 FM 3-94, Theater Army, Corps, and Division Operations, (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), 4-1, 4-12, 4-13. The corps HQ is organized, trained, and equipped to serve as the Army Forces in campaigns and major operations, with command of two or more Army divisions, together with supporting theater-level organizations, across the range of military operations. The corps' command post controls current operations, performs detailed analysis, and plans future operations. It included command group and most of the coordinating, special, and personal staff. The staff organizes into five functionally focused cells (intelligence, movement and maneuver, fires, protection, and sustainment) with broad responsibilities for coordinating these warfighting functions across the corps. Liaison elements from higher, adjacent, and subordinate units locate at the main command post. Corp HQ's basic structure has not changed since the Korean War to current date with the required inclusion of special staff, G-1 -G9 sections, liaison elements, and air and fire support coordination centers. and direct coordination meetings. 120 A set battle-rhythm of meetings was established where the officers from their respective staff sections of both I Field Force and ROKFVFC met four or five times a week. 
121
122
123
The evolution of the United States involvement in Vietnam, from advisors in MAAG-V to combat operations in MACV to support South Vietnam's fight against communist VC and NVA forces, brought with it a growing need for "more flags" to assist US and ARVN forces. The integration of foreign armies into a multinational force was required for MACV to shift from a defensive to offensive operations, and to break away from its coastal bases and begin to attack the NVA and VC at their inland safe havens. The entry of ROK army combat forces was critical in bolstering the coalition numbers to a sufficient strength to enable MACV to start the transition to the offensive. However, before this could be done, the issues of C2, command authority, and interoperability had to be addressed. The ROK army integration into MACV and I Field Force's C2 structure started with uncertainty due to the lack of strategic formal agreements. While LTG Chae refused a formal agreement with GEN Westmoreland for ROKFORV to be OPCON to MACV, he agreed to be de facto OPCON to MACV and I Field Force through a more informal arrangement. Chae knew the political risks for ROKFORV to fall under direct control of MACV.
He understood the advantages of being an independent and distinct, yet comparable, force in a parallel command structure similar to the AEF in its initial entry to World War I. FM 3-16 states, "A successful multinational operation establishes unity of effort, if not unity of command. The success of a multinational operation begins with the authority to direct operations of all assigned or attached military forces." 124 Westmoreland established such a unity of effort and understood the informal nature of the command relationship between his forces and Chae's forces. He understood the politics involved and was comfortable with the "gentlemen's agreement" with Chae because of the trust and understanding built between the US and ROK forces dating two decades prior. Although Westmoreland's masterful handling of C2 relationship had a large part in building a cooperative parallel command structure, the continuous partnership  through two decades also eased of C2 integration. The creation of the ROKFVFC, with its similarity in organizational structures and SOPs, enabled efficient and effective interoperability with I Field Force. More importantly, trust and understanding between the US and ROK armies enabled cooperation and commitment between the forces, and such trust was vital to the planning and execution of combat operations.
From 1965 to 1966, the US military dramatically increased its support from 184,000 to 385,000 troops, not including Free World Forces troop numbers. 
125
126
7
127
125
126
127
Our policy was based on the concept that the combined intelligence program demanded a free exchange of classified information among all participants-that intelligences personnel sitting side by side, working on the same project, and fighting the same enemy should have equal access to all available data. A lesser policy could only hinder our efforts to seek out the enemy, foster mistrust, and inhibit the maintenance of mutual respect and confidence. 
135
136
Vietnam Studies,
142,
143. 135 Ibid.,
142. 136
With the establishment of this disclosure program enabling intelligence sharing amongst the multinational forces, the I Field Force and ROKFVFC staffs were able to meet four to five times a week, but also held monthly intelligence conferences with intelligence staff sections from multiple organizations. These monthly intelligence staff conferences typically were held at I Field Force HQ and were designed to improve the production and dissemination of intelligence. 
137
138
139
Overall, MACV's intelligence sharing proved effective in providing its multinational partners with intelligence in a timely manner and improving intelligence coordination overall.
The increasing build up of not only US forces but also FWF caused MACV to develop an intelligence organization with four centers and policies to enable J2 MACV and subordinate headquarters to share classified intelligence. MG Joseph A. McChristian was instrumental in the growth of the MACV's intelligence organization. He secured exception to US national policy from the Department of Defense for MACV to release classified intelligence to multinational partners. McChristian developed MACV's policy of "a free exchange of classified information among all participants" that enabled subordinate US headquarters to conduct monthly intelligence staff conferences with their multinational partners to openly discuss and share intelligence between each other which contributed toward a unity of effort.
In addition, as mentioned earlier, the ROK Army's similar organizational structure and SOPs allowed for it to process the intelligence efficiently and effectively, further aiding in mutual understanding and cooperation. I Field Force and ROKFVFC headquarters benefited greatly with these regular intelligence conferences, gaining a holistic understanding the operational environment in II CTZ. These conferences supported the planning and execution of significant multinational operations, including Operation Irving, which took place between September 23rd through October 24th.
hitting an anvil effect. 
148
155
156
ROK units, without exception, employed tactics in line with established US Army Doctrine. Squad, company, and battalion operations were characterized by skillful use of fire and maneuver and by strict fire discipline…It should be noted that regardless of the type of operation or formation used, the actions were characterized by patience, a thorough estimate of the situation, use of fire and maneuver, and search and countersearch of suspected areas…This persistence paid off time and again in rooting out the VC and finding his weapons and equipment.
157
The summary portion of the operational report states the ROK Army's "Adherence to tactical doctrine as it is taught at US service schools and is written in US manuals" and "demonstrated that their grasp and practice of tactical fundamentals… were laudatory."
158
This study focused on the US Army's integration of multinational forces into a developing theater of war. The ROK was selected for the study because it was America's most vital partner among the Free World Forces committed during the Vietnam War and held a continuous military relationship that began just after World War II. In the early stages of the MACV's buildup of US Army combat forces in 1965, it had challenges in assimilating inbound ROK Army forces into US-led operations because of a lack of formal command relationships.
Fortunately, MACV Commander General William Westmoreland's diplomatic handling of command structure and authority with ROKFORV Commander Lieutenant General Chae Myung Shin along with the established military relationship helped to develop mutual confidence between the armies. Furthermore, the US Army's military partnership with ROK Army during the period allowed for the ROK Army to be familiar with the US Army operations thus easing its ability to adapt to be compatible with the US Army in organizational structure and doctrine.
These factors resulted in the overall successful integration of the ROK Army.
This case study analysis examined three aspects of the integration of the ROK Army into MACV using criteria from Field Manual 3-16, The Army in Multinational Operations. It delivers a historical narrative evaluated by the doctrinal criteria to provide an in-depth analysis of applying those principles to the relationship between the US and the ROK Army. The first was the establishment of a command and control relationship with multinational partners using the lead nation, integrated, or parallel command structures and their associated authorities command authorities. The second was intelligence sharing to ensure critical intelligence is distributed to multinational partners. The last criteria was combined operational planning and execution of a significant operations. Each of these three criteria were selected due to their logical connection in forming a multinational force with a command structure focused on achieving unity of effort, sharing actionable intelligence in support of military operations, and from that actionable intelligence, employing multinational forces in the planning and execution of a combined operation such as Operation Irving. With each evaluation criteria focusing on a specific aspect of the integration of the ROK Army into MACV, lessons emerge from each along with gaps within FM 3-16.
The establishment of the parallel command and control relationship between MACV, I Field Force, and the ROK Army was not the doctrinally desirable lead nation command structure.
FM 3-16 implies the lead nation command structure is most desirable with one nation in the lead role and its command and control is dominate with a single commander. 
159
160
Westmoreland expected Chae's forces to be subordinated to MACV and I Field Force.
When Chae refused and demanded that the ROK Army be a separate and co-equal force in a cooperative relationship with MACV and I Field Force, Westmoreland developed a unique arrangement. Westmoreland solution was a parallel command structure and co-locations of ROK Army headquarters near their US Army equivalents which facilitated mutual support and cooperation among the armies. The implication for the US Army in the future is that continued military partnership will involve similar parallel command structures to accommodate and satisfy foreign armies' political and military leaderships thus developing cooperation from operational to tactical levels to build a high level of trust and mutual respect between each force. This will enable effective command and control even if it is not in the preferred lead nation command structure.
MACV needed to develop an intelligence sharing system. It understood the critical nature of sharing intelligence with its multinational partners. MACV developed policies to ease the burden of intelligence classification restrictions imposed on it and its subordinate headquarters to and continuous military cooperation that overall made Operation Irving a success. The implication for the US Army is that cooperation with operational leaders to develop an mutually agreeable command structure with open dialogue between staff section, especially in the military intelligence and operations planning, will result in ease of combined planning and execution of tactical operations. By establishing military cooperations between various armies, the US Army can avoid hasty crisis-driven military cooperation where the US and foreign armies are working together for the first time in a major operation. Not only will each army have challenges to adapt themselves to bridge capabilities gap, but they will not have developed the mutual trust, respect, and understanding needed to effective and efficient cooperation.
Although FM 3-16 is designed to provide broad guidance, it could improve to provide expanded details on parallel command structures in planning multinational command structures.
FM 3-16 does not provide the appropriate level of details on parallel command structures. It describes parallel command structure in one paragraph as follows:
The parallel command structure is an alternative to the lead nation concept. There is no single coalition commander under this structure. The multinational leadership coordinates among the participants to attain unity of effort. This is not the preferred structure because of the absence of a single coalition commander and lack of unity of command. 
163
Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom are recent examples of multinational operations where a coalition of countries contributed to support a US-led multinational force. As a result of the US and coalition's contributions, Afghanistan and Iraq were able to form national governments and have trained and equipped security forces. However, the conflicts are still too recent as for the time of this study and many applicable military documents in multinational integration with combat operations are not available due to their current classification levels. In addition, the author feels that most current historical writing on both conflicts are not mature in details and analysis about integration of foreign armies for the same reasons. These military documents are not expected to be declassified until government and military officials believe the declassification and release of the related documents will no longer have the possibility of domestic and international political repercussions for all nations involved.
The author focuses solely on the Vietnam War with the understanding the lesson learned in that conflict are universal and relate to future conflicts. In the future, when classified documents are declassified and released to the public, the author recommends future researchers conduct a comparative analysis of the integration of the ROK Army's integration into the US-led coalition in Vietnam War to the ROK Army integration into the US-led coalition in Operation Iraqi
Freedom. This comparative analysis will have demonstrated the US Army's strengths and continued challenges of integrations of multinational forces that can improve future multinational doctrines.
Overall, The Vietnam War provides an example of multinational partnership in modern warfare, where the US Army was part of a multinational force conducting decisive action in a unified effort towards a strategic objective. The US Army's overall success in integrating the ROK Army during the Vietnam War was due to MACV's approach to command and control,
25  
25  
Robert M. Blackburn, Mercenaries and Lyndon Johnson's "More Flags": The Hiring of Korean, Filipino and Thai Soldiers in the Vietnam War(Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1994), 1 3,10-11.
Headquarters, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (HQ, USMACV),"Command History 1966," 30 June 1967. Since July 9th , 9th  Company and it parent battalion, 3d Battalion of the 1st Cavalry Regiment of the ROK's Tiger Division, joined alongside three battalions from the US 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile) and 3d Brigade of the 25th Division as part of Operation Paul Revere, which began on 10 May. I Field Force Commander, Lieutenant General Stanley R. Larsen, responsible for II Corp Tactical Zone II (CTZ) which included Pleiku and Kontum provinces, greatest concern was a massive coordinated multipronged enemy offensive in widely scattered areas. He feared friendly reaction forces in II CTZ would have difficulty or be unable to effectively counter widely scattered attacks against isolated outpost in difficult terrain. Larsen attempted to mitigate this by sending out forces to actively search along the border for enemy infiltration and supply routes to prevent the NVA from effectively building up their forces.
Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 1-02, Terms and Military Symbols (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2015), 1-18, 1-89. Tactical control (TACON) is the authority over forces that is limited to the detailed direction and control of movements or maneuvers within the operational area necessary to accomplish missions or tasks assigned.
Carland, Combat Operations, 298.   
Sorely, "Adaptation and Impact," 340. The Presidential Unit Citation is the highest unit award. The unit must display such gallantry, determination, and esprit de corps in accomplishing its mission as to set it apart from and above other units participating in the same campaign.
The President, National Security Strategy (Washington, DC: The White House, 2015), 7.
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The U.S. Army Operating Concept (AOC): Win in a Complex World (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), iii-iv. The AOC describes the US Army's ability to provides foundational capabilities for integration of multinational efforts to project national power in future conflicts.
Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 3-0, Unified Land Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2012), 2-2. ADRP 3-0 defines decisive action as the continuous, simultaneous combinations of offensive, defensive, and stability or defense support of civil authorities tasks.
The ROK Ministry of National Defense, The History of the ROK-USAlliance, 1953  2013 (Institute for Military History Compilation, Ministry of National Defense, South Korea,  2014), 100, 106, 107; The American War Library, "Vietnam War: Allied Troop Levels 1960-73," accessed September 27, 2015, http://www.americanwarlibrary.com/vietnam/vwatl.htm. By 1972, 29,655 US troops remained in Vietnam while ROK forces numbered at 37,438 of two infantry divisions and maintain that force strength until the Paris Peace Accord took effect on 29 January 1973 requiring international military forces to begin withdrawing from South Vietnam.
Lawrence Freedman, Strategy: A History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), 143.
Ibid., 139.   
Stephen A. Carney, Allied Participation in Operation Iraqi Freedom (Washington DC: Center of Military History, 2011), 2.
Ibid., 3.   
Ibid., 5-1.
Churchill College Cambridge, "Sir Winston Churchill: Biography," https://www.chu.cam.ac.uk/archives/collections/churchill-papers/churchill-biography/
Churchill College Cambridge, "Sir Winston Churchill: Biography," https://www.chu.cam.ac.uk/archives/collections/churchill-papers/churchill-biography/
Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood Home, "Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, Office of Secretary, General Staff: Records, 1943-45," http://eisenhower.archives.gov/Research/Finding_Aids/pdf/SHAEF_SGS_Records.pdf. accessed December 20, 2015, 2.
[2]
Graham A. Cosmas, MACV: the Joint Command in the Years of Escalation, 1962-1967  (Washington, DC: Center of Military History, 2006), 345; Blackburn, Mercenaries and Lyndon  Johnson's "More Flags," 130.   
[2]
Larsen and Collins Jr., Vietnam Studies, 138.   
FM 3-16, 2-9. All multinational force troops understand the mission, goals, and objectives of the operation. The G-3/S-3 develops SOPs whenever appropriate these SOPs should be easy to understand and address multinational procedures, not single-nation procedures. The lead nation uses its SOPs for most purposes. Even with SOPs, the lead nation provides a forum for deconflicting and resolving misunderstandings. A robust liaison team bridges command and control interoperability gaps;Larsen and Collins Jr., Vietnam Studies, 138, 139.   
Ramsey III, OP 18,[5][6][7][8]. The United States Military Advisory Group to the Republic of Korea (KMAG) were partnered with the ROK army to train, advise, and assist during the Korean War and afterwards, the The ROK and US Armies continued combined training exercises to improve their interoperability.
James F. Schnabel, United States Army in the Korean War, Vol. 3rd v., Policy and Direction: the First Year (Washington, DC: Center of Military History, 1992), 62-71;Cosmas,  MACV, 345; Larsen. and Collins Jr., Vietnam Studies, 122, 134.   
Cosmas, MACV, 286.   
HQ I FFV "Operational Report: Lessons Learned, Headquarters, I Field Force Vietnam, Period Ending 31 October 1967," 5.
Ibid.; HQ I FFV, "Operational Report: Lessons Learned, Headquarters, I Field Force Vietnam, Period Ending 31 October 1966," 3.
HQ I FFV "Operational Report: Lessons Learned, Headquarters, I Field Force Vietnam, Period Ending 31 October 1967," 5, 6.
 
Ramsey III, OP 18,[7][8][9][10]  The ROK Ministry of National Defense, The History of the ROK-USAlliance, 1953Alliance,  -2013, 86-89.   , 86-89.    
HQ I FFV, "Operational Report: Lessons Learned, Headquarters, I Field Force  Vietnam, Period Ending 30 April 1967, 95-100.    
Ibid., 96, 97.   
Ibid., 99, 100.   
[2]
Ibid., 2-1.
 
[2]
s Integration with the 
US Army
66027 -2301 9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS( ES) 10
SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) School of Advanced Military Studies 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER
North Vietnamese Forces
Republic of Korea (ROK) Army
Vietnam War. AOC Army Operating Concept ARVN Army of the Republic of Vietnam C2 Command
Control CENTCOM Central Command CFLCC Coalition Forces Land Component Command CFSOCC Coalition Forces Special Operation Component Command CIA Central Intelligence Agency CIDG Civilian Irregular Defense Group CJSOTF Combined Joint Special Operations Task Force COMUSFK Commander United States Forces
Korea COMUSMACV Commander
United States Military Assistance Command
In the beginning of 1965, MG Joseph A. McChristian became the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (J2, MACV). 
129
130
130
Cosmas,
MACV,
285.;
McChristian,
Vietnam Studies,
13. 131
In summer of 1966, Generals Larsen, Chae, Loc, and their staffs met for their semi annual combined commanders and staff meetings to plan the next six months of operations and campaign strategy. 
140
141
142
143
140
and Collins Jr.,
Vietnam Studies,
139. 141
part because of its ability to be integrated at the division level for combined operations with the US Army employing US Army tactical doctrine.
Following the summer semi-annual combined commanders and staff meetings, two intelligence staff conferences took place, one on August 10th and the other on September 23rd, which was the start of Operation Irving. 
144
The intelligence reports indicated that the NVA 3rd Division forces consisted of the 2nd People's Liberation Armed Forces (PLAF) Regiment, the 12th North Vietnamese Regiment, and portions of the 22nd North Vietnamese Regiments. 
145
146
147
145
146 Carland,
Combat Operations,
262. 147
MACV's ability to achieve such success in these areas was largely the result of mutual confidence and trust built on the ground, but underpinned by a two-decade long military relationship built prior to the Vietnam War. This is an example the US Army should follow in conducting future multinational operations. As Sir Lawerance Freedman, expressed in his book Strategy: A History "When it came to victory, what mattered most was how coalitions were formed, came together, and were disrupted." 164 164 Lawrence Freedman, Strategy: A History, 143.