# ID: bcbf0bf0959b47349858fafa780b0a85
# Title: Strategic Insights. Volume 10, Issue 1, Spring 2011
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2011.0
# Fulltext:
The cover on this edition of Strategic Insights features part of a map designed in December 2010 by Paul Butler, an intern on Facebook's data infrastructure engineering team. Mr. Butler sampled ten million pairs of friends from Facebook and plotted lines based on the distance between their locations. The more friendships between a pair of cities, the brighter the lines. The end result is not data plotted across a map-rather, the map is made from the data itself. Based only on the online relationships between people, this map shows the outlines of continents and even some international boundaries, offering a glimpse of how international relations unfold both in cyberspace and physical reality.
"As a doctrinal matter, the Pentagon has formally recognized cyberspace as a new domain of warfare…it has become just as critical to military operations as land, sea, air, and space." These words, written by Deputy Secretary of Defense William Lynn last fall in Foreign Affairs, cemented the status of cyberspace as a domain of warfare like all others, and coincided nicely with US Cyber Command reaching its full operational capacity. Yet, suggestions of a strategy in the pages of this article and subsequent publications from Cyber Command and its four-star commander, Keith Alexander, belie the fundamental fact that the United States military, government, private sector, and citizenry are all seriously vulnerable to cyber attack and that we have no coherent plan to protect America. "Active defense," by which Cyber Command means going offensive first, is not a strategy that will protect this nation. If anything is clear, it is that we have a remarkably well-developed offensive capability, but no commensurately serious commitment to defense. There is neither a plan nor any capability to defend America's civilian infrastructure, from banking to telecoms to aviation. Perhaps the most important thing Americans can do to make us safer from cyber war is to discuss it, openly, in academic journals, to debate aspects of cyber war in Congress, and to educate the public and the world through mass media. Thus, this volume by the Naval Postgraduate School is an important step in improving our security as a nation.
Given the central importance of net-centric warfare to our current military doctrine, I fear that this lack of clear thinking with regards to defense in cyberspace leaves not only our military, but our society as a whole, highly vulnerable to cyber attack. It will not be the first time that initial adopters of a new military technology, overcome with inertia or overconfident in the weapons they love and consider supreme, fail to defend effectively against that which they have just created. Thus it was that while American Colonel Billy Mitchell was the first to recognize the capability of small aircraft to destroy battleships, it was the Japanese Imperial Navy that most effectively harnessed this knowledge and nearly defeated the Americans in the Pacific during World War II. Great Britain invented the modern tank and a French Colonel, Charles de Gaulle, developed the first tactics of rapid attack with massed tanks supported by air and artillery. However, it was the Germans that perfected the tank design during the interwar period and employed de Gaulle's tactics with horrific efficiency in what they referred to as blitzkrieg. I fear that we may be on the precipice of a similar situation in cyber war, one that may leave the American military hamstrung and the US civilian infrastructure shredded.
Unlike the conventional examples from history, however, the threat to the United States in cyberspace will very likely not come from an adversary developing superior offensive capabilities. Rather it will be from one who can most effectively exploit the inherently asymmetrical nature of cyber war. While the notion of asymmetry in warfare is as old as the profession itself, its implications have rarely been so great as they are when placed in the context of cyber. To confront the United States military in conventional terms is a losing proposition; no other military today can surpass its capabilities on a tactical or strategic level. Yet, the conventional supremacy of the Americans is predicated upon a highly vulnerable foundation, its complete reliance upon information technology. Computers and networks enable all elements of the defense apparatus to function. From units in the field to procurement officers to strategic planners, all communications pass through various computer networks. Navigational and weapons systems aboard planes and ships depend on highly sophisticated networked hardware and software, to say nothing of the thousands of satellites that provide imagery of nearly every inch of the earth. While this high degree of networking has brought unprecedented levels of productivity and efficiency, they also expose the entire operation to serious vulnerabilities. From the insider threat, as demonstrated by the WikiLeaks incidents, to the attacks that compromised the classified SIPRNet, to the hacking of Secretary of Defense Robert Gates' personal computer, the examples of the vulnerabilities in cyberspace to our military abound. For this simple reason, the single most effective way to prevent units from communicating, procurements from taking place, or F-16s from properly acquiring targets, is to compromise chips and software in order to attack the network infrastructure and advanced weaponry of the net-centric giant.
Nevertheless, for all of the potentially devastating implications for the United States military in a cyber war, such a war is probably not imminent. What ought to be of far greater importance not only to the United States, but to all industrialized nations, are the consequences of the current pandemic of economic cyber espionage. Economic warfare, which takes the shape of espionage conducted on an industrial scale against private corporations in all sectors across the globe, is happening every day. Intellectual property, proprietary information, bid and financial data -anything that comprises competitive knowledge in the digital global economy -is a potential target. The risks associated with such large-scale intellectual property theft pose an existential threat to the foundations of a state's economic leadership, competitiveness, and well-being. In our interconnected world mutual dependencies among states abound, and thus, it would be in the long-term interest of few states to seek conventional war that could easily disrupt the delicate architecture of the global village. However, as the global competition for economic primacy intensifies in a knowledge-based global competition, the value of intellectual property, from research and development to biotech formulas to engineering designs, will only increase. China, among other nations, is systematically stealing terabytes of data at low cost, financially and diplomatically, and passing that data to its own companies. Private firms, limited by finite resources and obligations to maximize profits, will always lose against state-backed hackers unbound by such concerns. Governments, in the interest of maintaining economic stability, must therefore protect private industry and start the process of establishing an arms control regime in cyberspace.
Arms control for cyber war is too often summarily dismissed with the question of attribution. Critics assert that if you cannot definitively determine who committed an attack, you cannot hold anyone accountable for violating an agreement. Definitely establishing the origin of cyber attacks is extremely difficult post facto, and in nearly all cases one only ends up with an educated guess. What the argument essentially says is that arms control in cyber war cannot work because it would be too hard to establish. This is a refrain that I encountered multiple times over the course of my career at the Pentagon, State Department, and White House. Whether it was conventional force reduction in Europe, nuclear weapons limitation and reduction with the Soviets, or international agreements on chemical and biological weapons, the initial reaction invoked, without fail, the "it's too hard" argument. Yet we did, after long negotiations, draw down troop levels in Europe, and limit and reduce the numbers of nuclear weapons in our arsenal and ban chemical and biological weapons. With persistence, there are solutions. A way around the attribution problem may be to include in an international agreement on cyber arms control an Obligation to Assist clause. Such a clause would require states party to share information on attacks as they were taking place, and would require that states cut off computers engaged in malicious activity, as confirmed by other parties and an international monitor. Such a convention obviates the attribution issue. The responsibility for malicious traffic rests with the state in which the malicious traffic originates, regardless of whether the actual attacker is located within its borders. I concede that this proposition is not perfect, but it is perhaps the basis of a discussion that must begin now, because the risks are too grave and despite the associated difficulties, there is a great potential for good.
Given the gravity of the implications of activities in this new domain of war fighting, it is vital that our national strategy be comprehensive, serious, and reflective of an open and frank debate, not just within the corridors of the Pentagon, but with academia and the broader public. Though the new Defense Department documents may suggest otherwise, "active defense" and "going first" do not constitute such a strategy. Again, I find myself reminded of historical precedent. In the early days of nuclear strategy, the Pentagon refused to share information regarding policies governing the use of nuclear weapons with anyone, let alone university professors. Yet as it became clear that the military's plan to strike first with the entire nuclear arsenal was not an optimal strategy, civilian officials began to see the value of having academics like Bill Kauffman and Herman Khan dissect and analyze this all too important topic. Those whom Fred Kaplan has called "wizards of Armageddon" brought a much-needed critical eye to the nuclear strategy debate, and slowly backed the nation away from the dangers of a policy governed by a hair trigger. We need a similar debate today regarding cyber war. Should the US government keep secret its knowledge about software vulnerabilities that put the US economic infrastructure at risk? We do not know can who initiate cyber operations against a foreign entity, nor do we know how we would respond if we were the victims of a cyber attack. At what point would we respond kinetically? When does the response require presidential approval? These are but a small fraction of the number of critical, yet unanswered, questions about the national cyber strategy that need to be addressed. Fortunately, this journal and others like it are beginning to explore precisely these kinds of questions and analyze the issues associated with cyber war, work that will undoubtedly ultimately contribute to making us all safer.
Over the last five years, interest in cyber-defense has grown in earnest, particularly after the cyberattacks against the Estonian government in spring of 2007, the discovery of the GhostNet network targeting the Dali Lama's diplomatic offices in 2009, and the Stuxnet worm's disruption of the Iranian nuclear program in 2010. As a result, the US government has made substantial moves in the last two years towards the institutionalization of cyber-defense: • The appointment of Howard Schmidt as Cybersecurity Coordinator for the Obama Administration in December 2009;
• The implementation of a formal partnership in October 2010 between the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Defense, which specifies the responsibilities of each organization;
• Finally, the creation of the US Cyber Command in May 2010, a joint organization including components from all military services (the Army Forces Cyber Command, the U.S. Navy Fleet Cyber Command, the 24 th Air Force, the Marine Corps Forces Cyberspace Command).
Despite these bureaucratic efforts in the White House and in the interagency process, this article argues that there remains a lack of consensus in Washington, particularly within the Department of Defense, on threat assessment in cyberspace and its military implications. A stark intellectual rift between "alarmists" and "skeptics" still prevails. As a result, this elementary battle has led to dysfunction in the institutional response to cyber-threats and jeopardizes the implementation of an effective military posture in cyberspace. Consequently, we need to reassess the relevance of cyberspace as a distinct military domain.
To that end, this article aims for a middle ground between these opposing views, supporting the idea that cyberattacks are more than just a technical nuisance, but less than an existential threat to US national security. As of today, they remain a valuable, but not decisive, tool of military action. At the operational level, it means that cyberspace is not an independent domain. In other words, while warfare in the air is different from warfare on the sea, it is possible to have one without the other. But warfare in cyberspace must be accompanied by warfare in one of these other domains to lead to physical effects. As a result, this paper recommends a comprehensive integration of cyberattacks (which are precisely not autonomous cyberwarfare) into a joint analysis of military battles. Because pundits have been focusing on the broad geopolitical implications of cyberattacks, the strategic literature lacks a systematic and detailed campaign analysis of these acts. This joint analysis would frame cyberattacks as offensive or defensive military engagements in the process of a larger naval, air, or land campaign. Based on the findings of this research, cyberattacks should be considered a subset of an offensive, a means of denial rather than a means of punishment. They aim at attaining an intermediate goal for the attacker.
Consequently, as long as cyber operations are launched by actors with broader objectives than exclusively dominating channels of communication, there is legitimate doubt over whether a cyberwar could occur without an extension to other traditional military domains.
As a necessary word of caution, this article explicitly excludes cases of cyber-espionage whose aim differs from cyberattacks: while the former tries to steal and exploit information from an enemy (eg, the daily attempts of intrusion into the servers of the Defense Department), the latter are defined here in strict military terms to directly or indirectly destroy or disrupt targeted infrastructures. In other words, cyberattacks should be narrowly considered at the battle level as a component of the forces used by the attacker.
This article has three sections. The first section assesses the fundamental divide of the strategic debate on cyber-defense. I show that although many efforts have been dedicated to understanding the strategic dimensions of cyberspace, a rift prevails between two camps: one predicts the emergence of cyberwarfare while the other characterizes such events as no more than cases of 'cyber-annoyance'. In the second section, I explain that this protracted clash of views comes mainly from the use of two misleading analogies for cyberwarfare: nuclear warfare and strategic bombing.
The article then demonstrates in a third section that a middle way to implement a military policy in cyberspace can be found by understanding cyberattacks as a subset of broader military operations.
To that end, I employ the tools of campaign analysis to make an appraisal of events such as the cyberattacks against Georgia prior to its August 2008 war against Russia. Finally the article's conclusion explores the implications of my findings for future research.
In spite of obvious efforts (such as the 2009 60-day Cyberspace Policy Review, led by Melissa Hathaway, former Senior Advisor to the US Director of National Intelligence), the Obama administration has not tackled the fundamental dispute over the strategic implications of cyberattacks. Currently in Washington, two opposing views compete with each other: the alarmist voices (and indeed the most vocal ones) who predict the advent of cyberwarfare as a revolutionary form of conflict, and the skeptical voices who acknowledge the "annoying" vulnerabilities of US civilian and military infrastructures but who do not see such attacks as the constituents of a pattern for potential new major conflicts.
This divide has existed since the middle of the 1990s, when the US Department of Defense and military-related think tanks started issuing reports and articles on the strategic implications of cyberspace. Although the cyber realm and information warfare have significantly evolved since then, the terms of the divide have been noticeably constant all along. Starting in the 1990s, an impressive proportion of the strategic studies literature focused on the so-called "Revolution in Military Affairs", of which the optimal exploitation of electronic interfaces was only one of many components. From the futurists Alvin and Heidi Toeffler, and their famous "third wave" characterization of the information revolution, 1 to the iconoclast colonel Richard Szafranski and his fuzzy concept of "neocortical warfare", people inside the Defense Department started to read and write about warfare in the information age. 2 This led to the now famous but still-ambiguous concept known as "information warfare". 
3
4
Yet straight away, ideas about a war in cyberspace sounded at best farfetched, at worst spurious. After all, was it not a term -cyberspace -taken from a science fiction book? 5 Some researchers saw this conflation of concepts and ideas as an eventual march toward the establishment of a coherent field of studies. For instance, the late Laurent Murawiec, a scholar from the Hudson Institute, observed in 2001 that
As presently constituted, the field seems to cover a bewildering array of subsets: psychological warfare, deception, cyberwar, critical information protection, computer network attack, computer network exploitation, netwar, and more. The confusion is normal.
When people started building automobiles, hundreds, if not thousands of attempts were made which bore the name of "automobile", and other names too. The variety of shapes, methods, materials, solutions proposed to the various problems of a self-propelled vehicle, was equally bewildering. It took time and experience, much competition and failures, to winnow, to rationalize, to weed out. We can only expect the same to hold true in the field of "information warfare" as opened up by the digital revolution of the last quarter century. 
6
7
8
9
In a US Air Force journal, Chilton wrote that "the deterrence impacts of such uncertainty over the potential impacts of a cyberspace attack would be a function of the nature of the attacker's goals and objectives. A competitor's concerns about unintended consequences could enhance the effects of our deterrence activities if it wishes to control escalation or fears blowback from its cyberspace operations". 
10
Originally emerging at the end of the Kennedy administration, MAD was a doctrine that assured that a full-scale use of nuclear weapons by two opposing sides would effectively result in the destruction of both the attacker and the defender. 
11
As a matter of fact, one year prior to Chilton's article, a suggestion from a US military officer was already raising similar questions. In May 2008, Colonel Charles Williamson from the US Air Force wrote a widely criticized article in the Armed Forces Journal on the potential build-up of military botnets that could be used for offensive purposes. 
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Balancing the equation between the alarmists and the skeptics of cyber-threats requires a critical examination of the terms of the debate, and more specifically of the frequently used analogies. The study of new phenomena in international affairs is often dependent on analogical reasoning. Analogies provide guideposts on the assumption that new issues can be understood within the framework of older, more familiar ones. Regarding cyberspace, two analogies have been extensively used, both explicitly and implicitly: cyberwarfare as nuclear warfare, and cyberwarfare as strategic bombing. Each is misleading.
The analogy with nuclear warfare is often used to emphasize the low level of existing knowledge on the strategic implications of cyberattacks. Within that logic, the same could be said of the early nuclear literature published in the 1950s and 1960s. At that time, no one denied the potentialities of nuclear weapons, as they were dramatically demonstrated at Hiroshima and Nagasaki. But equally, no one could accurately appraise how nuclear forces and their diffusion would alter the balance of power in the context of the Cold War. It took years and some risky and bold analysis from Bernard Brodie, Herman Kahn, and Albert Wohlstetter to build a more coherent understanding of nuclear strategy. 
19
20
Furthermore, computer scientists underline that technical limitations prevent the victim of a cyberattack from identifying their attacker in cyberspace, which results in an inability to deter a potentially anonymous aggressor. Indeed, with the current state of technology, cyberattacks deny the technological possibility to trace their origins. The use of botnets implies the hijacking of computers that can be located in other countries, or even on other continents. Therefore, authorities do not have any certainty with which to attribute an attack to a terrorist organization or to a state. For instance, cyberattacks on Estonia in spring 2007 were partly originating from computers physically located in California. Therefore, for all these reasons, cyberattacks can barely be compared to nuclear strikes.
The second analogy refers to strategic bombing, a theory of coercion based on the exploitation of massive air attacks that emerged at the end of the First World War and that has, for much of the period since, constituted a dogma of the US Air Force in its claims for the independent effectiveness of airpower. As Caroline Ziemke wryly observed: "Strategic bombing is not mere doctrine to the USAF; it is its lifeblood and provides its entire raison d'être. Strategic bombing is as central to the identity of the Air Force as the New Testament is to the Catholic Church". 
21
The presumed similarity between cyberattacks and strategic bombing has already led several pundits to argue for an explicit cyberpower doctrine, recalling directly the long and intractable debate over the independent effects of airpower. 
22
23
24
25
The best example of this misleading analogy is the contemporary debate surrounding the Stuxnet attack against the Iranian uranium-enrichment plant in Natanz. After rumors spreading in the summer of 2010, the authorities in Tehran acknowledged in November that the control systems of its nuclear facilities had been targeted by a cyberattack that caused significant physical damage. There is clear evidence from the reports issued by the International Atomic Energy Agency that the cyberattacks targeting the centrifuges delayed for about a week Iran's nuclear program. Nevertheless, Stuxnet did not decisively stop Tehran's ambition, it only hindered the pace of its fulfilment. 
26
Consequently the analogy is not applicable, not strictly because cyberattacks lack the lethality of air strikes (they actually could resemble air strikes in terms of disruptive effects), but because the analogy is biased by the fundamental assumption that strategic bombing can be decisive and so cyberattacks could as well.
Although the errors vary for the respective different comparisons with nuclear warfare or strategic bombing, one common conclusion can be drawn: as of today, cyberattacks do not amount to a distinct field of warfare with its own rules and processes. Both analogies should therefore be avoided if we are to get the conceptual framework for the analysis of cyberattacks right. Therefore, we need to strictly understand the history of the phenomenon within the context of military operations.
The political science literature dedicated to campaign analysis can provide precious insights on how to articulate a robust strategic analysis of cyberattacks that avoids both the fads of "cyberwarmongers" and the reductionist arguments of "cyberskepticals". Campaign analysis looks at the operational level of military activity by combining an appraisal of the objectives, the military balance (quantity, quality, joint capabilities), the terrain, the duration of the campaign and its evolution (breakthrough, maneuver). 
27
28
29
30
31
32
Interestingly, this also happens to be the way that Chinese strategists conceive the exploitation of cyberspace. In spite of misleading speculations regarding Chinese capabilities (mainly a consequence of the alarm generated by the best-selling book Unrestricted Warfare, written in 1999 by PLA colonels Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui), the People's Liberation Army (PLA) does not conceive cyberspace as an autonomous military domain. 
33
34
In spite of all the political exaggerations regarding cyberwarfare, modern cases (Estonia in 2007, Georgia in 2008, the revelations over a so-called 'GhostNet' operating against Tibetan authorities) display evidence that there are no truly independent or even autonomous cyberwars per se. 
35
As a result, our assessment renders debate on the future of deterrence in cyberspace irrelevant. Of course, this does not mean that hackers cannot inflict significant damage that could severely disrupt the vital infrastructure of a country but so too, still, could bombers and tanks. Even worst-case scenarios involving cyberattacks do not suggest that the United States or other major powers could be severely coerced, let alone existentially threatened, by such cyberattacks alone.
The belief that disruptions in cyberspace could defeat a country is flawed-and dangerous. The idea that cyberwarriors could become the principal combatants of a future war without physical implications remains science fiction à la William Gibson. It might be the role of strategic futurists to explore such narratives, but policy-makers that need to base analysis on present-day objective facts have to acknowledge this evidence: taking into account recent international events and known technological trends, cyberattacks cannot be compared to nuclear warfare. The actual analogy that should be explored, if such analogical reasoning is cognitively necessary to conceptualize and understand the emergence of cyberattacks, is electronic warfare. It may be less strategic and more technical, but it is also more relevant.
Policy-makers and military planners should neither overestimate the strategic scope nor underestimate the operational effectiveness of cyberattacks. The protracted battle over their significance has not only intellectual implications but policy ones as well. The inability of the Obama administration to bridge this decade-long gap between these two distinct views of cyber-defense extends the institutional dysfunction into the current system. Alarmists and skeptics are dispersed in all levels of the chain of command (in the White House, the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Defense, the National Security Agency or the Department of State) without anyone prevailing. As a result, final decisions are still taken as a product of bureaucratic tactics, rather than on the back of cautious strategic threat-assessment. 
36
In the coming years, the challenge will be precisely to measure this added-value, whether in offense or in defense, and at both the national armed forces level and the joint international level. Policy makers and strategic analysts should then increase their efforts on the exploitation of two techniques helpful to adapt a military posture in cyberspace:
• First, thorough campaign analysis of recent cyberattacks can provide precious assessments of the "force employment" factor in cyberspace and its effectiveness on the battlefield. It will permit the US military to shift its focus from cybertechnology as the decisive assets to a posture based on an optimal exploitation of these weapons in the context of combined operations to achieve strategic objectives;
• Second, scenario-based exercises should look at how US armed forces can operate in a degraded cyber environment. 
37
38
Jean  This dispute over the Hoover Dam demonstrates the classic pattern of debate over critical infrastructures and their vulnerability to cyber attacks. Most of the process control systems designed to manage critical infrastructures, such as electric grids, oil pipelines, and water utilities, use specialized hardware and proprietary protocols. However, since the 1990s, the managers of these infrastructures have been integrating their control systems with computer networks built from commercial off-the-shelf operating systems, such as Windows and Unix. 2 This has simplified the task of managing facilities remotely, but it has also made process control systems vulnerable to attack over the internet. Alarmists point to these connections as vulnerabilities that pose almost epic threats; skeptics immediately dismiss such fears, claiming that the necessary measures to prevent a catastrophic cyber attack have already been implemented. History suggests the truth lies somewhere in between.
As a relatively young field, national cyber security policy has been open to speculation about potential threats. However, in 2011, network operators have accumulated enough experience and data from real world attacks to draw a more realistic picture of the threats facing critical infrastructures. This paper will examine the history of cyber security incidents at nuclear facilities to assess the extent to which recorded vulnerabilities pose an "epic" threat. Specifically, it will examine three cyber incidents that occurred at U.S. nuclear facilities between 2003 and 2008. It will then turn to details of the 2010 Stuxnet attack against the Iranian nuclear program to outline similarities with the three U.S. incidents. The lessons from these four incidents suggest that situational awareness and other security measures are too weak in their current state to guarantee that a catastrophic attack will never happen. However, it will also argue that launching a catastrophic attack is not simple and requires a sophisticated adversary. The article will then turn to gaps in nuclear regulation that policy makers should consider when formulating cyber security policies, not only for nuclear facilities, but for other critical infrastructures. 
Historically, critical infrastructures have used two kinds of control systems: supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems that quickly gather remote field data, and distributed control systems (DCS) that manage automated manufacturing processes. Over time, these systems began to share many of the same technologies and features, making them less distinct from each other. However, given their separate histories, much of their distinct terminology remains. Other terms, such as integrated control systems (ICS) or instrumentation and control (I&C) are also used, depending on the traditional practice of the facilities using these systems. This paper will collectively refer to these technologies as process control systems (PCS). 
3
4
Power plants also have office networks for business purposes. The office networks often collect data from control networks and have connections with a wider corporate network over the internet.
Connecting control networks with business offices and the larger corporate network makes it easier for managers to match plant operations with business goals and improve efficiency. However, it also opens a path that malicious hackers on the wider internet could follow to the plant's process control systems.
Operators of process control systems used to believe they were invulnerable to cyber attack for two main reasons. The first reason is the assumption that PCS are isolated from the internet; the second is that PCS generally use proprietary protocols and specialized hardware not compatible with ordinary computers and common network protocols like Ethernet and TCP/IP. These assumptions have led some PCS operators to see the threat of a cyber attack as alarmist. For example, a 2002 article published in CIO Magazine outlines the numerous security precautions taken by the Massachusetts Water Resource Authority (MWRA) and concludes that a cyber attack against its PCS would have no effect:
[M]ost public utilities rely on a highly customized Scada system. No two are the same, so hacking them requires specific knowledge --in this case, knowledge of the MWRA's design and access to that customized software. ... Scada is not networked, except in two places. 
5
[PLCs] follow the lowest level, most basic instructions (such as turn on and turn off), and report them to Scada ... If something is wrong, the PLC says, "Help me" in the form of an alarm. The alarm sounds at the water site and at the Scada operations centers. The alarm also flashes on the computers, and it can't be shut off until a formal acknowledgement of the alarm is made and physically logged by a human being 
6
However, many operators have been moving towards open protocols and off-the-shelf hardware to manage their process control systems, even connecting them to the internet-sometimes inadvertently. 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
The United States has 104 nuclear power plants generating 98,000 megawatts of electricity, roughly 20% of the electricity generated within the US. These plants generally have process control systems, often designed by the same companies that provide these systems to non-nuclear power plants. 
14
15
16
17
On January 25, 2003, at 12:30 AM Eastern Standard Time, the Slammer worm began exploiting a vulnerability in Microsoft SQL Server. Within ten minutes, it had infected 75,000 servers worldwide-90% of vulnerable hosts. The design of Slammer was simple; it did not write itself to the hard drive, delete files, or obtain system control for its author. Instead, it settled in system memory and searched for other hosts to infect. Removing the worm was as simple as rebooting the server after closing network port 1434, Slammer's point of entry. Installing a patch Microsoft had released six months earlier would eliminate the vulnerability Slammer exploited and prevent another infection.
Although Slammer carried no malicious payload, it still caused considerable disruption. It searched for new hosts by scanning random IP addresses. This generated a huge volume of spurious traffic, consuming bandwidth and clogging networks. Slammer's random IP scans disabled data-entry terminals at a 911 call center in Bellevue, Washington (population 680,000), shutdown 13,000 Bank of America ATMs, and forced Continental Airlines to cancel several flights when their online ticketing system and kiosks could not process orders. 
18
19
The reactor at Davis-Besse had been offline for nearly a year before its Slammer infection due to the discovery of a hole in the reactor head. 
20
Davis-Besse had a firewall protecting its corporate network from the wider internet, and its configuration would have prevented a Slammer infection. However, a consultant had created a connection behind the firewall to the consultancy's office network. This allowed Slammer to bypass the firewall and infect First Energy's corporate network. From there, it faced no obstacle on its way to the plant control network. In response, First Energy set up a firewall between the corporate network and the plant control network.
The Davis-Besse incident highlighted the fact that most nuclear power plants, by retrofitting their SCADA systems for remote monitoring from their corporate network, had unknowingly connected their control networks to the internet. At the time, the NRC did not permit remote operation of plant functions. 
21
The August 19, 2006, shutdown of Unit 3 at the Browns Ferry nuclear plant near Athens, Alabama, demonstrates that not just computers, but even critical reactor components, could be disrupted and disabled by a cyber attack. Unit 3 was manually shutdown after the failure of both reactor recirculation pumps and the condensate demineralizer controller. 
22
The condensate demineralizer is a kind of programmable logic controller (PLC); the recirculation pumps depend on variable frequency drives (VFD) to modulate motor speed. Both kinds of devices have embedded microprocessors that can communicate data over Ethernet, a popular standard for local access networks (LAN). However, both devices are prone to failure in high traffic environments. A device using Ethernet broadcasts data packets to every other device connected to the network. Receiving devices must examine each packet to determine which ones are addressed to them and to ignore those that are not. It appears the Browns Ferry control network produced more traffic than the PLC and VFD controllers could handle; it is also possible that the PLC malfunctioned and flooded the Ethernet with spurious traffic, disabling the VFD controllers; tests conducted after the incident were inconclusive.
The failure of these controllers was not the result of a cyber attack. However, it demonstrates the effect that one component can have on an entire PCS network and every device on that network.
Combined with the Davis-Besse worm infection, the Browns Ferry shutdown presents a possible attack scenario. If a worm like Slammer had infected the control network of an active plant and attempted to spread not only through UDP, but also through Ethernet, it could have disabled the recirculation pumps as well as the sensors that would alert plant personnel to the problem.
Due to the growing network connections between control systems and office computers, even seemingly simple actions can have unexpected results. On March 7, 2008, Unit 2 of the Hatch nuclear power plant near Baxley, Georgia, automatically shutdown after an engineer applied a software update to a single computer on the plant's business network. The computer was used to collect diagnostic data from the process control network; the update was designed to synchronize data on both networks. When the engineer rebooted the computer, the synchronization program reset the data on the control network. The control systems interpreted the reset as a sudden drop in the reactor's water reservoirs and initiated an automatic shutdown. 
23
The Stuxnet attack against the Iranian nuclear program demonstrates the impact that a sophisticated adversary with a detailed knowledge of process control systems can have on critical infrastructures.
Stuxnet is believed to have destroyed 984 centrifuges at Iran's uranium enrichment facility in Natanz. 
24
25
However, that sophistication must be considered when assessing the vulnerability of nuclear facilities to cyber attack. The Stuxnet worm targeted specific PCS components used in the Iranian centrifuge cascades: a frequency converter manufactured by Iranian firm Fararo Paya, another frequency converter manufactured by Finland's Vacon, 
26
27
28
29
30
While the New York Times article only presents a possible scenario, that scenario and the evidence reflect the challenges of executing a catastrophic cyber attack against a nuclear facility. Programming is a cyclical process of trial and error. For an amateur hacker working only with a computer, the costs of testing software are trivial. Testing software designed for process control systems, however, requires access to the system in question, which is usually expensive. Malicious hackers could run tests on a remote PCS they had compromised, but an unsuccessful test could raise alarms or damage the system before the hackers were ready for the next stage of an attack. The Stuxnet authors would need a dedicated testbed to refine their code. Stuxnet also incorporated technical information specific to the Iranian facility. These resources are out of the reach of amateurs and would require the kind of funding and actionable intelligence that comes from state sponsorship.
The Stuxnet attack also incorporates elements of the other three incidents examined in this paper. First, it disrupted the systems that monitored physical components, like the Davis-Besse worm infection. Second, it interfered with programmable logic controllers, like the Browns Ferry data storm. Third, it relied on there being some path from ordinary office computer to process control systems, as in the Hatch automatic shutdown. At the same time, the Stuxnet authors innovated on these features: Stuxnet did not simply disrupt sensor output, it faked it; it did not simply interfere with PLCs, it gave them specific instructions; finally, it did not rely on an internet connection to Natanz-it also traveled between computers on worker's thumb drives 
31
32
These four incidents hold important lessons for the cyber security of nuclear facilities and critical infrastructures in general. First, skeptics claim that PCS are immune from attack since they are not connected to the internet. However, the Davis-Besse incident shows that this is a misconception; even operators who try to monitor and protect every connection cannot be sure they know about all of them. Stuxnet even traveled on portable thumb drives to infect computers that were not connected to the internet. Second, skeptics argue that PCS are immune from attack since they are different from ordinary computers. However, all four incidents demonstrate that PCS have become interoperable with ordinary computers, making them vulnerable. Third, vulnerabilities are more complicated than both skeptics and alarmists realize. Alarmists often invoke the danger of hackers taking control of a power plant, but these incidents show how unintelligent computer viruses and even malfunctions in small devices can have big unexpected effects. This suggests that even though nuclear facilities are vulnerable to attack, a malicious hacker would have difficulty making sure an attack works precisely as planned. Even so, states are working make cyber attacks more precise, supplementing their methods with intelligence from other sources.
As states take a greater interest in launching cyber attacks against nuclear facilities, they should also 31  take a greater interest in protecting their own facilities against attack. This means translating the lessons of previous incidents into workable guidance and regulation for plant operators. So far, this has been lacking, both from the United States government and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The nuclear industry does not have the expertise to handle such threats on its own, as evidenced not only by the incidents covered here, but also by the lack of compliance with NERC critical asset identification standards. 
33
34
35
While the IAEA lacks the enforcement powers of the NRC, it still has an important role to play as inspector and advisor to the nuclear programs of other nations. However, it seems to be a bit slower than the NRC in developing its cyber security expertise. Its most recent technical guidance on the matter seems to be "Security of Information and Instrumentation & Control Systems at Nuclear Facilities" released in 2007. However, this guidance fails to account for documented PCS incidents in both nuclear and non-nuclear facilities and the reported experience of penetration testers. For example, the guidance states that cyber security at nuclear facilities can be achieved using the same methods and tools developed for IT security. 
36
While some cyber security incidents have occurred at nuclear power plants, crossing the imaginary boundary between IT and PCS and shutting down reactors, so far the potential for damaging a nuclear reactor appears theoretical. Scott Lunsford, a penetration tester for IBM, says government mandated safeguards would prevent a hacker from triggering a meltdown. So far, no catastrophic damage has resulted from a cyber attack against a nuclear facility. The same cannot be said for other sectors, as in the case of the Maroochy water incident, and the Stuxnet attack has demonstrated that states are likely pushing the development of new tactics and capabilities in cyberspace.
Although the experience of the nuclear sector lags behind that of non-nuclear facilities in cyber security and PCS, nuclear plants must also comply with stronger safety regulations and inspections.
Although he NRC's cyber regulations are still being developed, its existing regulations have put several incidents on the public record that would have gone unreported by non-nuclear power plants. This parallels the trend of cyber security in e-commerce. In the early 2000's, banks and online merchants commonly suffered cyber attacks that potentially revealed their customers private data to hackers. To protect their reputations, they hired consultants to quietly fix their systems under a nondisclosure agreement. Eventually, California passed SB1386, requiring any company that did business in the state of California to notify their customers if a hacker could have potentially accessed their private data. After the law went into effect in July 2003, the extent of the hacking became public knowledge and companies began to invest in cyber security to reassure their customers before they suffered an attack. Oil, gas, and electric companies have been active in protecting their PCS from cyber attack, however, they still have little incentive to report the attacks they suffer. No regulation requires it, and companies fear their information could be made public under the Freedom of Information Act if they do. The years from 2010 to 2015 could prove decisive in the field of PCS security. If the NRC can implement the same sort of rigorous inspection and reporting requirements for cyber security as they have for physical security and safety, it may open the field up to greater public scrutiny and spur the investment needed to better protect critical infrastructures.
Brent Kesler graduated from Dartmouth College in 2003 with a degree in computer science. Until 2006 he wrote Security in the News, a daily report of developments related to malicious hacking, malware, cyber security best practices, and homeland security. He later worked as research coordinator for the Institute for Information Infrastructure Protection (I3P), helping manage federal research projects related to critical infrastructure protection. In 2010, Mr. Kesler graduated from the Monterey Institute of International Studies, building on his cyber security background with a master's degree in international policy and a focus on terrorism.
The Republic of China (Taiwan hereafter) and the People's Republic of China (China hereafter) are two particularly attractive targets for internet hackers. Reports have found that, compared to other countries in the Asia and Pacific regions, China and Taiwan rank as the top two countries in terms of malicious computer activity. 
1,
2
3,
4,
5,
6,
7
8
Impeded by the present political situation, there is currently no formal mutual assistance agreement against crime between Taiwan and China. a However, there exists a level of quasi-formal and informal cooperation between law enforcement agencies, and these include "the Kinmen Agreement", "the Agreement on Cross-Strait Mutual Assistance in Crime Matters" (hereafter, the Agreement on Mutual Assistance), and informal police-to-police cooperation. It is arguable whether these existing cooperation methods are applicable to cybercrime issues because cybercrime is potentially more sensitive for both governments as opposed to more conventional crimes. This paper will introduce cases of cybercrime across the Taiwan Strait and the existing mutual cooperation methods used against crime. Based on interview data, it will also examine the use of quasi-formal agreements signed by non-governmental organizations under the authorization of both governments, and it will then examine the role played by informal relationships between police officials. In each case, the paper will examine obstacles these strategies face in obtaining cooperation.
◆ ◆ ◆ 
Thirty-eight interviews (including four focus groups, one in China and three in Taiwan) with a total of 44 interviewees were conducted in Taiwan and China during the years 2008 and 2009. All the interviewees interviewed in Taiwan are coded with the letter "T" while those in China are coded with the letter "C". The number following the letter refers to the case record. For example, T001 means the first interview done in Taiwan.
Interviewees were selected purposely based on their work experience or background. People with knowledge of information security and cybercrime were potential samples for this research. These included but were not limited to IT people in government agencies and private companies, police officers, prosecutors, and other professionals in cybercrime and information security, such as professors, managers of legal compliance in companies, and information security experts in big accounting firms which audit information security and conduct staff training in organizations. They were categorized into four groups: public sector, private sector, law enforcement, and other professionals.
The concept of data saturation, whereby data is collected until no new information is obtained, 9 was adopted by this research as the basis to decide the sample size. Except for the interviews in the categories of public sector and law enforcement agencies from China, interviews in other categories all reached the point of theoretical saturation.
In Taiwan, there were 23 interviews with 28 interviewees. There were only three interviewees with less than ten years experience in information security or related areas. All other interviewees in Taiwan had more than ten years working experience in this area. Four participants were female.
Among all the interviews in Taiwan, ten were conducted with 12 participants from the private sector; five interviews were conducted with seven participants from the public sector; four interviews were conducted with five participants from law enforcement agencies such as the police and prosecutors; and four professors were interviewed who were experts in law, information security issues or criminology.
In China, 15 interviews were conducted and 16 people participated. Seven interviews were conducted with eight participants from the private sector; three policemen were interviewed as well as five professors. With regard to the experience levels of the interviewees in China, only two had experience in the related area of less than ten years. In terms of gender, only one interviewee was female.
There were no Chinese government agencies willing to be interviewed. As well, there were no Chinese prosecutors interviewed. However, in lieu of formal prosecutors, some professors interviewed were also concurrently serving as deputy chief procurators. Their contributions helped overcome the lack of data from government officers and prosecutors in China.
The special political situation between Taiwan and China, and their often antagonistic relationship, has encouraged the growth of malicious activities between them. It has been reported that both Taiwan and China possess net-armies which hack into their respective counterpart government systems to conduct cyber espionage and to steal sensitive data. 
10,
11,
12
As an example, a significant number of cyber attacks occurred in 1999 when a special state-to-state relationship was declared by then-President of Taiwan Teng-hui Lee. In that year President Lee declared in an interview with Deutche Welle that relations between Taiwan and China were of a stateto-state nature, or at least a "special" state-to-state relationship existed. Seeing that interview as a possible pro-Taiwanese independence declaration, nationalistic Chinese hackers cracked into Taiwan's government websites to show their anger. Government websites such as those belonging to the Administrative Yuan, the Control Yuan, the National Assembly, and Presidential Executive Office were replaced with an image of the Chinese five-star flag and with political statements such as "Taiwan is an indivisible part of China". As revenge, Taiwanese hackers spontaneously responded in kind. They hacked into Chinese government websites and replaced the image of China's national flag with the Taiwan national flag. 
13,
14
15
16
17
18
Although there is no inter-governmental mutual assistance agreement between Taiwan and China, there As a framework for the swift repatriation of stowaways and criminals, the Kinmen Agreement on Handling Deportation of Wanted Criminals and Suspects was signed in 1990 between the Red Cross Society of the People's Republic of China and the Red Cross Society of the Republic of China (Taiwan). This was the first bilateral agreement between Taiwan and China since 1949, although both governments did not sign it but authorized non-governmental organizations to sign. It was also the first document between the two countries to contain "quasi-judicial" mutual assistance provisions and is recognized as a precedent for the Agreement on Cross-Strait Mutual Assistance in Crime Matters. 
19
20
Containing 24 articles in five chapters, the Agreement covers the extent of cooperation, the types of crime covered, mutual assistance in crime investigation and evidence collection, and other administrative aspects. Unlike the Kinmen Agreement, which focuses on the repatriation of criminals or suspects, this agreement focuses on collaboration in combating crime and the arrest of criminals.
Mao-Su Huang, e the Deputy Director-General of Taiwan's National Police Agency, f comments that the Agreement has institutionalized collaboration in combating crime. 
21
The Agreement realized the institutionalisation, generalisation and comprehensive nature of the judicial mutual assistance across the Taiwan Strait. Since entering into effect in June, it is executed very well with significant outcomes. It promoted greatly the efficiency of collaboration between both sides, and protected the rights and interests of citizens on both sides. 
22
23
Chang (2010) also advised that although some requests had been made by Taiwan, "they are still pending and the attitude of the Chinese Government in terms of cooperation is the most important factor." He said, in an interview with Taiwanese Government officials, that trust between Taiwan and China is the key to the success of the Agreement. Therefore, the effectiveness of the Agreement on Mutual Assistance is still hugely reliant on the political situation between, and the attitudes of, both Taiwan and China-especially the attitude of China. 24
Apart from the above quasi-formal agreements against crime, informal police-to-police cooperation is often used to advance crime investigations. Some senior police and academics said that limited mutual help with investigations has been secured privately and that some guan-xi (關係 "informal relationships") exist between the police in Taiwan and China.
Guan-xi, which resembles the idea of social capital, plays a very important role in different aspects in Chinese society. g As Yang notes in her anthropological work on Chinese culture, the term guan-xi literally means relationship. However, she argued that in the context of the gift economy, "it has the sense of social connections, connections which must be carefully initiated, preserved and renewed through the giving and receiving gifts, favors and dinners or banquets." 
25
26
Many things can be done privately and not be discussed formally. It is related to the status of Taiwan. We think this is the most troublesome thing to us…It is just like the mo-chi between you and me. We know our "bosses" are like aliens to each other, but in order to achieve outcomes, we need mo-chi (T017, senior police officer).
A senior law enforcement officer in Taiwan also illustrated the existence of informal police-to-police relations and cooperation between Taiwan and China. He said that some police in the Crime Investigation Bureau in Taiwan had some guan-xi with the public police in China. They could deal with some cases "under the table". That is, there is some unofficial cooperation.
For example, in 2005 a cross-Strait kidnapping case was cleared with the help of informal police-topolice cooperation. While there was no formal mutual cooperation between Taiwan and China, the police in Taiwan, in order to solve the case, used their personal relations (guan-xi) to request help from police in China. The criminal was finally arrested by police in Macao and was sent back to Taiwan. Interestingly, official press releases do not emphasize this informal police-to-police relationship as it might be criticized for being "under the table".
g There are doubts about the similarity and differences of guan-xi and social capital, especially in the field of anthropology, where some argue that guan-xi is an essential and defining elemental part of Chinese culture, while others believe that guan-xi is little more than a Chinese word for social capital which can be found in all societies, see more discussion at e.g. Gold, Guther, & Wank (2002), Jacobs (1979), King (1991), Smart (1993), Yang (1988). Here, the original expression guan-xi is used to avoid any misunderstanding that might result from using other terms, such as "social capital".
Inevitably, there are some defects that diminish the effectiveness of informal police-to-police cooperation. One is that guan-xi is usually exclusive to the persons who build it and it does not usually last long. It is difficult to pass to others. Therefore, guan-xi might not work if the person changes position or leaves his job. Furthermore, informal police-to-police cooperation is still highly dependent on a positive political environment for guan-xi to be effective. In other words, if the relationship between Taiwan and China improves, the police may be able to achieve more. Equally, if the relationship between the countries worsens then little will be achieved.
From the discussion above, we can see that a number of alternate forms of cooperation against crime exist to cover the current lack of formal cooperation between Taiwan and China. These include quasi-formal mutual cooperation and informal police-to-police cooperation.
Theoretically, quasi-formal cooperation agreements, such as the Kinmen Agreement and the Agreement on Mutual Assistance should be sufficient for Taiwan and China to cooperate in combating cybercrime. This is supported by most of the interviewees. All elements for cooperation against cybercrime, such as mutual assistance in crime investigation and evidence collecting, and extradition, are included in these two agreements. Academics, both in Taiwan and China, believed that the agreements should be able to be used as a model for cooperation against cybercrime.
Elements of cybercrime, such as hacking and other malicious activities, were proposed for inclusion in the Agreement on Mutual Assistance by the Taiwanese negotiators. 
27
However, should attitudes change, the use of the generalized term "other crimes" in the Agreement on Mutual Assistance could cover cooperation on cybercrime for those cybercrimes which are not sensitive, such as purely economic crimes like fraud. Indeed, some cybercrime cases have been pursued under the agreements. For example, since the signature of the Agreement on Mutual Assistance, at least 100 computer fraud crime groups have been investigated and hundreds of criminals and suspects involved in computer fraud have been arrested. 
28
Apart from the quasi-formal agreements listed above, informal police-to-police cooperation is another channel for cooperation when investigating cybercrime across the Taiwan Strait. As advised previously, a level of guan-xi already exists between certain police officers in China and Taiwan, leading to informal cooperation on major crimes. As a senior police officer said, for computer fraud cases, they cooperate "under the table" first in crime investigation and evidence collection. Through the use of guan-xi, they can ask "their friends" to locate criminals so that they can obtain accurate information on the criminal's whereabouts. When the case is ready to close, they will then formally apply for mutual assistance to the appropriate contact officer in charge of the region and seek the arrest of the suspect criminals. This approach is more efficient than simply sending out a request to ARATS without any helpful background information.
Notwithstanding some success in this mutual assistance against cybercrime, the methods used have been limited and only apply to certain types of cybercrime. Most police interviewed were still very pessimistic about cooperation between China and Taiwan against cybercrime.
A senior police officer in China said that they seldom dealt with transnational crime cases, and if a case was related to Taiwan, there was even less chance of it being pursued. Similarly, some senior law enforcement officers in Taiwan said that, according to their experience or their understanding, when a crime originated overseas the local police could usually do "nothing":
For Taiwan and China, zero. There is no mutual help between Taiwan and China. We try to tell them and ask for their help, but … basically there is no response (T004, senior police officer).
T004, a senior police officer in Taiwan, explained that this might be because some hackers were hired by their respective governments. Cooperation when combating cybercrime, especially when that cybercrime was directed against government agencies, was likely to be awkward even when both sides trust each other. As Professor Susan Brenner h indicated in her book Cyberthreats: The Emerging Fault Lines of the National State, it is quite impossible for the sponsoring state to cooperate in the investigating efforts:
When what is ostensibly cybercrime is state-sponsored -as is increasingly true of economic espionage -the efficacy of the civilian law enforcement response process breaks down. The sponsoring state will almost certainly refuse to cooperate with the investigative efforts of the victim state's law enforcement officers, and thereby thwart the crime response process. 
29
Given this, the Chinese and Taiwanese governments could only be anticipated to cooperate if it could be shown that the hackers involved were not supported by either government or that the hacking behavior was not related to national interests. Senior police officers in Taiwan believed that cooperation against cybercrime between Taiwan and China was possible if it was an economic issue and there is no government element involved and when both sides suffered from the same crime:
…Only when they are suffering from the same crime do they cooperate. Do you remember the news not long ago about organised crime being cleared-up? That group not only committed fraud in Taiwan, but also in China. That is why China's public police were willing to help. See, I reckon only when they are suffering will they help! (T017)
When the Chinese suffer from the same crime will they start to cooperate? The best example of cooperation is the mutual assistance between Taiwan and China in terms of telecommunication and computer fraud! (T004)
h NCR Distinguished Professor of Law and Technology at the University of Dayton School of Law.
In addition to the nature of the cybercrime being committed, the political situation between Taiwan and China can determine whether cooperation is possible. Most interviewees agreed that there would be no cooperation between Taiwan and China when the political situation was tense. T017 said that, when Cross-Strait relations were tense, Taiwan could hardly get a response from China to their requests. Even informal police-to-police cooperation stopped-even guan-xi does not work when relations between Taiwan and China are bad.
The attitude of the respondent can also play a vital role in cooperation. According to a senior police officer's experience, most of the SEF requests to ARATS for help in cybercrime investigations remain unsettled. Often only a pro forma reply to the request for assistance was received, even when the relationship was good:
I remember that we had requested ARATS, via SEF, to investigate some cybercrime problems.
For most of the cases, we did not get any response from them. Even if there was a reply, the answers were usually pro forma, telling us that they could not find any information or there was nothing wrong (T017).
It is encouraging that, despite the lack of formal mechanisms for mutual assistance between Taiwan and China, there are alternative channels for cooperation, including quasi-formal mutual assistance and informal police-to-police cooperation. Current agreements and informal police-to-police cooperation could potentially be sufficient for police from both sides to cooperate with their counterparts against cybercrime. However, that cooperation can only apply to cybercrimes that are purely economic in nature and where there is no government involvement. Cooperation is more likely when both countries are suffering from the same crime, such as computer fraud.
There are still barriers impeding cooperation between the two countries. Cooperation, whether quasi-formal or informal, is highly dependent on the official or governmental relationship between Taiwan and China existing at the time of the criminal investigation. Quasi-formal cooperation and informal cooperation through guan-xi between police forces work well only when the official relationship between Taiwan and China is not tense. Moreover, as indicated by interviewees, the attitude of respondents can also potentially impede cooperation.
It may be a long time before the two governments are able sign an official agreement for formal mutual assistance against cybercrime. However, with current improvements in the relationship between Taiwan and China, there is optimism that the situation could change in the near future. In the interim, and in the absence of a formal agreement, it is all the more important to advance the current quasi-formal and informal cooperation between Taiwan and China.
Dr  
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
For the purposes of this analysis, "internet censorship" is any measure enacted to restrict internet accessibility, processes, functions, or content based on sociopolitical imperatives. Such efforts take place in four distinct realms: laws and regulations; norms; markets; and architecture. 
13
14
States can conduct censorship at four key architectural layers. These include, from least to most centralized: individual computers, organizations, internet service providers (ISPs), and the internet backbone. 
15
16
17
18
19
The Department of Defense (DoD) has no official, unified definition for "cyberspace situational awareness," 20 despite the term's frequent, government-wide usage since the mid-2000s. 
21
Cyberspace situational awareness enables commanders and planners to assess the current situation, collaborate on courses of action, take action, and anticipate opportunities and challenges in the domain. Automated tools must be employed to provide near-real time notification of anomalous activity and properly inject appropriate data into operational views to characterize the cyberspace activity. This situational awareness combined with proper risk assessments, including intelligence loss or gain determinations, will allow commanders to make the best decisions on courses of action. 
22
23
In many aspects of the cyber domain, particularly those that relate to computer network attack, US capabilities appear far more advanced than the policies that guide their use. This resembles the early phases of the nuclear age, prior to the advent of deterrence theory and other guiding concepts. 
24
With respect to enterprise situational awareness, the 2011 US budget states that the Office of Management and Budget should initiate ICT programs and activities that promote the "[m]ove towards Situational Awareness across the Government". The document asserts that:
More frequent reporting, near or at real-time, is imperative for developing situational awareness across the Federal enterprise. The use of Security Information Management or Security Information Event Management tools will assist in progressing towards real time security awareness and management in the Government. 
25
26
27
build an effective cyber-situational awareness in real time through a common, shareable operating picture. We must share indications in warning threat data at Net speed among and between the various operating domains. We must synchronize command-and-control of integrated defensive and offensive capabilities, also at Net speed. 
28
29
Progress towards these ends is evident, but legal and structural impediments remain. With respect to enterprise situational awareness, DHS Secretary Janet Napolitano recently announced that the Einstein 2 program, which can "automatically detect and disrupt malicious cyber activity," is almost fully deployed across the ".gov" domain. Development of the program's third iteration is already underway. 
31
32
34
35
36
37
The following exercise, held in March 2008, cites improvements but maintains that a better "[u]nderstanding [of] the interconnectedness and cause/effect relationships between actions taken by each organization would help to maintain broad situational awareness and galvanize a holistic approach to cyber response." 
39
40
Other checks, from a structural standpoint, include the market-driven and generally decentralized development of internet infrastructures. For example, US internet traffic destined abroad (and foreign traffic destined for the United States) may transit any of the approximately 19 undersea cable landing facilities along the US east and west coasts. Moreover, internet access in the United States is multimodal. That is, users may connect in a variety of ways, including by satellite. Finally, there are thousands of ISPs operating in the United States, of which perhaps a half dozen are considered "tier 1" providers. As a corollary, numerous US firms operate the international gateways that connect the internet in the United States to internet infrastructures in foreign countries. This multitude of infrastructure actors severely complicates efforts to establish comprehensive cyberspace domain situational awareness.
In contrast to the abundance of US policy statements on cyberspace situational awareness, there are few indicators of Chinese views on the subject. In absolute terms, China's enterprise situational awareness status is probably less robust than its US counterparts. Software piracy-rampant in China-adversely affects software updates and patch implementation, management, and other essential aspects of system hygiene. Microsoft, for example, recently estimated that 90 percent of its software in use in China is pirated. 
42
Notwithstanding recent efforts to counter the use of pirated software, it remains a common feature of even Chinese government computers. 
43
44
The overwhelming majority of China's internet communications with the outside world transit just three international gateways located in Beijing in the north, Shanghai in the east, and Guangzhou in the south. 
45
46
physically monitor all [internet] traffic into or out of the country. They do so by installing at each of these few "international gateways" a device called a "tapper" or "network sniffer," which can mirror every packet of data going in or out…. "Mirroring" is the term for normal copying or backup operations, and in this case real though extremely small mirrors are employed. Information travels along fiber-optic cables as little pulses of light, and as these travel through the Chinese gateway routers, numerous tiny mirrors bounce reflections of them to a separate set of… computers. 
47
This separate set of computers, known colloquially as China's "Great Firewall," 
48
49
50
51
52
53
An important caveat here is that DPI technology is generally effective only on data sent "in the clear," or in unencrypted form. This weakness allows users to leverage virtual private networks (VPN) to "scale" the Great Firewall. Although Chinese authorities could simply block encrypted internet traffic destined abroad, such a move could immediately halt substantial levels of foreign business operations in China, which the government is loathe to do. 
54
55
56
There are at least five components of situational awareness: intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, environmental monitoring, and common operating picture. 
57
58
59
60
These potential intelligence-related features present more cause for concern when viewed in light of China's ability to essentially import internet traffic from abroad. Although by no means unique-ISPs in other nations have previously done the same thing-China briefly demonstrated this capability in April 2010. In that incident-which could have been accidental-state-owned China Telecom propagated improper routing information that instructed US and other foreign internet traffic to transit Chinese servers. The event affected traffic to and from, among other things, the web domains associated with the Office of the Secretary of Defense and all four US military services. 
61
Surveillance: China's control of the internet extends beyond censorship and into surveillance. 
62
63
64
65
66
Reconnaissance: If Chinese authorities leverage the Great Firewall to analyze traffic, the limited number of international gateways would simplify the process. That virtually all internet traffic between China and the outside world transits three locations would significantly bind the complexity of information mining. 
67
68
69
70
Some evidence suggests that Chinese authorities previously configured routers on national-level networks to filter virus-related traffic. 
71
Common Operating Picture: The confluence of all traffic at just three international gateways could also help enable threat characterization analysis. China has an active marketplace for data mining utilities, frequently used for surveillance applications, 
72
Although situational awareness is clearly a desirable end in the cyber domain, the means employed by China imply some important tradeoffs. Three in particular merit consideration. First, states must determine how to allocate resources in the cyber domain, and skilled personnel might well be the key constraint. Second, states may have an interest in the topology of their networks, particularly the extent to which infrastructure should be centralized. Third, if states view cyberspace as a potential domain of conflict, infrastructure and force structure should be optimized to address contingencies based on threat assessments.
Resource allocation: China's censorship system is rooted in the Chinese Communist Party's (CCP) perception about how best to maintain regime stability. Thus, from a defense planning perspective, derivative gains in situational awareness are essentially free. However, it is unclear that Chinese investments in ICT architecture reflect risk analyses that weigh censorship against the potential implications of a cyberwar, which could also affect the CCP's ability to maintain social control. Assuming a finite pool of human capital with the advanced skills required to operate in the cyber domain, man-hours expended on censorship activities-even with their ancillary benefits for cyberspace situational awareness-come at the expense of other cyberwar-related capabilities. 
73
Network topology: The CCP's perceived need for censorship influenced the development of China's internet architecture, resulting in considerable centralization. Though helpful for filtering and situational awareness, this comes at the expense of robust redundancy. This may be an acceptable trade-off at the enterprise level. 
74
75
78
79
80
82
83
The discussion above suggests that China's domain configuration yields some benefits for cyberspace situational awareness at the expense of other features. Although China's internet architecture probably evolved independently of these considerations, the Chinese government is nonetheless left with forces and infrastructure that appear better equipped to handle limited rather than total conflicts in cyberspace. For example, in a constrained engagement, situational awareness might be the primary consideration, as it could enable smart defense and mitigation techniques. By contrast, in a more intense scenario, emphasis might shift to favor offensive actions. To the extent that resources available for each mission are drawn from the same pool, this would relatively diminish the importance assigned to domain situational awareness activities. Of course, it remains unknown whether this orientation aligns with the Chinese government's threat perception regarding the relative likelihood of limited versus severe conflict in cyberspace.
The United States must consider the security implications of internet filtering activities. This may influence the urgency and means with which US policy seeks to address internet censorship and related activities abroad. By extension, a policy that accounts for the nexus between certain censorship activities and cyberspace situational awareness could alter present views about the permissibility of US firms' assistance to foreign countries' censorship activities. 
84
85
86
In the event that improvements do require alterations to existing legal and structural checks, each change should reflect a deliberate, inclusive, and transparent review process. Moreover, each potential change ought to be justified through cost-benefit analyses related to resource allocation, network topology, and domain optimization, as described above, or another compelling rationale. Finally, on a tactical level, internet architecture should be a central factor in the context of defensive and offensive cyberspace operational planning. 
86
The decline of the United States as a great power has been a popular topic with pundits for years. The same is true of the United States dollar (subsequently referred to as "dollar") and its role as the world's dominant international currency. Not surprisingly, the loss of such currency status has historically coincided with the loss of great power status.
1
The purpose of this study is to identify looming vulnerabilities that may lead to the demise of the dollar undermining United States power and compromising its national security. In identifying vulnerabilities, we consider economists' views of international currency dominance and Benjamin J. Cohen's state of power theory, apply those views to the historical case of the United Kingdom, and then compare that to the present-day US in light of the National Security Strategy.
There are two opposing thoughts on the potential decline of the United States' international leadership that help shape this examination. Paul Kennedy, of Yale University, wrote in 1987 that the transition between great powers was a slow process that centered on the incumbent's struggle to balance short-term national security demands and long-term economic interests. 
2
3
The central purpose of an international currency today is to serve "as a store of value for central banks' and governments' international reserves."
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11
Finally, Benjamin J. Cohen's state of power theory has noteworthy application. Cohen identifies two operational dimensions of state power: the ability to control the behavior of others and the ability to act unilaterally. 
12
13
14
1. as a store of value for central banks' and governments' international reserves 2. as a unit of accounting denominating international obligations and pricing commodities 3. as a unit of exchange for transactions between other currencies 
15 16
The transition between the sterling and the dollar is significant for two reasons. First, it is the most recent such reordering of the international financial system. Second, according to Eichengreen, based on the role of an international currency as a store of value for central banks and governments, it is the only such transition in history. 17 13 Susan Strange, States and Markets, ((London: Pinter Publishers, 1994): 24-25. 
14
15
16
17
18
20
Various estimates of economic size have the United States surpassing the United Kingdom before the beginning of the 20 th century. As stated, Chinn and Frankel put the exact year as 1872. Table shows that the United States had the largest economy and the fastest rate of growth throughout the first half of the twentieth century. The most notable aspect of this data is the dramatic growth of the United States' economy relative to the other nations. Despite having become twice the size of the British economy by 1913, the dollar did not claim the primary role in the international economy until the end of World War II. This is not unexpected. Having a relatively large economy was a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for a nation's currency to achieve a primary international role.
The data appear to support Rey's finding that GDP is not the primary factor in determining the internationalization of currency. It may also reflect the inertia of incumbency due to the selfreinforcing tendencies of holding the predominant position. Chinn and Frankel note that part of the explanation lies in the fact that the United States' financial system was not properly developed until 
18
19
20
the creation of the central bank in 1913. Even with this condition met, it would take an additional 30 years and the events of World War II for the dollar to claim the top spot.
One explanation for the slow relative growth of the United Kingdom's economy, compared to the United States can be found in each nation's debt to GDP ratio. Figure 
1
21
21
22
23
24
Eichengreen points out that there was a perceptible shift occurring in reserve currency allocation during the interwar years. He notes that the dollar's increasing role in trade as a unit of account and in payments contributed to international diversification in reserve currency holdings, with the sterling holding a 57% share and the dollar rising to 19% in 1928. 
25
26
Rey's hypothesis was that trade volume was the key determinant in the internationalization of currency. Matching this with Krugman's finding that the process of transition would be catastrophic for the incumbent, it would follow that the sterling would give way to the dollar rapidly following the United States' assumption of the top place in trade volume. Table 
2
3
22
23
24
25
26
It should be noted that the value of the United States' exports was increasing from 1913-1929, while that of Britain were falling over the same period. This leads to the inference that the value of United States exports overtook those of Britain much earlier than the 1950 data can confirm. Yet it was still at least another 15 years before the dollar would surpass the sterling as an international currency.
From the 1870s through 1939, the economic balance of power shifted from The United Kingdom to the United States. It began with the United States economy becoming the world's largest. As the United States developed its financial institutions, the dollar began to play an important role in the international system. During World War I, the two nations exchanged their net investment positions, with the United Kingdom becoming a net debtor nation and the United States becoming a net creditor. The high levels of British debt and persistent deficits contrasted with the relative economic health of the United States, which slowly translated into patterns of international trade. However, the sterling maintained its role even after the United States held the dominant role in international trade. It took another world war to effect the change.
These slow foundational changes resulted in conditions where British liquid assets and exports were insufficient to finance their war effort. 
27
28
29
The creation of the Bretton Woods System during World War II provides an example of structural power and the role of economic strength as its foundation. American and British policy makers developed a joint plan for post war monetary arrangements that was adopted by 44 nations at the 1944 Bretton Woods conference. 
30
31
32
33
When Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal on July 26, 1956, he triggered an international crisis that demonstrated the importance of autonomy in international relations and made clear that the United Kingdom had lost a measure of theirs. In the days following the nationalization, British Prime Minister Anthony Eden stated that the incident was a vital national interest because 80% of Western Europe's oil and commerce between the United Kingdom, India, Australia, and British colonies passed through the canal. 
34
35
The action had cost the British $400 million in reserves by the end of the month and the United States would not support aid from international institutions without a complete withdrawal of forces. 
36
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
This transition illustrates a number of important points. Overall, it demonstrates a synthesis of Kennedy's and Ferguson's theories. The decline of the British Empire with the sterling as the dominant international currency was the culmination of over 50 years of slowly shifting economic fundamentals. The Suez crisis ultimately revealed that a shift in the balance of power had occurred between the UK and the US. The next important point is that despite high levels of debt and persistent current account deficits, the international community continued to provide financing to the United Kingdom. This continued despite the existence of a nation with a larger economy and an equal, or greater, role in trade. This reinforces Krugman's finding that once a currency becomes the leading international currency its role is self-reinforcing. The collapse in the face of a crisis may indicate that he was also correct in his assessment that a currency's fall from the top spot would be catastrophic. A final important finding is that the British collapse followed the government's sale of its illiquid income producing assets. The loss of these assets prevented the United Kingdom from retaining its position of global leadership. In the end, the reasons for the collapse of the British Empire and the sterling are complex, but the primary lesson appears to be that through excessive reliance on deficit spending, the government robbed itself of the ability to function autonomously when it needed to. While this overview is useful in illustrating these points, it is important to acknowledge the context of that transition. American isolationism and the Great Depression may have slowed the process. These factors probably pushed investors to the sterling, which had the trust of the international community. This would be similar to the reaction of the international community to the latest financial crisis. 39
The current position of the United States appears to be different from that faced by the United Kingdom a century ago. Unlike the position of the United Kingdom at the beginning of the 20 th century, the United States still has the world's largest economy. Table 
4
37
39
As reflected in figure 
2
6
The data show that the United States current account is increasingly negative which will heighten the vulnerability of the dollar if it follows current projections. Figure 
3
40
41
In order to understand what is possible, it is necessary to understand why the trade deficit is as large as it is. There are two explanations for the emergence of the current global imbalance. The first offered by Ben Bernanke is the "global savings glut," which is the result of the developing world's transition from net borrower to net lender. 
42
43
44
While there seems to be consensus that the dollar will inevitably lose its predominance, there is wide disagreement on the process of transition and the end state. This is likely due to the uncertainty regarding the true meaning of the United States current account deficits and overall levels of debt. As previously stated, Kennedy and Ferguson have opposing views on the length of a possible transition. Chinn and Frankel state that the Euro could replace the dollar as a single dominant currency as early as 2015. 
45
46
As stated earlier, the United States current account deficit is not considered indefinitely sustainable along the current trajectory. The question is how much higher can deficits and debt go before an adjustment occurs. Martin Wolf contends that the imbalances are sustainable as long as creditors are willing to finance the United States. 
47
The theory maintains that the capital will flow to the highest rate of return, seeking the best store of value. The Congressional Research Service offers reasons this might be the case for the United States and the dollar. They are that the United States has enjoyed greater productivity growth than most of the world since the mid 1990's, higher interest rates due to the low level of domestic savings combined with deficit spending, and the theory of diminishing returns which in this case applies to developed countries' need to invest abroad for efficiency reasons. 
48
49
The dollar was depreciating steadily at a rate of 3-4% annually from 2002-2006, but then declined by 10% in 2007. 
50
51
52
Krugman evaluates two scenarios for dollar depreciation that help answer this question. The first scenario occurs over 20 years at an annual depreciation rate of 1.75%. 
53
The second scenario occurs over 10 years at an annual rate of 3.5%. 
54
If investors are willing to accept some annual depreciation in exchange for the ability to quickly liquidate their reserves and intervene in a crisis, it should be asked whether there are investors that hold such a large share of United States securities that they alone pose a risk to the dollar's status. It is impossible to know exactly what scenario might emerge to cause the dollar to lose its place as the dominant international currency, but it is certainly possible to evaluate existing vulnerabilities.
Concern that China will seek to liquidate its large share of dollar holdings makes the unlikely assumptions that the rest of the world can absorb their share and that they are willing to accept significant losses as the value of the dollar plummets during the selloff. It could also result from some unforeseen crisis such as another world war, as was the case for the United Kingdom. However, because the United States is reliant on the international community to fund its current budget deficit, the real problem may reside in the economic health of those nations. 
52
53
54
Table 
7
4
Japan's current role as a major holder of United States debt, combined with its own debt concerns may prove to be the spark that leads to the dollar's loss of international predominance. Figure 
5
55
The United Kingdom's economic health poses a similar problem. Figure 
6
7
A resurgence of the sovereign debt crisis that hit Europe earlier this year could trigger such a scenario. Based on data in table 8, five high-risk nations owe the United Kingdom a total of $418 billion. Three fourths of this amount is owed by Spain and Ireland, nations who have significant debt issues of their own. Spain and Ireland have both experienced setbacks in their efforts to avoid future defaults. The Irish have announced an initiative to spend billions to prop up its banking sector while Moody's downgraded Spain's credit rating on September 30, 2010 over concerns about its current financial condition and prospects for growth. 
56
Just as it is impossible to predict exactly what the future of the dollar holds, it is impossible to predict exactly the second and third order effects of a dollar collapse. However, the falling value of the dollar would have important consequences because of the United States' continued reliance on deficit financing. The inflow of foreign financing would be dramatically, if not wholly, reduced as the value of the dollar falls. Therefore, the United States would have to pay higher interest rates to fund future debt to offset the increasing uncertainty about its future value; this would place a restrictive constraint on future government spending. Any hope of covering this spending shortfall by increasing revenue through taxation is also unlikely to succeed in the short-term because of potential impacts to the domestic economy. Eventually, the economy would recover as the weaker dollar makes United States exports more affordable for the rest of the world.
Such a crisis would force the United States Government to make immediate spending cuts due to the loss of international funding. The fiscal year 2010 budget provides an example of the risk. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projections for fiscal year 2010 anticipate $2.175 trillion in revenue balanced against $3.524 trillion in outlays. 
57
58
Even modest reductions in government spending would affect funding support for the National Security Strategy. The 2010 National Security Strategy outlines four enduring national interestssecurity of the United States, its citizens, allies and partners; prosperity through a growing United States economy in an open international system; respect for universal values throughout the world; and an international order advanced by United States leadership and international cooperation. 59 Each of these national interests would be adversely affected by a dollar crisis.
A key component of the national interest in security is to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat terrorism around the world. 
60
61
62
The remaining national interests of prosperity, values and international order would be undermined by the inability of the United States to continue funding international development institutions at current, and less than ideal levels. One policy nested within the prosperity interest is to increase investments in development in order to help developing countries grow into prosperous, democratic, and accountable states. 
63
57
58
59 Barack H. Obama, The National Security Strategy of the United States, (Washington, DC: The White House, May 2010), 17. 
60
61
62
63
economic system while simultaneously promoting universal values and international cooperation. The United States may not be able to maintain its leadership role in these organizations following a dollar crisis, as it will become harder to maintain a higher level of financing relative to the other members. The United States could find itself reliant on the policy interests of another nation that may not weigh universal values, democracy, and international cooperation as highly as it does.
The case for fiscal year 2010 is extreme based on stimulus spending, however, it is also a fact that the government faces. The CBO projects that annual budget deficits will fall dramatically by 2020 behind significant increases in revenue, resulting in deficit levels equal to less than half of annual discretionary spending. 
64
The analysis indicates a synthesis of Kennedy and Ferguson's theories of great power decline. Economic foundations shift slowly over time, but the true frailty of the system is not apparent until a crisis tips the balance of power. Much of the United States' current international power has been derived from its economic strength, and the translation of that strength into leading roles in current international institutions such as the IMF and World Bank. However, there are indicators that this strength has turned into vulnerability due to excessive budget deficits financed by foreign nations with growingly fragile economic fundamentals.
Economists' views of international currencies and the case of the interrelated declines of the sterling and the United Kingdom indicate that there are a number of necessary conditions that can make a great power vulnerable. The loss of economic prominence-as measured in terms of GDP, gross government debt, and trade-weakened investor confidence in the sterling, while undermining its utility in the trade roles of an international currency. This resulted in diversification by central banks and private investors who replaced a portion of their sterling reserves with dollars. This reduced the inflow of foreign capital to the United Kingdom, led to its inability to continue making interest payments on debt owed to the United States. When the United States refused additional loans to Britain at the outset of World War II, it forced them to sell their gold reserves and illiquid income producing assets. In the end, the United Kingdom had relied too heavily on deficit spending supported by external sources. When these sources proved unwilling to provide further support, the United Kingdom and the sterling gave way to the United States and the dollar. This resulted in the loss of international leadership, but also lost autonomy as demonstrated by the Suez Crisis.
The United States is now following the same path as the nation's debt has grown rapidly in the midst of its own wars following the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. There is a long-term vulnerability in the trajectory of the United States' current account deficit and growing debt burden, which will undermine investor confidence in the dollar as a store of value. If foreign governments and private investors no longer view United States securities as a safe store of value, they will begin to diversify their reserve holdings. This combined with the United States' loss of its lead in world trade could result in the replacement of the dollar as the primary international currency. However, 
64
the evidence indicates that investors still feel that the dollar is a useful investment, either as a store of value, or as a highly liquid asset that provides a ready means to intervene in a domestic crisis. Therefore, the United States has time to make necessary adjustments before the dollar loses its predominant role. Change will require altering federal spending priorities to restore fiscal discipline. However, investors holding the dollar for its high liquidity create a different vulnerability, with potentially more immediate consequences.
If foreign governments are holding the dollar for its liquidity, the real danger to the United States international predominance may reside in the house of cards upon which its deficit spending relies.
The largest, and fastest growing, investors in United States securities are heavily indebted themselves. This leaves the country vulnerable to a crisis that it cannot control. Looming crises in those nations could result in a run on the dollar, which would force the United States Government to make an immediate budgetary decision between national security and other spending. Defense cuts would undermine national security objectives as stated in the 2010 National Security Strategy and constrain ongoing overseas military operations and the nation's leadership role in international institutions. A dollar crisis could also result in the dollar's loss of status as the leading international currency, which poses long-term implications to national security, as the US would lose a measure of its autonomy as the United Kingdom did following World War II.
The authors would like to thank Mr. 
Strategic Insights • Spring 2011Volume 10, Issue 1
John Arquilla, David Ronfeldt, 'Cyberwar is Coming!', Comparative Strategy, (Vol.12, No.2, Spring 1993), pp.141-165.
William Gibson, Neuromancer, (New York: NY, Ace Hardcover, 1994).
David Kravets, "No, Hackers Can't Open Hoover Dam Floodgates" Threat Level, (Wired blog),February 3,  
http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2011/02/hoover/ 2 Martin Stoddard et al, Process Control System Security Metrics -State of Practice, Institute for Information Infrastructure Protection, August 2005. Strategic Insights • Spring 2011 Volume 10, Issue 1
Stoddard et al, PCS Security Metrics.
K. Korash et al. Emerging Technologies in Instrumentation and Controls: An Update. (Oak Ridge: Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 2006), 25-28. Strategic Insights • Spring 2011 Volume 10, Issue 1
Ibid, page 23.
Joe Weiss. "Nuclear plant cyber security has a ways to go", ControlGlobal.com Unfettered Blog, March 25, 2008. http://community.controlglobal.com/content/nuclear-plant-cyber-security-has-ways-go
Ronald L. Krutz. Securing SCADA Systems. (Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing, 2006), 29. Strategic Insights • Spring 2011 Volume 10, Issue 1
Brain Krebs, "Cyber Incident Blamed for Nuclear Power Plant Shutdown" Washington Post, June 5, 2008. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/06/05/AR2008060501958.html
William J. Broad, John Markoff, and David E. Sanger. "Israeli Test on Worm Called Crucial in Iranian Nuclear Delay". New York Times, January 15, 2011. Strategic Insights • Spring 2011 Volume 10, Issue 1
b A distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack makes web sites or other network services unavailable to users by flooding the resource with spurious requests from many computers.
a This paper presents the author's personal views and does not reflect those of any institution with which he is affiliated. The author wishes to thank Edward Monan and several anonymous reviewers, whose thoughtful comments on previous drafts helped to greatly improve this paper.
Jeffrey A. Frankel, "Still the Lingua Franka: The Exaggerated Death of the Dollar" Foreign Affairs 74, no. 4 (July 1995), 12.
Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers (New York: Vintage Books, 1989), 536, 540.
Niall Ferguson, "Complexity and Collapse: Empires on the Edge of Chaos," Foreign Affairs 89, no. 2 (March/ April 2010): 20, 30.
Barry Eichengreen, "Sterling's Past, Dollar's Future: Historical Perspectives on Reserve Currency Competition" (Lecture, Economic History Society, Leicester, UK, April 10, 2005), 2.
Paul Krugman, "Vehicle Currencies and the Structure of International Exchange," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 12, no. 3, (August 1980): 513.
Congressional Research Service, Dollar Crisis: Prospects and Implications, by Craig K. Elwell, RL34311 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, January 8, 2008), 6.
Rey, Helene. "International Trade and Currency Exchange." The Review of Economic Studies 68, no. 2, (April 2001): 457.
Krugman, "Vehicle Currencies and the Structure of International Exchange," 523.
Ibid.
Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S Rogoff, "Growth in a Time of Debt," National Bureau of Economic Research working paper15639, Cambridge, MA (January 2010): 9.
Reinhart and Rogoff, find a positive correlation between rising inflation and a high gross government debt to GDP ratio, defined as higher than 90% in the United States. Therefore, the ratio of gross government debt to GDP should be a key factor in evaluating the fit of an international currency for a leading reserve role.
Floud and McCloskey, The Economic History of Britain Since 1700, 306.
Ibid.    
Ibid. Strategic Insights • Spring 2011 Volume 10, Issue 1
Martin Feldstein, "Japan's Savings Crisis," Project Syndicate, http://www.project-syndicate.org (accessed October 13, 2010).
Wall Street Journal World at a Glance, "World Watch -Europe," Wall Street Journal Online, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704483004575524032776735098.html (accessed October 1, 2010).
Notes 1 
U.S. Congress. Senate. Senate Armed Services
By Keith B. Alexander
Lynn III, William F. "Defending a New Domain
U.S. Department of Defense
Joint Statement by Secretary Gates and Secretary Napolitano on Enhancing Coordination to Secure America's Cyber Networks
Corrin, Amber. "DISA Creates 'demilitarized Zone' for Unclassified Network
John J. "China's Unpeaceful Rise
105
690
April 2006
160-62
For example, Lopez, C. Todd. "Next War Will Begin in Cyberspace, Experts Predict." Army News Service
For example, U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission. Capability of the People's Republic of China to Conduct Cyber Warfare and Computer Network Exploitation. By Bryan A. Krekel. McLean, VA
Northrop Grumman
OpenNet Initiative
Clinton, Hillary R. "Remarks on Internet Freedom." Speech, Newseum, Washington, DC, January 21
2010/01/135519
Breaking Down Barriers
Free Flow of Information
U.S., see Libicki
Martin C. "Chinese Use of Cybewar
Antiaccess Strategy: Two scenarios." Testimony
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission
Lessig, Lawrence. Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. New York: Basic Books
U.S. Joint Chiefs Staff
National Military Strategy for Cyberspace Operations
Department of Defense
2006
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
Robert Sheldon is a Policy Analyst for Military and Security Affairs at the US-China Economic and Security Review Commission. He previously worked on various cyber issues in law enforcement, intelligence, and defense-related capacities. Sheldon has an MA in Security Policy Studies and a BS in Computer and Digital Forensics. He can be reached at x@longtelegrams.com.
As the British case demonstrated, it is prudent to consider both trade volume and export values to analyze the strength of the United States and the dollar. According to table 5, the United States still accounts for the greatest share of the world's trade volume (exports plus imports). However, six of the top ten nations, in terms of trade volume, are members of the Eurozone. From the table, their combined share of world trade volume is more than twice that of the United States, which, according to Rey, is the key determinant of the dominant international currency. However, the British case showed that the United States had passed the United Kingdom in terms of trade volume by 1928 without causing the sterling to collapse. • The number of people killed is over one hundred.
• The attack devastated a large area-a square mile of a city or ten square miles in rural areas. • The attack damaged or destroyed a critical facility, such as a power plant, a major airport, or an important government office. • The attack disrupted everyday services enough to cause a significant reduction in quality of life. • The attack caused significant economic losses to the target (eg, $10 billion for the United States, less for developing nations). • A manifest "degree of terrorism"-a subjective but nonetheless present psychological or emotional impact on the population.
Strategic Insights is interested in papers that examine recorded incidents of WME and examine any policy changes they provoked and their implications for policy makers. Of particular interest are incidents that changed the way states view their national security or their relations with other states. 