# ID: bd47af0e426145539a4256c75c44a2d3
# Title: Cultural Perspectives, Geopolitics, & Energy Security of Eurasia: Is the Next Global Conflict Imminent?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Ukrainians described another sector of their society in which Russia has had an increasingly polarizing influence: the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
The two patriarchates in Ukraine -the Moscow Patriarchate and the Kiev Patriarchate (which split from the former in 1992) -claim to represent the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
A Ukrainian military officer told me that the two components of the Church had peacefully co-existed in his country until 2014, when the Moscow Patriarchate began overtly supporting Russia's actions in both Crimea and eastern Ukraine.
The officer explained that the public had expected both components, in their efforts to represent the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, to come to the aid of Ukrainian casualties and their families.
Instead, the Moscow Patriarchate distanced itself from the Ukrainian people for political reasons; this angered many Ukrainians enough to leave that church.
Meanwhile, the Kiev Patriarchate has made a concentrated effort to help in the crisis, supporting first the protesters during the Maidan revolution -when it opened the doors of its Mikhailovsky Monastery as a safe haven and later as a hospital -and now the Ukrainian soldiers fighting against Russian-backed separatists.
In a related press article, Kiev Patriarchate Archbishop Yevstratiy Zoria stated that "Moscow is using its influence over Ukraine in the church as an instrument of hybrid warfare against Ukraine."
8 The article described how tensions between the two churches got so bad in 2015 that in one incident, a priest from the Moscow Patriarchate church stabbed a priest from the Kiev Patriarchate, allegedly shouting "For Russ!
For the Orthodox faith!"