# ID: bd47af0e426145539a4256c75c44a2d3
# Title: Cultural Perspectives, Geopolitics, & Energy Security of Eurasia: Is the Next Global Conflict Imminent?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Some observers believe that one of the main reasons for the Russian military assault in Chechnya had been the Azerbaijani oil.
US and the Western companies and Azerbaijani State Oil Company (SOCAR) had been considering several possible routes of the future pipeline.
Russia has been assertive to get the pipeline through its territory to the Black Sea port of Novorossiysk.
The Russian pipeline runs directly through the territory of Chechnya.
Having the Azerbaijani oil pipeline pass through its territory would give Russia a political leverage over Azerbaijan.
In fact, it would conflict with the American and Western commercial interests in this region.
Russia already had such a policy in the case of Kazakhstan, where American oil companies were also involved (i.e., Chevron).
Moreover, Russia had already challenged the southern flank of NATO, trying to exert pressure on Turkey by leveraging its traditional relationships with a number of Kurdish organizations.
The conference of the Confederation of CIS Kurds was held in Moscow in October 1994.
At the same time, the leaders of the National Liberation Front of Kurdistan had been trying to gain support from Russia as "mediator and peacekeeper" in the conflict between Kurds and Turkey.
Additionally, there was a strong evidence of growing anti-American and anti-Western mood among Russian politicians.
There were also some indications that the Clinton administration was beginning to realize the nature of Russia's relations with the other Newly Independent States (NIS) and the implications of those relations for US national security interests.
On several occasions, American officials pointed out that the CSCE principles framed the American position on Russian relations with its neighbors, taking into account the complexities of regional dynamics and the various motivations leading Russia toward a more assertive posture in the former Soviet Union.