# ID: bd47af0e426145539a4256c75c44a2d3
# Title: Cultural Perspectives, Geopolitics, & Energy Security of Eurasia: Is the Next Global Conflict Imminent?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Iraq and Afghanistan made a majority of Americans aware of the specter of encountering the demographical political dynamic of what may be called "Global Islam."
This reality is the second vital aspect we would like to consider in this chapter.
According to the Pew Research Center, At the projected rate of 1.5% for the period from 2010 to 2030, the Muslim population will make 26.4% of the world's total projected population of 8.3 billion in 2030.
The world's Muslim population is expected to increase by about 35% in the next 20 years, rising from 1.6 billion in 2010 to 2.2 billion by 2030.
This growth is expected to take place not only in countries with a predominately Muslim population, but also in America, Europe, and Asia.
3 A remarkable feature is that Muslims occupy some of the most strategically important lands, such as the Suez Canal, ancient Mesopotamia, Afghanistan, and Central Asia.
In addition, much of world's petroleum, minerals, and raw materials are available in countries that are predominately Muslim.
In light of this data, it is essential for the United States' survival to eventually make Muslims our partners in trade.
In addition, The People's Republic of China's (PRC) economy is rapidly growing, often dominating markets that were open to Western exports before.
China's economic, trade, military and strategic rapprochement with Russia and some other countries of Asia and Western Hemisphere adds to this concern.
The United States cannot compete with China having a hostile relationship with Muslim countries.
Also, while PRC is focusing on selling more to markets that were previously devoted to Western products, much of the USA's resources are being spent on wars or emerging regional and global conflicts.