# ID: bdb70e75153049639157efbf3b06557d
# Title: A New Look at the Theories of Operational Art and the Levels of Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Theory is a critical component of military thinking and doctrine. It underpins how the United States views, comprehends, and acts within the strategic environment. The Joint Force views warfare through the lens of the 'Levels of Warfare'
Theory is a critical component of military thinking and doctrine. It underpins how the US views, comprehends, and acts within the strategic environment. This monograph is fundamentally about theory and more specifically about the theory of operational art. It explores how the Joint Force views warfare and demonstrate how the theory of operational art is related to and interacts with political, strategic, operational, and tactical theories. Increased understanding of operational art prepares commanders and their staffs (the operational artists) to better understand how the military instrument of power can be applied in novel ways to contribute to political and strategic objectives.
This study makes five specific deductions. First, each of the above theories are separate and distinct entities with their own logic and use but cannot be viewed or used in isolation from each other. Second, the current 'Levels of War' model misapply and misrepresent how these theories interact. Third, the theory of operational art is currently misunderstood in the American military, as it has been linked with operational theory (the operational level of war), which causes practitioners to use the theory in an improper manner. Fourth, the linear model (levels of warfare) must be updated to represent all the complex linkages and relationships between each theoretical sphere. Finally, operational art is a mindset of beliefs, behaviors, and practices used to manage the connections between each of the other theoretical spheres and uses methods and methodologies to affect other systems in pursuit of strategic advantage and political power. interface with policy makers, strategists, and tacticians.
Each of the theories in this study is examined independently to gain a baseline of what they are, what they are attempting to explain, and how they tend to work in practice. While time is spent explaining the purpose of theory and describing political, strategic, operational, and tactical theories, most of this study focuses on the theory of operational art. This is done for several reasons: first, it helps establish the base line of what the American theory of warfare is, since this idea stems from the combination of each of the above theories. Second, it enables a better understanding of each individual part, to show how the parts interact, before examining the whole. Finally, this method allows the Joint Force Commander to fully understand the context and use of the theory of operational art; thereby, allowing them to refine the theory's structure, use, and utility.
The Joint Force views warfare as a three-rung ladder, with the tactical level on the bottom, the operational level in the center, and the strategic level on top.0 F 1 This theoretical construct has served the Joint Force since the 1980's with the adoption of the operational level of war into US doctrine. It serves as the fundamental model of the United States' theory of warfare.1 F 2 By constructing these theories into a linear top-down model, the Joint Force creates a cognitive anchor that does not reflect the fluid and dynamic nature of war, even though this dynamic is well understood within the force. This model also corresponds with and supports the current definition and theory of operational art, one that confounds its four component theories.
The current way the Joint Force thinks about and practices the theory of operational art and its model of warfare are rooted in America's industrial and expeditionary nature and heavily shaped by Cold War practices. A review and revision of both theories and their relationships to each other allows the Joint Force Commander to formulate a more complete understanding of how each theory 1 Joint Staff. Joint Publication 1-0, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States. Incorporating Change 1 (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2017), I-7.
2 United States Army. Field Manual 100-5, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 1986), 9.
functions in relation to the others and how these relationships can enhance the commander's (operational artist's) understanding of the environment. In theory, the Joint Force Commander understands that tactical actions can have immediate operational, strategic, and policy effects (of varying degrees), but American doctrine fails to illustrate this phenomenon. The current model indicates a stratified system of effects, with tactical actions having to pass through operational effects before impacting the strategic level. This failure is due to what Daniel Kahneman calls "theory-induced blindness: once you have accepted a theory…it is extraordinarily difficult to notice its flaws."2 F 
3
The purpose of this study is to introduce a new theoretical construct that describes the interplay of policy, strategy, and tactics through the lens of the theory of operational art. For a theory to be successful, it must provide answers over time and across a wide range of cultures and circumstances. This study seeks to update the theory of operational art into a more mature and practical construct that can serve the Joint Force Commander. It also seeks to aid the policy maker, strategist, tactician, and operational artists by introducing a new model and theory of warfare, one that compliments a new theory of operational art. Ultimately, it seeks to educate and influence US military thinking and doctrine and to aid its warfighters in their pursuit of achieving national objectives.
The intended audience for this study is the Joint Force Commander and his staff and the policy makers that they serve. For the Joint Force to properly fulfill its purpose, operational artists must understand each theory that shapes their thinking and how those theories interact to create and explain the strategic environment. Therefore, this monograph delivers a new model, informed by theory, to serve as a starting point for policy makers, strategist, operational artists, and tacticians to speak on equal ground.
The significance of this study is that it presents a model to integrate different yet intimately interconnected theories. It also presents an updated definition and understanding of the theory of operational art, one that focuses on the relationships and emergent properties of each component theory. This study argues that the most important aspect of the theory of operational art is not the "how" aspect, but the "why" aspect. It argues for a focus on the connections and relationships between the component theories and not the "things to do" within them.
The Joint Force's linear model of warfare is no longer sufficient to achieve its desired political and strategic aims. The world, and the warfare it produces, is too complex for a linear model to be effective. To ensure success, the Joint Force must arm every echelon of leadership with a mental construct of how warfare manifests itself and how their actions and decisions can and will affect American interests and policy objectives.
To avoid confusion, this study provides definitions of several key concepts discussed throughout the paper. They are critical to the theories presented in this monograph. Though no stated definition of these exists, this study examines current doctrine and academic scholarship to determine their meanings. Political, strategic, operational, and tactical theories are defined later in the text during each of these theories' reviews.
The Joint Force theory of warfare refers to how the US conducts military operations, in conjunction with civil actions, to achieve its political objectives. This study suggests that the US theory of warfare is its inherently joint and combined approach to warfare. The US has often used joint and combined forces and operations to pursue and achieve its policy objectives. The Joint Force model of warfare refers to how it views the application and interaction of political, strategic, operational, and tactical theories. Often known as the Levels of Warfare diagram, it is the linear and hierarchical model of the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of war presented in Joint Publication (JP) 1 and JP-3.3 F 4 The Levels of Warfare model graphically depicts how the Joint Force views and treats each of the represented theories and their interaction. It is a theoretical framework that has a substantial impact on the military's thinking and represents a summation of a large body of theoretical work.
The hypothesis of this study is that the Joint Force is handicapping itself in how it views and practices operational art by constructing a linear model of war that does not depict the fluid and dynamic nature of conflict. This model affects not only how the Joint force interprets the relationship between tactics, operations, and strategy, but it also negatively affects how the military thinks of policy and interacts with its civilian leaders as a tool of policy. By creating a model that breaks the linear paradigm and allows for a mental construct that can account for the fluid nature of war and the speed with which actions and decisions interact, the Joint Force can optimize the use of operational art.
This study has a few key limitations. Primarily, the author is unable to speak with many of the original theorists of operational art. As such, it relied on a modern understanding of their work with an attempt to place their ideas in context with their historical and cultural meaning. A second limitation is the narrow use of primary sources. To mitigate this limitation, the researcher collected a large volume of secondary sources. This was useful because secondary sources informed how the Joint Force interpreted the theory of operational art and how it placed it into doctrine.
This study relies on two assumptions. The first assumption is that political, strategic, operational, and tactical theories possess their own logic and framework, which shapes how the Joint Force interprets the strategic environment. That assumption allows this study to update the current theory and model of the strategic environment to better explain how this environment works. The second assumption is that the interactive and dynamic nature of the strategic environment is governed by complex social connections that lead to an infinite number of possible outcomes. This assumption allows for the removal of prescriptive elements of the theory of operational art and shows that descriptive elements can be introduced to better explain and anticipate how this environment functions over time.
This study used historical review and path dependency methods to collect, analyze, and present data.4 F
5
This study also used two different methodologies to explore the various theories and their relationships. It first takes a reductionist approach, exploring the logic of each individual theory. This approach explores the parts of the whole to gain an understanding of how the parts work. This study then takes a holistic approach to gain insight on how each theory, or part, interacts with the others. Then it seeks out relationships in a systems theory manner, for it is in the relationships between the theories that one finds the essence of operational art. As with any complex system, the Joint Force model of warfare and understanding of operational art must account not just for the parts (theories, levels, or spheres) but also the relationship between the parts, the collective behavior that they exhibit, and the effect of this behavior on the environment.5 F
6
Research and data collection for this study utilized secondary and doctrinal sources. Data collection focused on the theory aspects of operational art history and the context in which that theory and its constituent theories developed. Secondary sources focused on provided data from third party analysis of the theorists and other author's analysis and use of such theories. Doctrine was used to understand past and current use of the theory of operational art within the Joint Force.
Research also focused on how the American theory of operational art interacts with the current three Levels of Warfare model and how this interaction forms and shapes the United States theory 
The literature used to support this monograph focused on how the Joint Force interprets the theory of operational art today and how past theorists defined the subject. The theory of operational art and the concept of an operational level of war was not a theoretical notion until the 1920s and 1930s in Soviet Russia.6 F 7 Numerous studies have suggested that the concept and practice of this theory appeared before its conceptual naming, specifically with the French Revolution and 7 Bruce W. Menning, "Operational Art Origins," in Historical Perspectives of the Operational Art (Washington, D.C.: Center or Military History, 2005), 3. Napoleonic Wars, the Mexican American War, the American Civil War, and the Wars of German Unification.7 F 8
It is important to note that the theory of operational art and the Joint Force model of warfare, as with any social or political science theory, must contend with other theoretical frameworks. The first such theory is Robert Putnam's Two-Level Game theory.8 F 9 In this article, Putnam posits that any international negotiation or deal must conform to acceptable domestic and international terms.9 F 10 This theory has major implications on the relationships between all of the theories used in a model and employed by the operational artist. Another theory that must be accounted for is Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann's Social Construction of Reality theory.1 0F 
11
12
8
13
The 1986 edition of FM 100-5 had a different approach. It stated that, "Operational art is the employment of military forces to attain strategic objectives in a theater of war or theater of operations through the design, organization, and conduct of campaigns and major operations."1 4F 
15
16
Aleksandr Svechin stated that, "[t]he art of conducting military operations cannot be divided by any clear boundaries into completely independent and delineated sections."1 6F 
17
14 Joint Staff. Joint Publication 5-0, Joint Planning (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2020), xii.
15 Field Manual 100-5, Operations, 10. top, operational in the center, and tactical on the bottom.1 7 F 18 JP 3-0 states that, "Three levels of warfare-strategic, operational, and tactical-model the relationship between national objectives and tactical actions."1 8F 19 FM 100-5 mentioned the levels of war but did not provide a definition or framework for them.1 9F 20 Understanding warfare as a tiered linear construct anchors almost every thought of warfare and military action, just as the levels of warfare construct permeates each of these theories.
G.S. Isserson, states that operational art is not a guide to action, yet is a way of thinking, one that "presupposes freedom of methods and forms which should be carefully chosen each time to fit a concrete situation."2 0F 
21
22
Krause describes it as simultaneously tactical and strategic, used to create "…a vison of unity of action on the battlefield that ultimately achieves a strategic objective."2 2F 
23
Mikhail Tukhachevskiy recognized that the character of war changes with time, place, and technology and that armies may no longer be vulnerable to destruction in a single battle.2 3F 
24
26
Clayton Newell views the operational level of war and operational art as synonymous.2 7 F 28
He further argues that this theory is key in modern warfare because it integrates tactical capabilities to strategic objectives by planning and conducting campaigns.2 8 F 
29
30
Michael Matheny contends that the "story of modern American operational art is the story of joint operations…"3 1F 
32
33
34
The above literature review provides some insight into the historical trends of the theory of operational art. Broad themes, such as mindset, methods, time, space, campaigns, joint and intergovernmental, and the use of tactics to achieve strategy are used to describe what operational art is and does. Although these are but a few theorists, represented by a limited number of passages, the highlighted themes hold true with other theorists and are indicative of how the theory of operational art is considered and applied.
Operational art, like any art form, must by its nature change with the time, materials, artists, and social and environmental factors that inform it. Therefore, historians and theorists constantly debate "when" operational art first appeared and "what" constitutes operational art to begin with.
It grew out of other well established and matured theories and continues to evolve in concert with these older theoretical constructs. The four theories below are critical to the theory of operational art and cannot be divorced from each other. While each has its own logic and function, each logic cannot properly fulfill its purpose without a proper interface with the other theories. Once each theory is understood on its own, this study shows how, when combined, their emergent logic can best be understood from a different, non-linear model. These theories collectively form a system that includes the theory of operational art.
What is a theory? According to Mary Jo Hatch, a theory is "a set of concepts whose proposed relationships address a phenomenon of interest, either by offering an explanation or by enhancing understanding or appreciation of it."3 4F 35 She goes on to describe concepts as "basic building blocks of theory" and that theory is a "set of concepts whose relationships are used to explain, understand, or appreciate the phenomenon of interests the theorist wants to address."3 5F 36
35 Mary Jo Hatch, Organizational Theory: Modern, Symbolic, and Postmodern Perspectives 4th Edition (Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press, 2018), 9. 
36
Everett Dolman argues that theory is used to shape the perception of the world around us.3 6F 37 Alan
Lamborn describes theory as an intellectual framework that must generate positive heuristics that lead to other theoretical relationships.3 7F 38 Colin S. Gray describes a theory as something that "provides a unifying context of relevant concern" and cannot be predictive but should aid in anticipation.3 8F 39 Theory starts with observed phenomenon that evolves into conceptual approaches and finally ends in a coherent theory to explain the observed environment. In this study, theory means a set of concepts addressing a phenomenon of interests that is used to shape and inform how one views the world and interacts with it.
There are many volumes of work dealing with the subject of political theory. For the purposes of this study, political theory narrowly refers to policy and interests at the national level and does not discuss the subject writ large. This study defines interests and policy to better understand political theory's interaction with the theory of operational art. Marine Corps Doctrinal Publication (MCDP) 1-1 describes politics as "the process by which power is distributed in any society…"4 2F 
43
44
45
46
Strategic theory is as old as organized warfare. Along with tactical theory, strategic theory is one of the first frameworks developed to discuss war and its use. Modern definitions are based on an evolution of strategic theory from ancient Greece to modern Joint Publications. Many modern-day writers separate Grand Strategy from Military Strategy. This study does not. It treats the subject inclusively in its definition and discussion. JP 1 defines strategy as "a prudent idea or set of ideas for employing the instruments of national power in a synchronized and integrated fashion to achieve theater and multinational objectives."4 6F 
47
48
Finney argues that the term strategy is best understood as "the threat or use of force for political purposes."5 1F 
52
Everett Dolman argues that strategy is not concerned with winning or losing, that war is only one part of political competition and that victory has no meaning in strategy; concluding that the outcomes of battles are but moments in time and that the strategist is primarily concerned with the "…favorable continuation of events."5 4F 
55
52
53
54
55
56
Colin S. Gray describes strategy as "a quality, perhaps a value, that needs to be added to tactical realties."5 6F 57 He argues that strategic theory is timeless, but that strategies themselves must be about consequences, since it is made up of tactical and operational actions.5 7F 
58
59
Hart defined strategy as "the art of the general" and argued that its success depends on "sound calculation and coordination of the end and the means.5 9F 
60
Like policy, strategy is evolutionary, continuous, and not concerned with victory and defeat, only advantage and consequences. Strategic theory is non-linear and does not necessarily reflect a cause-and-effect dichotomy. This link of continuity, evolution, and constant quest for advantage explains why tactics continuously evolve and why the theory of operational art must account for dynamic and chaotic environment. For this study, strategy is defined as a nation's attempt to gain relative advantage against an opponent(s), in pursuit of policy aims and interests, within time, space, and context, through the setting of conditions and management of consequences by the use of actions.
Operational theory spawned the operational level of war within the Joint Force. Operational theory was developed to explain war's progression from the strategy of a single point and decisive battle to distributed battles over time and space seeking decisive results. The Soviets were the first to identify this theory and credited its inception to the German Field Marshal Helmuth von 
57
62
Finally, he describes an operation as "…a weapon of strategy…"6 3F 
64
65
Svechin states that an operation is "…a conglomerate of quite different actions…" and combines the preparation of logistics, movement, maneuver, and combat to achieve the "…capture or holding of a certain line or geographical area."6 5F 
66
67
68
69
These theorists make three main arguments. First, they argue that operational art and operational theory are one in the same. Secondly, they argue that the joint operation is the essence of modern 
61
72
73
It is also noted that early theorists, many of whom conflate operational art and operational theory, sought a politics free area to practice military art. This basis caused a misapplication of theory and has led to the current model and thinking.
From the various theorists, it becomes clear that operational theory supports strategic and political theory by arranging and sequencing the effects of tactical actions on the environment or targeted system. These actions must be arranged in time, space, and sequence to produce a desired and specific effect, such as denying a system its intended aim or disrupting its function. Operational theory can then be used to not only generate these effects (consequences of tactical actions), but also to sequence these effects in time and space to create relative advantage and favorable conditions over an opponent within a given time and environment. Often, these effects have either 
71
72
Tactical theory has been consistent throughout history. Its meaning and use have generally translated through time and culture. Carl von Clausewitz describes tactical measures as "…the manner in which the forces are to be used in the event of an engagement."7 4F 
75
76
77
78
81
Vego states that tactics "is both the art and science of planning, preparation, and employment of individual platforms, weapons and associated sensors, and combat arms to accomplish assigned tactical objectives…"8 3F 
84
For this study, tactics means influenced actions taken by forces within a given environment that seeks to create and combine effects against a system or environment for the purpose creating conditions that enable the accomplishment of campaigns and operational objectives.
The above-mentioned authors and theorists compose but a fraction of the extensive work produced on these subjects. The important part of this review is the three trends that manifest themselves from these theorists. First, strategic and tactical theory are interlinked and cannot be considered in isolation from each other. Even though time, culture, definitions, and context have 
82
84
86
87
Second, operational theory is a tool of strategy that uses various methods to subordinate tactical actions to strategic need. This theory is much more convoluted in how and with what tools it uses but does remain consistent with how it is supposed to function. Finally, policy and politics are a constant influence on each of these theories and cannot be discounted.
From these three trends, this study makes five specific deductions. First, each of the above theories are separate and distinct entities with their own logic and use but cannot be viewed or used in isolation from each other. Second, the current Levels of War model misapplies and misrepresents how these theories interact. Third, the theory of operational art is currently misunderstood in the American military, as it has been linked with operational theory (the operational level of war), which causes practitioners to use the theory in an improper manner. Fourth, the linear model (levels of warfare) must be updated to represent all the complex linkages and relationships between each theoretical sphere. Finally, operational art is a mindset of beliefs, behaviors, and practices used to manage the connections between each of the other theoretical spheres and uses methods and methodologies to affect other systems in pursuit of strategic advantage and political power.
Based on these deductions, the Joint Force must update its Levels of Warfare model and theory to fully appreciate each of these theories, their relationships, and how they function. Without correcting this mental construct, the various theories that comprise the Joint Force's mental model will continue to be misaligned and misused, for warfare is a summation of all its parts and not just the parts themselves. It is in understanding the parts and their function while observing their interactions and relationships that the operational artist becomes effective. Figure 
1
89
89
"reality" and must exist with the other levels, but still contends that they are governed by a common theory. This approach, although well-articulated, leaves several unaddressed issues.
Luttwak's argument seeks to explain the current linear construct and how it operates but does not offer any compelling arguments as to why the structure functions better through the singular lens of strategic theory. He articulates many of the observed phenomenon of the current model and even admits that, "…the outcomes are not simply imposed in a one-way transmission from top to bottom because the levels interact with each other."8 9F 
90
94
90
91
92
93
94
95
The second mistake is the conflating and joining of political and strategic theory. Svechin states, "…the claim that politics is superior to strategy is universal in nature" and that bad policy cannot be rescued by good strategy.9 5F 
96
98
99
Another distinguished theorist, Milan Vego, offers a different model to better explain how the various theories interact. In his seminal work, Operational Warfare, he offers another Venn diagram, but one that is not hierarchical.1 00F 
101
96
98
99
100
101
103
One of the founders of the US theory of operational art, Huba Wass de Czege, wrote an article in 2011 stating that operational art is not a level of war.1 03F 
104
105
106
Vego and Luttwark make several important contributions to the body of theory surrounding operational art and the 'levels of warfare' construct. They recognize the intricate links between the theories, even if their models do not show this well. They also recognize that each theoretical sphere has its own logic and function and that the theory of operational art and the operational artist must account for these functions. However, both fail to address the fundamental issues with the Joint model that it is stratified and does not include policy within its considerations.
By combining the conclusions gained from analyzing the other proposed theoretical models and this study's five deductions, this study can assert that operational art is a mindset that allows a practitioner to harmonize political, strategic, operational, and tactical theories to create strategic advantage and accomplish policy objectives. These various theories interact with each other in a non-linear manner, as part of a whole that is recognized during conflict. Each theory acts as an element within a whole, forming a system. Operational art does this through the use of actions (tactical) to create effects in time, space, and purpose (operational), so that the artist can set 104 Wass de Czege, Thinking and Acting, 1. 
105
106
conditions to gain relative advantage over an adversary (strategic) in pursuit of power and influence (political), to ensure national success and survival (interest).
Traditional American operational theory is based on Jominian and Clausewitzian theories, does not expound upon classical operational theory, other than to acknowledge that it exists, that it dominates most western thinking on warfare, and that it offers many time tested and relevant observations. This form of thought stands in contrast with a more recent structure, systems thinking, which has made an episodic impact on US Joint thinking within the last three decades.
Systems theory was introduced to the US military in the 1930s when the US Army Air Corps planners developed their theory of strategic bombing.1 07 F 108 This line of thought saw that militaries and societies were a set of complex system of systems, comprising of nodes and links, and if influenced properly, could produce a shock that would force the system to change and lose its normal functionality.1 08F 109 This line of thinking has created the current systemic design method within planning, which actively seeks to find key nodes (critical vulnerabilities) to attack for maximum effect.
In his piece, "What is a System," Alex Ryan defines a system as, "…a representation of an entity as a complex whole open to feedback from its environment."1 09F 110 He believes that a system is a representation of an observed reality or phenomenon and functions best as an idealization, 
107
109
110
111
There are strengths and weaknesses to each model of thinking, with staunch proponents on each side of the debate. Each model and theory offer clues and insights for an operational artist to use in pursuit of his strategic and policy aims. It is because of this recognition of value for each theory, that the Joint Force currently employs aspects of each theory into its doctrine and tries to harmonize these bi-polar theories. Vego argues that operational thinking is rooted in the human factors of warfare; that war is a social interaction and cannot be boiled down to an exact science or accurately predicted.1 12F 
113
115
116
Both theories have their champions within the Joint Force and both theories represent valuable aspects that the Joint Force seeks to capitalize on; however, much like warfare, neither theory offers an absolute truth. Both should be used to devise a new theory of warfare and operational art, to synchronize and harmonize all of the theories that inform modern warfare. The final section of this study does just that; it suggests a new model of warfare and theory of operational art.
The above research and analysis have established some key findings critical to the formulation of a new model and theory of operational art. The first finding is that a theory of warfare is a conglomeration of multiple interacting theories (political, strategic, operational, and   tactical). The second finding is that a link has always, and must continue to, exist between policy, strategy, and tactics. The third finding is that a linear model of warfare, especially one that inserts a 'level' between strategy and tactics, constrains practitioner thinking and misapplies the theories that exist within warfare. The fourth finding is that each theory exists within a complex, open system, where inputs and outputs into one theoretical sphere, can and will create inputs (influence) into each of the other theoretical spheres simultaneously. The force of those inputs and their effect on each sphere vary depending on the condition of the system. The fifth and final finding is that systems thinking, when applied to the theory of operational art, removes characteristics and elements, and replaces them with mindset, methods, and methodologies.
Current doctrine teaches that operational art is comprised of certain elements, but the history and practice of the theory shows us that this is an incomplete way of viewing operational art. It is true that these elements can be found throughout many historical campaigns, but so can 
117
As with the current Operational Art definition, ADM calls for "…critical and creative thinking to understand, visualize, and describe…"1 17F 
118
119
2
120
Operational art is a mindset that uses methods and methodologies to leverage harmony amongst the various theoretical spheres to achieve strategic and policy objectives. This achievement of harmony is the art in the form of systems thinking, since every single situation is unique, even if many aspects are similar.
The mindset of operational art is the most important aspect; for it allows the operational artist to think in a manner that properly frames and makes sense of chaotic and complex situations.
The behaviors, beliefs, and practices that make up this mindset are broad and can be different for each artist. It acknowledges that each situation exists within its own context and that solutions must be creative, unique to its specific problem, and that results often diverge from intended consequences. Even though each artist's mindset is influenced by culture, environment, technology, and language, some important trends can be observed. A habit of thought consisting of an open and inquisitive mind that is willing to experiment, explore, and err; yet is anchored to the needs of the policy objectives, the reality imposed by the environment and situation, the nature of war, and resources available with which to work are the hallmarks of an operational artists mindset.
Since the environment is dynamic, the artist too must possess a dynamic mind, one able to bend with the environment and to develop and use tools creatively to solve problems.
Methods are a procedure or technique for accomplishing something. They are the observable physical manifestations of the theories handed down to us from theorists such as Jomini and Clausewitz. They are contextual and normative in nature and provide a solid foundation from which an artist can apply and combine in unique and creative ways to achieve a stated goal. In current Joint Doctrine and in historical examples, this is what the Joint Force recognizes as maxims: tenants, elements, forms, aspects, and principles. The Elements of Operational Art, Joint Warfighting Functions, Leadership Principles, and Forms of Maneuver are but just a few examples of methods used by practitioners to apply military force in pursuit of political and strategic aims. It is the combination of these methods, into unique groupings, that form operational art's methodologies and, when applied correctly, are guided by an operational artist's mindset to address unique problems and impose changes on a targeted environment or system.
Methodologies are ideas and ways; they are abstract in nature. Since a methodology is a grouping of methods, operational art methodology must be descriptive and not proscriptive. It must explain what needs to occur and not how or by what manner. There are no set rules to developing methodologies since there are no set rules for how societies evolve, view, and translate their political and strategic environment, and choose to interact with them. As such, there are five methodologies of operational art that describe the desired outcomes or effects on a system that are sought. These five methodologies are: affect an opposing system by denying its aim, reducing its options, disrupting its synergy and function, overloading its processes, and disrupting its equilibrium and cohesion. Since each system is unique to its particular time, environment, and context, each one of these methodologies must manifest themselves into different combinations of methods, each with different degrees of effect. Therefore no two battles, operations, or campaigns can be identical, even though they may have some similarities.
The above framework supports the operational artist in three ways: by properly defining who the artist is; by making key distinctions on the utility of theory in practical use; and by establishing an anchoring mechanism that properly models reality.
The first utility of this theory is describing who the operational artist is and why it matters.
Operational theory tells us that the operation and campaign are the primary vehicles by which a practitioner achieves strategic and political objectives. This would indicate that the commander and his immediate staff, in charge of a named operation or campaign, are in fact the operational artists. This means that operational theory and the theory of operational art can be practiced by any echelon of command, so long as that commander is tasked with executing an operation or campaign. As such, current Joint doctrinal thinking that labels echelons of command as tactical or operational is misguided and a byproduct of the misapplication of theory via the stratified 'levels of warfare' model. Once the Joint Force acknowledges that an operational artist is the 'owner' or commander of an operation or campaign, then the force can deliberately institutionalize and organize towards this artist. Under the current US organizational chart, this would indicate a component or Task Force commander. Once this occurs, then the Joint Force can determine what organizations can conduct operations and campaigns (depending on the mission type and scope) and ensure that the commanders of these organizations are properly trained and staffed to accomplish this task, potentially requiring a change in staffing models and the current train, man, equip models.
The second utility of this theory is explaining the key distinctions of theory in practical use. If operational art is a mindset that uses habits of thought and non-prescriptive approaches, then maxims, such as elements and characteristics, do not belong to the theory of operational art, but belong to operational theory. The art is not in the maxims; it is in their unique combinations and use. This conclusion is an important nuance. Operational art is not constrained by any specific form or method and does not have to weigh or balance any specific checklist to be successful. The artist is free to engage his challenges with any combinations of methods that he believes are required to gain success. With a focus on mindset, an anchoring on strategy and policy, and a new mental model to visualize from, the operational artist can exercise disciplined initiative, be unpredictable, and outthink an opponent. By adopting a systems approach to thinking, the artist can use the theory to frame, explain, effect and manipulate his reality, better aligning the actions of the Joint Force to the needs of the commander and body politic.
The third utility of this theory is to establish a framing mechanism that properly models reality and enables broad thinking. By providing a model that can be molded to fit an artist's reality and a theory that talks about managing the relationships between each sphere, the artist is given tools that enable what Joint Doctrine is calling for, critical thinking and unique applications against complex problem sets. This tool can be used to understand the past, frame the present, and provide feasible options for future actions, from both a friendly, neutral, and enemy perspective. This model can also interact with many of the other theoretical models in use by the military, to include John  This study has examined the theories that apply to conflict, described how each theory interacts with each of the others, introduced a new model to show this interaction, introduced a new concept for the theory of operational art, defined who the operational artist is, and provided an explanation for the utility of the above model and theory. With this done, this study can propose an evolved definition of operational art. Operational art is a mindset that leverages the relationships between the policy, strategy, operations, and tactics of us and our adversary, through the use of consequences and conditions within a given time, space, environment, culture and context (campaigns and operations within a theater), to gain a relative advantage over an opponent and achieve policy or strategic objectives. This definition considers past and current definitions, the various theories and their place within warfare, and the conclusions of this study. It is an evolution of the American understanding of warfare yet is designed to explain the theory's essence and history. It recognizes the primacy of policy and strategy without interposing itself onto their theoretical constructs and logic. Most importantly, it focuses on the linkages and connections between the theoretical spheres and not on a particular theory or sphere.
This study sought to analyze and learn from the various theories that compose warfare, to reevaluate the Joint Force's logic of its Levels of Warfare model and its understanding of operational art. It showed that each theory has its own logic, is rooted in classical and systems operational theory, and that each theory is intrinsically linked to each other in bounded relationship.
Even though each sphere is governed by its own logic and serves its own purpose, they cannot exist or function properly without the inputs from each other. By viewing them as a whole, the study was able to draw out how they interact and co-exist with each other. Next, by searching other theoretical models, presented by accomplished and acclaimed theorists, this study was able to determine the strengths and weaknesses of each to formulate a stronger and more enduring model.
Finally, this study produced such a model, proposed a more complementary understanding of what operational art is, described how operational art uses the relationships represented in the mental model, and proposed a more complete description of how operational art can be used (through its five methodologies) to design operations and campaigns to achieve strategic and political objectives.
There are several implications associated with the findings. The first is related to doctrine.
The Joint Force needs to refine its doctrine, at both the Joint and Service level. The second is related to who the operational artist is. This study identified the campaign or operation owner, the commander, and his immediate staff, as the operational artists. The implications of this acknowledgment are that the Joint Force would need to invest in leader development to ensure that assigned commanders and staffs have appropriate education and depth of understanding to properly function in this role. The third implication is a continued outreach to other governmental departments and allies. If doctrine and understanding change, specifically in the Joint Force's model of warfare and theory of operational art, then it will require its adjacent organizations to adopt a similar understanding and lexicon. This includes an increased outreach and education of political leaders and may require a Presidential Decision Directive to have other departments adopt these findings. It also includes engaging with NATO and other allies to gain consensus and change the Alliance doctrine and thinking.
Finally, this study will require further research to confirm its theoretical assertions. Further historical research into recent campaigns and operations are needed to confirm if the proposed model and understanding of operational art are consistent with practical execution. Further research will also be needed to ensure that this study's findings can support and work in concert with Joint and service level concepts. By integrating the findings of this study into Joint Doctrine, nesting it with Joint, Service, and other department concepts, and incorporating it into Allied thinking, the US can posture itself to better view, understand, decide, and act within its environment at every echelon.
66  
66  
Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011), 277.   
Joint Publication 1-0, Doctrine, I-7 / Joint Staff. Joint Publication 3-0, Joint Operations (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2017), 
Scott Page, "Path Dependence" in Quarterly Journal of Political Science; Jovita J. Tan, Historical Research: A Qualitative Research Method (San Francisco, CA: Academia.edu).
Yaneer Bar-Yam, Making Things Work Solving Complex Problems in a Complex World (Cambridge, MA: Knowledge Press, 2004), 24-26.
James J. Schneider, "The Loose Marble-And the Origins of Operational Art.", 87.
For a more in-depth and complete understanding of Soviet thinking and execution of operational art via their deep battle concept, refer to a copy of Alexander Hill's The Red Army and the Second World War. This volume does an incredible job of not just outlining how Soviet thinking progressed, but places their theory of operational art in context of their political, strategic, operational, and tactical problem sets. It also does a masterful job of describing and detailing how the Soviet theory was put into practical use.
Vego, Operational Warfare, 3.   
Vego, Operational Warfare, iii-iv.   
US Department of The Army. United States Army. Army Techniques Publication 5-0.1, Army Design Methodology (Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office, 2015), 1-3.
Army Techniques Publication 5-0.1, Army Design Methodology, 1-3 to 1-5.
Joint Publication 3-0, Joint Operations, II-3.
OMB No. 
0704-0188
Theories of Operational Art
__//signed/24FEB21/BES//__________
Monograph Director Bruce E. Stanley
Seminar Leader Jason M. Alvis
20 APR 21/BAP//
Army Combined Arms Doctrine Directorate