# ID: beb24d636e6741a496f31d0abd0168ff
# Title: Russian Disinformation Efforts on Social Media
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
Popular portrayals of the Russian disinformation machine at times imply an organized and well-resourced operation, capable of affecting behaviors and events around the world.
Evidence paints a more nuanced picture: Despite its strengths, there are also distinct limitations to the power of Russia's information confrontation machine.
Russia has a wider variety of official and unofficial actors to wage its information warfare than do Western countries.
However, publicly available evidence indicates that these actors are not all seamlessly coordinated or particularly well funded.
Although Russia has used a multitude of social media accounts to spread disinformation and propaganda on a great variety of subjects across multiple platforms and has reached broad and varied international audiences, this outreach does not equate to impact.
The fullest display of Russian information warfare-with, almost certainly, the greatest impact-took place in Ukraine, where Russia integrated information and kinetic operations, using disinformation and propaganda both as strategic tools to shape political outcomes and as operational tools to undermine military morale.
The impact of Russia's information operations in Western countries is less obvious and more difficult to assess.
In this chapter, we examine the practical and more-detailed aspects of Russia's information operations on social media by addressing the details of Russia's information warfare, offering a sense of the scale of the activities, and providing observations on their impact.