# ID: beb24d636e6741a496f31d0abd0168ff
# Title: Russian Disinformation Efforts on Social Media
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
• Russia views social media as a double-edged sword, at once harboring anxieties about social media's potential to undermine Russia's security and recognizing its advantages as a low-cost and potentially highly effective weapon of asymmetric warfare. •
Russia's use of social media outside the former Soviet Union picked up most markedly in 2014, suggesting that this behavior is, in part, a response to the West's response to the Ukraine conflict. •
The Russian disinformation machine has been neither well organized nor especially well resourced (contrary to some implications in popular media), and the impact of Russian efforts on the West has been uncertain. •
However, even with relatively modest investments, Russian social media activity has been wide reaching, spreading disinformation and propaganda to sizable audiences across multiple platforms. •
Russia appears to view its own activity as successful, so the threat posed by this activity is likely to persist-and, potentially, to grow. •
Western countermeasures have raised awareness of Russian activities, but their impact on Russia's efforts has been uncertain, and Russia appears undeterred. •
Moreover, Russia's social media-based information warfare is evolving.
Russia is likely to continue pursuing some of the same goals and targets but is developing more-sophisticated tactics and techniques aimed at circumventing Western countermeasures.