# ID: c1fa0d1196ad4c3ea0ca46b48f597414
# Title: The Echo of Battle: The Army’s Way of War
# Database: Libgen
# Year: 2009
# Fulltext:
No topic today unites and divides Americans more than war. But what does it mean? Even the people charged with its prosecution disagree. Former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld's declaration shortly after the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 that "even the vocabulary of this war will be different" exemplifies the present difficulty in conceptualizing warfare. 
1
Even before GWOT, the defense community was in the midst of a vibrant debate over whether the nature of war itself had changed. Advocates offered the prospect of a glittering future through a "Revolution in Military Affairs," "Military Transformation," and a "New American Way of War." But their voices were only some, if perhaps the most strident, in a much larger discussion. Others defended the relevance of military philosophers such as Henri Jomini and Carl von Clausewitz, while still others advocated what General Wesley K. Clark termed "modern war-limited, carefully constrained in geography, scope, weaponry, and effects." 
2
This failure of military intellectuals to agree on a concept of war might seem surprising, given that virtually everyone in the armed forces claims to be a "warfighter" and every few years at least one of the services proclaims its intention to make each member a "warrior." 
3
Yet much anecdotal evidence suggests otherwise. Until very recently, a common joke at all the war colleges was that the one subject not studied was war. In 2005 a Department of Defense agency offered $5,000 for the best essay on the "new principles of war," thus paradoxically implying both that war was subject to scientific laws (principles) and that these laws were transitory and situational (new). Such confusion is by no means uncommon. The Pentagon routinely issues directives purporting to give a concept of war that are little more than gibberish. For example: "Joint Adaptive Expeditionary Warfare requires capabilities organized cross-enterprise, adapting dynamically to uncertainty and turbulence in a multi-dimensional, nonlinear, competitive environment." 
4
The premise that historical analysis can clarify contemporary military issues-or, in military parlance, that history provides applicable "lessons learned" for the present and future-is one of the cardinal tenets of American military thought. But the search for a usable past has tended to follow three distinct lines of inquiry. Some have studied prominent military officers, in the process encountering the problem of separating the individual's own views on war from a broader service consensus. Others have studied military reform movements, seeking to establish a collective professional ethos that promoted transformation. 
5
6
General John R. Galvin recognized this crucial relationship between prewar concepts and wartime conduct. "When we think about the possibilities of conflict we tend to invent for ourselves a comfortable vision of war . . . a combat environment that is consistent and predictable . . . one that fits our plans, our assumptions, our hopes, and our preconceived ideas. We arrange in our minds a war we can comprehend on our own terms, usually with an enemy who looks like us and acts like us. This comfortable conceptualization becomes the accepted way of seeing things . . . until it comes under serious challenge as a result of some major event-usually a military disaster." 
7
Army officers and military historians, past and present, assume that the service shares a common definition of war. Indeed, this assumption is central to the regular army's institutional selfidentity. Since its inception, it has maintained that "modern warfare," a term whose specific meaning has changed radically, is too complex to be trusted to gifted amateurs, who may or may not appear when the nation is in crisis. Only professional officers who have devoted a lifetime to understanding warfare are qualified to wage it. Internal debates may rage over the means of waging war, but the army's basic concept of war itself has not changed. Or has it?
Far from displaying the rigid organizational unanimity often ascribed to the "military mind," the army has been engaged in prolonged and often acrimonious debate over the nature of both war and national defense. In the process, the army has developed three distinct intellectual traditions that together make up the "army way of war." The three traditions are not mutually exclusive. Most officers adopt concepts derived from all three, though if pressed they will usually champion one. These traditions are not sequential. At many times two of them have overlapped and the third has almost disappeared. Nor are they always in opposition. At times their proponents have reached consensus on policies, weaponry, or the nature of current and future conflict. But instances of brief agreement on the army's way of war should not obscure the reality that these three traditions think about warfare in fundamentally different ways.
The first of these martial philosophies is espoused by a group that I will call the Guardians, and it was the dominant military paradigm for much of the nineteenth century. Its military intellectuals postulated that war was both an art and a science, the former consisting largely of the application of the latter. As a science, war was subject to laws and principles which, if applied, provided the means to anticipate or even predict the consequences of specific actions or policies. Only an officer who had mastered the science of war could be trusted to practice it as an art.
After the experience of the Revolution and the War of 1812, the Guardians envisioned the primary threat to the nation as a sudden naval raid on Atlantic coastal cities. A devastating blow to these urban areas might not only cripple the U.S. war effort but might also provide the springboard for continental invasion. Guardians saw a solution to this threat in harbor fortifications, the newest weaponry, and a small, elite corps of military specialists supported, if necessary, by masses of patriotic citizen-soldiers. Once these defenses were in place, the nation would have absolute and relatively cheap security, able to deter any current or future adversary.
The legacy of this military tradition continued long after the prologue disappearance of the threat on which it was based. Indeed, in some respects much of today's dialogue about homeland security and a ballistic missile shield harks back to the Guardians' nineteenth-century vision. Their legacy can be seen as well in some officers' view of war as an engineering project in which the application of scientific principles by skilled technicians all but guarantees success. This perspective was manifest in the Powell Doctrine, named after the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Colin Powell, which imposed strict preconditions on the deployment of military forces. It is also apparent in Army Vision 2010, a "conceptual template" asserting that, irrespective of what the enemy does, the army will "win decisively" through "dominant maneuver," "precision engagement," and "full dimensional protection." 
8
9
10
11
As consistently as each intellectual tradition has maintained its own vision of warfare, so each has invented its own rationale for failure. For the Guardians, war is best understood as an engineering project in which the outcome is determined by the correct application of immutable scientific principles. Strategic planning for future warfare is largely a matter of determining the correct national security policy and then totaling up weaponry and man-prologue power and comparing it with that of potential enemies. Taken to extremes, this leads to the belief that the next war is predictable and its outcome predetermined. When conflicts do not turn out as planned, Guardians blame an irrational American society, through its political representatives, for refusing to accept the Guardians' logical and informed defense policies or for failing to allocate sufficient human resources and materiel. They reproach the army as an institution for not acknowledging their primacy in strategic direction and for pursuing risky military goals. When confronted with a war that fails to meet their preexisting convictions, their reinterpretation soon discovers that it actually confirms their beliefs.
For Heroes, war is simply battle-an extension of combat between individuals on both the physical and the moral plane. The side whose commanders and soldiers exhibit superior courage, strength, discipline, martial skills, honor, and so forth will inevitably secure victory, unless betrayed by other factors. In the face of evidence that charismatic leadership, tactical skill, high morale, and martial experience does not guarantee victory, Heroes blame their enemy for failing to fight honorably and their own civil and military leaders for wanting sufficient will to win. They often accuse American society of lacking the physical and spiritual qualities needed for warfighting. They have a similarly bad opinion of the institutional army. In their view, it is a soulless corporation in which warriors are subordinated to technicians and careerists. In their criticisms of the army, Heroes tend to make no distinction between Guardians and Managers-they throw them all into the same bureaucratic pot.
For Managers, war is fundamentally an organizational (as opposed to an engineering) problem-the rational coordination of resources, both human and materiel. Whereas the Guardians seek to make war more predictable, the Managers seek to make war more effective. They complain when Americans refuse to accept their guidance and instead champion irrational martial virtues, or (worse) defense priorities unfavorable to the army. In their internal assessment, Managers are contemptuous of the narrow technicism of the Guardians and the romanticism of the Heroes. Should overwhelming resources, superior administration, and detailed planning fail to secure victory, the Managers' response is to reorganize. Too often, this takes the form of what military personnel cynically term "moving the ravioli around": drawing elaborate diagrams to rearrange (and "re-acronymize") the chain of command, the force structure, and the budgetary priorities, while leaving the military institution and its fundamental problems virtually untouched. In the name of reform and modernization, Managers are perpetually engaged in the radical reorganization of administrative structures and tactical units, creating new concepts and buzzwords, and promoting their new, transformed military organization as superior to the one it replaced. Ironically, their reformist zeal is fed by historical lessons, so that an organizational scheme for the army of the future might claim as its inspiration a Roman victory two millennia ago.
Taken together, Guardians, Heroes, and Managers represent three distinct schools of thought whose influence continues to shape the army's vision and thus its conduct of warfare. But to study the army's way of war requires a clear delineation between the ideal of war and the practice of war. Peacetime military thought focuses on what the army thinks about past wars, how it interprets current threats of war, and how it anticipates future wars. From this perspective, the wars the United States has actually fought are important less for what happened than for what military intellectuals believed they had learned from them after the shooting stopped. The fact that much of American military thought has been narrow, contradictory, and logically suspect in no way diminishes its importance to the army's way of war or to the course of the nation's history. Today, more than ever, soldiers and citizens need to understand what the army hears in the echoes of battle. prologue 1
During the Cold War, when many Americans believed they faced nuclear annihilation or communist dictatorship, the dangers posed a century earlier seemed insubstantial. But during this so-called "era of free security," the perils were very real indeed to those concerned with the nation's defense. Secretary of War John C. Calhoun warned Congress in 1820 that "however remote our situation from the great powers of the world and however pacific our policy," it was almost inevitable that the United States would be drawn into another protracted war. 
1
And always in the background were intermittent border conflicts with Native American peoples. However overblown these dangers appear to us today, the threat from such internal and external opponents remained ever present in contemporary military thought.
The absence of an American military profession prior to the War of 1812 makes it impossible to identify a distinct army philosophy or way of war at the time. Anthony Wayne's Legion of the United States showed considerable discipline and efficiency in suppressing Native American resistance at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794, but it was soon broken up. The Corps of Artillerists and Engineers (created in 1794) supervised harbor defenses, but the organization was minuscule and much of its leadership foreign. 
2
Among these citizen-soldiers was a consensus that the European great powers were predatory and that military weakness invited attack. The War of Independence provided a graphic example of a primary danger facing the new republic-what one secretary of war termed "requisitional invasions" by European nations against vulnerable cities along the Atlantic coast. 
3
4
5
6
Headed for most of its existence by the internationally renowned engineer Joseph G. Totten, the Fortification Board was in many respects an extension of his strategic concepts. 
7
In developing a plan, the Fortification Board assumed that the nation's next war would be much like the last; thus the War of 1812 became the model for future conflicts. But this template was based on a highly selective study of the lessons of the recent past. Virtually ignoring the aggressive military operations on the western and southern frontiers that broke the back of tribal resistance, the board focused solely on the British expeditionary raids along the coasts. In the board's view, these coastal attacks demonstrated that unless a hostile expedition could seize a port to serve as its base (as the British had done during the War of Independence), it could not sustain a land campaign or permanently occupy territory.
Indeed, without access to unloading and transportation facili-fortress america ties, the enemy would be forced to disembark troops in a difficult and hazardous over-the-beach landing. This would, in turn, impose severe constraints in the size, logistical support, and equipment (particularly artillery and ammunition) of the invading force. This relatively weak expedition would have to immediately march overland to seize a suitable harbor for the main force-in the process giving the regular army and militia time to prepare land defenses. As the battles in front of Baltimore and New Orleans had indicated, even untrained citizen-soldiers fighting behind earthworks could repel European veterans who were operating at such disadvantage. 
8
9
Given these assumptions, the board envisioned that future conflicts, though having much in common with the last one, would have far more horrific consequences. The memory of the burning of Washington and the plundering of the coast spurred the board's imagination. One of its scenarios was that an enemy might send an expedition to Louisiana, blockade New Orleans, and ravage the area for 150 miles around, destroying plantations and liberating slaves. Another was a raid on Philadelphia, with enemy troops rowing ashore, cutting off the city, and then creating a swath of destruction across Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Yet another scenario postulated 20,000 troops based in Halifax, with expeditions sent out to menace the coast from Maine to Louisiana, "ruin[ing] us by a war of mere threatenings. If the cities are not garrisoned they will become [its] prey at once, and if they are the treasury will be gradually emptied, the credit of the government exhausted, the wearied and starving militia will desert to their homes, and nothing can avert the direful consummation of tribute, pillage, and conflagration." 
10
11
Just as it had argued that recent improvements in weaponry and military organization posed a new threat, so it concluded that these same improvements could be used to protect the nation. In particular, it maintained that the improved design and fortress america construction of masonry fortifications made them virtually impervious to ship-borne artillery while at the same time allowing the concentration of overwhelming firepower. Towering two or three stories high, mounting forty or fifty guns, protected from counter-fire by eight or more feet of bricks and stone, the forts would hurl crushing salvos into the vulnerable upper works of attacking ships.
Such fixed defenses would diminish the need for a standing army-the third element in the Fortification Board's strategy. The 1821 report calculated that fewer than 5,000 soldiers would be sufficient to maintain the works and repel a sudden and therefore relatively small-scale raid. The fourth element, the militia, would be called up only "to repel invasions," as the Constitution specified. 
12
Central to America's national defense strategy was the principle of deterrence. Curiously for a group of officers with such ample evidence of American aggression in the form of Jackson's forays into Florida and the Southeast, the board clearly believed that the United States would not be the aggressor in future wars and that the nation's main concern was to defend itself against European encroachments. From the Anglo-American conflicts the board drew the lesson that if the nation was sufficiently prepared to withstand a sudden attack, the result would be a war of attrition in which "the advantage must always rest, everything else being equal, with the country which, from its geographical situation and its natural and artificial strength, is most secure from invasion." From this it followed that "it is this property of inaccessibility by land at which the United States should aim, and which it may attain by well contrived permanent works and by the gradual increase of the navy." 
13
14
In the imagination of army officers, the War of 1812 also provided a template for fighting the next war on the Canadian border. Right after the war ended, President Monroe and Major General Jacob Brown had developed a plan for an attack up the St. Lawrence that probably would have failed for the same reasons that wartime expeditions had failed. But in the view of the Fortification Board, the Canadian border never loomed as large as the coast did, and board members devoted little attention to cross-border attack from either direction. Of the $8,250,000 dollars devoted to construction of fixed defenses between 1816 and 1829, only $200,000 went to the northern border. 
15
Moreover, the board developed a military policy and a strategy that suited its narrow institutional self-interest. Dominated by engineers, it postulated a defense system it claimed was based on four mutually supporting elements, but in fact provided only vague guidance for the navy, neglected the rest of the regular army, and all but ignored the militia. Implicit in the board's view was the presupposition that the republic faced only one significant strategic problem, an enemy seaborne attack on a port, for which there was only one solution, harbor fortifications. By disregarding all ancillary threats in favor of this almost medieval worldview, the board was free to concentrate on problems that would yield to its expertise. But as a result, it created a program that was less a coherent plan of national defense than a series of disconnected strong points dotting the Atlantic coast. The board's insistence that the future would repeat the past-a conviction that owed much to its selective reading of the lessons of the War of 1812-made it blind to other strategic possibilities. Focused on the danger of invasion from Europe, it neither foresaw, nor made any provision for, offensive conflicts that might accompany frontier expansion. More illogically, the board simultaneously placed its faith in relatively new and unproven defensive technology while assuming that offensive technology would remain stagnant.
If with hindsight the Fortification Board's conceptual limitations appear obvious, nevertheless it was practically the only military agency to comment on national strategy. It occupied a unique place among military institutions, partly because of the respect accorded to the board and the Army Corps of Engineers both within and without the army. In Totten they had a worthy champion who was justly renowned as a scientist and engineer. During his four decades on the board, Totten's sustained, consistent, and unchanging articulation of the original defense plan was such that he often copied parts of it into his later recommendations for national defense. New information was assimilated only when it supported his preexisting views, as when he included in his 1836 report statistics to show that, at least hypothetically, in the event of invasion the United States could concentrate almost a million militiamen within ten days at its nine largest port cities. In the ensuing decades when others perceived in new technology or in their experience of war signs that the board's program-or at least its tactics and weaponry-needed to be revised, Totten saw only vindication of its prescience. His political superiors did not challenge his conservatism. Both the secretary of war and Congress deferred to the program and the corps, not least because of the substantial economic benefits the program's construction projects generated among constituents.
Within the army, the Fortification Board and the Corps of Engineers' interests were so symbiotic it was often hard to separate them. The board's program provided a justification for an educated officer corps, one whose expertise lay not in combat experience or political connections but in its grasp of "military art and science." Both an organizational philosophy and an effort to apply engineering precision to war, military art and science had its ultimate expression in the construction of fortifications. Moreover, both an officer's expertise and his ability to practice it was controlled by the corps, which governed the source of almost all post-1820 peacetime officers, the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. The engineers shaped the academy's curriculum and then fortress america drafted its top graduates, most of whom spent their careers carrying out the board's program. 
16
17
The Mexican War of 1846-1848 was a glorious victory that demonstrated, depending on the individual officer's perspective, the combat effectiveness of the regulars; the Corps of Engineers' expertise; the martial spirit of citizen-soldier volunteers; the poor discipline, political intriguing, and atrocious conduct of citizensoldier volunteers; or the need for a commander to have charisma, experience, and intuition (usually referred to as "genius"). Winfield Scott's landing at Vera Cruz and capture of Mexico City were recognized in Europe as operations worthy of study. In turn, Scott declared that without "the science and skill" of his West Pointers he could not have succeeded with an army four times larger. 
18
The navy also failed to provide an alternative strategic vision. It had no equivalent to a chief of staff or military advisor. Its cumbersome bureau system, which oversaw administration, supply, and construction, was not charged with developing a distinct vision of warfare appropriate for the navy. Nor did it produce a military intellectual of the stature of Totten or others to articulate a navalist strategy. Like the army, it was divided by personal rivalries, political factions, and deeply rooted antagonisms among the various branches; and it had no postgraduate service school, no professional journal, no planning staff, and no intelligence-gathering agency. Rather than developing its own strategic paradigm, the navy readily adopted the Guardians' way of war because it provided them with an offensive mission-to prowl the seas after enemy merchant shipping, free from the control of the army, a far better role than coastal defense or the "floating fortification" motif envisioned by President John Quincy Adams. 
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Evidence that did not fit into the Guardian paradigm, or contradicted it, was either dismissed or explained away. Thus one member of the Corps of Engineers cautioned against the popular perception that the fall of Sebastopol had proven that recent improvements in artillery made the corps' fortresses obsolete. The proper lesson was that if the Russians had but applied the sound construction principles that the corps practiced, Sebas-topol would have withstood all attacks. It was therefore incumbent that the board's program be continued. 
29
30
The expansion of the program in turn begat shortages, which were compounded by the army's own mistakes. In particular, the board devoted so much time to designing and building fortifications that it failed to provide sufficient artillery and gunners to defend them. By 1851, despite expenditures of over $20 million, only 59 sites were considered adequately fortified; of the 4,572 guns of all calibers needed to arm the main defenses, only 1,864 were actually mounted. As one secretary of war pointed out, some of these guns were more dangerous to their operators than to enemy warships. 
31
Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor was a case in point. When fortress america construction began in 1829, it was designed as a massive structure, its masonry walls towering over 50 feet high and supporting 135 guns on three tiers of casemates. But over thirty years later when the fort was finally called upon to fight, much of it was in disrepair. Only ten of the guns had been mounted, and the garrison consisted of some 80 soldiers. Despite the clear gap between ideal and reality, the board refused to consider replacing the enormously expensive and complicated masonry casemates with designs that were cheaper, easier to construct, and more in accord with recent developments in weaponry. Rather, it urged spending another $24 million building even more fortifications. 
32
33
34
35
Only in the years immediately preceding the outbreak of the Civil War did some members of the Corps of Engineers begin to seriously question its paradigm. In 1859 Lieutenant James St. Clair Morton wrote the secretary of war that the "revolution that strategy has undergone" rendered the board's program no longer valid: "When such extraordinary improvements are being effected in the means of destruction and of transportation, and such increase in the scale of warfare is observed . . . it is impossible that the art of war should remain stationary." 
36
37
38
39
40
Despite their vehement attacks on the Guardians' methods, these three critics still endorsed most of the group's assumptions. Indeed, for all their claims to innovation, Gaines, Morton, and Hunt were inherently conservative in their outlook. They accepted that the primary threat was from Europe, most probably Great Britain, and that it would come in the form of an attack on an Atlantic coastal city. They agreed that the nation's strategy should be defensive and deterrent. Like the board, they envisioned no scenario that required committing the army to combat operations outside of the North American continent. Where the board cited the War of 1812, its critics now cited the Cri-mean War and other conflicts, but they shared similar conclusions about the hostile intentions of the international community and the necessity for a coherent defense program. And, like the board, its critics proved exceedingly poor prophets of the next war. Indeed, writing two decades before the Civil War, Gaines was more keenly aware of the danger posed by internal dissension over slavery than were Morton and Hunt, writing barely a year before its outbreak.
The surrender of Fort Sumter after just thirty-three hours of ineffective resistance offered dramatic evidence of the limitations of the nation's harbor defenses. In April 1862, almost exactly a year later, Union warships steamed past the corps-designed fortifications guarding New Orleans almost untouched. That same month Fort Pulaski at Savannah surrendered after being pounded into rubble. As critics had predicted, new technology-rifled cannon, steam-powered armored warships, and mines-radically changed the dynamics of military fortification. 
41
42
The first years after the war witnessed a strong effort to revive the nation's harbor defenses. In 1866 Congress assigned to the Harbor Defense Board the mission of reappraising the nation's se-fortress america curity in the event of foreign attack. Its three committees, each consisting of one army and one navy officer, worked on an integrated defense plan that relied on long-range cruisers that would attack enemy merchant shipping and communications, and harbor defenses that would incorporate such new or improved technologies as mines, rifled cannon, and monitors.
By 1869 officers at the Artillery School had concluded that improvements in heavy guns made it impossible to build a fortress wall that could withstand sustained gunfire from either land or sea. To counter the increased range and power of naval gunnery, engineers and artillerymen began to design radically new fortresses camouflaged by the surrounding terrain when viewed from seaward. Instead of an overwhelming volume of firepower, they would mount a few rifled cannon whose shells could smash through any warship's armor five or six miles distant. These longrange guns would be supported by shorter-range heavy mortars whose shells would land on the unarmored decks, by minefields, and by mobile gun barges and monitors. With this layered scheme, enemy fleets would encounter a multitude of defenses; whether they attempted to force their way through with battleships or speed through with smaller vessels, they would be stopped.
In some respects, this new harbor defense system argues that responsible professionals assimilated the lessons of war, analyzed new weapons technologies, reassessed the threat, and incorporated their conclusions into a transformed military system. But such an interpretation fails to acknowledge the persistence with which military thinkers revived old arguments under the guise of new and innovative ideas. Once again, officers carefully selected incidents and data, ignored or explained away contrary data, and hypothesized counterfactuals. Thus, for example, one member of the corps argued that the true lesson of the Civil War was that whenever a corps-built fort fell, it was "due more to the weakness of the defenders themselves than to any essential damage inflicted by the shells of the enemy." 
43
The harbor defense community applied their professional expertise in testing and assessing new guns and construction materials, but their conclusions inevitably fit a broad strategic concept virtually unchanged from that of the antebellum Fortification Board. This was especially true of the Corps of Engineers, which continued to view itself as first among equals. In the decades after the Civil War, the corps tried to respond to a double challenge. One was intellectual and came from line officers such as William T. Sherman and Emory Upton, who sought to articulate a new version of land warfare. The other was methodological and came from Artillery officers asserting their branch's primacy in harbor defense.
The corps' response was perhaps predictable, and it incorporated many of the same arguments that succeeding generations of American military intellectuals would use. It created a fictive past. Disregarding three decades of complaints on the lack of support for the board's program, they now proclaimed that "General Totten was able to give the country what at their date were perhaps the most perfect sea-coast fortifications the world has ever seen." 
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
If the strategic context and the nature of the threat closely followed that of the 1820s boards, so too did the solution: a layered maritime-land defense system to protect the nation's major ports against a sudden naval raid, provide secure harbors for the navy's warships, and protect coastal trade. Like the earlier Fortification Board, the Endicott Board promised that this security could be achieved at a reasonable expense if undertaken immediately. Al-though it estimated the total cost of the coastal defense system to be $126 million, an average of almost $10 million a year, the board claimed that this sum was actually cheaper than the earlier program. And, like the earlier board, it claimed its program would relieve the nation of the much higher expenditures and the implicit political dangers of a large standing army.
Where the 1886 study differed from the 1820s defense system was in its methods. Steam power, iron construction of warships, and above all improvements in artillery had rendered masonry towers more dangerous to their garrisons than to attacking fleets. But if military technology had created an imminent threat, it had also provided the solution. The Endicott Board advocated a comprehensive system consisting of deep-water warships to raid the enemy merchant marine and the latest coastal defense weaponsfloating batteries and monitors, mines, torpedo boats, and new fortifications mounting new heavy artillery-all directed by an elite corps of specialists and backed up by a wartime mass army. A few long-range steel cannons (cast from a new $8 million foundry), dispersed behind cement-and-earth bunkers all but invisible from the sea, would replace the old batteries of dozens of smoothbore guns. So powerful were these new guns that they could sink a modern warship with a single well-placed shot.
Like the earlier Fortification Board, by outlining the threat and offering a plan of defense, the Endicott Board helped define the army's view of national security. Commanding General John M. Schofield told the secretary of war in 1894, "The situation of the United States is directly the opposite of that of the continental powers of Europe . . . Here there exists no necessity for great armies in the field. On the contrary, nearly the entire power of the nation is available for sea-coast defense." 
54
55
56
57
58
59
According to one member, the first principle of harbor defense was to estimate both enemy firepower and tactics and then ensure sufficient artillery "to overpower the enemy's fire." 
60
61
Other premises and assumptions proved equally faulty. Lieutenant Charles P. Summerall revived a criticism made of the antebellum defense system by noting that the Endicott plan devoted all its attention to the threat from the sea and glossed over land-ward defense with vague references to the militia. 
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
But military intellectuals' support for an offensive global navy was based in part on a clear separation between the two services and their missions. In Schofield's words, "The purpose of the Navy of the United States is for operation beyond the reach of the guns of American fortification, while the object of the Army is to defend the sea-coasts against foreign attack, and any possible aggression from abroad." 
72
Both to the officers who lived through them and to later historians, the three decades between the outbreak of the Civil War and the end of the Spanish-American War were a period of profound transformation. Americans reeled from the effects of the Civil War and Reconstruction, especially in the South, from immigration and the settlement of the western frontier, and from industrialization and urbanization in the East and Midwest. As big business arose along a progressive middle class, the sheer rapidity of modernization threatened to tear American society apart. In the military services, advances rippled out and overlapped at a bewildering rate, not just in weapons, transportation, and communication but in doctrine, organization, and administration as well. To those American officers who had been taught-based on the dictums of Totten, Mahan, and Halleck-that war was a science with immutable principles of order and predictability, these changes were especially traumatic. Perhaps the coastal defense community could adapt the old Guardian paradigm to new technology, but for others the old way of war had been destroyed.
These army officers felt compelled to invent a new idea of warfare, and the process by which this doctrine evolved has had criti-cal implications for the nation's military policy. Unfortunately, historians have often neglected this evolution in favor of the broader army reform movement, or have subordinated it to the study of "professionalism" in the officer corps. A good example is the influential 1957 work The Soldier and the State by Samuel Huntington. He argued that the post-Civil War era was "the most fertile, creative, and formative in the history of the American armed forces." 
1
Huntington's thesis inaugurated a huge subfield of study in military professionalism. It also confirmed a deeply cherished belief among America's military personnel that, if left alone, the armed services would reform themselves, and their reforms would be vindicated on the battlefield. But as a historical explanation for the evolution of American military thought between 1865 and 1898, the thesis imposes a false coherence upon an era of confusion and disagreement, of many wrong turns and mistaken assumptions. Few army officers writing on military affairs after 1865 imagined they would be leading the nation's armed forces into a great war for empire before the end of the century. But they did know they were living in a period of military transformation that was both exhilarating and terrifying. As Captain A. D. Schenck marveled in 1895, just three years before the outbreak of the Spanish-American War, "Within a single generation . . . the art of war has changed more than it has ever changed since the advent of gunpowder." 2 They were a diverse and often modern warfare factionalized assemblage, agreeing on one issue and emphatically disagreeing on another. Some focused narrowly on tactics or weapons, while others sought a radical revision of national security policy; some believed war was becoming more rational and humane, while others saw it as increasingly destructive and unpredictable.
But despite their many differences, military intellectuals shared certain assumptions. They all believed that a technological, organizational, and conceptual revolution in military affairs was under way. They were convinced that the United States was vulnerable to attack by its European rivals. They took as an article of faith that history offered clear lessons for current policy. And they all recognized that the American people required guidance or direction in preparing for the next conflict. These assumptions were interwoven in their efforts to develop a new concept of war. 
3
4
5
One of the major differences between the Guardians and those who wrote on modern warfare was their approach to the past. Although the War of 1812 continued to shape the Guardian strategic perspective, the Civil War and the German wars of unification redefined warfare for this new generation of officers. 
6
In just one decade, a united Germany emerged as the dominant land power in Europe, France was humiliated, Italy achieved independence, Austria-Hungary began its slide into client status, and the Confederacy was annihilated. These conflicts revolutionized the practice of war.
In 1846 the Americans had fought the first battles of the Mexican War with barely 2,000 troops, and in 1854 the allied expeditionary forces in the Crimea numbered 60,000. But by the 1860s the Confederacy, Austria, Prussia, and France each mustered over 500,000 soldiers, and some 2 million served with the Union. Battles were fought on a similarly colossal scale-160,000 combatants at Gettysburg, 320,000 at Sedan in 1870, and perhaps as many as 500,000 at Königgrätz in 1866. The numbers killed in combat, dead from disease, wounded, and captured were calamitous: 45,000 Austrians at Königgrätz; over 51,000 at Gettysburg; 435,000 French soldiers in 1870-71. Some 620,000 Americans died in the Civil War.
The size of the armies, the magnitude of the battles and casualties, and the immensity of their consequences all reflected the impact of industrialization. It would not have been possible to recruit, train, arm, transport, or direct these armies without the widespread adoption of telegraphs and railroads, or to support them without mass production of uniforms, munitions, weapons, and food. Organization and management were almost as important as industrialization. The Union victory owed a great deal to the application of industrial business practices to military challenges. Even more impressive was the Prussian system. Guided by its elite general staff, the Prussian army had organized and trained a large conscript army, adopted new weapons, developed doctrine, and drawn up strategic plans. When war broke out, it was as though a giant machine had been switched on. In a few weeks, tens of thousands of troops mobilized, trains deployed them to the front, generals coordinated the movements of their armies with the master war plan, and the enemy army was overwhelmed and smashed in a few battles.
The Civil War provided the army with the closest approach to a doctrine of war it had until 1905: General Orders Number 100 or Instructions for the Government of Armies of the United States in the Field. Written by the noted jurist Francis Lieber in 1863, the Instructions conferred both legitimacy and guidance to Union forces occupying the Confederacy during and after the war. The Instructions posited that in premodern conflicts, among "barbarous armies," and in "the internecine wars of savages," war was unregulated violence. Private property was wantonly destroyed, prisoners killed, and noncombatants slaughtered or enslaved. In contrast, what Lieber termed modern warfare took place within the community of "many nations and great governments," among which "peace is [the] normal condition" and "war has come to be acknowledged not to be its own end, but the means to obtain great ends of state, or to consist of defense against wrong." The great aim or "ultimate object of all modern war is a renewed state of peace," while "the destruction of the enemy in modern war, and indeed, modern war itself, are means to obtain that object." In sum, the Union cause was legitimate because as a civilized nation-state it was using military force only to secure a just peace.
Lieber may well have intended his code to provide both a rationale and a means to return to the limited conflicts of the eighteenth century in which, at least ideally, combatants would restrict military violence to one another's armies and avoid attacks on civilians. Certainly his definition of "modern regular wars" as those in which "protection of the inoffensive citizen of the hostile country is the rule; privation and disturbance of private relations are the exception" recalled the ideals of pre-Napoleonic limited conflicts. In this respect, the document was profoundly conservative. But in the face of massive popular resistance to occupation, the Instructions could also become a weapon for total war. Lieber maintained that "the more vigorously wars are pursued, the better it is for humanity. Sharp wars are brief." He gave wide latitude for violence based on "military necessity," defended retaliation, and insisted that "to save the country is paramount to all considerations." 
7
None of the army's prominent antebellum intellectuals embraced the challenge of modern warfare. Totten died during the conflict, and Halleck-unpopular and virtually exiled-wrote no analysis of the war. Mahan was an anachronism long before his death in 1871. His 1863 edition of Out-Post largely ignored the Civil War and everything else that had occurred since 1815. Although he changed little of the original 1853 text, he almost doubled the length by adding a large section on principles of strategy and grand tactics. In this revision, Mahan noted that the outcome of war was not always predictable; he also acknowledged the existence of irrational factors such as chance or morale and admitted that generalship was often governed by instinct and expedience. 
8
Given the opportunity to analyze a truly modern war just a few hundred miles away, one that was cannibalizing his own nation (including many of his former pupils), his response was to chart the campaigns of Napoleon. Despite graphic evidence that war was becoming more violent and chaotic, Mahan still sought to deduce invariable paradigms and rules. And when a veteran commented that the tactics Mahan taught bore no relation to those the Union Army had actually employed, the enraged professor ordered him to be silent. 
9
10
11
12
The only senior officer to contribute a serious analysis to the early debate over modern warfare was Schofield. Appalled at the cost, disorder, and social upheaval caused by the Civil War, he came to believe that only by limiting popular passion and military destruction could war achieve political objectives at an acceptable cost. This led him to seek what he termed a "science of war" to provide theoretical principles and allow for the integration of new technology, management, and tactics while at the same time limiting the escalation of violence. 
13
14
15
16
17
18
The senior leadership's failure to provide a clear vision of a new way of war was reflected at the lower levels as well. The army had no institution, whether staff or educational, charged with assessing the lessons of past conflicts or preparing for future ones. Nor did its school system provide a unified doctrine. After the Civil War, West Point declined into complacency and ritual, placing the burden of military education on a few branch schools and an individual officer's own academic interests. At the Artillery School, established in 1868, students spent some time studying the Civil War and European military operations, but their primary focus was on ordnance and gunnery. Sherman established the School of Application for Infantry and Cavalry at Fort Leavenworth in 1881, but it provided only a rudimentary education in tactics to lieutenants and captains. One student who attended both schools recalled that "the commanding officer in each case was a kindly, well-intentioned relic of the Civil War who, while wanting his school to be a success, was frightened to death of the innovations proposed by his subordinates." 
19
One of the first and most influential of these interpreters was Emory Upton. A brilliant and opinionated officer, Upton rose from lieutenant to brevet major general during the Civil War. The appalling cost and duration of that war moved him to turn his considerable intellect toward designing what he modestly termed a "complete revolution" in tactics. 
20
Upton was driven by a desire to make the army larger, more efficient, better prepared for war-and thus able to employ his tactics. His proposals for military reorganization, outlined in his 1878 book The Armies of Asia and Europe, borrowed heavily from the German example. 
21
Like Mahan and Halleck before him, Upton tried to apply scientific precision to the study of history, deducing from the consequences whether various principles had been correctly applied. Also like them, he tended to disregard inconvenient variables, particularly such intangibles as morale, innovation, and technology, that did not lend themselves to scientific analysis. His Civil War experience convinced him that American wartime citizensoldiers were the best troops in the world once they were properly trained and led. Why then had the war taken so long and been so destructive? Upton blamed the nation's shortsighted policies that all but precluded effective military forces until the Union was on the verge of defeat. He maintained that for a variety of reasons, most of them irrational, throughout the nation's history the American populace and its political leaders had persistently disregarded the sage advice of its military professionals. The resulting state of unpreparedness practically invited external attack and in-ternal rebellion, and inevitably led to wars more costly in blood and treasure than necessary.
Upton's death interrupted the narrative of The Military Policy of the United States halfway through the Civil War, before he could analyze what had made it a distinctly modern conflict. 
22
Arthur L. Wagner, Upton's successor as the army's leading tactician, also based his critique of national military policy on lessons learned from history. In words Upton might have used, Wagner wrote in 1886, "The most prominent features of the military policy of the United States are a parsimonious and inadequate provision, in time of peace, for the necessities of war; an injudicious reliance upon raw troops; and a mischievous intermeddling by civil officials with the conduct of military operations." 
23
24
25
26
27
28
The Principles of Strategy: Illustrated Mainly from American Campaigns, first published in 1891, proved Bigelow to be both insightful and original. 
29
To Bigelow, the "primary object of military operations should be to overpower, and if possible, to capture or destroy, the hostile army." If defeating the enemy army failed to achieve the war's objectives, it might be necessary to capture the enemy's capital city and occupy key strategic points in enemy territory. Although Bigelow's focus was clearly directed against European opponents, he was one of the few officers who recognized that the army's next conflict might be in an "imperfectly-civilized country" in which "the only course to pursue may be that of carrying the war home to the people." 
30
31
32
The works of historian-policy advocates such as Upton and Wagner, and of observers and strategic writers such as Greene and Bigelow, expressed their conviction that in many ways the conduct of war had profoundly changed. These proponents of industrial warfare tended toward a total or absolutist view: war's objective was "annihilating the enemy's war power by destroying his armies." 
33
Not surprisingly, officers in these neglected branches quickly created scenarios in which the coastal fortifications failed, requiring land campaigns and large-scale battles. Thus, in 1884 Wagner postulated an invasion force of 100,000 men, a number soon to be accepted as a minimum. Within twelve years this had increased to 150,000. 
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
In 1873 the army took a significant technological leap when it adopted the breech-loading Springfield .45-70 caliber rifle. This weapon could fire almost a dozen times a minute, was effective at 400 yards, and in tests could hit a target at 1,500 yards. 
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
Managers rejected the Heroes' belief that individual will and genius were the determining factors, and instead maintained that the nation's ability to mobilize its manpower, materiel, and popular support would ultimately decide victory or defeat. Schofield declared in 1897, "The valor of great masses of men, and even the genius of great commanders in the field, have been compelled to yield the first place in importance to the scientific skill and wisdom in finance which are able and willing to advance the most powerful engines of war." 
67
68
The army's confusion over the meaning of "modern warfare" can perhaps best be understood by studying it in the microcosm of the Cavalry branch. In many respects, the last year of the Civil War was the highpoint for the cavalry and the benchmark by which it measured its mission, tactics, weaponry, and self-iden-tity. Equipped with repeating carbines and pistols, the Union horsemen possessed formidable firepower and, in violation of accepted military wisdom, could not only seize terrain but also hold it. In contrast to contemporary European cavalry, which saw its mission as first and foremost mounted combat against other cavalry, the American horsemen fought dismounted as often as mounted. They were used both independently and with other combat arms for a host of missions: reconnaissance and security; screening; attacking isolated detachments; delaying enemy advances and harrying enemy withdrawals; seizing and defending strategic points; maintaining communications between separated forces; and raiding deep into enemy territory to destroy supplies and transportation. 
69
70
71
72
73
74
This contradiction is nowhere better illustrated than in an 1891 article by Lieutenant J. Y. Blunt that argued, "In future we will have to reckon with troops handled according to the methods of modern scientific war . . . for whether we will have to meet the Canadians from the north or the Mexicans from the south, these nations have trained armies, better or worse, to be con-quered at any cost, and as we are told that in future, wars will be 'short, sharp and decisive,' it behooves the army that would be victorious to be ready." 
75
Blunt's startling conclusion illustrates the dangers of interpreting the period between 1865 and 1898 as one of evolution and progress in which a small group of enlightened reformers envisioned a professional army that would become a reality in the twentieth century. Such an interpretation imposes a coherence and foresight all too often missing in reality. Like the Guardians, the modern warfare movement was in many ways profoundly conservative. Even as they trumpeted the radical changes brought by new weaponry and industrialization, even as they prophesied horrific scenarios of future conflict, many theorists held profoundly regressive views. Just as the Guardians had been convinced the next war would repeat the events of 1814, so the post-Civil War theorists similarly failed to predict the future. Like the Guardians, they tried to create an army for a war the United States would never fight. And, like the Guardians in 1861, those who claimed to have seen the future of modern warfare were completely unprepared when their own nation went to war in 1898.
In 1837 Major General Edmund P. Gaines unleashed a diatribe against military intellectuals who had "never seen the flash of an Enemy's Cannon" and who drew all their insight on war from "mazes of French Books." Instead, the nation should heed Heroes like himself, men whose long experience endowed them with a "common sense science of war" far superior to foreign theory. 
1
What contemporaries sometimes termed "minor warfare," and is today best termed "unconventional warfare," was a far cry from the great nation-state struggles envisioned by modern warfare enthusiasts. Encompassing partisan and guerrilla operations, punitive expeditions, small-unit raiding and skirmishing, counterinsurgency, and a variety of other forms of conflict, unconventional warfare was a continuation of America's long-standing struggle between colonists and native inhabitants. 
2
3
4
5
In punitive campaigns against tribesmen defending their homelands, regular army officers discovered what their colonial predecessors had-the futility of chasing highly mobile bands of warriors. Frontier officers soon resorted to colonial methods of striking at the enemy's society by destroying foodstuffs and shelter and subjecting noncombatants to exposure and starvation.
One secretary of war described this warfare in 1858 as "beating their forces, capturing many prisoners . . . destroying large amounts of property, and laying waste their country." 
6
7
The Heroic officers who served on the frontier in the nineteenth century produced no military intellectual equivalent of Clausewitz to provide a theoretical understanding of minor warfare. They passed on Gaines' "common sense science" by various means ranging from official reports to memoirs. To those assigned pacification duties, the lessons of unconventional warfare-first in the West and later in the growing American empire-were handed down piecemeal. They could be gleaned from a variety of sources, such as field reports, articles, and books de-tailing tactical and logistical adaptations, field craft, command decisions, and other practical matters. Works such as Mahan's Out-Post or Arthur L. Wagner's Service of Security, although primarily designed for the European battlefield, did contain advice on small-unit formations, reconnaissance, patrolling, and intelligence gathering that could be adapted for Indian fighting. John Bigelow's Principles of Strategy provided examples of formations used on the frontier and even a brief study of campaigns pitting armies against rebellious populations. 8 There were also unwritten rules, such as tempering coercion with conciliation.
Some commanders did arrange training exercises to provide their troops with practical instruction in frontier operations. One example occurred in 1887 when Brigadier General Nelson A. Miles staged an exercise in which scattered garrisons of his Department of Arizona attempted to catch a detachment of soldiers acting as a "raiding party." This exercise provided more than useful training in tactics. It brought home to its participants the physical demands of desert campaigning, the need for accurate intelligence, and the importance of adapting to local conditions. 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Paradoxically, at the same time it fostered a climate of barbarism and savagery, the Heroes' emphasis on individuality and martial virtues pointed to morality (often interpreted as the officer's personal character) as an essential component of warfare. Officers like Miles might believe that Indian-white conflict was unavoidable and the destruction of Native American culture inevitable, but once their opponents had ceased armed resistance, it was the government's ethical and legal responsibility to "devise some practical and judicious system by which we can govern one quarter of a million of our population, securing and maintaining their loyalty, raising them from the darkness of barbarism to the light of civilization, and put an end to these interminable and expensive Indian wars." 
17
18
19
20
21
22
The Heroes' emphasis on individual skill and adaptability and their broad interpretation of war allowed them to make a relatively easy transition to other irregular conflicts. So too, their contractual view of the relationship between the army and the populace ultimately became an essential part of army doctrine. During the Mexican War, General Winfield Scott was extremely sensitive to the threat of popular resistance. He decreed that his troops were to disturb the population as little as possible and to respect the inhabitants' religion and customs. He imposed draconian punishment on soldiers who committed crimes against civilians. Such measures had various goals: to limit armed violence to the rival armies and avoid popular participation; to control suffering and destruction; to impose discipline on his own troops; to protect his supply lines; and to provide order and control. But Scott insisted on equally good behavior from the occupied population. When guerrillas and partisans continued to attack his forces, Scott ordered them summarily executed and burned the villages of those he suspected as having aided them. Henry Halleck's International Law provided a cogent legal argument to support both Scott's policies and the contractual relationship between soldier and occupied population. 
23
24
25
These concerns were addressed in 1863 with the proclamation of the Instructions for the Government of Armies. The Instructions made a sharp distinction between legitimate and illegitimate warfare, between "public war," defined as "a state of armed hostil-ity between sovereign nations or governments," and "barbarous" war, insurrection, and criminal violence. "Partisans," or uniformed soldiers in authorized military units operating on special missions, were lawful. But "men, or squads of men, who commit hostilities, either by fighting, or inroads for destruction or plunder, or by raids of any kind . . . without being part and portion of the organized hostile army," and who alternately took up arms or became civilians, were "highway robbers or pirates."
The Instructions also outlined a social contract between the army and the population. Soldiers were held to a high standard of conduct, not only for the sake of military discipline but because as government agents charged with imposing order in the occupied area their behavior had to be orderly as well. They were expected to provide law enforcement, revive commerce, and improve public health, while at the same time interfering as little as possible with the lives, customs, and institutions of civilians. But this population had to accept the conqueror's authority. Continued resistance to lawful government made them "war traitors," "war rebels," and "armed prowlers." To crush such opposition and restore peace and order, the Instructions legitimized "protective retribution" such as confiscating or destroying property, imprisonment, and execution. 
26
Thus, both advocates of conciliation and of hard war could find arguments to justify their positions, for the Instructions legitimized everything from burning homes to building schools. The Instructions' very flexibility made them popular. It is little wonder that, although intended as an emergency measure to provide specific guidance for Union troops pacifying occupied areas under martial law, they became an essential part of army practice, regarded by many officers as the final word on occupation and pacification. Almost four decades later, when Filipino guerrillas contested American occupation, officers would turn to the Instructions to meet the threat. Some have seen close parallels between the Civil War and postwar army frontier campaigns, while others assert these conflicts share few similarities. Both positions are correct, depending on whose "way of war" is examined. Certainly, officers who had ravaged the homes of white Americans in South Carolina or Virginia might have had few compunctions in applying equally harsh measures against Indians in the West. And the tactics used were similar-burning crops and homes, treating irregulars harshly, and occasional resorting to the rhetoric of extermination. But the number of differences is equally large. At roughly 27,000 officers and men, the entire post-1877 regular army was much smaller than the forces that Sherman, Sheridan, or Schofield had each commanded in a single Civil War campaign. The scale of campaigns was also vastly different. The three-day Battle of Gettysburg involved some 160,000 troops and resulted in 45,000 casualties. The Red River campaign against the Kiowa took half a year but involved no more than 2,000 soldiers, 25 skirmishes, and fewer than 100 combat fatalities on both sides.
Not surprisingly, Guardians and Managers who believed the army should prepare for war against a rival European power dismissed post-Civil War unconventional conflict as barely worthy of note, an unpleasant reality that inhibited their efforts to transform the service. Upton declared to a fellow officer "that 'bush-whacking' and Indian fighting with one or two companies do not qualify an officer for the position [of ] General" when it came to "a great war." 
27
28
With the onset of violent industrial strikes in the North-and particularly the Great Strike of 1877-some officers came to accept Sheridan's prophecy of future "wars of internal stress between capital and labor." 
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
The outbreak of the Spanish-American War in 1898 was in some ways a major turning point, and in others a continuation of the army's way of unconventional warfare. The ensuing fifteen years of military operations encompassed not only distinct campaigns in Cuba and Puerto Rico (1898), the Philippine Islands (1898-1902), and China (1900) but also a decade of pacification campaigns in the Philippines (1902-1913), the Cuban Occupation (1906-1909), and various incursions into Mexico (1914-1917). As on the western frontier, soldiers faced a variety of opponents on even more varied terrain and were charged with a multiplicity of missions, ranging from the defeat of enemy armies to the creation of a colonial government. As on the frontier, military victory on the battlefield did not end armed conflict. This was especially true in the Philippines, where once the conventional war ended in late 1899, there was no centralized resistance, either political or ideological. As on the frontier, army officers relearned the Heroic martial tradition of initiative, morale, and adaptation of one's tactics to the environment and the enemy. And, as on the frontier, the army and successive presidential administrations steadfastly refused to dignify these conflicts as "war"the Philippines were an "insurrection," the Chinese incursion a "rebellion," while Cuba had required "pacification."
Many veterans of Philippine campaigns shared the intellectual presuppositions of frontier Heroes. They too believed that the enemy must be totally defeated before negotiations were possible, but that military measures alone would not achieve the nation's goal of peacefully occupying the country and improving the lives and morality of the Filipinos. In the words of one officer, "The question of our policy is mainly a civil one. If we give the natives peace and prosperity, they will be content; and opposition will cease." 
41
42
43
44
45
46
As Bell recognized, Heroic qualities such as adaptability, intelligence, leadership, and character were crucial in unconventional warfare. One observer commented that counterinsurgency operations in the boondocks did "a great deal to develop in all officers that most important quality, self-reliance, for with the defective communications, junior officers and their companies were often isolated for months from their headquarters and had to steer their own way as best they could. In the majority of cases they rose to the occasion, and the greatest credit is due to them for the manner in which they adapted themselves to circumstances." 
47
48
Robert Lee Bullard was the closest thing to an imperial military theorist the army produced. His central thesis was this: officers must recognize that their professional duties extended far beyond the conduct of war. Imperial service had reconfirmed the experience of the frontier and Reconstruction, demonstrating that "if army officers and the army have had to know something of the art of war, they have had to know and use far more the art of pacification. In the Philippines the work was four-fifths peace and one-fifth war making." 
49
50
Though equally in the Heroic tradition, Major Augustus P. Blocksom drew a very different lesson-that too many officers lacked a "practical knowledge of the sterner features and necessities of war." Under a too-benevolent army rule, guerrillas could live among the population, sneaking out to ambush and kill and then returning to resume the guise of peaceful and friendly "amigos." Only by employing the Instructions' full sanctions, which Blocksom interpreted as torture and summary execution, was the war won.
Blocksom defended the army against its critics, including the "vicious hostility" of the press. The army was merely the instrument of its nation. "If inspired by military training with desire to make war sharp and brief, they do not always conduct it in accord with the strictly moral point of the civil critic, the fault lies either in the heart of the people from whom they spring or in the war itself." He concluded with a self-justifying, simplistic, ethically suspect, and factually incorrect argument that has since been echoed by many other military thinkers. "When war comes officers . . . will exert their power to keep its evils at the minimum. But public sentiment will be morally responsible for its beginning, and should without cavil let the army and navy fight it to the end, remembering that the larger the well-trained, properly equipped fighting force sent early . . . the shorter will be the war and the less liability to methods like those described . . . And when things go wrong, the . . . blame for cruelty, privation, and delay should be placed where it belongs-on war itself." 
51
52
Instead of providing instruction for future counterinsurgency campaigns, many feared these imperial wars had taught all the wrong lessons. Living in isolated posts and fighting a distinctly local insurgency, officers had developed initiative and small-unit leadership. But they had also grown accustomed to an independence and individuality inimical to the discipline and doctrinal adherence required by large-unit operations. Modern warfare advocates worried that fighting untrained and poorly armed opponents had "played havoc" with these young officers' tactical judgment and "inculcated erroneous and regrettable ideas," including "impetuosity" and a "disdain" for the killing power of modern firearms. 
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
Army planning for counter-insurgency campaigns continued to rely on earlier tenets. War Plan Brown dealt with potential uprisings in the Philippines, ranging from minor violence to full-scale insurrection. The troops assigned to implement Brown were to be trained in "guerrilla warfare" and in "attack, defense, mopping up, and control of towns." 
65
66
67
68
69
But the vast majority of writing on unconventional conflict reflects the distinct Heroic tradition. Across the decades, veterans stressed the importance of character, intuition, experience, courage, honor, and other intangible attributes. They have approached war in a broader, if less precise manner, as encompassing not only the destruction of the enemy but also the winning of the peace. For those military intellectuals who followed this way of war, the key question was how these individual qualities could apply to the industrialized process that had defined great power conflict since the Civil War.
Providing for War?
The war with Spain in 1898 revealed the army's unpreparedness for modern warfare, and subsequent imperial commitments in the Caribbean and the Pacific stretched it to the breaking point. Appointed in 1899 with a mandate to reform the nation's scandalously weak land forces, Secretary of War Elihu Root declared, "The real object of having an army is to provide for war." 
1
2
3
Moreover, Root's injunction to provide an army for war came at a substantial cost. Both the service and the nation sacrificed much that had served them well for a century, not least a small and inexpensive military establishment. The regular army increased from less than 27,000 before the war with Spain to 75,000 in 1903, and to 105,000 in 1915. Appropriations quadrupled from their pre-1898 level. Whether the service's efficiency increased proportionately to the financial and human resources lavished on it is less clear. Such factors as recruitment and retention, officer resignations and absenteeism, courts martial, desertion, and troop health might lead one to argue-as many officers did-that in its first decade of existence the post-Root army was less prepared for war than the pre-1898 army.
By some standards, the likelihood of war actually rose after 1898. Although the imperial conquests of 1898-1902 increased the nation's prestige, they burdened it with overseas territories far from the mainland, which could be reinforced only with great difficulty and, in some cases, were well within the range of powerful enemies. Presidents, no longer constrained by minuscule defense establishments, dispatched troops and warships to enforce their particular economic or moral agendas. And despite the creation of planning staffs, the improvements in military education, and the supposed professionalization of the officer corps, in 1917 the army was no better able to predict the next great conflict than it had been in 1898, or to envision how it would be fought. Instead, contemporaries often contrasted the nation's supposedly secure past with the dangerous present, seeming to forget their predecessors' dire predictions even as they repeated them.
In his 1910 annual report, Chief of Staff J. Franklin Bell claimed that "with modern ocean transportation facilities . . . it would be easier to conduct a campaign from Europe against New York than it was for General Grant in 1864 to conduct his campaign through Northern Virginia." 4 As Bell's warning makes clear, despite the Root era's alleged transformative role, some military intellectuals continued the Guardian tradition, repeating the familiar litany that "the safeguard of isolation no longer exists." 
5
6
7
8
9
10
To their frustration, the American public would not support an army sufficiently large to ensure the protection of overseas territories. Officers considered the empire's indigenous populations far too untrustworthy to play a role in their own defense. Nor was the army willing to sacrifice its institutional commitment to modern warfare for the unpopular task of imperial policing. As it had done when it faced a similar problem in the nineteenth century, the army turned to the greatest "force multiplier" of the era: the heavily armed strategic harbor.
The investment in building fortified keeps at Pearl Harbor, Manila Bay, and the two entrances to the Panama Canal was enormous, but the army hoped to reap two long-term benefits: to defend the possessions themselves and to keep the majority of its troops within the continental United States to prepare for a putative European invasion. But by 1915, when these fortifications were almost complete, the Philippine Defense Board concluded that not only were those in Manila Bay vulnerable to land attack, but they would serve little strategic purpose in a Pacific war. This finding reflected a growing consensus among Guardian strategists that the overseas possessions, and particularly the Philippines, were valuable only to facilitate the army's traditional mission of protecting the continental United States. 
11
Other officers were equally certain that technology was overvalued. Machine guns, one officer sniffed, had "kept up a terrible clatter on San Juan Heights" but had killed no Spaniards and were in all respects "very inferior engines of war." 
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Those who wanted to prepare the army for modern warfare were not only divided by branch interests but by their adherence to the army's three martial traditions. Managers perceived war as essentially an industrial process directed by a trained corporate elite. Heroes interpreted it as an extension of individual combat, and therefore determined as much by skill and mental preparation as by mass and organization. This tension contributed a curious, almost schizophrenic quality to military theory and practice. At the same time that military intellectuals contemplated the effect of rapid-fire artillery and machine guns, they also urged the retention of the saber and bayonet. They worked out schemes to raise armies in the millions while at the same time insisting that the regulars' rigid peacetime discipline must apply to wartime citizen-soldiers. They trained officers as scientific practitioners of "safe leadership" while simultaneously stressing the commander's intangible, God-given qualities of character and determination. 
23
These contradictions permeated the extended debate over the nature and future of war, often flavored by a Social Darwinist insistence that human progress and war were interconnected. One military intellectual deduced from recent conflicts that "the improved weapons and implements of war have given the nations of the earth the power to preserve order throughout their extensive domains, to curb and restrain unruly elements, to force respect everywhere for law, and to strike swift and telling blows against lawlessness, crime, and rebellion." 
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
The development of doctrine-defined as "the core statement of the army's view of war" and "a common guide for the conduct of operations"-provided further evidence of Manager-Hero differences. 
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
When the army tested these distressing scenarios, it discovered they were actually optimistic. Maneuvers in both Hawaii and the Philippines revealed that even if the forts withstood a siege, the harbors could be shelled by land-based artillery, making them inaccessible to the American fleet. Reflecting these grim realities, in 1908 students played out a hypothetical war in which the Pacific possessions fell in less than a month. The next year's problem added a Japanese expedition that landed near Seattle and ravaged the Columbia River basin. This scenario, repeated in 1910 with even more disastrous consequences to the West Coast, demonstrated once again that in the Pacific "the role of the United States is defensive, and will be so for a long time." 
47
48
49
50
A World War I general recalled that the prewar "plans were not worth much, for they did not accept conditions as they actually existed in the U.S. at the time . . . they envisioned the use of troops that did not exist and could not be expected except after long delay." 
51
One notable failing in the war plans-and, indeed, in most post-Root military thought-was any recognition that the American people, either as militia or citizens, might contest the invasion of their nation. Instead, strategists assumed popular participation would be almost entirely negative and take the form of panic and interference in sound military policy. Should the longexpected invasion occur, "The newspapers would call for battle, the people would demand it; our 77,000 regulars would be forced to attack, and would be wiped out of existence . . . [and providing for war? the] invaders would have a free hand in our coast towns." 
52
53
54
55
56
57
The military intellectuals' bleak view of American society enhanced their conviction that the regular army should not only organize and command the nation's land forces but direct national strategy as well. To Captain Carl Reichmann, "It is self-evident that no one is so qualified and capable of imparting the intelligent, common sense discipline of the regular army as those who have been brought up in that discipline. The logical deduction is, that in the creation of volunteer regiments the important places should be filled by officers drawn from the regular army." 
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
Nor were officers circumspect in discussing the possibilities providing for war? of war. In writing for their colleagues and the public, military intellectuals lamented an America invaded, its cities burned, its women ravaged, and the nation forced into debt and decline.
As the world war continued, and the mutual slaughter virtually ended any possibility of attack from Europe, officers created ever more fanciful scenarios. A 1916 War College study warned that countries as diverse as Russia and Germany had the potential to invade with overwhelming numbers; even Italy could land more than 200,000 soldiers in little over a month. 
71
72
73
74
In the two decades between the splendid little war of 1898 and the war to end all wars in 1917, the army underwent profound transformation under Root's directive that it "provide for war." But despite the completion of the harbor fortification program, the creation of institutions charged with planning and preparing for conflict, and a tripling in manpower, along with other improvements, the army did not believe that the nation was more secure. Both planners and individual officers outlined alarming and quite improbable scenarios of national defeat while producing equally dubious solutions. As they had prior to 1898, military thinkers continued to draw both from the past and from current events only those lessons that confirmed their cherished beliefs.
A decade after serving as a chief of artillery for the American Expeditionary Forces and directing the AEF's titanic bombardments on the Western Front, Major General William E. Lassiter recalled his observations of a recent war exercise: "Fine body of men, the 1st Cavalry Division. Excellent esprit, lots of vim-but operating as if they had been to sleep like Rip Van Winkle and knew nothing of machine guns, aeroplanes, etc. Obsessed with the idea that they must charge, and that modern weapons will not permit them to charge . . . And so they go careening over the open plains . . . waving their antiquated sabers and yelling at the top of their lungs. Stirring to the senses in peacetime, but murder in war." The experience led him to reflect, "It is terribly difficult for military men to keep their methods adapted to rapidly changing times. Between wars the military business slumps. Our people lose interest. Congress concerns itself more with cutting down the Army than with building it up. And the troops . . . find a large part of their time and energy taken up with caring for buildings, grounds, and other impedimenta. In view of all the inertias to be overcome, and in view of the fact that our lives and honor are not in peril from outside aggression, it is not likely that our Army is going to be kept in an up-to-the-minute state of preparedness." 
1
2
In the immediate aftermath of World War I, most uniformed commentators believed it was still possible and even desirable to return to the nation's historic continental deterrent strategy. Only a few urged an active international role, warning that Europe's unstable borders and the nation's global interests made a retreat into isolationism untenable, and a virtual guarantee of future war. The 1920 War Department's directive that the army make "the adequate defense of all permanent fortified or garrisoned possessions of the United States the top priority" received little challenge within the service. 
3
4
The 1920 National Defense Act seemed to address this multiplicity of dangers. Rejecting army manpower schemes dating back to Upton, the act incorporated Brigadier General John McAuley Palmer's vision of a trained citizen-soldier defense force. It authorized a unified "Army of the United States" with a peacetime strength of 288,000 regulars to provide training cadres, to man overseas garrisons, and to serve as an immediately deployable expeditionary force. In the event of a great war, the regulars would be reinforced by a 435,000-man National Guard and a potentially larger federal Organized Reserves, both trained by the regular army. The act divided the continental United States into nine administrative corps, each of which could mobilize one regular, two guard, and three reserve divisions, which together would form three field armies immediately upon the declaration of war.
The act also addressed some of the specific lessons of World War I. Recognizing that modern warfare required the concentration of all elements of national power, the act established an assistant secretary of war to oversee the procurement of military supplies and the mobilization of industry. The importance of new technologies was acknowledged with two newly created combat organizations, the Air Service (to become the Army Air Corps in 1926) and the Chemical Warfare Service. For better or worse, the act did not accord mechanization-the use of armored vehicles for combat-the same status, and it rejected proposals to establish a separate tank corps. Instead, it assigned tanks to the newly formed Office of the Chief of Infantry, and scout or combat cars to the Office of the Chief of Cavalry. Army service journals lauded the 1920 Defense Act as the first formally authorized national security policy in the nation's history. 
5
Despite these setbacks, and in contrast with the aftermath of earlier conflicts, the army set out to make a comprehensive study of the lessons of World War I and their application for future military contingencies. This process occurred on a variety of levels, from the War Department down to the individual military officer. In 1920 the service secretary, proclaiming that the conflict "marked the beginning of a new era in the military art," instructed the army "to study the records of the World War, with a view to extracting from them all the lessons they contain." 6 Among these lessons were: that the immense size of modern armies imposed logistical demands met only by the mobilization of domestic industry and transportation; that size, logistics, and fortifications rendered armies immobile; and that war was increasingly dominated by technology such as artillery, airplanes, and tanks, all of which required highly specialized operators.
The commander of the AEF, John J. Pershing, had already established a series of boards to study the war's lessons and their application for future organization, logistics, equipment, and doctrine. These culminated in the April 1919 Report of the Superior Board on Organization and Tactics, which recommended that the postwar army be restructured for trench warfare. Pershing, in turn, submitted his own report, which declared, "Our army is most likely to operate on the American Continent and mobility is especially necessary under all probable conditions of warfare in this theater." The general concluded that World War I had been an anomaly; he therefore rejected many of the Superior Board's recommendations on the grounds it had been too influenced by "the necessities of stabilized warfare in Western Europe rather than upon the requirements of warfare of the character and in the theater upon which we are most likely to be engaged." 
7
World War I only strengthened the Guardian dogma that "our national policy [was] one of non-interference in the affairs of foreign nations" and its "military policy [is] purely defensive in character." 
8
9
10
11
If World War I had little influence on the Guardians' strategic paradigm, it had a far greater impact on the harbor defense mission that had defined their existence for over a century. The AEF Superior Board recommended shifting responsibility for the sea-coast fortifications to the navy-in effect abolishing the Coast Artillery Corps-and attaching all artillery to mobile combat units. 
12
13
14
15
16
The harbor defense community responded as it had when threatened in the nineteenth century. It argued that new technology would soon restore its primacy, and it resurrected old scenarios as modern threats. The airplane, which could both identify and bomb harbor defenses designed to be invisible and invulnerable to ship bombardment, was initially hailed as a valuable ally. The chief of Coast Artillery led the chorus: "Never in the future will fortifications be independent of another branch-the air service." 
17
The Coast Artillery's enthusiasm for aviation was predicated on their confidence that the airplane posed no threat to their branch's primacy in defending the nation's shores. To the editor of the Coast Artillery Journal, it was obvious that "the chance of an enemy bombing fleet putting out of commission a modern harbor defense is absolutely nil." 
18
19
20
21
In 1919 the corps unveiled its new sixteen-inch rifled cannon, a weapon that could fire a one-ton shell over twenty miles and destroy a battleship with one well-placed shot. But the construction and emplacement of these guns went so slowly that in 1926 the chief of Coast Artillery estimated the last one would not be ready until 1961. 
22
23
Although the harbor defense community was increasingly demoralized, other intellectuals, including reformers within the Coast Artillery Corps, inherited the Guardian mandate. The lesson these reformers took from World War I was that their branch must abandon the "concrete pedestal" of stationary fortress defense and instead serve as mobile heavy artillery for the great field armies that would fight the next war. 
24
25
26
Haan's Positive System applied the defense-in-depth tactics that had turned so many assaults into bloody failures on the Western Front. As the enemy fleet approached the shoreline, heavy railroad and tractor artillery would be rushed to the threatened area and begin shelling the vulnerable warships and transports at distances ranging up to 25,000 yards. This would force the enemy to disembark their landing craft far from the shore, and as their troops approached the beach, they would be blasted by beach cordons of machine guns and artillery. Those disorganized and demoralized survivors who struggled ashore would be struck by a violent counterattack launched by the main force of infantry and artillery, rushed forward just in time to drive the invaders into the sea. Conceptually, the Positive System was a radi-cal innovation: simultaneously breaking from the fixation on harbor defense that had dominated Guardian thought since 1821 and ending the coast defense community's equally long separation from the mobile army. Not surprisingly, it provoked resistance from the harbor fortification community, which claimed it substituted an unproven theory for a defense policy that had deterred invasion for over a century. 
27
28
29
30
In common with earlier Guardians, aviators were preoccupied with both the imminent danger posed by technology-in their particular case the bomber-and a technological solution, the air defense pursuit airplane. Predictably, aviators revised the centuryold scenarios of apocalyptic attack. "Out of the dawn behind a cloud of smoke there may come the sound of great guns firing at an important harbor. Overhead will be the whir of aircraft. Now and then the terrific bursts of aerial bombs of great size exploding near the forts . . . Other squadrons of planes and fleets of airships will be dropping men, and munitions and food at vital points . . . We may expect to see whole hamlets along the shores captured and their inhabitants held as hostage." 
31
William "Billy" Mitchell was the best-known aviation spokesman to adopt the Guardian strategic paradigm, as both the title and content of his most influential work, Winged Defense, testify. 
32
33
34
35
36
37
While the Guardians were shaping the army's postwar strategy, Heroes were influencing the army's approach to fighting the next war. Like the Guardians, most Heroes regarded World War I less an indicator of future warfare than a confirmation of traditional beliefs. Like the Guardians, they selected lessons to validate their presuppositions and disregarded any that did not. For example, Pershing, the AEF Superior Board, and Field Service Regulations 1923 all advocated offensive infantry operations that had proven impossible on the Western Front; all three still insisted that decisive battles more reminiscent of 1870 than 1917 should remain the military objective. 
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
agreed. "There is no limit save in the moral[e] of the troops and their leaders and . . . no troops are beaten until they admit the fact . . . War is the shock of two wills . . . Moral force is the soul of battle." 
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
The army as an institution was not hostile to aviation. Surveying the lessons of World War I, the AEF Superior Board made the confident prediction, "Undoubtedly aviation will affect to a greater and greater extent the tactics of future warfare." 
57
58
59
60
61
62
In their discussion of mechanization, and especially the tank, Heroes showed a similar ambivalence-impressed with the weapon but disputing its revolutionary potential. By the late 1920s virtually all agreed that "in any future war we shall witness a decided increase in the use of highly mobile, armored forces." 
63
64
65
66
67
Branch identity also shaped the Heroes' perception of technology. In 1930 the chief of infantry dismissed "schools of thought [that] visualize a war of machines" and declared, "The very weapons and methods-motorization, chemical agents, automatic weapons, and tanks and armored vehicles-that some claim may replace Infantry, will be used by the Infantry to perform that very necessary object of battle-to gain and hold ground. The Infantry may be reinforced but not replaced." 
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
In the interwar period the cavalry, responding to criticism that its units lacked combat power, dramatically increased the number of automatic rifles and light machine guns in its regiments until they exceeded those of the Infantry. This, when combined with the ability to rapidly shift positions, was believed sufficient to allow mounted units to deliver a heavy volume of fire-and at the crucial time and place. It also incorporated the gasoline engine and motorized transport to drive "portee" units to the area of operations, where they would mount their steeds and deploy.
Predictably, these efforts to incorporate technology were not completely successful. In combat against infantry, the cavalry's sole firepower advantage was machine guns. Its troopers lacked virtually every other supporting weapon, from mortars to antitank guns. And porteeing exhausted both horses and men, all but incapacitating mounted units. But by nurturing such rationalizations, which persisted into World War II, the cavalry could claim that it was both progressive and sensible, assimilating the latest in technology while at the same time retaining the methods of fighting that had made it so successful in the past.
Cavalrymen, and Patton in particular, were among the most vociferous proponents of the supremacy of the "human element" in battle. As early as 1921 he abandoned his support for tank warfare and began attacking what he perceived as an army-wide emphasis on technology, over-centralization, and technical specialization. In Patton's view, "The bayonet charge and the saber charge are the highest physical demonstration of moral victory. The fierce frenzy of hate and determination flashing from the bloodshot eyes squinting behind the glittering steel is what wins." 
77
78
In a direct swipe at the Managers, Scammell denounced the General Staff for having "failed to develop a distinctly American theory of war." Instead, by conforming to the "influence of the materialistic age," the army had made "logistics instead of the human and intellectual factors the basis of our war plans." Burdened by artillery, transport, and all the paraphernalia of trench warfare, the American field force was quickly routed by the invaders. Fortunately, in the nation's darkest hour, a native martial genius, General Caldwell, appeared. Out of castoffs and rejects he created an elite force with the simple philosophy: "I make warriors first, then soldiers . . . and then I can make technicians and tacticians over night." Like Caldwell, his troops "mysteriously appeared from nowhere" to strike devastating blows on the coalition's supply line and its isolated detachments, and then disappeared. Harassed and demoralized, the invaders were soon routed. Caldwell, the penultimate warrior, not only saved the nation but created a tactical revolution. The chastened army abandoned its earlier "European" emphasis on logistics and organization and became "100 per cent American. It took tactics from the Red Man, the Minute Man . . . even our modern racketeering gangster . . . Fighting, not administration, became the main business of our army." 
79
80
81
82
83
84
Managers believed that to play its part in the national war effort it was imperative that the army plan ahead, anticipating warfare far into the future. In the words of the 1936 Draft Mobilization Plan, the army must avoid the mistake it had made in 1917, when the nation had "drift[ed] into war without having made provisions for prompt mobilization of industry" and "improvised methods were unable to prevent extravagance and delays in procuring munitions or to prevent profiteering in some quarters and unnecessary suffering in others." World War I had taught one essential lesson. "War is no longer simply a battle between armed forces in the field-it is a struggle in which each side strives to bring to bear against the enemy the coordinated power of every individual and every material resource at its command. The conflict extends from the soldier in the most forward line to the humblest citizen in the remotest hamlet in the rear." 
85
86
87
Managers naturally disputed the Heroes' focus on the individual commanders' will, arguing that "we have passed from the age of great captains to an age of nations in arms . . . A modern nation must rest its faith, not in the trust that a deliverer will be raised in time of need, but in training the composite mind of its regular army to think in terms of the next war." 
88
89
90
91
Both Managers and Heroes recognized that the world war demonstrated the importance of popular support. But they differed markedly in their approach to the American public. The Heroes tended to view patriotism, national will, and sacrifice as emotional connections supporting the military in war. They distrusted most aspects of American society and were acutely sensitive to any perceived challenge to the military ethos. In contrast, the Managers believed that "morale is a basic factor in the conduct of war and is largely a civil function." 
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99 A 1922
101
103
105
106
From the earliest days of empire, a succession of Guardian strategists had raised uncomfortable questions about the army's commitment to Philippine defense, and in the process presented practical military reasons for withdrawal. They had noted that ultimate possession of the islands depended on winning the naval war; winning the land campaign was therefore irrelevant. The Manila Bay fortifications were vulnerable to both air and land bombardment, and Guardians protested that defending the Philippines tied up essential resources needed elsewhere. But most important, as early as 1916 they had raised the specter of what might happen if, whether by its own skill or the design of the enemy, the Manila Bay garrison was able to hold out. The nation's precious battle fleet might be forced to undertake a hastily planned relief mission into the Far East where, at the end of a long and debilitating cruise, it would encounter the Japanese fleet. The result would most likely be a devastating defeat and complete Japanese command of the western Pacific. Unable to accept this grim prognosis, the army produced a series of unsatisfactory Orange plans, including MacArthur's bizarre 1933 scheme to ship virtually every regular soldier in the continental United States to the Philippines at the outbreak of war.
In the 1930s a core of Guardians in the War Plans Divisionmost notably Brigadier General Stanley C. Embick and Colonel Walter Krueger-urged that the United States reduce its military forces in the Philippines to the minimum needed to maintain public order. Establishing an impenetrable Alaska-Hawaii-Panama defensive perimeter would protect the continental United States and lessen the possibility the nation might be drawn into a great power conflict in the Far East. Krueger declared that both militarily and economically the United States was "virtually invulnerable" and exerted "virtual hegemony" over the Western Hemisphere. The only danger of war came from its "bungling policy" of provocation in Asia, itself based on a "dogma" that combined naked greed for Far Eastern resources with moralistic platitudes about the Open Door and uplifting Asians. He accused the navy of exploiting this dogma to justify an offensive mission while proclaiming itself "the first line of defense." 107 Supported by Chief of Staff Malin Craig, the Guardians made Embick's perimeter the basis of Pacific defense, and in the process reconciled military with foreign and domestic policy. But they were not strong enough to prevent MacArthur's cavalier disregard of these plans or the futile effort to reinforce the Philippines in 1941.
While the Guardians' contribution was primarily strategic, the Heroes provided a concept for combat. They recognized the danger implicit in the organization-and-materiel-driven Managerial way of war, which reduced the soldier to the least important cog in the vast national war machine. The Heroes insisted that warfare was above all a human activity. Their study of the past convinced them that "the tide of battle in the future, more than ever before, will be in the hands of each soldier at the front. The bravery and intelligence of each man is more than ever of primary importance." 108 Although this belief often took the form of absurd declarations about mind overcoming matter, on the whole it was a positive development, leading to the crucial observation that "whatever the science of the superior commander, the genius of his strategic combinations, the precision of his concentrations, whatever numerical superiority he may have, victory will escape him if the soldier does not properly conduct himself without being watched, and if he is not personally animated by the resolution to conquer." 
109
110
111
112
The Managers' view of war was summed up by Major St. Clair Streett in 1932: "The aim of the nation at war is to subdue the enemy's will to resist with the least human or economic loss to itself. The destruction of the enemy's forces is but a means to the attainment of this goal. All such acts, such as defeat in the field, propaganda, blockade, diplomacy, or attack on centers of industry, population, or government, are but means to this end." 114 They drummed home the dogma that the nation needed to create a "military machine" that ensured a "balanced distribution of brain and brawn, both in the field armies and the supporting industrial organization." 
115
The army faced a considerable challenge assimilating the lessons of the first world war in preparation for the second. With hindsight, it is easy to spot crucial decisions made or unmade, branch parochialism crushing technological or tactical innovations, reactionaries dismissing visionaries, and a host of other errors and missteps that led to the defeats at Pearl Harbor and Kasserine Pass. Yet this same period produced the army's greatest generation of strategic and operational leaders-Marshall, Eisenhower, Patton-who would lead the service to its greatest victories. The interwar era witnessed enormous divides between military intellectuals over strategy, technology, the nature of war, and a host of other subjects. Guardians, Heroes, and Managers developed radically different interpretations of the past and visions of the future. Each school played an important part in preparing the United States for the challenge of World War II, but their stubborn disagreements and lack of consensus inhibited their collective effectiveness.
Yet, if a military institution's wartime success is the ultimate vindication for its peacetime preparation, the interwar period was clearly a high point in the history of American military thought. Indeed, compared to what has happened when the army shared a single vision of war-and then found that the enemy it was fighting was not the one it had prepared for-there is much to be said for the interwar era's vibrant if discordant debate.
World War II proved to be the army's finest hour. The defeat of Germany and Japan was a titanic military triumph, calling forth the service's greatest effort since the preservation of the Union. The army's recruitment, training, equipping, and transport of millions of citizen-soldiers across the globe, its development and production of weaponry, and the strategic insight and operational leadership of its commanders all proved its professional expertise. Yet at this moment of greatest triumph, the explosion of the atomic bomb at Hiroshima dramatically redefined modern warfare, making both the army and "conventional warfare" seem irrelevant.
Just when momentous changes in international affairs-the Cold War, the Communist victory in China, decolonization, the Soviet military buildup, the Warsaw Pact, reconstruction of Europe and Japan-required equally momentous changes in U.S. national security policy, the army's status plummeted. The nation's military missions (and the bulk of funding) went to those services that promised to project power globally-the navy and the newly independent U.S. Air Force. Presidents Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower both sought to cut land forces to the bare minimum. Pundits prophesied an era of "push button warfare" waged by a few scientists. A new breed of civilian defense and security studies analysts challenged the military's claim to expertise in strategy and defense policy. According to many in rival services, the media, politics, and even the general public, ground combat was obsolete.
Against this tide of neglect, military intellectuals struggled to prove the relevance of the army and of land warfare. They relentlessly attacked a national strategy based on all-out Soviet-American nuclear war, and they resisted the defense reorganization plans that grew out of this strategy. In opposition to "general warfare," they championed such notions as "limited warfare" and "flexible response." They argued that only land power could prevent Soviet aggression across what General Maxwell D. Taylor called "the spectrum of possible challenges" from brush fire wars to atomic war. 
1
2
3
4
5
Small wonder that collectively the postwar army suffered from malaise. Unsure of its future, bitter at its sudden decline, its intellectuals lashed out at rival services, politicians, the fickle public, and occasionally their own seemingly ineffective senior leadership. This last group proved an especially tempting target, since some generals had contributed to the trauma. Perhaps still influenced by wartime Chief of Staff George C. Marshall's record as "the organizer of victory," his successor, Eisenhower, continued to focus on priorities that far transcended specifically army concerns. During his 1945-1948 tenure as chief of staff, he and the General Staff immersed themselves in managerial issues such as grand strategy, national security, budgets, defense organization, service unification, universal military training, international relations, alliances, industrial production, domestic security, and so on. Each of these problems had important military ramifications, and collectively their resolution was essential for the nation's security; but they were far removed from the emphasis on ground warfare that had historically been the army's first priority. Moreover, Eisenhower and his staff were unable, or unwilling, to pre-vent the relegation of their service to secondary status, far below that of the air force in budgets and prestige.
In their efforts to organize the nation's industrial and manpower resources, the army's high command downplayed, if it did not forget, their service's self-defined reason for existence as fighting and winning the nation's wars. Lieutenant General James M. Gavin succinctly observed, "The army's big problem in the postwar era was learning how to live in the nuclear environment." 
6
7
8
9
The nation's war plans acknowledged that American superiority in airpower and atomic weaponry made it logical to strike immediately at the Soviet heartland and avoid bloody land campaigns on the Eurasian periphery, particularly when enemy ground forces enjoyed overwhelming manpower and materiel superiority. Plan Pincher, developed in 1946, assumed the outbreak of war in mid-1947. It estimated Soviet forces at the outset of war at 4,500,000, of which over 3,000,000 were ground forces organized into some 208 combat divisions. Within four months, these would increase to 15,000,000, including 12,400,000 ground troops in 650 divisions, bolstered by an additional 1,000,000 allied soldiers. Against this, the entire U.S. Army in June 1947 consisted of 990,000 soldiers; within one year it would dip to 574,000 and 10 divisions. Roughly half of these troops were stationed overseas, but few were organized into combat-ready formations. In Western Europe, the point of greatest danger, there was a single under-strength and ill-equipped infantry division and a few battalions of lightly armed constabulary, prompting one veteran to admit, "If the Russians had decided to start World War III at that point in time, hell, we would have been wiped out." 
11
12
Then they had to demonstrate how the army's way could better achieve the nation's political and military goals than could all-out nuclear attack. To make their case, officers searched the past for immutable military truths transcending the ephemeral technocratic notions of war promulgated by the air force and proponents of strategic nuclear warfare. In so doing, they revived longheld beliefs from their three traditional perspectives on preparing for war.
The army had made a conscientious effort to learn the lessons of World War II even while fighting it. Both overseas and in the continental United States, boards composed of the service's top leadership reviewed everything from personnel to weaponry to future strategy. A host of staff officers analyzed, codified, taught, and disseminated reports on tactics, weapons, enemy psychology, and myriad other topics. Selecting the correct lessons of the war spurred much debate: should they commemorate the army's greatest victory or provide guidance for the future? The great bulk of postwar writings tended toward the former.
The service's official histories exhaustively chronicled the maneuvers of corps and divisions, and the logistical and administrative agencies that supported them, as they fought across Africa, Europe, and the Pacific. They were models of narrative detail, but taken together they created the impression that World War II had set for all time the standard for modern warfare. Many senior of-ficers, particularly in the first decade after the war, also invoked the purported lessons of the war for both inspiration and justification. Typifying their attitude was General Jacob L. Devers, who in 1948 defended the continued relevance of ground forces with the claim: "World War II demonstrated the invincibility of the United States Army's infantry-tank-artillery team; any future war would prove the same combination an even better bet, no matter what the odds." 
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
In the late 1940s both Managers and Heroes began to stand postwar national security doctrine on its head, by shifting the emphasis from air power to land power. Instead of the army serving the air force, Chief of Staff Omar N. Bradley declared in 1949 that the bombing campaign should support the "eventual climactic ground attack" that would "destroy the enemy's armies in large-scale ground assaults." 
20
21
22
23
24
Both of these concepts of future war glossed over the gap between vision and reality. Airborne theorists grappled with the conundrum, repeatedly demonstrated in both World War II and peacetime exercises, that forces light enough to be air-transported were deficient in manpower, logistics, and firepower. Unless they were immediately reinforced by all the paraphernalia of heavy units-tanks, artillery, communications, truck-borne logistics, and so forth-airborne forces could be easily isolated and crushed by enemy tanks and artillery. Airborne advocates overlooked that their long-range air assaults required such complete control of enemy airspace that the war would probably be won before they were possible. Moreover, such operations depended on technology still on the drawing board: gigantic multipurpose cargo containers; helicopters that could accommodate a company of soldiers; chassis configured for everything from light tanks to bulldozers; light infantry weapons that could destroy a tank with one shot, and so on.
And while armor officers might boast of tanks' mobility, range, flexibility, and firepower, in reality their way of war required not only tanks but also supporting forces such as mechanized infantry, artillery, and engineers. These, in turn, required such a large logistical and transportation infrastructure that armored warfare was essentially restricted to North America and some parts of Western Europe. Armor's ambitions were similarly frustrated by the consensus that the existing American tanks were "distinctly inferior" to their Soviet opponents in both quality and numbers. 
25
The war's opening weeks dramatically revealed the army's lack of intellectual and physical readiness. But beyond providing both contemporaries and later generations with yet another graphic example of American military unpreparedness, the war offered other important lessons. To General Matthew B. Ridgway, whose charismatic leadership was widely credited with averting disaster, "Korea taught us that all warfare from this time forth must be limited. It could no longer be a question of whether to fight a lim-atomic war ited war, but of how to avoid fighting any other." 
26
27
28
29
30
Other efforts to draw lessons from Korea were even more controversial, particularly the explanations for the army's uneven combat performance. The disastrous early days of the war, symbolized most graphically when North Korean forces quickly overran Lieutenant Colonel Charles B. Smith's undermanned and poorly equipped command on 5 July 1950, demonstrated the pathetic state of the nation's ground forces. In the coming decades, the army leadership would take as a mantra "No More Task Force Smiths," to remind soldiers they must always be prepared to go into combat. 
31
32
33
34
35
The army's enthusiasm for the European mission is illustrated in the evolving visions of future warfare offered by J. Lawton Collins, chief of staff from 1949 to 1953. In 1948 Collins dismissed any prospect of a major ground campaign until very late in the war. 
36
37
38
President Eisenhower owed his election both to his military reputation and to public discontent with Korea and the Cold War. Eisenhower was optimistic about the United States' ultimate victory against Soviet Communism, but he believed this victory depended on preserving the nation's economic strength, democratic political institutions, and cultural values. The Manager concepts he had espoused as an army officer found expression in the New Look. Partly due to fiscal constraints-nuclear weapons were much cheaper than manpower-heavy land forces-Eisenhower built up the air force's strategic bombing elements. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles declared that the United States would follow a policy of "massive retaliation" based on the use, or threatened use, of nuclear weapons to counter Soviet expansion. Both the secretary and the president were deliberately vague on what would constitute sufficient provocation to justify an American attack. Determined to avoid a land war with the far superior Red Army, and as a practical check on further Korea-type mili-tary interventions, Eisenhower cut the army budget by nearly a third in fiscal year 1955, making it the smallest of the three services. Between 1954 and 1960, regular army strength declined from 1,400,000 to 870,000.
Eisenhower stated that even before taking office in 1953 he had become convinced that "since modern global war would be catastrophic beyond belief, America's military forces must be designed primarily to deter conflict." 
39
40
Because bluffing the Soviets was at the heart of massive retaliation, Eisenhower required the armed forces to publicly support it. But throughout his presidency the army refused to play along. It rejected both his strategy and his call to present a united front. Instead, officers leaked information to the media, challenged the administration in their congressional testimony, and otherwise kept up a drumbeat of criticism. For Eisenhower, a consummate bridge player, the army must have seemed the most inept of partners, constantly trumping his aces and ignoring his leads.
Yet Eisenhower himself contributed to the confusion by pursuing such a vigorous, even confrontational foreign policy against the communist powers that some termed it "brinkmanship." By his drastic curtailment of ground forces, Eisenhower left the nation with little military resources short of strategic nuclear weap-atomic war ons, thereby amplifying the danger that a Soviet-American crisis would escalate into the very war he dreaded. And even more perilous, Eisenhower continued to tout massive retaliation long after the Soviet Union's nuclear arsenal was sufficient to destroy the United States. Thus, he increasingly risked the Soviets either launching a preemptive atomic strike or using their atomic deterrent to shield insurgencies, coups, and invasions.
Just as Eisenhower's views of postwar national security policy were the logical outgrowth of his prewar adherence to the Manager's way of war, so the army's 1950s critique of the New Look incorporated both Managerial and Heroic arguments. In Ridgway, who served as chief of staff between 1953 and 1955, these two martial traditions overlapped. As a Manager, he dismissed the New Look as a misguided strategy of attempting to "use the A-bomb to save money." 
41
42
43
44
Taylor approached the problem of national defense with a Manager's eye for organization and policy process, which he often articulated in language reminiscent of an advertising agency. In place of the New Look, Taylor advocated a "National Military Program of Flexible Response" centered on "versatile, highly mobile" ground forces with "an integrated atomic capability" to deter or punish "local aggression" without escalation into general war. Since only ground forces could occupy territory, destroy Soviet ground forces, and liberate populations from Communist rule, the army was the "decisive instrument in the attainment of a victory compatible with post-war national objectives." 
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53 A 1954
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
Trapnell observed in 1957 that the army's doctrine for limited war focused exclusively on destroying the enemy's military forces and ignored political and civil affairs. Anticipating a problem that continues to plague American strategic thinking to the present, he warned that the results of "quick military conquest" would "be transitory and fleeting, unless the gains are consolidated by other than military forces." 
72
73
74
75
76
The exercise also revealed some serious unintended conse-quences of the army's focus on atomic warfare. Commanders were obsessed with the lethality of atomic weapons and failed to either attack or defend with determination, displaying a disturbing reliance on atomic strikes to resolve even relatively minor tactical problems. Equally troublesome, Sagebrush suggested that because even small-scale atomic weapons inflicted such devastation, it was doubtful, according to Chief of Staff Taylor, that any NATO member would allow their use on its own territory. 
77
78
79
The army was equally stymied in creating a fleet of combat vehicles for the atomic battlefield that could withstand blasts and radiation, be transported by air, and travel hundreds of miles through areas devoid of refueling facilities. They also needed strong armor and powerful weapons to defeat the more numerous Soviet tanks and artillery. Ultimately, the design solution required a vehicle built from some as-yet-undiscovered substance, powered by an as-yet-undiscovered fuel source, and armed with an as-yetuninvented weapon. 
80
The army's most heralded effort to prepare for limited atomic warfare, and the most widely reviled, was the Pentomic Division experiment, which Taylor unilaterally imposed in 1956. Replacing the army's historic regiments with five small battle groups, Pentomic "was based on the concept that tactical operations on a dispersed or porous battlefield would be conducted by smaller, faster moving, harder hitting, high-quality units which would concentrate quickly to fight and disperse again quickly to avoid the atomic blast." 
81
82
83
Taylor's attempt at military transformation encountered considerable resistance. From the beginning, many officers believed that Taylor's pet project "was sort of being rammed down our throats." 
84
85
86
87
Taylor did little to address these problems. He did not even revise the army's operational doctrine. The result was that divisions touted as the solution for the battlefield of the future were trained to refight World War II. Nor did he reconcile the army's existing war scenarios to take advantage of the new organization's unique capabilities and compensate for its logistical and materiel weaknesses, so that the "tactical plans for the defense of Europe or Korea . . . could not have sustained the pentomic divisions for more than a few days of combat." 
88
89
With such problems plaguing even Taylor's pet division, the rest of the army was in much worse shape. The 25th Infantry's experience may have been typical. Their orders for conversion lacked "critical information such as organization structure, number of personnel, equipment, and effective date." The 25th resolved the problem of insufficient equipment by such artful means as declaring its tanks to be assault guns and its trucks personnel carriers, but even this artifice left some units "crippled." 
90
91
92
93
94
Taylor advocated a strategy of "flexible response" that "suggests the need for a capability to react across the entire spectrum of possible challenge, for coping with anything from general atomic war to infiltrations and aggressions." 
95
96
97
98
99
101
103
104
105
One of the most forceful critiques was by Colonel Peter Schmick, who questioned whether his service's institutional culture might render it incapable of responding to the challenges of guerrilla war. Although in every conflict the United States had both encountered and employed irregular warfare, officers persisted in regarding it as a "peculiar phenomenon" and "promptly dismissed it from our thinking at the end of [each] war." Army doctrine failed to appreciate that "partisan warfare differs from orthodox warfare in that it springs from the people, not from their government." Schmick also criticized the Managerial focus on organization and materiel as a solution. Money, equipment, and training-especially training in "totally ineffective" conventional warfare-was less important than "convinc[ing] the peoples of the world that something better is in store for them if they fight with us." 
108
109
110
111
112
113
115
118
The air defense community shared another characteristic with their coast defense predecessors-a persistent inability to reconcile technological limitations with their vision of ideal war. Until the mid-1950s, army antiaircraft weapons were obsolescent and inaccurate, early warning systems virtually nonexistent, and ammunition of dubious worth. In a 1955 exercise in the limited airspace of West Germany, air controllers could barely identify half the aircraft operating in the defender's area, much less shoot them down. By the end of the Eisenhower era, army accuracy against aircraft had so greatly improved that it became routine for Nike and Hawk batteries to destroy airplane targets with a single shot, a skill that was, unfortunately, of diminishing importance since the Soviets were rapidly converting to intercontinental ballistic missiles. Against this new threat, the army had great faith in future weaponry, but no present means of defense. 
119
120
122
123
125
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
In the 1950s, modern warfare, in its new incarnation as atomic limited war, restored the army to an important if not central position in the nation's defense. But what began as an option short of all-out nuclear general war, whereby conventional military forces might achieve national objectives without escalation into mutual annihilation, soon morphed into a doctrine by which the army, virtually unassisted, could wage a victorious land war. And the same officers who delivered devastating critiques on the immorality of turning Soviet cities into radioactive shells embraced "limited atomic war" scenarios that would have obliterated most of Europe, even if they somehow failed to trigger nuclear Armageddon. Equally disturbingly, these terrifying visions of future conflict were not delivered as assumptions but as certainties. The army, boasted one general, could apply "discriminating power" so "swiftly and decisively" that victory was all but guaranteed. 
135
136
By 1969, when the army was mired in a bloody, divisive, and corrupting conflict in Southeast Asia, such hubris was long gone. Responding to a War College student, Ridgway all but repudiated his former advocacy of limited atomic war, and even of war itself. Instead, the use of military force should only be committed to "vital national interests . . . where all the other means offer little or no hope of being effective. Recognize that the world has radically altered since the days of 'gunboat diplomacy,' or when . . . a small military commitment might be rewarded with large national gains." Ridgway concluded with the sobering assessment that "the era we have recently entered is not likely to offer much, if any compensation for military intervention. The primary effort should be to seek a political solution." 
137
In military parlance, Vietnam nearly broke the army. So deep was the bitterness, and so broad the army's internal problems, that in the decade after 1972 the institution all but denied responsibility for the defeat. As one War College student rhetorically demanded in 1973: "Can a military subordinate be held accountable for a tactical error which occurs in the framework of a faulty national strategy?" 
1
2
3
4
5
6
The influence of On Strategy was immense. Within two years of its publication, it was assigned by all the services' war colleges and was generally accepted, both inside and outside the army, as the official interpretation of the Vietnam War. Within the officer corps, Summers' thesis was often perverted into a stab-in-theback myth that persisted for decades. Officers took as a mantra what one general would assert in 1997, "When our army left Vietnam, they had not lost . . . They were victorious in every tactical engagement." 
7
8
9
This distortion of the Vietnam experience was facilitated by a coalescence of external and internal factors. U.S. policymakers, disillusioned with nation building in far off places and recognizing that Vietnam had estranged the United States from its Western allies, shifted their attention back to Europe and NATO. In 1969, one of the bloodiest years of the Vietnam War, President Richard M. Nixon issued the Guam Doctrine, declaring that henceforth the United States would advise and support Third World nations threatened by communist aggression, subversion, and insurgency but would not necessarily commit ground forces. Congressional attacks on presidential prerogatives-symbolized by the War Powers Act of 1973-further lessened the likelihood of direct military intervention in areas that were not critical to the nation's security. With the economy in decline for much of the 1970s and a widespread feeling that the United States had lost direction, the limited interest in defense focused on slowing the escalating Soviet-American nuclear arms race. Yet for army officers, the situation in Europe seemed as precarious as the late 1940s. While the army exhausted itself in Vietnam, the Warsaw Pact nations had modernized their militaries, particularly the armor, mechanized infantry, artillery, and air defense forces required for offensive warfare. Moreover, the Soviets had developed a new operational doctrine that seemed destined to overwhelm NATO's defenses and overrun much of Western Europe.
For the army in the 1970s, reeling from the effects of Vietnam, the immediate future looked bleak indeed. The end of the draft resulted in an almost 50 percent cut in manpower. Mirroring problems in civil society, the new volunteer army struggled with racial tension, drug use, and indiscipline. A 1970 War College study found an army-wide "professional climate" reflecting the worst aspects of the Managerial way of war. The officer corps was rife with careerists who put their own interests ahead of both the mission and the service. Junior officers repeatedly described "an ambitious, transitory commander-marginally skilled in the complexities of his duties-engulfed in producing statistical results, fearful of personal failure, too busy to talk with or listen to his subordinates, and determined to submit acceptably optimistic reports." 
10
The service's loss of confidence can be seen in the 1973 decision by Chief of Staff Creighton W. Abrams authorizing a War College strategic assessment to determine the future role-if any-of conventional land power. The study group concluded that both economic and political constraints made military interventions unlikely in areas that were not absolutely vital to national interests. There would be no more Vietnams, no more infantry-dominated land wars in the Third World. The only region where the army had both a legitimate and a politically acceptable role was in NATO's defense against the Soviet Union.
To meet the Soviet challenge and restore its own identity, the army believed it needed to regain its prowess at modern warfare. Dennis Hart Mahan had found direct tactical parallels between the Romans and the 1840s U.S. Army. But by the 1970s, land warfare was a complex phenomenon requiring a lifetime of study and practice. As Chief of Staff Edward C. Meyer explained, "The challenge in applying effective military power in combat is how to orchestrate maneuver forces composed of over 10,000 ground maneuver elements, several thousand additional fire support, combat support, and service units working behind those maneuver elements and additionally several thousand air support elements. Each of these roughly squad-sized elements is about the size of a football team, and the composite force maneuvers on and over physical areas immense in size and diverse in geography from reformation to reaction and climate." 
11
12
But the Guardian tradition continued to shape important aspects of post-Vietnam army thought. The first of these was in the realm of strategy, most notably in Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger's 1984 "doctrine," which imposed strict preconditions before deploying American combat forces. Powell, its most prominent advocate and its probable author, offered the doctrine as a "practical guide" to govern strategy. The essential question was, "Is the national interest at stake? If the answer is yes, go in, and in to win. Otherwise, stay out." 
13
14
15
The Weinberger-Powell doctrine illustrates a second Guardian legacy, the propensity to view war as an engineering project in which the skilled application of the correct principles could achieve a predictable outcome. Like the earlier Guardians, their successors believed the army's primary mission was to deter war. Should conflict occur, they favored limited military operations that provided soldiers and policymakers with "the ability to define and adopt precise, attainable political goals and achieve them rapidly with unswerving and bold use of military force." 
16
Vietnam left the Heroes in disarray, not least because the martial spirit of their opponents exceeded that of the army in the later stages of the war. Despite the finger pointing and the blaming of draftees, Jane Fonda, politicians, the media, and lack of popular will, the Heroes could not avoid the conclusion that their warrior ethos had been tested and found wanting. General Joseph T. Palastra spoke for many veterans when he condemned "the bloated base camps, bloated headquarters staffs, luxurious living, in stark contrast to the life of the combat unit out in the field . . . as long as a policy is set that says we are going to make sure that all of headquarters have linen on their dining tables . . . and live with a minimum disruption to the normal American way of living during combat operations, then we deserve everything bad we from reformation to reaction get in the way of publicity. That is the way we fought that war in Vietnam." 
17
Like the Guardians and the Heroes, the Managers had to recast their assumptions. Their analysis taught them that "we did not manage the war in Vietnam efficiently or effectively. In the main, our organizational problems stemmed from the omission of basic management theories and techniques." 
18
19
20
21
22
23
Almost through serendipity, the 1973 Arab-Israeli War pro-vided DePuy with a template for the future. This surrogate conflict between the US-supplied Israelis and the Soviet-supplied Arab states revealed just how poorly prepared the army was for conventional land conflict. It was short, intense, violent, lethal, and almost the polar opposite of Vietnam. Columns of tanks and mechanized infantry, supported by artillery and aviation, clashed in enormous battles, inflicting catastrophic casualties in the space of hours. TRADOC's analysis confirmed that not only were Soviet weapons and equipment excellent, but the Soviets' combined-arms doctrine was superior to the army's. General Donn Starry, one of DePuy's most influential supporters, termed the Arab-Israeli war "a fortuitous event" that "laid out for everyone to see" the very "lessons" the reformers required to justify shifting the army toward mechanized warfare. 
24
Further complicating the NATO defense problem was that logical military solutions-a preemptive attack, a fighting retreat to a geographical barrier, or a defense in depth to channel attack-ers into killing zones far from their supporting artillery and air support-were politically impossible because they would compromise West Germany's territorial and political integrity. Nor could the army return to its 1950s solution of tactical atomic limited warfare. As one 1975 War College study noted, "By the time the conventional situation had deteriorated to the point where nuclear weapons had to be used to halt aggression, the Warsaw Pact forces would probably be relatively deep in Allied territory, and their bargaining power would be strong . . . Given a possible Soviet retaliation, the weapons of both sides would create catastrophic damage to Western Europe, twice the devastation one would expect from the enemy alone. The effort to save Western Europe would truly destroy it." 
25
DePuy's views were manifested in the opening sentence of 1976 FM 100-5: "The Army's primary objective is to win the land battle." Barely acknowledging the need to prepare for "war in any of a variety of places and situations," the manual declared that "Battle in Central Europe against forces of the Warsaw Pact is the most demanding mission the US Army could be assigned . . . this manual is designed mainly to deal with the realities of such operations." 
26
27
28
29
30
Like the Guardians, DePuy emphasized technical skill over subjective factors such as morale. Soldiers were important largely in their role as operators of machinery. In active defense, units maneuvered principally to improve their firepower; victory was defined as the physical destruction of materiel and personnel. Faced with an attacking enemy, commanders calculated relative strengths and weaknesses and engaged in combat based on precise "force ratios." A six-to-one disadvantage was acceptable in tank-to-tank combat, a three-to-one for infantry on the defense, and so on. They assigned their subordinates "target servicing" goals, such as one tank to destroy ten targets or one battalion to destroy two hundred in ten minutes. And, like the Guardians, FM 100-5 strongly suggested that if its complicated formulas were followed, victory was inevitable.
In its holistic approach, FM 100-5 was simultaneously Managerial. The manual not only directed how the army would fight but how it would evaluate its weaponry, training, force structure, and professional skills. It treated combat commanders as midlevel executives whose primary tasks were to master their organization's materiel and methods, plan military operations, and train and supervise an unintelligent and unmotivated labor force.
DePuy intended FM 100-5 to stir discussion in the army, and he succeeded. By making doctrine the cornerstone of army reform, and thus the authority on not just fighting but training and procurement, DePuy all but ensured that any disagreement with one part weakened the entire edifice. The crucial area of weapons procurement serves as an example. Active defense was predominantly a method for "heavy" armored and mechanized forces to defeat equivalent Soviet heavy forces. The doctrine's success, as one officer noted, "rests on the proposition that the U.S. weapons have a qualitative value which to some extent balances the quantitative advantage of the Warsaw Pact." 
31
32
There were other problems as well. By 1978, nine of the army's sixteen divisions were armor or mechanized and required a sophisticated transportation and logistical infrastructure for sustained combat. Such a support system existed only in Western Europe. If the army wanted to fight anywhere else, it would have to build an extensive network of base camps, administrative centers, communications nets, supply lines, and a host of other re-from reformation to reaction quirements. Moreover, it would need to restructure its divisions and add the necessary combat support organizations to sustain them. To illustrate the difficulties this might entail, in 1999 the army required several weeks, 500 air sorties, millions of dollars, and 5,350 support personnel simply to deploy the 24 Apache helicopters of Task Force Hawk from Germany to Albania. Critics, both then and later, charged that DePuy's doctrine created an army equipped for a war in Central Europe but ill-prepared for any other conflict.
Military reformers, particularly the advocates of "maneuver warfare," also challenged FM 100-5. A mélange of civilian defense theorists, military dissidents, politicians, and followers of the air force iconoclast John Boyd collectively claimed a unique ability to interpret history, assess technology, and promulgate strategy. In their view, active defense was symptomatic of a flawed army approach to war that was overly reliant on firepower, linear formations, and overwhelming resources. They championed an alternative approach based on rapid action, dislocation and disruption, mobility, exploitation, and quick and precise strikes at physical and psychological targets. Their army critics ridiculed their selective use of history-"if you study half a war, you will probably become half a warrior"-and their blithe confidence that concepts designed for individual combat between airplanes could be easily applied to campaign planning. 
33
This external critique paralleled a growing recognition within the army that FM 100-5 rested on flawed concepts. Chief of Staff Meyer, who served from 1979 to 1983, pushed for a major revision of operational doctrine. In his view, DePuy's attempt to win a battle of materiel with the Soviets ignored the American forces' limited means. As he pungently quipped, "We couldn't fight an attrition war if we wanted to today. We'd be the first attritted!" 
34
35
36
37
Meyer's subversion of FM 100-5 addressed his fear that the doctrine inhibited the army's recovery from Vietnam. Ironically, although DePuy was personally innovative, open to new ideas, and tolerant of dissent, both the manual and the way he disseminated his doctrine throughout the service was through top-down directive. 
38
In a letter to his fellow generals, Meyer indirectly addressed the long-term effects of DePuy's reforms: "Frankly, I am troubled when I observe apparently competent officers . . . who fail to scrutinize rather basic but critical assumptions underlying our plans, or who substitute program guidance in situations which clearly demand military judgment." 
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
The army's identification with its new definition of modern warfare can also be seen in the evolution of the elite School of Advanced Military Studies (SAMS) in 1983. The school owed its origin to TRADOC commander Lieutenant General William R. Richardson and to Wass de Czege, who both believed that CGSC was too focused on tactics and procedures and that its pedagogical methods were inherently flawed. As Meyer once remarked, CGSC provided students with a "handy-dandy checklist." 
49
50
51
Yet at its heart, SAMS was essentially an honors version of the CGSC curriculum. The papers that students wrote, the exercises they planned, the military theorists they read, indeed their entire education was directed at mastering modern warfare. Moreover, SAMS clung to this vision of warfare even in the face of evidence that the army was far more likely to encounter other ways of war. As one student admitted in 1998, in the fifteen years since the school's inception, American military forces were committed to eleven significant operations, but only Desert Storm resembled any conflict SAMS taught its students to fight. 
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
Widely credited with preparing the army for victory in Desert Storm, the NTC further focused the officer corps toward largeunit mechanized operations and the winning of battles. By the mid-1980s, rotation through the NTC largely controlled an officer's command tour and a tactical unit's training cycle. The training center captured the army's military imagination as well. One officer urged his colleagues to remember that "your trip to the NTC is more than a mere training event-it's World War III." 
59
Ironically, some evidence suggests that this preoccupation with pseudo-war at the NTC actually inhibited preparation for real war. Daniel P. Bolger, who went through both the NTC and the light infantry equivalent, the Joint Readiness Training Center (JRTC), noted that American units soon learned their equipment and doctrine were sufficient to defeat Krasnovian tanks but were largely ineffective against small bands of guerrillas who enjoyed from reformation to reaction the passive support of the population. 
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
The attempt to balance NATO's abhorrence of NBC weapons with U.S. doctrine sometimes led to ludicrous results. In the 1977 exercise one side launched numerous NBC strikes, but these strikes were either ignored by the putative targets or "simply disappeared into the system." 
67
In the late 1980s the rumble of discontent among military intellectuals over army preparations for war grew louder. Much of this grumbling came from Heroes, who complained the service had "become stultified by tiers of staff oriented on management, logistics, and weapons engineering." 
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
In the decade after the Gulf War, neither the army leadership nor the institutions charged with preparing for the next war could refocus from the Cold War's epic Soviet-American clash. What had been billed in the 1970s and early 1980s as a doctrinal revolution congealed into intellectual inertia and institutional complacency. As Richardson, one of the great innovators of the 1980s, commented on the 1990s, "I think the army can be criticized for not thinking enough about the next war, and instead thinking about the past war, about the Desert Storm type war. The reason it is not thinking about the next war is that it does not have the people to do the thinking." 
93
Unfortunately, much of the evidence refuted this boast. A 1995 study of 24,000 officers showed many believing "the state of ethical conduct is abysmal . . . Telling the truth ends careers quicker than making stupid mistakes or getting caught doing something wrong." Subordinates accused their superiors of "the 'zero defects' and ticket-punching mentality of the 1960s and 1970s that nearly destroyed the officer corps." 
94
Chief of Staff Sullivan, who served between 1991 and 1995, made a strong effort to transform the army to meet the challenges of the post-Cold War environment. Once in office, he initiated the Modern Louisiana Maneuvers, taking as a precedent the 1941 field exercises in which the army had tried out the organizations, equipment, and leadership soon used in World War II. His goal was to promote an army-wide dialogue about methods, purpose, and concepts for the next century, all without sacrificing its capability for large-unit conventional operations. The maneuvers would serve as a "vehicle to assess progress as well as focus and facilitate change in a warfighting context through exercises, simulations, and intellectual interface." 
95
96
Sullivan's successors, Chiefs of Staff Dennis J. Reimer (1995-1999) and Eric K. Shinseki (1999-2001), were less ambitious and less committed to change. Both were intelligent and dedicated officers, and Shinseki showed considerable courage in opposing the military adventurism of his political superiors. But neither had been conspicuous in the post-Vietnam reformation; both had been implementers rather than originators. In army parlance they were "operators," skilled executives steeped in the institutional culture who could be trusted to run the organization competently and pass it on to their successors. Yet each faced significant problems taxing to a far more imaginative and daring leader. The shrunken manpower base and restive officer corps they inherited were stretched thin by overseas deployments and by the frenetic pace of operations. Compounding these manpower shortages, both the public and politicians were eager to cancel expensive and apparently unnecessary weaponry and modernization projects while cashing in on the anticipated post-Cold War peace dividend.
Perhaps the greatest challenge the army faced was ideological. Defense reformers announced a "revolution in military affairs" (RMA) that, together with new concepts such as "networkcentric operations," had created a "new American way of war." 
97
Neither Reimer nor Shinseki fully rose to these multiple challenges. Reimer's 1996 Vision 2010 purported to be a "template" to "channel the vitality and innovation" of soldiers in order to "manage change and advance into the 21st century with the most capable army in the world." It introduced a barrage of concepts or buzzwords-mass effects, dominant maneuver, precision engagement, shaping the battlespace, full dimensional protection, and asymmetric leverage-that supposedly guaranteed future victory. But on closer examination, these concepts were more ideals than practical goals. "Information-age technologies" were to provide the means for "decisive operations, resulting in the successful accomplishment of all missions." "Precision engagement" and "shaping the battlespace" would "allow the force to overcome the enemy's center of gravity and result in the total takedown of an opponent." And "dominant maneuver" was predicated on "creating an image in the mind of an adversary of an unstoppable force of unequaled competence." 
98
99
The senior leadership's inability to provide a coherent, practical vision of future warfare contributed to a decade of doctrinal floundering. Much of the impasse stemmed from the legacy of DePuy, who had made doctrine, especially the FM 100-5: Operations manual, a crucial component of an officer's professional identity. Problematic even in the 1980s, when the army was focused on AirLand Battle and an officer's "warfighting" skills could be assessed at the National Training Center, it proved insoluble in the post-Cold War world. In order to be a "full-spectrum force" capable of global deployment, the army required, in Vuono's words, "an evolving warfighting doctrine that focuses overwhelming combat power against any enemy, on any battlefield." 101 But Vuono's statement contained a host of assumptions-that the army could, or should, create a single doctrine applicable to every operational contingency; that overwhelming combat power was an end to itself; that future opponents would risk a battlefield decision-all of which were shared by the service's senior leadership in the 1990s.
The 1993 version of FM 100-5, with the pretentious title of AirLand Battle Future, was a compromise. It held to such Cold War concepts as rapid, decisive battlefield operations by large combat forces that would result in a short, decisive war. Much of it was based on the promise of new, and still unavailable, technology. The army's experience in Haiti and Somalia soon revealed AirLand Battle Future as impractical. By 1995 officers were hard at work on a new version of FM 100-5. For over five years this project dragged on, plagued by rotating directors, institutional resistance, and bitter disputes. A decade after the Gulf War, the army could not produce a doctrine that could, as DePuy's had done, provide a vision of war and a template for change. 
102
103
104
The college's stubborn adherence to large-unit operations extended throughout the curriculum. The military history coursethe Evolution of Modern Warfare-narrowly defined "modern" as European-style nation-state conflict and bestowed the bulk of its attention on the epic battles of World War II. The college's complacency with curriculum was extended to students. During the entire decade, virtually no one failed CGSC. Indeed, in 1993, 99.5 percent of the students in the corps and division combat operations course were graded as "above average," and over half received an A. And yet 34 of these students had to take a remedial course to understand the basic material. 
105
Nor were other army intellectual centers able to provide a new concept of war. As SAMS' own students noted, its 1998 curriculum was essentially that of 1983. 
106
The Advanced Warfighting Studies Program, a history-based course introduced in 1986, and made mandatory for combat arms officers shortly afterward, narrowly focused on World War II-style campaigns. As was true at CGSC, officers at the War College were given a wide choice of electives on subjects such as unconventional conflict, expeditionary operations, and future warfare, which were taught by expert faculty. Where else in the United States could a student take a course on African failed states from a veteran of the Liberian civil war and have as a classmate a Ugandan general? But these courses remained optional. Despite the efforts of their faculty, the army's educational institutions were slow to recognize the changing conditions of twentyfirst-century warfare. 
107
110
113
115
As the army entered the twenty-first century, it faced an almost insurmountable problem. It had to overcome its own past, and its own mythology about that past, if it was to prepare for the future. Under senior officers determined to exorcise the ghost of Vietnam, it had undergone a reformation in the 1970s and 1980s. But this reformation had proved more a revival than a revolution, retaining the three traditional army ways of war even as it created a new vision of modern warfare based on a great land conflict in Central Europe. The opportunity to defeat the Soviets at the Fulda Gap never came, leaving the army to find proof of its reformation in Panama and the Persian Gulf. The broken army's thirty-year climb back from the depths of Vietnam was impressive. But it was achieved at considerable cost, and it had many unanticipated, and unpleasant, long-term consequences. Most seriously, it fostered an intellectual rigidity, a propensity to mistake slogans for strategic thinking, and the dogmatic belief in itself as the "best trained, best armed, best led" force that had ever existed. Too few officers asked the central question-best trained, best armed, and best led for what war? As retired Colonel Douglas V. Johnson noted, in the wake of the Gulf War, "Hubris set in." 
116
A military institution's concept of war is a composite of its interpretation of the past, its perception of present threats, and its prediction of future hostilities. It encompasses tactics, operational methods, strategy, and all other factors that influence the preparation for, and conduct of, warfare. During active hostilities, this vision must be focused on the here-and-now, on recovering from the last battle and preparing for the next one. Only after the guns fall silent, in the echo of battle, can military intellectuals refer to the lessons of centuries and contemplate a variety of futures. They can anticipate the effects of weapons still on the drawing board, of new tactical schemes, of radical organizational reforms. They can speculate on probable enemies and possible battlefields. They may debate for years the relative merits of annihilation versus attrition, offensive versus defensive, firepower versus maneuver. And they can, in theory, develop and cultivate the methods that will allow them to emerge victorious from the next conflict.
The U.S. Army has spent most of its existence at peace, if time spent fighting official wars is the standard. Yet both historians and officers have persistently identified the American philosophy, or way, of war by focusing on the relatively few years of active hostilities. From this perspective, peacetime military thought is important only for what later proved right or wrong on the battlefield.
In this book I have taken a different approach. I argue that the army's way of war has been shaped as much or more by its peacetime intellectual debate as by its wartime service. For almost a century its fortification boards defined the service's understanding of the foreign threat and developed the strategy and methods to deter invasion. In the post-Civil War era, military intellectuals defined "modern warfare" and thus justified the service's transition from a frontier constabulary-harbor defense force to a global military power. During the interwar period, the debate over the lessons of World War I both constrained and inspired the service's preparation for World War II. Without the officer intellectuals who created a concept of land warfare for the atomic era, the army might have reverted to a home defense force. And without the post-Vietnam reformers, the service would have lacked a unifying vision of future battle to save it from internal division and external apathy. In short, the army's peacetime thinkers, as much as its wartime commanders, have defined the service's martial identity, identified its mission, determined professional standards, and created its distinct way of war.
These military intellectuals have tended to separate into three distinct, and often antagonistic schools of thought, which I have called the Guardians, Heroes, and Managers. Together, these martial traditions form the peacetime army's intellectual construct of warfare. Like a braid, each strand will, for a time, be visible on the surface and at other times will disappear, only to emerge farther down the braid. At times the strands are so closely knit as to be indistinguishable; at other times they practically pull apart.
It is a common criticism, even a cliché, that peacetime soldiers prepare to refight the last war. Yet few ask the obvious question: what version of the last war are they preparing to fight? This is an important qualification, since all three of the army's martial traditions claim a unique ability to understand the nature of war and to predict its future, yet all three have consistently proven unable to do so. The recent complaint of a senior officer in Iraq-that the enemy the army encountered was not the enemy it had prepared for-is but the latest in a long litany.
Civilians erroneously assume that individual officers, and certainly generals, speak for the entire service when they articulate the army's mission and strategy. This trust is misplaced, particularly today. The officer corps may share a unifying ethic and ideology, but it has never shared a unifying philosophy of warfare. It is equally fallacious to conclude that criticism from uniformed mavericks represents "outside-the-box" thinking or that these critics are really agents of change. In fact, they often represent the more conservative elements. This was true of the 1890s cavalrymen who eschewed rifles for the saber charge, the 1920s advocates of "open warfare," and the 1990s proponents of "network-centric operations" who sought to reprise the Gulf War. It is certainly true of many self-proclaimed reformers today.
Indeed, interpreting both past and current military thought as a struggle between progressives and conservatives obscures how much the dead hand of the past shapes the parameters of discussion and dictates the positions that proponents assume. Today, as in the past, most officers who write on war almost invariably represent factions rooted in one of the three martial traditions. Their arguments both for and against a particular policy, weapons system, strategy, or doctrine are filled with assumptions drawn from these three schools of thought. Recognizing the strength of this intellectual legacy, or legacies, allows both soldiers and civilians to better understand the underlying suppositions that inform peacetime budget and policy initiatives, influence its doctrine and training, guide its procurement of armaments, and thus ultimately shape the army's conduct of warfare. epilogue The army's vision of war has seldom involved public participation, except on the services' own terms. Instead, military intellectuals have either dismissed the citizenry altogether or ascribed to them a largely negative influence. Army intellectuals have portrayed themselves as enlightened and informed professionals struggling against venal, ignorant politicians and an apathetic, selfish public. The army's lack of empathy for the nation's own citizens, its distrust of the political system, and its insistence that defense be the nation's overriding priority have greatly influenced its way of war. With few exceptions, peacetime officers have underestimated the latent power of patriotic civilians and democratic institutions. As a result, they have tended to envision future conflicts in which the public is little more than a frightened mob, the political system is ineffectual, and the regular army has been granted carte blanche to fight the war it imagines. And in assessing the lessons of past conflicts, it has tended to focus on its own contributions and to ignore those of industry, the home front, political leaders, and citizen-soldiers. At its most insidious, this bias has contributed to an institutional fable that the regular army's success on the battlefield has often been undermined by a lack of sufficient "will" on the home front.
One of the army's most cherished myths is that its greatest peacetime successes-the Root reforms, the post-Vietnam renaissance-were entirely self-generated, carried through in the face of public apathy or opposition. Yet rarely have these transformation initiatives-from the 1820s harbor fortifications to the 1990s AirLand Battle Future-actually prepared the service for the war it would have to fight. The absence of direct causationthe ability to demonstrate that a specific reform actually had the effect its planners intended-should make both officers and civilians more skeptical of the tendency of some military intellectuals to present guesses as certainties. This unwarranted certainty about what former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld termed "known knowns" has been matched by an equally danger-ous dismissal of "known unknowns." Despite decades of personal experience to the contrary, army officers have consistently underestimated the difficulty of unconventional warfare, military occupation, and pacification. The price of this hubris has been high, in both the past and the present.
The army's inability to recognize the weaknesses of its intellectual traditions is manifest in its selective use of historical examples. All three schools appeal to a mythical past, sometimes contrasting golden eras such as the Civil War or World War II with the allegedly dark periods that followed them. At times, this historicism approaches the ludicrous. During the late 1990s, it was almost mandatory that any briefing by a senior officer would show a slide juxtaposing German tanks with the Maginot Line as warning of the dire fate that awaited should the nation not fund the army's transformation program. The choice, the slide intimated, was between overwhelming victory and humiliating defeat-history proved it. That the blitzkrieg-Maginot analogy was of almost no relevance to the United States even in the 1930s, much less today, appeared to escape an entire generation of officers. In this case, as all too often, historical cherrypicking does the very thing that the study of history should guard against. Rather than encourage informed analysis and criticism, the army's interpretation of the past serves to enforce complacency and the "comfortable vision of war."
The Global War on Terror is, according to its supporters, a war totally unlike any other-a war that calls for new concepts, new methods, even a new vocabulary. Army vision statements speak less of war than of a variety of "challenges" such as terrorists, "nonstate entities," rogue nations, and "breakthrough technologies" in the hands of opponents, which might prove crucial in a particular "operational domain." Yet despite the inflated rhetoric, in many ways GWOT has highlighted long-term problems in each of the three army ways of war.
The pre-GWOT army was enamored of the Guardians' pro-epilogue pensity to reduce the chaos of war into rules, principles, and predictable outcomes. Many in the army were convinced they could dictate to politicians the rules that governed military deployment, a naive conviction that Colin Powell helped perpetuate. Their references to war were filled with pseudoscientific terms like "battlefield calculus," "seamless synchronization," and "massed effects." Even the service's slogan-"Soldiers on Point for the Nation . . . Persuasive in Peace, Invincible in War"-conveyed the impression of waging war with such precision that the enemy was virtually helpless. After the 9/11 attacks, some rushed to revive apocalyptic Guardian scenarios of the nation's cities in ruin and to demand an all-encompassing "homeland security" plan akin to the national defense scheme proposed by Totten in the 1820s. More disturbing, the Guardian tradition of military deterrence was distorted into a doctrine of preemptive war. Today, a halfdecade after the invasion and occupation of Iraq, some still claim that only by killing "terrorists" in Baghdad can the nation avoid similar battles in New York City. This conflation of protecting the United States with aggressive or preemptive action against potential enemies goes far beyond what the originators of the Guardian tradition would have ever imagined. Even before GWOT, the Managers were too immersed in the day-to-day tactics of administration and too little concerned with long-range strategic planning. For all the rhetoric of "breaking the phalanx," "working the interagency process," or "coordinating the instruments of national power," senior officers clung to a Cold War vision of battle. They referred to their service's "inviolate contract" with the American people, but they limited its obligations to fighting conventional wars against other nations' armies. Viewing themselves as executives of a highly successful corporation-the best army in the world-they fixated on issues as picayune as the color of berets. The service's leadership proved unprepared for the twin challenges of Iraq and Rumsfeld. Too of-ten they were so busy reacting to the immediate crises that they did not exercise their responsibility to lead the army.
Chief of Staff Eric Shinseki did provide realistic assessments for the occupation of Iraq and challenged, albeit too quietly, the sanguine pipedreams of Rumsfeld and his theater commander. His successor, General Peter Schoomaker, did a commendable job maintaining his overstretched forces, and he initiated a significant intellectual shift throughout the service from the Fulda Gap to counterinsurgency. Unfortunately, the army has also had a number of senior officers who were essentially caretakers, adequate executives in peacetime who have proven unable to adapt to wartime challenges. One of these was Lieutenant General Ricardo S. Sanchez, who presided over what army officers refer to as "the lost year" in Iraq that witnessed the Abu Ghraib scandal and the outbreak of civil war.
The Heroes have also had a mixed record. Today, their values appear in the service's dominant philosophy, or at least in its rhetoric. The army issues each soldier metal identification cards stamped with the "Soldier's Creed," the "Warrior Ethos," and "Army Values," and virtually every mission statement emphasizes that the foundation of "warfighting" is the individual soldier. But the flaws of the Heroic tradition were nowhere more apparent than in the person of General Tommy Franks, commander of U.S. Central Command and architect of the invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan. He epitomized the propensity for simplistic solutions to complex problems, as well as the inclination toward self-promotion. Openly scornful of Managers, Pentagon "bean counters," and his civilian superiors, Franks opined that victory in Iraq depended on individual character, patriotism, and military genius. He intimidated his staff and excoriated critics, but acquiesced when Rumsfeld redrew his operational plans, revised the deployment schedule, and slashed troop strength. While claiming credit for great victories in Iraq and Afghanistan, he epilogue denied any blame for their postconquest descent into violent disorder.
Fortunately, Franks is not typical, and in many ways Iraq has spurred a renaissance of the Heroic tradition within the army. At a fundamental level, officers and soldiers now recognize that winning battles is less important than winning the peace, that no plan can result in a predetermined outcome, and that "the enemy gets a vote." The ability of soldiers, from privates to generals, to innovate and adapt to constantly shifting battle conditions has been impressive. However much they question the wisdom of the Iraq War, or doubt its success, returning veterans are immensely proud of their service and their comrades. The cohesion of the army's forces, their willingness to sacrifice, and the quality of leadership have surprised even the service itself. As one soldier, returning from his second tour, said, "I cannot believe how good we have become." Veterans speak of small "flat" staffs functioning more like teams than military hierarchies, of a command climate that fosters individual responsibility, and of tactical organizations so receptive that a private's idea may become a general's policy almost overnight.
These Heroic traits are also thriving in the army's intellectual community. Ultimately, Heroic practicality-crudely expressed as "what you don't know can kill you"-has done what years of top-down directives to "transform" could not. The service's school system has undergone enormous change in the course of responding to the challenge of the Iraq War. Thanks to reformers such as Brigadier General Volney J. Warner, Leavenworth's curriculum is moving rapidly away from its previous emphasis on rote learning and planning for conventional large-unit warfare. The Army War College's Strategic Studies Institute (SSI) has published a flood of provocative and often harshly critical essays on Afghanistan, Iraq, and GWOT. Although SSI has often incurred the wrath of powerful military and political chiefs-in-cluding Rumsfeld-the army leadership protects and encourages these military intellectuals. The War College itself is shifting from an exclusive focus on conventional warfare and strategic decision-making at the highest levels to emphasizing irregular conflict, cultural awareness, the necessity of working with civilian federal agencies and private organizations, and nonmilitary solutions to complex contingencies.
The more innovative and flexible approach of soldiers has shaken the army out of its self-referential peacetime mentality. Charged with developing a new manual for dealing with modern insurgencies, General David H. Petraeus assembled a top-notch staff, headed by Conrad Crane, a Stanford-educated historian, that incorporated advice from academics, federal agencies, nongovernmental organizations, journalists, medical specialists, and even an Australian officer-anthropologist. A crop of relatively junior officer intellectuals have emerged-John A. Nagl, Peter Mansoor, Daniel Bolger-who are already drawing lessons, concepts, and methods from the recent past to guide the service in the future, rather than letting the three traditions straitjacket the army's vision of war. Most importantly, Iraq has revitalized the old frontier-imperial Heroic belief that securing the peace is as important as winning the campaign. Paradoxically, although many officers refer to Iraq as "breaking the army," it may also have served to bond it into a more cohesive, more flexible, and more appropriate instrument for executing the nation's military policies.
If a GWOT-inspired Heroic renaissance is to truly have an impact on the army, it must be accepted and assimilated by the other two traditions. This is not at all certain. It is likely that Guardians will reject the preemptive adventurism of the Bush administration, along with grandiose objectives such as imposing democracy through military force. Adhering to their belief in scientific and rational warfare, they may also reject much of their epilogue service's recent experience with unconventional operations. They will probably reaffirm the Powell Doctrine that the nation's military forces should be deployed only to secure vital interests, that they should be sent in overwhelming strength, that they should have limited objectives, and that there should be a clear "exit strategy." Guardians may continue to seek in new technologies and new doctrines the means to engineer war with precision and predictability. And they will probably maintain that the ultimate goal of the nation's armed forces is to dominate so as to deter war all together. All these goals are understandable, possibly laudable. But the Guardians must defend against a revival of the pre-GWOT hubris which led to their insistence that the army could impose its vision of war on any opponent, at any time, in any place. And they must guard against their tendency to discover in one weapons system and one doctrine the solution to all strategic problems.
Managers may find in Iraq support for both a thorough reorganization of the service and a new concept of modern warfare. They will see in the rapid drive to Baghdad and the destruction of Iraqi conventional forces evidence that, properly transformed, the army can dominate future battlefields. Citing this and other carefully chosen historic examples, they may argue that the army needs to refocus on large-unit, high-tech conventional operations, and raise the specter of an expansionist China or a resurgent Russia. And, like the post-Vietnam generation, they will seek to fix a broken army by holistic reform, interweaving doctrine, training, officer education, promotion, procurement, and force structure into a coherent program.
However, Managers may also recognize that Iraq offers evidence of a need to return to their intellectual roots, to acknowledge that modern warfare requires not only well-organized military forces but also mobilization of the nation's economic, diplomatic, political, and popular resources as well. Like Eisen-hower, they may realize that winning the "long war" entails as much attention to preserving American values, individual human rights, and economic diversity as it does building up the nation's military strength. If so, they may become more willing to end branch and service parochialism and more accepting of outside advice and assistance. They might even be willing to spend real intellectual and financial capital on the "interagency process" instead of trying to shuffle off the difficulties of peacemaking and nation building to grossly understaffed and underfunded federal bureaucracies.
Whether the army emerges from the Global War on Terror prepared for future challenges, or whether a postwar malaise will require decades of rebuilding, will depend to a large measure on how Heroes, Managers, and Guardians choose to interpret the conflict. They can all justly claim the army was given inadequate resources for an impossible mission. And they have more than sufficient targets to blame. So the question is not whether, from this foundation of collective grievance, military intellectuals can revive and reaffirm their three traditional martial schools. 
the echo of battle
notes to pages[34][35][36][37][38] 
This project began during my tenure as the Harold K. Johnson Visiting Professor of Military History at the 
U.S. Army War College
Dean William T. Johnsen
Anne Perry
Debbie Jussel
John S. Guggenheim Memorial Foundation
Woodrow Wilson International Center
Claudius M. Easley
Texas A&M University
Walter Buenger
Dean Charles Johnson
R. J. Q. Adams
Terry Anderson
Daniel Bornstein
Joseph G. Dawson
Adam Seipp
Over the three decades I've built up a formidable debt to archivists. This book would not have been possible without the help of 
Dr. Timothy Nenninger
National Archives
Marty Andresen
Robert Dalessandro
FSR 
Field Service Regulations GPO Government Printing Office HIA Hoover Institution Archives
Stanford University
Palo Alto
CA IJ Journal of the U.S. Infantry Association/Infantry Journal JCS Joint Chiefs of Staff JMH Journal of Military History JMSI Journal of the Military Service Institution JUSA Journal
U.S. Artillery Association MA Military Affairs MDLC Manuscripts Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC MHI US Army Military History Institute, Carlisle, PA MMAS Masters of Military Art and Science, CGSC MR Military Review NASP Benjamin Franklin Cooling
Chief of Army Ground Forces RG Record Group
RWD Annual Report of the War Department SAMSM School of Advanced Military Studies Monograph
Allan R. Millett
Peter Maslowski
United States of America
Richard W. Stewart
Russell F. Weigley
U.S. Army (Bloomington: Indiana University Press
Antulio J. Echevarria II
Robert M. Citino
German Way of War: From the Thirty Years' War
Third Reich (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas
2005
Victor Davis Hanson
Western Way of War: Infantry Battle in Classical Greece
David French
Unwin-Hyman
Richard M. Harrison
Basil H. Liddell Hart
British Way of Warfare (New York
Russell F. Weigley
Indiana University Press
John R. Galvin
Uncomfortable Wars: Toward a New Paradigm
16 (Winter 1986
Department of the Army, Army Vision 2010
1999
. George S. Patton, "Success in War," CJ 40
January 1931
26. 10
George S. Patton
488. 11
Tommy Franks
Malcolm McConnell
American Soldier
Regan Books