# ID: c2a3e5d7f5da47cb9358409716f04b06
# Title: Nodes and codes: The reality of cyber warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information.
What is the reality of warfare in the cyber domain? According to James Mulvenon, founder of the Cyber Conflict Studies Association and prominent Chinese military expert, "It's 1946 in cyber. We have these potent new weapons, but we don't have all the conceptual and doctrinal thinking to support those weapons or any kind of deterrence." 1 If Mulvenon is correct, and potent new cyber weapons indicate a shift in the character of warfare analogous to the introduction of nuclear weapons, then what evidence indicates the development of corresponding policy, strategy, military doctrine, or organizations to support a shifting reality of cyber warfare?
The Stuxnet attack is an integral component of this research because it is the first proof of concept to demonstrate that acts of cyber warfare can destroy physical, rather than virtual, targets.
The former head of the United States (US) National Security and Central Intelligence Agencies, retired General Michael Hayden, captured the essence of Stuxnet during an interview with 60 Minutes when he said, "We have entered into a new phase of conflict in which we use a cyber weapon to create physical destruction." 
2
3
2 Michael Hayden, interview by Steve Kroft, 60 Minutes, CBS, March 4, 2012. Hayden emphasized the word "physical" to describe Stuxnet's destructive capability, italicized in the quote.
3 Kathryn Stevens and Larry K. McKee Jr., "International Cyberspace Strategies," National Security Cyberspace Institute, http://www.nsci-va.org/WhitePapers/2010-06-28-InternationalCyberspaceStrategies- Stephens-McKee.pdf (accessed February 12, 2012). See also Stockholm the operational implications of a transformed reality of war and recommends modifications to the current US warfighting theory, Network Centric Warfare.
In order to identify changes in the discourse on cyber warfare, this monograph will analyze the unclassified, open-source literature on cyber warfare published by the US, Russia, and China, as well as academic publications around the world, before and after the Stuxnet attack.
It will consider major policy documents and statements, changes in military budgets and procurement, and changes in military doctrine, organization, and training. This monograph will not address or assess responsibility for the Stuxnet attack or speculate about the motivation of the actors involved. 4
The purpose of this section is to tell the story of Stuxnet from the forensic analysis of its code and the logic it used to destroy critical industrial infrastructure in Iran in order to facilitate understanding of the environmental context in which it operated and changes to the discourse on cyber warfare. Analyses of the open-source facts surrounding Stuxnet provide a framework of understanding into why and how the world's major military powers responded to the most-International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), "Military Spending and Armaments," SIPRI Yearbook 2011, http://www.sipri.org/yearbook/2011/files/SIPRIYB1104-04A-04B.pdf (accessed March 10, 2012). According to Lewis and a McAfee report cited by Stevens and McKee, "five militaries (US, Russia, China, Israel, and France) have advanced cyber-attack capabilities and at least another 30 countries intend to acquire them." SIPRI ranks the US, Russia, China, and France as four of the top five defense spending and exporting countries. Therefore, this monograph considers the discourse from the US, Russia, and China, excluding France due to expected similarities with their NATO ally, the US, and due to space restrictions. 
4
Since the initial discovery of Stuxnet in June 2010, a legion of journals, magazines, and bloggers have opined on the composition and significance of the virus, and most are undoubtedly informative. However, this section will attempt to clear away much of the noise and opinion to tell the story through the lenses of the five individuals most responsible for the initial public detection, forensic analysis, and characterization of the intent of Stuxnet. The five primary sources represent five different nationalities and all work for multinational corporations, unbeholden to the authority of any single government. This section will also cite a handful of technical journals and blogs most helpful to prospective researchers looking for concise explanations of otherwise complex information. 
5
6
7
Ralph Langner, a German researcher and expert in industrial control systems, is the fifth and final primary source used in this section. Langner solved a major piece of the puzzle when he personally identified Stuxnet's intended target, Siemens supervisory-control and data acquisition systems (SCADA) used in Iranian uranium enrichment facilities. Langner published his revelation, methodology, and logic on his blog beginning September 16, 2010.
8
In June 2010, a recent graduate of the Belorussian State Technical University and antivirus programmer for VirusBlokAda named Sergey Ulasen noticed arbitrary computer reboots and "blue-screens-of-death (BSODS)" on a customer's network near Tehran. 
9
10
12
13
14
However, as they continued to deconstruct the code, they found that Stuxnet "phoned home" to allow the attackers to update infected machines and remotely determine whether an infected machine ran Siemens Simatic WinCC Step7 software.
17
18
19
20
20
21 Nicolas Falliere, "Stuxnet Introduces First Known Rootkit for Industrial Control Systems," Symantec Security Response Blog, entry posted August 6, 2010, http://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/stuxnet-introduces-first-known-rootkit-scada-devices (accessed 15 September 2011). The Symantec trio publicly compared Stuxnet's destructive capability to an alleged, and unsubstantiated, 1982 CIA digital attack on a Siberian pipeline that resulted in an explosion one-fifth the size of the atomic bomb that fell on Hiroshima.
22 Ralph Langner, interview by Dale Peterson, December 15, 2010, "Ralph Langner -Stuxnet  Interview," http://www.digitalbond.com/2010/12/15/december-podcast-ralph-langner-stuxnet-interview/  (accessed November 3, 2011). See also Ralph Langner, "September 16, 2010," Stuxnet Logbook Blog,  entry posted September 16, 2010, http Langner went public with his discoveries in the blogosphere, publishing a technical roadmap that detailed Stuxnet's known path from initial infection in June 2009 through the fall of 2010. Langner argued that publicizing the scope and effects of Stuxnet raised awareness of vulnerable civil infrastructure throughout the world that rely on PLCs or Siemens controllers.
However, his characterization of Stuxnet as a precision weapon employed by a state actor openly inferred exposure of a covert state-run operation. 
23
Finally, in November 2010, after deciphering all but two small encrypted Stuxnet files, the Symantec team published conclusive evidence that Stuxnet intended to destroy nuclear centrifuges at Natanz. 
24
When evaluated within the context of the attack, Stuxnet exposes shortcomings in current theory, doctrine, and international legal opinions as well as vulnerabilities in sophisticated weaponry, ultimately representing a great leap forward for warfare in the cyber domain. As John Lynn noted in Battle, history provides many examples of shifts in the reality of warfare that affect 
23
24
25
Many elements of strategic context contributed to the response of major military powers to Stuxnet. Variables consisting of International Atomic Energy Agency inspections, compliance with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, diplomatic rhetoric, economic sanctions, regional conflicts on Iran's eastern and western borders, and the potential for escalation of conflict provide context for understanding why Stuxnet occurred. 
26
First, the Stuxnet worm bored into the industrial controllers at Natanz under conditions that made attributing a sophisticated cyber attack to a specific actor difficult and, unlike an attack through conventional weapons, problematic for both the attacker and the recipient. As soft power advocate Joseph Nye notes, the proliferation of information on networks across territorial jurisdictions promotes the diffusion of power from governmental functions to virtual 
25
26
27
28
29
(New York: PublicAffairs, 2011), 113-114. 28
31
Second, ambiguous definitions and opinions on cyber attack and acts of warfare in the cyber domain provided the Stuxnet attackers with an opportunity to destroy an adversary's material and shape the discourse of future cyber warfare without significant risk of escalation or retaliation from Iran in response to Stuxnet. Despite numerous predictions in the international academic and military communities warning of impending cyber warfare, no authoritative body acting on behalf of a major military power delivered a comprehensive definition of acts of war in the cyber domain prior to Stuxnet. This ambiguity in terminology ultimately led to elastic legal restrictions and allowed the attackers to operate with initiative from a legal sanctuary, while constricting the response options of the attacked party.
In November 2008, the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defense Centre of Excellence (CCDCOE) published an inconclusive legal review entitled "International Cyber Incidents: Legal Considerations." The NATO report acknowledged ambiguous cyber terminology and discussed the applicability of the Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC) with respect to Russian cyber attacks against Georgia and Estonia, but stopped well short of recommending solutions to the cyber "gaps" in international treaties. 
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
Georgetown University professors Christopher Joyner and Catherine Lotrionte identified a lack of specificity within modern international law to distinguish "which state actions are permissible as normal computer-generated trans-border data flow from those cyber activities that may qualify as an armed attack against a state." Joyner and Lotrionte suggest that Article 2(4) of the United Nations Charter uses the terminology "use of force" instead of "acts of war" to describe prohibited behavior in international relations between member states in order to include hostile acts that fall short of the common threshold for belligerency. The study concludes by acknowledging the seriousness of ambiguous opinions concerning acts of "armed attack" in the cyber domain and recommending the reevaluation of acceptable definitions of warfare in order to maintain the relevancy of international law. 41 Given the vagueness of the legal threshold for which a cyber attack constitutes an act of war, one can understand how the Stuxnet attackers outmaneuvered the Iranians, taking away conventional retaliatory options and leaving them without a legal charge.
US joint doctrine, both before and after the Stuxnet attack, failed to provide terms that adequately address an attack through networked nodes resulting in the physical destruction of material property or infrastructure. The 2001, 2007, 2010, and 2011 editions of Joint Publication 1-02: Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms contain consistent definitions of computer network attack (CNA), and electronic attack (EA). 42 Like Stuxnet, CNA includes "actions taken through the use of computer networks to disrupt, deny, degrade, and destroy." However, the definition proceeds to limit the targets of CNA to "information, computers, or networks." Prior to Stuxnet, cyber related attacks targeted information, computers, and networks, but Stuxnet specifically targeted uranium centrifuges set in cascades of 164 and their associated nuclear material at Natanz, and did not attempt to disrupt, deny, degrade, or destroy computers or networks. 
43
next several decades, a multitude of conventions, agreements, and treaties matured the concepts that became International Space Law, based on the precedent and new reality set by Sputnik. 
44
Likewise, Stuxnet powerfully demonstrated the potential for the weaponization of the cyber domain and exposed the vulnerability of industrial and defense infrastructure throughout the world to a new type of threat. 
45
Third, a trend of increasing digitization in weaponry and critical infrastructure corresponds to an increase in the number of nodes vulnerable to attack by malicious codes.
Locating the point of manufacture and the increasing quantity of computer chips, automated processors, and supervisory control mechanisms of major weapon and infrastructure systems is beyond the scope of this research. However, the available data suggests that formerly analog systems are now digital, complex, and dependent on data obtained from networked systems.
Components of modern, networked weapons systems contain millions of lines of code constructed by manufacturers with global supply chains. Within this context, the Stuxnet attack underscores the reality of a target-rich environment and an expanding number of potential targets on vulnerable, networked nodes.
According to the SIPRI's Arms Transfers Database, the US and Russia exported more arms every year from 1992-2010, in terms of dollar value, than all other nations combined. The US was also the fifth largest arms importer in 2010, demonstrating the multi-dimensional flow of sophisticated weaponry across borders. 
46
Air defense systems exported by the US and Russia with advanced radar and target acquisition components demonstrate the increasingly digital and network-dependent nature of modern weaponry. According to SIPRI, American and Russian sales of upgraded air defense systems and associated components rose sharply in 1996 and maintained a growing trend through 2010. 
47
The increased demand for networked, integrated air defense systems and weapons platforms are examples of a larger trend toward weaponry and military information systems built by manufacturers that leverage global supply chains. Global supply chains introduce increased risk to the integrity of electronic components and accompanying software, which often consist of millions of lines of code programmed in large part by automated processes. 
48
Therefore, the trend of sophisticated weapon components developed and assembled by increasingly global supply chains represent an increase in the vulnerability of modern weapon systems to attack or sabotage.
Two articles posted on the "Spectrum: Inside Technology" blog sponsored by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers prior to Stuxnet demonstrate the trend of increasingly sophisticated software to support advanced war fighting platforms. Robert Charette showed that the avionics systems in the F-22 Raptor and the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, both fifth generation fighter jets, contain about 1.7 million and 5.7 million lines of code respectively. The avionics in Boeing's 787 Dreamliner require approximately 6.5 million lines of code while the current S-Class Mercedes Benz requires over 20 million lines of code executed on almost 100 microprocessor-based electronic control units. 
49
51
Additionally, an increase in industrial and municipal development projects performed by multinational corporations like Siemens and General Electric demonstrate the risk associated with the decentralized manufacture of sophisticated componentry used in modern infrastructure. 
52
53
54
55
Problematic attribution, ambiguity in the terminology associated with cyber-warfare, and trends of increased vulnerability in supposedly sophisticated weaponry and infrastructure provide a shifting reality of warfare and the contextual framework to understand the American, Russian, and Chinese responses to Stuxnet. Each of these nations presents a case study, a slightly different 53 GE Press Releases, "City of Leesburg Launches Grid Modernization Project to Better Manage Electricity Loads and Empower Customers," http://www.genewscenter.com/Press-Releases/City-of-Leesburg-Launches-Grid-Modernization-Project-to-Better-Manage-Electricity-Loads-and-Empower-Consumers-357f.aspx (accessed January 2, 2012). The city of Leesburg, Florida will utilize GE's Grid IQ to integrate an automated power distribution network with online portals to create energy efficiencies. This monograph does not argue that the Grid IQ is an insecure system. Rather, it demonstrates the trend of increasingly sophisticated infrastructure, representing the distributed manufacture of components by multinational corporations. 
54
The purpose of this section is to paint a picture that illustrates the American perception of changes in the reality of warfare in the cyber domain by analyzing changes within US policy, strategy, military doctrine, and organization before and after Stuxnet. American political, military, and homeland security leaders recognize the vulnerability of their own infrastructure and power-projection capabilities to cyber attack, they anticipate Stuxnet-like attacks from state and non-state aggressors against the US homeland, and they recognize cyber warfare to be a potential enabling component of US military operations.
The administrations of Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama leveraged formal 
The 2006 National Security Strategy is an ideal starting point for analysis because it is the last of the capstone US publications to omit cyber considerations from policy or military strategy. The lone cyber reference in the document consists of a line copied from the Quadrennial Defense Review, published one month earlier, predicting "disruptive challenges from state and non-state actors" that employ innovative cyber technologies to counter US military capabilities. 
56
The 2008 National Defense Strategy discussed the impacts of warfare in the cyber domain in terms of the disruption of commerce and economic damage that would follow a major cyber attack. However, the strategy claimed that the Department of Defense (DOD) is neither the best source of resources nor the appropriate authority to "shoulder the burden" of cyber warfare.
The strategy discussed China's development of cyber warfare capabilities in a section titled "Managing Risk" but did not include cyber warfare in its discussion of "DOD Capabilities and Means." 
58
In 2009, amid significant tension between US departments and agencies over ambiguous cyber terminology and the burden of responsibility for cyber operations, President Obama ordered a 60-day comprehensive "clean slate" review of US cyber policies and organizational attacks against the US.
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
In the fall of 2010, at the same time the Symantec Trio and Ralph Langner described Stuxnet's systematic progress from infected flash drive to centrifuge destruction in the blogosphere, William Lynn published an eye-opening article in Foreign Affairs entitled "Defending a New Domain." The Deputy US Secretary of Defense opened the article by describing a previously classified incident in which a flash drive infected with malicious code established a "digital beachhead" on a US military laptop in the Middle East that it used to send data from classified military networks to servers under foreign control. 
67
67
68
General James Cartwright, Vice Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, followed Lynn's article with a memorandum addressed to the chiefs of the uniformed services and the combatant commanders acknowledging the inadequate and ambiguous terminology of cyber operations lexicon found in US joint doctrine. Cartwright specifically addressed the inappropriate use of the term "computer network attack" to reference cyber operations that attack physical material instead of virtual assets. Cartwright redefined CNA as a form of "offensive fires," thereby directly categorizing the destruction of information, systems, and networks as an act of war. Cartwright's guidance directed the use of the term "cyber attack," as a part of "offensive cyber operations," to define hostile acts to destroy an adversary's systems, assets, or functions that meet "use-of-force" levels through the cyber domain. 69 General Cartwright's guidance represents the most significant result of American introspection in the aftermath of the public disclosure of Stuxnet and a fundamental public change regarding the potential role of cyber attacks in future US military operations. Cartwright modified the definition of "advance force operations" to include the delivery of software payloads to facilitate, enable, or provide effects to larger military operations. 
70
The National Military Strategy published shortly thereafter, in January 2011, declared the emergence of cyberspace as a war-fighting domain on the same level as the land, sea, air, and space domains. The strategy included cyberspace among the global commons, comparing it to "the connective tissue upon which all nations' security and prosperity depend," within which the 69 James Cartwright, "Joint Terminology for Cyberspace Operations" (Washington, D.C.: The Pentagon, November 2010), 1-3, 5. 
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
The purpose of this section is to demonstrate the Russian Federation's perception of the changing reality of cyber warfare by analyzing changes to Russian policy, strategy, and the operating doctrine of military and security services following Stuxnet. Russian leaders were among the first to acknowledge the risk and opportunity associated with computer network attack and cyber attack. They anticipate Stuxnet-like attacks from state and non-state actors against the Russian homeland and they recognize cyber warfare to be a potential enabling component of both military and internal security operations.
References to a cyber domain of military operations are largely absent from Russian open source material outside of citations of Western military theory. Rather, the Russian view of information war, or informatsionnaya voyna, is a concept that combines cyber operations, electronic warfare, psychological operations, strategic communications, deception, and influence. 
77
Capstone publications demonstrate Russian perceptions and concerns, from the National Security Strategy to the February 2010 Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation. Additionally, statements from the Russian President and Prime Minister, along with papers from major Russian military and internal security theorists, provide an understanding of Russian military actions with respect to offensive cyber operations. However, Russia remains a collection of government institutions and bureaucracies with carefully scripted publications that reflect its secretive history, and censorship of on-line content presents a challenge to efforts aimed at assessing changes in posture and perception. 
78
The Russian Federation was one of the first states that publicly recognized the risks and opportunities associated with information attacks enabled by network operations, demonstrated by their significant investments to develop organizations and promote leaders to focus on cyberrelated capabilities. As with other emerging technologies, Russia applied advances in offensive network operations to both their military and internal security organizations. In 1998, the Kremlin created the Directorate for Combating Crimes in the High Technology Sphere, or "Directorate K," the official network information branch of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Directorate K's initial mission included working closely with Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB), the lead agency for state security and the successor agency of the Soviet Committee of State Security (KGB), to interdict network security threats and develop network information capabilities. 
79
78
79
describing future war as "attacking state and military control systems, navigation and communication systems, and other crucial information and facilities." 
80
81
In the hours before the 2008 South Ossetia War, servers throughout Georgia sustained the coordinated assault of hundreds of millions of network requests that overloaded and shut down its governmental and commercial information networks, isolating the Georgian state from the rest of the world. 
82
83
84
86
88
86 Jeffrey Carr, Inside Cyber Warfare: Mapping the Cyber Underworld (Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media, 2012), 164. 
87
88 Carr,
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
From a policy perspective, the May 2009 National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation to 2020 addressed the major threats to Russian national security and national interests, established Russian national security priorities, and identified the most likely technological means by which Russian leaders will ensure national security. The strategy characterized the information threat to Russian assets as consisting of "illicit information network activities in the sphere of high technology" and focused national efforts on preventing network crime. Two of the strategy's 112 paragraphs address limiting the effects of network crime and "high technology means of conducting armed warfare," but the policy stops well short of identifying information attack as either a threat to Russian national security or a means of warfare. 
89
Rather, the doctrine listed "impeded and disrupted function and operation of state and military command and control systems" as the second major military threat to the Russian Federation. The doctrine described the systems of greatest concern to impeded and disrupted operations, which all rely on networks of interconnected nodes: strategic nuclear forces, missile early warning systems, space systems, nuclear munitions storage facilities, nuclear energy facilities, and atomic and chemical industry facilities. 
90
91
In the years that preceded the Stuxnet attack, the Russian government's use of resources and investments in doctrine, organization, training, and operations of the MOD and the FSB reflect the expanded role of information operations as an instrument of Russian policy, even if their National Security Strategy did not reflect that reality. Most open-source indications of the Russian pre-Stuxnet posture toward information operations focus on computer network attack, a nonviolent instrument of policy to achieve political objectives, as an enabling component to military information operations. However, the discourse among some Russian officials reflects at least a basic understanding that offensive cyber operations could result in indirect, "kinetic" effects. Stuxnet reinforced General Burutin's comments and revealed a new reality that offensive networked information operations could result in direct, violent effects.
Stuxnet became public amidst an ongoing Russian internal military review of their performance and capabilities during the brief war with Georgia, two years earlier. Despite the relative success of Russian information operations against Georgia and comments by the Commander of the US Cyber Command describing Russia as a "near peer" to the US in offensive 
91
Andrei Kokoshin, the Deputy Minister of Defense and an advocate for Russian information warfare dominance, encouraged an interdisciplinary approach to develop and implement offensive capabilities across state institutions. 
96
98
99
97
98 Khatuna Mshvidobadze, "The Battlefield on your Laptop," Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty, http://www.rferl.org/content/commentary_battlefield_on_your_desktop/2345202.html (accessed December 13, 2011). 
99
100
101
102
103
The purpose of this section is to demonstrate the reality of cyber warfare in China by analyzing changes to Chinese strategy, military theory and doctrine, and institutional organizations before and after Stuxnet. Chinese leaders and military theorists recognize the vulnerability of their infrastructure and defense networks to cyber attack, they anticipate Stuxnetlike attacks as a part of future warfare, and they recognize cyber warfare to be a potential enabling component of future Chinese military operations. As in the previous Russian case study, linguistic shortcomings limit the analysis of the Chinese cyber attack posture prior to and following the Stuxnet attack to journals, news articles, and policy documents translated from Chinese to English. Because the Stuxnet attack is a relatively recent event, not all relevant Chinese publications exist in translated form. Therefore, this chapter pursues the analysis of as many relevant Chinese publications as possible to paint the picture of changes to Chinese perceptions of cyber warfare.
The 1991 Gulf War provided Chairman Jiang Zemin and other Chinese Communist Party leaders the explicit realization that the PLA was an obsolete force, and reinforced the need for a "revolution in military affairs" to modernize the Chinese Armed Forces into a force capable of winning "wars under high-tech conditions." Although PLA transformation began two decades earlier under Deng Xiopang, the Gulf War accelerated changes in Chinese strategic, institutional, and operational thinking to fit the realities of Information Age conflict. 
104
In 1995, two military theorists at the Chinese Academy of Military Science in Beijing, Senior Colonel Wang Baocun and Li Fei co-authored an article in The Liberation Army Daily that appears to parallel Network Centric Warfare Theory and predicts smaller organizational structures in future armies due to the force multiplying effects of "informationalized forces."
According to Wang and Li, information warfare includes "computer virus warfare" aimed at destroying a computer's normal operating programs, characterized by problematic detection and attribution, resulting in an increase in vulnerability to combat systems on a digitized battlefield. 
105
106
The concept of using informationalized instruments of warfare in an asymmetric manner to achieve Chinese policy objectives is in line with the traditional Chinese approach called shi, which advocates "potential born of disposition," avoiding an adversary's strength by exploiting their vulnerabilities, and dominating an adversary indirectly. 
108
UN. 111
112
A few weeks after Stuxnet become a major news story, China's Liberation Army Daily published a story that claimed the PLA's outdated mode of warfare theory reflected conservative and traditional Chinese culture, required modernization, and called for audacious changes to leverage "recent innovations." 
113
Chinese cyber posture changed slightly in late 2010. Open-source publications suggest that the perceptions of cyber warfare held by many Chinese leaders and military theorists demonstrate a shift in the reality of cyber warfare. Additionally, Chinese investments in institutional organizational reforms reflect the power of discourse amid shifting perceptions of reality.
When James Mulvenon said, "It's 1946 in cyber," he would have been just as accurate to suggest that it is the 1920s in cyber. Technological advances in weaponry and innovation in warfighting capacity prior to 1914, to include the emergence of lethal capacity from the new air domain, forced military theorists to reevaluate their warfighting theories and doctrine during the  (Washington, DC, 2005). In summary, networking forces improves information sharing. Collaborative information sharing allows shared situational awareness. Shared situational awareness allows real-time synchronization across all domains and facilitates rapid command decisions. Synchronization is a necessary component to mission success. military capabilities and vulnerabilities to the computer network operations that became common long before Stuxnet. Military networks under attack, or sometimes just closed for routine maintenance, introduced compounding effects of chaos and complexity to military operations built around networked platforms. Compounding elements of chaos and complexity occasionally thickened the fog of war, requiring land component commanders to move away from their primary war fighting systems on occasion, in order to remain adaptive to events on the battlefield. 
128
129
130
131
129
131
132
Leon Panetta recently said, "the one thing I worry about most right now is knowing that a cyber attack is possible, and feeling that we have not taken the necessary steps to protect this country." The Defense Secretary and former director of the Central Intelligence Agency continued, "I think the capabilities are available in cyber warfare to virtually cripple this nation, and literally paralyze this country."
133
From the 1990s through 2010, leaders and theorists from the US, Russia, and China largely considered offensive network operations to be shaping operations designed to deny an also Strategic Studies Institute, "Key Strategic Issues List, 2011-2012," US Army War College, http://www.strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil/pubs/ksil.cfm?sortBy=organization (accessed March 11,  2012). adversary network-centric capabilities or to establish conditions that enable other forms of direct military action. However, their conceptions of nonviolent and indirect (shi) applications of cyber power changed during the course of 2010. Stuxnet demonstrated that the reality of cyber warfare consists of potentially violent cyber actions that are difficult to attribute, ambiguous in nature, and directed at the trends of supposedly sophisticated weaponry and infrastructure that essentially turn critical capabilities and requirements into critical vulnerabilities. Today, leaders and theorists from the US, Russia, and China seem to share Panetta's concerns and agree that the character of modern warfare includes violent instruments of policy that attack through the cyber domain in order to compel an adversary to accept one's will.
Evidence suggests that the US, Russia, and China are taking extraordinary measures to build cyber armies capable of exploiting adversary vulnerabilities in closed and open networks.
Cyber-related concerns and issues in all three countries constitute a priority topic in the newspapers, journals, and public forums as well as among top officials because tangible cyber vulnerabilities intersect across all elements of their modern societies and those of their potential adversaries. The Russians and Chinese both consider cyber capabilities to be useful tools to ensure internal security and order, although no evidence exists to suggest that their security leaders or theorists intend to pursue violent cyber weapons for use as domestic policy tools.
Russia already demonstrated its will to use cyber tools to enable military achievement of political objectives and their leaders publicly endorse the pursuit of offensive cyber weapons to use against American targets. China takes a more subtle approach to the changes in cyber warfare but acknowledges that "informationalized" warfare must include the capacity for a direct attack through cyberspace.
The pursuit of answers to the narrowly focused research question at the heart of this monograph overturned additional questions that deserve further study. First, what efforts are nations or multinational organizations taking to increase attribution and decrease the ambiguity associated with cyber attack? How will those efforts affect cyber warfare? Second, is it reasonable to expect that sophisticated cyber weapons will become an effective strategic or operational deterrent? Third, does the US Army's shift from "battle command" toward "mission command" and commander-centric operations represent a pivot away from NCW theory? How would such a move alter the American theory of warfare and associated procurement, doctrine, and organization? Finally, Stuxnet provoked significant discourse on cyber warfare from the world's major military powers. This monograph attempted to capture a snapshot of the evolving narrative of cyber warfare and the unique role that Stuxnet played as a proof of concept for what General Cartwright considered the cyber component of "operational fires." The discourse on cyber warfare will expand and evolve, as will the number and nature of vulnerable nodes, and continue to approach what James Mulvenon referred to as "all the conceptual and doctrinal thinking" to support potent, weaponized codes.
36  
36  
49 50 Jordan Robertson, "Hackers Cross from Digital to Physical World," Taipei Times Editorials, October 27, 2011.
108 110
Many of the sources used in this monograph come from web logs (blogs). The most relevant information on the story of Stuxnet exists in the blogosphere, the medium chosen by Stuxnet detectives to collaborate, communicate, and publish their work.
Sergey Ulasen, "Rootkit.TmpHider," Wilders Security Forum Blog, entry posted June 17, 2010,  http://www.wilderssecurity.com (accessed October 19, 2011). See also Sergey Ulasen, "Rootkit.TmpHider," VirusBlokAda Blog, entry posted June 17, 2010, http://anti-virus.by/en/tempo.shtml
Nicolas Falliere, Liam O Murchu, and Eric Chien, W32.Stuxnet Dossier Version 1.4 (Cupertino,  California: Symantec Security Response, 2011), 1-4.
Ralph Langner, "September 16, 2010
Lincoln Spector, "What to Do When Windows Gets Really Messed Up," PC World Blogs: Answer Line, entry posted May 5, 2008, http://www.pcworld.com/article/145266/what_to_do_when_windows_gets_really_messed_up.html (accessed September 2, 2011).
Dennis Elser and Micha Pekrul, "Inside the Password-Stealing Business: The Who and How of Identity Theft," McAfee Labs Research Report, http://www.mcafee.com/us/resources/reports/rp-insidepassword-stealing-biz.pdf (accessed September 2, 2011), 7.
13 Kim Zetter, "How Digital Detectives Deciphered Stuxnet, the Most Menacing Malware in History," Wired Threat Level Blog: Privacy, Crime, and Security Online, entry posted July 11, 2011, http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2011/07/how-digital-detectives-deciphered-stuxnet/all/1 (accessed September 1, 2011). "Out of more than 12 million pieces of malware that antivirus researchers discover each year, fewer than a dozen use a zero-day exploit
." 14 Microsoft Malware Protection Center, "Trojan: WinNT/StuxnetB, July 7, 2010," Threat Research and Response, entry posted July 7, 2010, http://www.microsoft.com/security/portal/threat/Encyclopedia/Entry.aspx?Name=Trojan%3AWinNT%2FS tuxnet.B (accessed October 19, 2011). Microsoft named the virus Stuxnet by combining file names (.stub and MrxNet.sys). See also Ulasen, Wilders Security Forum Blog and VirusBlokAda Blog.
Liam O Murchu, "W32.Stuxnet Variants," Symantec Security Response Blog, entry posted July 28, 2010, http://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/w32stuxnet-variants (accessed September 2, 2011). See alsoZetter.    
Nicolas Falliere, Liam O Murchu, and Eric Chien, "W32.Stuxnet Dossier, Version 1.4," Symantec Security Response Blog, entry posted February 3, 2011, http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/media/security_response/whitepapers/w32_stuxnet_dos sier.pdf (accessed September 2, 2011), 55.
Falliere, O Murchu, and Chien, 5.    
Zetter. The Symantec team discovered the numbers of infected computers and their geographical location by intercepting the data and time stamps that the attackers expected to receive. They assessed a high degree of collateral damage to computers and servers around the world, classifying the attack as a high risk operation.
Kaspersky Labs, "Cyberthreat Forecast for 2012," http://www.kaspersky.com/images/Kaspersky%20report-10-134377.pdf (accessed January 2, 2012). Kaspersky Labs, a software security industry leader, contends that cyber weapons like Stuxnet are highly unique, limited opportunity codes designed for a specific time and purpose.
Jack P. Gibbs, "Deterrence Theory and Research," in Law as a Behavioral Instrument, ed. Gary Melton, Laura Nader, and Richard A. Dienstbier, (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1986), 87.
Thomas Rid, "Cyber War Will Not Take Place," Journal of Strategic Studies 1-28 (October 2011): 2, 6, 25.
Matthew C. Waxman, "Cyber Attacks and the Use of Force: Back to the Future of Article 2(4)," Yale Journal of International Law no. 36.2 (Spring 2011), http://www.yjil.org/docs/pub/36-2-waxmancyber-attacks-and-the-use-of-force.pdf (accessed July 12, 2012), 443.
S. Neil Hosenball, "Current Issues of Space Law Before the United Nations," Journal of Space Law 2 (1974): 5.
Rene Obermann, "Digital Sputnik Moment," The New York Times Opinion Pages, February 27, 2011.
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, "Arms Suppliers/Recipients Database," http://armstrade.sipri.org/armstrade/page/toplist.php (accessed January 2, 2012).
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, "Arms Transfers Database," http://armstrade.sipri.org/armstrade/page/trade_register.php (accessed January 2, 2012).
The White House, National Security Strategy (Washington, D.C.: The White House, March 2006), 44.
US Department of Defense, Cyberspace Policy Review, Office of the Secretary of Defense, http://www.defense.gov/home/features/2010/0410_cybersec/docs/nps36-052909-01[1].pdf (accessed January 22, 2012).
US Department of Homeland Security, Quadrennial Homeland Security Review Report: A Strategic Framework for a Secure Homeland (Washington, D.C.: Department of Homeland Security, 2010), 57-58.
The White House, National Security Strategy (Washington, D.C.: The White House, May 2010), 27-28.
Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, The National Military Strategy of the United States of America, 2011 (Washington, D.C.: The Pentagon, January 2011), 9.
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2011, Section 934, Public Law 111-383, 111 th Congress, "National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2011," http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-111publ383/pdf/PLAW-111publ383.pdf (accessed January 24, 2012).
US Department of Defense, Department of Defense Cyberspace Policy Report: A Report to Congress Pursuant to the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2011, Section 934 (Washington D.C.: The Pentagon, November 2011), 2-3.
Ibid.,[3][4] 9.   
Department of Defense, Sustaining US Global Leadership: Priorities for 21 st Century Defense (Washington, D.C.: The Pentagon, January 2012), 4-5.
Ellen Nakashima, "Pentagon Ups Ante on Cyber Front," The Washington Post, March 19, 2012. See also US Department of Defense, "2013 Funding Highlights," The White House, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/budget/fy2012/assets/defense.pdf (accessed March 19, 2012).
Kier Giles, "'Information Troops' -a Russian Cyber Command?" Oxford Conflict Studies Research Centre, http://www.conflictstudies.org.uk/files/Russian_Cyber_Command.pdf (accessed January 12, 2012).
Rustrans,  The National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation to 2020, Rustrans Wikidot http://rustrans.wikidot.com/russia-s-national-security-strategy-to-2020-russian-text (accessed February 5, 2012).
The Russian Federation Ministry of Defense, Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, National Defense University, http://merln.ndu.edu/whitepapers/Russia2010_English.pdf (accessed February 9, 2012), para 10.b.
Andrei Soldatov, "Vladimir Putin's Cyber Warriors: The Kremlin's Ham-handed Effort to Squelch Online Dissent," Foreign Affairs Features, http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/136727/andreisoldatov/vladimir-putins-cyber-warriors?page=show(accessed March 4, 2012).
102 Hal Roberts and Bruce Etling, "Coordinated DDoS Attack During Russian Duma Elections," The Harvard Law Internet and Democracy Blog, entry posted December 8, 2011, http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/idblog/2011/12/08/coordinated-ddos-attack-during-russian-duma-elections/ (accessed March 4,
2012).103 Vladimir Putin, "Be Strong: Guarantee of National Security for Russia," Rossiyskaya Gazeta, February 20, 2012, http://www.rg.ru/2012/02/20/putin-armiya.html(accessed March 4, 2012).
Alexander Chieh-cheng Huang, "Transformation and Refinement of Chinese Military Doctrine: Reflection and Critique of the PLA's View," RAND Publications, http://www.rand.org/pubs/conf_proceedings/CF160/CF160.ch6.pdf (accessed February 17, 2012).
Wang Baocun and Li Fei, "Information Warfare," The Liberation Army Daily, June 20, 1995, http://www.fas.org/irp/world/china/docs/iw_wang.htm(accessed February 18, 2012). See also Timothy Thomas, The Dragon's Quantum Leap: Transforming from a Mechanized to an Informationized Force (Fort Leavenworth: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2009), 2. According to Thomas, "several terms (cyber, digital, network) that are information-related in English translate from Chinese to English in a number of ways (informationization, informationalization)."
Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare (Beijing: PLA Literature and Arts Publishing House, 1999), http://cryptome.org/cuw.htm (accessed February 17, 2012).
Dmitri Alperovich, "Revealed: Operation Shady RAT," McAfee Threat Research, http://www.mcafee.com/us/resources/white-papers/wp-operation-shady-rat.pdf(accessed February 19,  2012).
Willy Lam, "Beijing Bones Up it Cyber-Warfare Capacity," The Jamestown Foundation, http://www.jamestown.org/programs/chinabrief/single/?tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=36007&tx_ttnews%5 BbackPid%5D=414&no_cache=1 (accessed February 2, 2012).
Reuters, "China Paper Warns Military Thinking Outmoded," Reuters US Edition, http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/08/15/us-china-military-idUSTRE67E07020100815 (accessed February 10, 2012).
Li Daguang, "After One Opens 'Pandora's Box' of Cyber Warfare," Jiefangjun Bao Online, http://www.chinamil.com.cn/(accessed February 19, 2012). See alsoTimothy Thomas, email message to  author, February 7, 2012.   
Ye Zheng and Zhao Baoxian, "How do you Fight a Network War," Zhongguo Qingnian Bao, June 1, 2011. See alsoTimothy Thomas, email message to author, February 7, 2012.    
Hannah Beech, "Meet China's Newest Soldiers: An Online Blue Army," Time, http://globalspin.blogs.time.com/2011/05/27/meet-chinas-newest-soldiers-an-online-blue-army/ (accessed November 20, 2011).
Su Jie, "PLA 'Online Blue Army Gets Ready for Cyber Warfare," ECNS.cn, http://www.ecns.cn/2012/01-16/6254.shtml (accessed February 19, 2012).
David M. Glantz and Jonathan M. House, When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler (Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas, 1995), 148-169.
Michael O'Hanlon, Technological Change and the Future of Warfare (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2000), 13.
Robert Riscassi, "Principles for Coalition Warfare," Joint Forces Quarterly(Summer, 1993), http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/jfq_pubs/jfq0901.pdf (accessed March 10, 2012). As far back as 1994, the Vice Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, Robert Riscassi, predicted a future dominated by coalition warfare that required synchronization, interoperability, and precision information sharing to allow unified action.
Hyun Soo Suh, "The 3 a.m. Call Panetta Fears the Most," CNN Security Clearance Blog, entry posted March 2, 2012, http://security.blogs.cnn.com/2012/03/02/the-3-a-m-call-panetta-fears-the-most/ (accessed March 10, 2012).
Opinions, conclusions, and recommendations expressed or implied within are solely those of the author, and do not represent the views of the US
China. 
114
115
116
The March 2011 review of Chinese defense publicly recommitted China to a policy of active cyber defense and revealed China's concerns, implicitly referencing Stuxnet, that 2010 marked the moment in which other major military powers developed "enhanced cyber operations capabilities to occupy new strategic commanding heights." 117 Chinese National Defense University professor and space power theorist, Colonel Li Daguang, referred to the Stuxnet attack as a "Pandora's Box" of cyber warfare and predicted an arms race to develop cyber weapons capable of paralyzing an adversary's networks and their military and economic capabilities, thereby influencing a society's willpower. 
118
114
115
116
119
120
121