# ID: c318696750914ca28c0e471c0fca00ce
# Title: „The Crucial Role of the Operational Artist: A Case Study of Operation Barbarossa.”
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
According to current United States (US) Army doctrine, operational art is the pursuit of strategic objectives through the arrangement of tactical actions in time, space, and purpose. This monograph raises the research question why the German application and failure of operational art before and during Operation Barbarossa 1941 is still relevant for today's US doctrinal understanding of operational art. Furthermore, the analysis challenges the doctrinal notion that operational art is applicable at all levels of warfare. Operation Barbarossa helps to understand that tactical success cannot prevent strategic failure if the operational artist is not able to build the crucial cognitive bridge between tactical actions and the overall policy aim. The analysis of Operation Barbarossa reveals the crucial and unique function of operational art at the intersection of political aims and military actions. The monograph uses the methodology of a single case study presented chronologically: the planning phase (July 1940-June 1941) and the execution phase (June-December 1941). The roles and functions of the operational artist provide the three evaluation criteria for the analysis: the discourse between the policy maker and the operational artist, the military operational objectives and to what extent they support the given political objectives, and the assessment of military means. The analysis of Operation Barbarossa shows how important an open and continuous discourse between the policy maker and the operational artist is. Strategic mismanagement and over-extension as experienced by the German army in Russia always trump doctrinal innovation and tactical brilliance.
Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Operations defines operational art as "the pursuit of strategic objectives, in whole or in part, through the arrangement of tactical actions in time, space, and purpose."
1
World War II provides many valuable examples of how military leaders on both sides tried to arrange military means to achieve military objectives that were supposed to support political aims within the context of a specific conflict. The German way of warfare enabled the Wehrmacht in World War II to achieve lightning military success in Poland (1939) and in France (1940). The analysis of the planning and execution phase of Operation Barbarossa (1940-1941)   reveals the dynamic interdependencies and tensions between overarching political aims and the purposeful arrangements of military means in the face of the enemy. Furthermore, it allows the analysis of the outcome of tactical actions and the continuous need for the adaption of policy aims. Following this understanding, today's definition of operational art provides a lens to examine why the initial German tactical and operational success in the East did not translate into strategic victory.
This monograph raises the research question whether and why the German application and failure of operational art before and during Operation Barbarossa 1941 is still relevant for today's US doctrinal understanding of operational art.
Operation Barbarossa helps one to understand that tactical success cannot prevent strategic failure if the responsible military leader, the operational artist, is not able to exercise operational art as the crucial bridge between tactical actions and the overall policy aim. The analysis of the planning and the execution phases of Operation Barbarossa is therefore relevant because it reveals the crucial function of the operational artist at the intersection of political aims and military actions and thereby calls for a new emphasis within today's doctrinal understanding of operational art.
The detailed Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 3-0, Operations declares that "operational art is applicable at all levels of warfare."
2
3
This monograph uses the methodology of a single case study, Operation Barbarossa, presented chronologically. Based on the current US doctrinal understanding of operational art, the role and functions of the operational artist provide the evaluation criteria for the analysis. The planning phase (July 1940-June 1941) and the execution phase (June 1941-December 1941) of Operation Barbarossa are evaluated through these lenses. The selection of these specific timeframes focuses the analysis on important aspects of the campaign. Furthermore, the analysis of patterns that developed simultaneously as well as a changing scale, from the political down to the military operational focus and vice versa, allows for multiple perspectives and enhances the study. 
4
Derived from the doctrinal understanding of operational art, a model of the operational artist, which defines its characteristics, roles, and functions, forms the basis for the analysis of Operation Barbarossa. The operational artist directly interacts with the policy maker(s) to negotiate for the necessary military means. Within the defined policy aims for a specific theater of operations, the operational artist has the authority and responsibility to decide and order the ways in which the military means are employed. He or she defines the mission, the placement, and the rules of engagement to the tactical means. The emergent strategy and its adaption over time is a result of the continuous discourse between the policy maker and the operational artist and of the outcome of tactical engagements with the enemy. 
5
To provide facts, assessments, context, and background information about Operation Barbarossa, this monograph draws on limited primary sources and a variety of secondary sources from German and English-speaking authors. This allows for a broader judgment and enhances multiple perspectives.
Primary sources in the form of war diaries offer first-hand information and insights about the planning and the execution phase of Barbarossa. The war diary of Hitler's army aide, Major
Gerhardt Engel, provides on the one hand the perspective and the motivations of the policy maker. 
6
7
12
13
14
15
Barbarossa as a case study with the current US doctrinal understanding of operational art has received less emphasis-that is where this monograph intends to add value to the discussion.
The monograph consists of four parts. Section I outlines the guiding question and introduces the model of the operational artist as a lens that provides the criteria for the analysis.
Furthermore, it delineates the scope of the primary and secondary sources and frames the historical context of Operation Barbarossa as starting point for the analysis. Section II and III apply the defined lenses to examine the planning phase (July 1940-June 1941) and the first execution phase (June-December 1941) of Operation Barbarossa. Section IV summarizes the main conclusions and derives recommendations for today's doctrinal understanding of operational art.
The historical context in which planning and execution of Operation Barbarossa occurred creates the necessary understanding of specific actions and decisions of individuals at that time and allows an accurate and valid application of the chosen lenses for the analysis. 
16
17
16
17 Oscar Pinkus, The War Aims and Strategies of Adolf Hitler (Jefferson: McFarland & Company  Publishers, 2005), 14; Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, trans. Ralph Manheim (Boston: Houghton Mifflin  Company, 1971), 665-667.  Germany could not afford to conduct an economic war of attrition with its limited available industrial potential. Second, based on the Nazi ideology, Hitler strove for the annihilation of the inferior Bolshevik, Slavic, and Jewish races to gain and secure living space for the Pan-German Empire. Third, the geo-political situation of Germany made it clear that Hitler had to avoid a twofront war at all costs. Consequently, for the achievement of hegemony in Europe, the Soviet Union had to be overpowered in a quick and decisive manner. 
18
19
20
18
19
Glantz and House,
When Titans Clashed,
14. 20
21
22
From 1937 on, the Soviet army underwent challenging times. Stalin feared military treason and was suspicious of the army as an institution that might limit his power. Therefore, he started a purge that led to the arrest and disappearance of about fifty to sixty percent of the military officer corps. The purge decimated an entire generation of military commanders and government administrators. Especially in the years 1940-1941, that development further enhanced the arrogant and dangerous underestimation of the combat readiness of Russian forces by German military planners. 
23
24
22
23
Glantz and House,
When Titans Clashed,
9. 24
Russia. General Franz Halder, Chief of General Staff of the OKH, held the responsibility to initiate and develop the German operational planning effort in the East. 
25
Between July 1940 and June 1941, the discourse between the policy maker and the operational artist was not a continuous process and never enhanced an open-minded exchange over the necessary military means for the invasion of Russia. This is mainly the result of Hitler's ongoing indecisiveness, an increasing level of mutual distrust that led to a deteriorating personal relationship, and decreasing interaction between Hitler and Halder.
Based on Hitler's ideological mindset, military conflict with Russia was inevitable.
However, from summer 1940 to spring 1941, Hitler considered the military invasion only as one possible option besides others. Over several months, it was in fact unclear inside the OKH and to the designated AG commanders if Hitler would really start a war with the Soviet Union. On the occasion of the ordered redisposition of his headquarters to the East on August 31, 1940, General von Bock, the designated commander of AG Center, wrote in his diary that this move was "probably nothing more than to act as a scarecrow against any sort of Russian ambition." 
26
27
28
During the planning phase, the interactions between Halder and Hitler were two-fold.
Direct information briefings about the planning effort for the invasion of Russia were held only on rare occasions. In late 1940 and early 1941, other theaters of war such as Great Britain and the conflict in the Balkans demanded Hitler's attention. Of course, Hitler also indirectly interacted with Halder and influenced the planning efforts via the army commander in chief, General von Brauchitsch. Consequently, Halder had to deal with two principals.
Halder directly served von Brauchitsch within the OKH. Mutual respect and trust characterized their relationship. Daily contact and interactions allowed them to resolve occurring differences in a professional fashion. 29 However, Halder's role as Chief of General Staff of the OKH was different from that of his predecessors. Hitler's personality did not allow open discussion and dialogue. Hitler did not appreciate open criticism. He was convinced that the generals were not able to think strategically. Based on his unconditional authority, he made the decisions and used subordinates to execute his will. Hitler's dislike and distrust of generals and of the General Staff did not allow Halder to continue the traditional role of the German General Staff. Traditionally, the Chief of Staff of the OKH exercised extensive autonomy and responsibility with regard to operational questions. Quite the opposite, Hitler increasingly disregarded Halder's opinion, authority and military advice in operational questions. 
30
Rather, he worked patiently to create an operational plan that matched his own conviction without disobeying direct orders from Hitler.
31
Hitler and Halder did not agree on one coherent strategic focus of the campaign and therefore pursued deviating agendas concerning operational objectives. Both were convinced that the annihilation of the Red Army near the Russian border was important to throw the Soviet regime off balance. Hitler considered the conquest of the economic potential of the Soviet Union in the North and the South of Russia as the key to victory, while Halder perceived the seizure of the command and control hub, Moscow, as vital. In the end, the operational approach for Barbarossa reflected a risky compromise because it contained military operational objectives that did not nest with the intended policy aims in the East.
32
On July 31, 1940, Hitler gave his initial guidance concerning the planning for an assault on Russia. Motivated by political considerations about Russia's role and its impact on future British political behavior, Hitler announced that Russia's destruction should start in spring 1941.
He identified the object of Barbarossa as the destruction of Russian manpower. Furthermore, he gave guidance about his envisioned quick and decisive campaign that he estimated should not last more than five months. Based on his ideological, economic, and political considerations, Hitler   Hitler was still convinced that Germany could only cope with the Anglo-Saxon powers in the struggle for world supremacy if the Soviet economic centers and raw materials were seized by a coup-style assault. Hitler agreed with Halder's plan in general and emphasized that the destruction of the Russian forces near the border was of utmost importance. However, Hitler underlined his clear will and intent to strike with two strong prongs in the North and in the South.
Hence, he ordered that AG Center should be designed strong enough to support AG North.
Additionally, he directed the increase of the combat strength of AG South in order to destroy the Russian armies west of the Dnepr River. Hitler did not agree with Halder's assessment of the capture of Moscow as the decisive operation. Hitler clearly stated that Moscow would not be of 
37 Megargee,
Inside Hitler's High Command,
124.
38
39
40
On December 17, 1940, General Jodl, head of the Operations Divison of the Armed Forces High Command (Oberkommando der Wehrmacht -OKW), drafted Directive 21 for 
38 Halder,
Halder War Diary,
[293]
[294]
[297]
[298]
17
39
3
Halder expected that his concept would become relevant anyway soon after the start of Operation 
Barbarossa. 44
45
46
44
Hitler's High Command,
[30]
[31]
Halder,
Halder War Diary,
337. 46
47 ADP 3-0, 4.
Already during the early planning phase of Operation Barbarossa in fall of 1940, the OKH's assessment revealed that the German offensive forces would not have the advantage of numerical superiority against the Red Army. The OKH only planned with 145 German divisions, including nineteen armored divisions, for the fight against assumed 170 Soviet divisions plus ample reinforcements estimated to be stationed in western Russia. This planning factor supported Halder's early conviction that the only method of compensating for this deficiency was to define one clear main effort and to mass forces at one crucial point. 
48
On the eve of the invasion, on June 21, 1941, the final German order of battle showed that the initial planning assumptions had not fundamentally changed over time. Consequently, the set of military means for the invasion remained nearly unchanged. The total force available for the offensive operation consisted of 148 divisions, including nineteen armored. In detail, AG North under Field Marshal von Leeb assembled thirty divisions composed of three armored, three motorized infantry, twenty-one infantry, and three security divisions. Field Marshal von Bock, who commanded AG Center, had fifty-one divisions available, including nine armored, seven motorized infantry, thirty-one infantry, one cavalry, and three security divisions. The total strength of AG South under the command of Field Marshal von Rundstedt was forty-three German and fourteen Romanian divisions (five armored, three motorized infantry, twenty-six 
48
49
50
During a conference on December 5, 1940, Hitler clarified his flawed assessment of a poorly trained and inferior Red Army. He elaborated that the Russian army lacked good leadership and that material and troops were of substandard quality. 
52
[38]
[39]
[40]
Glantz and House,
When Titans Clashed,
35. 51
52
53
55
Based on the guidance of Directive 21, the Army's Operation Order (February 3, 1941)   specified the missions and objectives for the respective subordinate German Armies and Panzer Groups in detail.
The primary mission for all three AGs was to destroy the "bulk of the Russian Army stationed in western Russia by a series of daring operations spearheaded by armored thrusts." 
57
AG North was tasked to cut off and annihilate the Russian forces in the Baltic area, establish itself in the vicinity of Lake Ilmen, and subsequently capture the city of Leningrad. AG Center received the mission to encircle and destroy all Russian forces between the border and Minsk, and afterwards move on Smolensk. The intent was to conduct subsequent double envelopments with strong forces massed on both flanks. Hitler's intent, expressed in Directive 21, that AG Center would directly support AG North to annihilate Russian Forces in the Baltic area 
55
56
57
was not directly implemented in the Army Operation Order. Following Halder's own intent and his focus on Moscow, he treated that option as a contingency that would need further approval during the operation.
During a conference with the AG and army commanders on March 30, 1941, Hitler approved a change in AG South's conduct of operation. Instead of the initially ordered double envelopment, AG South was to strengthen its left with the intent to thrust quickly with mobile forces to Kiev, and successively cut off and destroy all enemy forces still in the western Ukraine.
German-Romanian forces in the south would fix the Red Army along the Romanian border in order to prevent an organized Russian withdrawal across the Dnepr River. 
58
60
61
Another important factor of the distribution of forces was the small number of decentralized reserve divisions directly assigned to the AGs. The twenty-four reserve divisions under OKH's centralized command accounted for Hitler's desire to exercise a closer control over the course of operations. Given the huge distances and the dimension of the Eastern theater of operation, the total reserves were too small to provide the ability to become effective in a timely To make things worse, Hitler and his planners at the OKH underestimated the Russian forces' capabilities and capacities. The assumptions that Russian forces would not trade space for time, would not use their vast territory to exhaust the German offensive, would not be able to mobilize a second and third strategic reserve echelon of forces, and would not be able to reallocate their industrial bases further to the East were based on a flawed assessment of the Red Army and were the result of poor German intelligence. 
63
Section III: Analysis of the Execution Phase (June-December 1941)
On June 21, 1941, the OKW released the code word Dortmund that initiated the execution of the military invasion of Russia. Subsequently, on June 22, the first units of Operation Barbarossa crossed the border to the East.
The analysis of the execution phase between June and December 1941 reveals that the initial tactical success of the German thrusts into the Soviet Union did not translate into the intended quick and decisive victory, but led to the culmination of the offensive at the gates of Moscow. Three points of failure mainly caused that strategic turning point in the campaign. First, the intensifying discourse between Hitler and Halder revived the inherent tensions of the operational approach and led to a leadership crisis with catastrophic impact on the campaign.
Second, ideologically motivated policy aims inspired Russian resilience that contradicted the intended operational approach of a quick and decisive campaign. Third, the German military 
63
From the German perspective, the outcome of the first two weeks of Operation Barbarossa appeared to be very successful. By the end of June, the thrusts of AG Center captured twenty Soviet divisions with 290,000 prisoners and 2,500 tanks in the Minsk pocket. 
64
65
67
68
69
64
65
66
67
Two major issues increasingly led to conflict between Hitler and Halder. First, Halder was a strong advocate of the leadership principle of mission command (Auftragstaktik). Hitler's direct interference in tactical questions contradicted the traditional core of the German command philosophy. Auftragstaktik was designed to empower subordinates to fulfill a given task by providing only mission and intent, but no detailed directives how to accomplish it. Preconditions for a successful application were an above-average acceptance of risk, a trusted relationship that allowed decentralized responsibility, and an appropriate education of the subordinates. 71 weeks. " Halder, Halder War Diary, 446; Hitler expressed his opinion on the same subject on July 4, 1941 and said, "for all practical purposes the enemy has lost this campaign." Quoted in DA PAM 20-261a, 45. 
70
74
72 Halder,
Halder War Diary,
506. 73
74
75 Halder,
Halder War Diary,
485.
76
77
All AG commanders supported the content of the submitted convictions. In the memorandum, Halder mentioned a variety of aspects such as weather, time, combat efficiency of armored forces, and the importance of the effects of massing forces. He recommended shifting the focus back on the primary target: Moscow. 
78
79
80
76 Bock,
War Diary,
262.
78
79
80
82
The main arguments for this position are the timely relocation of large parts of the Soviet industrial and political apparatus to the East and hence out of range of the German invaders. In a survey as of October 2, 1941, General Thomas, Chief OKW Economic Office, assessed that both the seizure of Leningrad and Moscow would not lead to Russian defeat because the German offensive did not affect the military and economic potential of the Soviet Union decisively.
Nevertheless, Halder and Hitler continuously disregarded such warnings because they did not fit their worldviews and intentions. 
83
81
82
83 Reinhardt, Moscow-The Turning Point, 99-101;
Stahel, Operation Typhoon, 304;
Bryan I. Fugate, Operation Barbarossa: Strategy and
Tactics on the Eastern Front, 1941 (Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1984), 310-315;
DA PAM 20-261a, 78-80;
Megargee, Inside Hitler's High Command, 140-141.
87
The conflict between Halder and Hitler about changing operational objectives is only one aspect that reveals points of failure based on an incoherent strategy. Furthermore, the overarching ideological policy aim impeded the intended quick and decisive victory and contradicted the chosen operational approach because it increased the resistance of the Soviet leadership, forces and populace.
Already on March 30, 1941, during his speech to the leadership of the Wehrmacht, Hitler proclaimed a war of ideologies and declared the inevitable conflict with the Soviet Union as war of annihilation. He expressed his clear intent to eradicate the Bolshevik, Slavic, and Jewish races. 
88
These types of orders changed the military operation into a war of ethnic annihilation aimed at the non-German inhabitants of the western Soviet Union. The German occupation policy deliberately intended to alienate the Russian populace. 
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
Although Germany could not stand a long lasting conflict because of its limited potential of raw materials and industrial production, Hitler and his operational planners disregarded the 
93
94
95
96
German military means proved to be insufficient to cope with a challenging operational environment and with an increasingly resistant Red Army with inexhaustible reserves. This was mainly because of an insufficient number of German reserve units, limitations in personal replacements and logistical supply, and the German infantry's inability to overcome the challenges of high tempo, vast distances, and lack of motorization.
Based on the assumption that the defeat of the Soviet Union would last only a few months, Halder failed to urge Hitler to mobilize the armament industry or increase the production for the German Army in July 1940. With the first units crossing the line of departure of Operation Barbarossa, the majority of the German military leadership was still convinced that superiority in leadership and operational experience would compensate for a potential numerical disadvantage. 
97
98
96
Barbarossa,
50;
Stahel,
Operation Typhoon,
[299]
[300]
Boog et al., Das Deutsche Reich und der Zweite Weltkrieg, 2nd ed., vol. 4, Der Angriff auf die Sowjetunion (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1983), 169, 189. 98 DA PAM 20-261a, 71-73.
100
101
102
103
99 Bock,
War Diary,
269. 100 Ibid.,
[71]
[72]
Burtt,
Barbarossa,
47. 102 Halder,
Halder War Diary,
519;
[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]
103
104
105
106
111
108
118
121
120 Halder,
Halder War Diary,
86.
122
122 Citino, Blitzkrieg to Desert Storm, 68;
Hartmann, Operation Barbarossa, 53. 123 Hartmann, Halder, 296-298;
Robert Kirchubel, Operation Barbarossa 1941 (2)
124
He could not build the crucial cognitive bridge between tactical actions and their overall purpose: the political aim. Overall, Halder had arranged insufficient military means facing an increasingly resistant Red Army and a very challenging operational environment.
Section IV: Consolidated Conclusions and Recommendations
The analysis of the planning and the execution phase of Operation Barbarossa reveals points of failure that are directly linked to the important role and the crucial function of the key operational artist, General Halder. First, a dysfunctional discourse between the policy maker and the operational artist did not enable General Halder to negotiate for the necessary military means and to exercise the full authority to decide the ways in which the military means were employed. Furthermore, the context of Hitler's rigid and authoritarian leadership style did not allow for an ongoing constructive discourse.
Second, static political objectives that did not incorporate the outcome of the ongoing campaign impeded an operational approach that aimed at a short-term victory. The execution of an ideological war of annihilation prevented the intended quick and decisive victory over the Red Army and a subsequent breakdown of the Soviet system. The divergent strategic focus on the operational objectives Leningrad, Moscow, and the Donets Basin during the planning phase did not allow developing an operational approach with a clear main effort. The inherent tensions of Directive 21 reemerged during the execution phase of Barbarossa when the Russian resistance thwarted German expectations of a quick victory. A crucial loss of time and momentum were the consequences of the leadership crisis between Hitler and the OKH in July/August 1941.
Operation Barbarossa revealed that a coherent strategy should indispensably consist of feasible operational objectives that support the overall policy aims in the conflict.
Third, overall insufficient military means with regard to overambitious friendly objectives and to an increasingly resistant Red Army led to the culmination of the German offensive and subsequently to the failure of the campaign. Halder as the operational artist did not follow the advice of Clausewitz, who warned in On War about the "culminating point of the attack." 125 His analysis revealed that without maintaining a combination of "superior strength […] both physical and moral […] the scale turns and the reaction follows with a force that is usually much stronger than that of the original attack." 
126
127
Clausewitz, On War, ed. and transl. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989), 528. 126
127
128
129
Overall, the planning and execution phases of Operation Barbarossa show how important an open and continuous discourse between the policy maker and the operational artist is. Critical thinking inheres in operational art. Strategic mismanagement and over-extension as experienced by the German army in Russia always trumps doctrinal innovation and tactical brilliance. Thus, Operation Barbarossa revealed that tactical success cannot prevent strategic failure if the operational artist cannot exercise operational art as the crucial bridge between tactical actions and the overall policy aim.
The specific historical context that shaped General Halder's actions as operational artist does not allow translating the findings of the analysis of Operation Barbarossa from 1941 to today in their entirety. However, the analysis of Operation Barbarossa through the chosen lenses 128 Dennis E. Showalter, "Prussian-German Operational Art, 1740-1943," in The Evolution of Operational Art. From Napoleon to the Present, ed. John Andreas Olsen and Martin Van Crefeld (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 55-56; Rudolf Steiger, Armour Tactics in the Second World War:  Panzer Army Campaigns of 1939-41 in German War Diaries, trans. Martin Fry (New York: Berg, 1991), 129-130; Geyer, "Germany Strategy in the Age of Machine Warfare," 587-588. is still relevant for today's understanding of operational art because it reveals the crucial function of the operational artist at the intersection of political aims and military actions and hereby calls for a new doctrinal emphasis.
US Army Doctrine Reference Publication 3-0 Operations declares that part of operational art is the "cognitive approach […] to develop strategies, campaigns, and operations to organize and employ military forces by integrating ends, ways, and means." 
130
Today's western democracies have decided to follow the primacy of politics when it comes to the employment of military force. However, that does not mean that the interaction between the policy maker and the operational artist is a one-way street. Unfortunately, US Joint Publication 5-0 Joint Operation Planning implies that operational planning occurs only after the political decision makers have completed their overall strategy including end states and objectives. Instead of expecting a coherent strategic guidance from the policy maker, operational art rather advocates an open and reciprocal civil-military discourse. 132 130 ADRP 3-0, 2-1. 
131
Naveh,
In Pursuit of Military Excellence,
[134]
[135]
In his important theory On War, Clausewitz derived a dynamic and interdependent relationship of policy and warfare. He underlined that, on one hand, the desired political end state as the original motive of war has a crucial role as the determining factor for the conduct of war.
On the other hand, Clausewitz revealed that military and political objectives are mutually interdependent and must continuously be adapted during ongoing conflicts. Clausewitz was convinced that the political leadership should take care not to ask the impossible, and closely collaborate with the senior military commanders in developing an overall policy. 
133
136
137
138
The US doctrinal declaration of ADRP 3-0 that operational art is applicable at all levels of warfare (tactical, operational, strategic) does not sufficiently reflect the specific role of the operational artist. Operational art does not apply to every formation, but in the context of conflict, the operational artist shapes an emergent strategy at the juncture of policy and military action.
Establishing the cognitive link between political aims and tactical actions and enhancing an open and reciprocal discourse with the policy maker are his or her two most important functions that are currently not emphasized strongly enough in US Joint and Army doctrine. In fact, "the pursuit of strategic objectives through the arrangement of tactical actions in time, space, and purpose" 139 does not reflect the core function of operational art. This kind of tactical art or art of operations should truly happen at all echelons of military planning. However, the term operational art should be reserved to its unique function as cognitive link at the intersection and the discourse between the policy maker and the operational artist.
The analysis of Operation Barbarossa as a historical case study helps to develop a better understanding of operational art today. Future studies might focus on the limitations and opportunities of the operational artist in exercising his or her crucial role at the seam between politics and tactics in current and future conflicts. Furthermore, one might analyze to what extent the current US Joint and Army doctrine needs to be adapted and harmonized to reflect the existing reality of emergent strategies as a result of the ongoing civil-military discourse.
Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office,
2016), 4.
Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP)
3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2016), 2-1. 3 G. Stephen Lauer, "The Tao of Doctrine: Contesting an Art of Operations," Joint Force Quarterly, no. 82 (3rd Quarter 2016): 122. 4 John Lewis Gaddis, The Landscape of History (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 22-26.
Lauer, "The Tao of Doctrine,[120][121][122] 
Gerhard Engel, Heeresadjutant bei Hitler 1938-1943. Aufzeichnungen des Major Engels, ed.  Hildegard von Kotze (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1974).
Franz Halder, The Halder War Diary, 1939-1942, ed. Charles Burdick and Hans-Adolf Jacobsen  (Novato, CA: Presidio Pr, 1988).
Fedor von Bock, Generalfeldmarschal Fedor von Bock: The War Diary 1939-1945, ed. Klaus  Gebert, trans. David Johnston (Atglen, PA: Schiffer Military History, 1996).
Klaus Reinhardt, Moscow-The Turning Point:  the Failure ofHitler's Strategy in the Winter of  1941-42, English ed. (Oxford: Bloomsbury Academic, 1992).
Christian Hartmann, Operation Barbarossa: Nazi Germany's War in the East, 1941-1945  (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2013).
Christian Hartmann, Halder: Generalstabschef Hitlers 1938-1942 (Paderborn: Ferdinand   
Gerhard P. Groß, Mythos und Wirklichkeit: Geschichte des operativen Denkens im deutschen Heer vonMoltke d.Ä. bis Heusinger (Paderborn: Ferdinand Schöningh GmbH, 2012), 255.    
Bock, War Diary, 189.   
Bob Carruthers and John Erickson, The Russian Front 1941-1945 (New York: Sterling  Publishing, 1999), 5.    
Engel, Heeresadjutant bei Hitler,
92;
Halder, Halder War Diary, 1-3; Samuel W. Mitcham, Hitler's Field Marshals and Their Battles  (London: Leo Cooper Ltd, 1988), 66-69.   
Geoffrey P. Megargee, Inside Hitler's High Command (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2000), 130-135.
Ibid.    
Geyer, "Germany Strategy in the Age of Machine Warfare," 588.
Pinkus, War Aims and Strategies of Hitler,[169][170][171][172][173][174][175] Halder, Halder War Diary,[244][245][5][6] 
The Tripartite Pact was an agreement between Germany, Japan and Italy signed on September27, 1940. Halder, Halder War Diary, 268-269.   
 6.   
Megargee, Inside Hitler's High Command, 139-141; Groß, Mythos und Wirklichkeit, 256-257;  James Steiner, Hitler's Wehrmacht: German Armed Forces in Support of the Führer (Jefferson, NC:  McFarland, 2008),90-93.    
Walter Görlitz, Kleine Geschichte Des Deutschen Generalstabes, 2nd ed. (Berlin: Haude &  Spenersche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1977), 387; Stephen G. Fritz, Ostkrieg: Hitler's War of Extermination in the East (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2011), 66-67.
Martin Van Crefeld, Supplying War: Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986), 163-169.
Current US doctrine defines operational reach as follows: "Operational reach reflects the ability to achieve success through a well-conceived operational approach. Operational reach is a tether; it is a function of intelligence, protection, sustainment, endurance, and relative combat power. The limit of a unit's operational reach is its culminating point." ADRP 3-0, 2-9.
Current US doctrine defines risk as follows: "Risk is the probability and severity of loss linked to hazards.[…] Understanding risk requires assessments coupled with boldness and imagination. Successful commanders assess and mitigate risk continuously throughout the operations process." ADRP 3-0, 2-10.
Burtt, Barbarossa, 38; 47; Stahel, Operation Typhoon,[25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36] 
Citino, The German Way of War, 297; Hartmann, Operation Barbarossa, 51; Hartmann,  Halder, 288.    
Stahel, Operation Typhoon, 25.   
The current US doctrine defines culmination as follows: "The culminating point is a point at which a force no longer has the capability to continue its form of operations.[…] While conducting offensive tasks, the culminating point occurs when the force cannot continue the attack and must assume a defensive posture or execute an operational pause." ADRP 3-0, 2-9.
Bock, War Diary, 376.   
Helmuth von Moltke, Moltke On the Art of War: Selected Writings, ed. Daniel J. Hughes, trans. Daniel J. Hughes and Harry Bell (Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1993), 45.
Lauer, "The Tao of Doctrine," 122.
Hew Strachan, "A Clausewitz for Every Season," American Interest, no.2 (2007): 33, accessed December 1, 2016, http://www.the-american-interest.com/2007/07/01/a-clausewitz-for-every-season/; Gaetke, "The Myth of Strategic Guidance," 46.
Lawrence Freedman, Strategy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013), 555; Henry Mintzberg, The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning (New York: The Free Press, 1994), 24-25.
Richard K. Betts, "Is Strategy an Illusion?," International Security 25, no. 2 (Fall 2000): 39, accessed November 22, 2016, http://www.jstor.org/stable/2626752.
ADRP 3-0, 2-1.
SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 8. PERFORMING ORG REPORT NUMBER 9
SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) Advanced Operational Arts Studies Fellowship
Advanced Military Studies Program. 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release
DA PAM Department of the Army Pamphlet JP Joint Publication km Kilometer OKH Oberkommando des Heeres (Army High Command) OKW Oberkommando der Wehrmacht
battle-centric approach to strategic thinking shaped Halder's attitude. He overly focused his attention on purely operational questions without tying back to the overall strategy. Based on this setting, a fruitful and constructive discourse was doomed to failure. 
84
85
Based on his distrust of his generals and his lack of operational understanding, Hitler compelled his subordinate commanders to defend the front "down to the last man. 84 Reinhard Stumpf, Die Wehrmacht-Elite: Rang-und Herkunftsstruktur der Deutschen Generale  und Admirale 1933-1945 (Boppard am Rhein: Boldt, 1982), 303-308; Hew Strachan, The Direction of War: Contemporary Strategy in Historic Perspective (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 37-39. 
85
86
Furthermore, the sequence of those events shows how Hitler overruled the institution of the OKH and thereby made the operational artist, Halder, obsolete. 