# ID: c31e78b9056b4d1689ecacf8626180ec
# Title: The Arctic Through 2035: An Overview of the Operational Environment and Competitor Strategies for US Army Training, Doctrine, and Capabilities Development
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The Arctic is a national security interest for the United States. The Department of Defense's (DoD's) desired end state in the region, as expressed in the 2019 DoD Arctic Strategy, is "a secure and stable region in which U.S. national security interests are safeguarded, the U.S. homeland is defended, and nations work cooperatively to address shared challenges." This includes the objectives of defending the homeland, competing to maintain balance of power, and ensuring freedom of the global commons. DoD's strategy includes building Arctic awareness, enhancing Arctic operations, and strengthening the rules-based order in the Arctic. The U.S. Army and the U.S. Army National Guard. These Army tasks complement sister Service missions and the directed roles of global combatant commanders across all warfighting functions.
In 2016, the Army published an Army techniques publication on mountain warfare and cold-weather operations. That document emphasizes and capitalizes on the Army's recent experience at high-altitude operations. Arctic-specific operations, however, receive minimal attention.
This assessment is therefore intended to add to that body knowledge by describing the Arctic region and associated competitor activities. This information can then be used for Army training, doctrine, and capabilities development.
The Arctic is a unique region of growing strategic importance. The dynamic and extreme Arctic environment and advantageous positioning of competitors will pose significant challenges for U.S. Army components to overcome to ensure land dominance and successfully complete their missions in support of the Joint Force. This report provides an overview of the Arctic as an operational environment (OE) from the present through 2035, identifies OE implications for the U.S. Army in multi-domain operations (MDO) and across warfighting functions, and discusses competitor approaches to exploiting the Arctic.
The Arctic includes all areas north of the Arctic Circle as well as western Alaska and contiguous seas of the Arctic Ocean (see figure 
1
If a conflict does occur in the Arctic, actors will have to contend with challenges across all domains. Space support will face degraded availability and quality of satellite systems because of the unique electromagnetic environment. Cyberspace operations will have to be conducted in environments ranging from advanced, networked urban areas to remote, isolated communities with poor infrastructure. Air operations will require additional support, specialized equipment, and extra training. Seas dominate the region, but are often inaccessible. The terrestrial environment is characterized by all manner of climatological and geological extremes. The Arctic also impacts all warfighting functions. Command and control will be characterized by unreliable communications and dispersion of forces. Movement and maneuver, along with sustainment, will be slow, difficult, and require purpose-built equipment. Space and air domain challenges will degrade availability and quality of intelligence compared to operations in lower latitudes. Similarly, fires will often be less precise because of unique position, navigation, and timing challenges. Increased vulnerabilities associated with Arctic operations will magnify protection requirements.
The two most capable U.S. competitors, Russia and China, have strategic interests and are active in the region. Russia is by far the most capable Arctic competitor, viewing the Arctic as critical to its overall national defense strategy. Consequently, the country is actively preparing its military forces to operate there, while simultaneously working to secure and exploit the region's untapped resources. Russia hopes to control enough Arctic resources, particularly energy resources, to ensure national economic stability and growth while controlling all shipping near its coastline and maintaining sufficient military power to deter any aggressors crossing the Arctic. China's Arctic ambitions and operational reach remain predominantly aspirational, but they are growing, and the country is attempting to stake claims and legitimize increasing influence in the region. China will continue to covet Arctic resources, working through economic investment and partnerships in the near future, with the long-term goal of operating in and exploiting the resources of the Arctic at a level comparable to some Arctic nations.
The Arctic is an extreme and dynamic region. It is increasingly receiving attention from global and regional powers for its natural resources, its utility as a sea line of communications connecting Europe, North America, and Asia, and its political/military advantages. As a result, it is rapidly becoming a new theater of great-power competition. Russia has been attempting to expand its exclusive economic zones in the region and is conducting enforcement operations with internationally unrecognized authority in Arctic Seas. The Russian military has also been improving its capabilities to operate in the Arctic. Similarly, China, coveting Arctic shipping routes and potential resources, has been attempting to legitimize potential future Arctic claims by describing itself as a "near-Arctic" power.
If called upon to conduct unified land operations as a component of the Joint Force in the Arctic, U.S. Army formations will need to understand the Arctic OE. This will include competitor capabilities, capacities, and intents in the Arctic, and unique challenges the Arctic poses to multi-domain operations.
This assessment informs U.S. Army doctrine writers, trainers, concepts and capabilities developers, and senior leaders about characteristics of the OE variables in the geographic space of the Arctic, including analysis of the actors that operate there. It also highlights challenges the Army will need to overcome to organize, man, train, and equip an Army capable of fighting and winning in that environment. This assessment complements previous TRADOC G2 OE assessments. • It discusses how adversaries could exploit the OE to their benefit and/or to the detriment of the U.S. and its allies.
This assessment opens with a summary of predominant definitions of the Arctic. It then provides an overview of the OE variables in the Arctic and forecasts their likely evolution through 2035, based on current trends. The assessment then summarizes challenges for multi-domain operations in the Arctic and presents likely implications of OE conditions upon warfighting functions. It provides an analysis of U.S. competitor interests, policies, and postures in the Arctic, as well as the implications thereof, which helps set the geostrategic context of the Arctic now and out to 2035.
The Arctic is a distinct geographic region where the OE variables interact and where the U.S. military could be called upon to operate. As one of the shortest routes between the land masses of northern Europe, Asia, and North America, the Arctic is a region with both economic and military global strategic implications. Moreover, with the reduction of polar sea ice and the resulting increased navigability of and access to this OE, along with the discovery of potential natural resources, interest in the Arctic by global competitors is increasing.  Various international governmental, intergovernmental, and nongovernmental bodies depart from a strictly latitudinal definition, depending upon their interests, capabilities, and functions. For example, the Arctic can be defined based upon the 10° isotherm, which includes all northern hemispheric areas with a July mean temperature below 10 °C (50 °F); the presence of permafrost; or the tree line, which includes all land north of the boreal forest limit in Europe and North America. 
4
The most influential international Arctic body is the Arctic Council, of which the U.S., Russia, and all other countries with Arctic territory are members. It uses a definition that is a compromise between the various definitions and allows it to address numerous issues
germane to the organization, ranging from environmental research to international trade. This definition includes all areas north of the Arctic Circle, extended to include Asian areas north of 62 °N and North American areas north of 60 °N. It also includes Hudson Bay, seas north of the Aleutian Islands, and parts of the North Atlantic Ocean and Labrador Sea. 
5
6
None of the OE variables in the Arctic exist in isolation. The physical environment predominates and influences all other variables and, in many ways, has a more discernable impact on the OE than it does in many other regions. It drives time and in turn is driven by time as the Earth's axial tilt, rotation, and orbit extend winter nights and summer days. The duration of solar radiation exposure, ocean currents, and the interaction of land and sea are the principle causes of Arctic climate extremes, which determine the accessibility of regional economic resources. The physical environment and location of resources shaped how communities developed, while the population centers directly influence the presence and extent of infrastructure and communications interconnectivity. Access to Arctic sea routes has historically been the most influential economic factor on international Arctic politics, although increased accessibility of natural resources is growing in importance. These political interests, combined with the physical terrain, have shaped the emplacement of military forces and conduct of military operations.
Arctic political conditions are heavily influenced by the economic and social environments, which are themselves shaped by the physical environment. The region crosses numerous international jurisdictions, exclusive economic zones, national and international indigenous territories, and global commons. There is no single political body responsible for the entire region, although there are multiple permanent and ad hoc intergovernmental associations. Most of these organizations are dedicated to science, environmental management, and safety. Some non-Arctic countries also maintain a presence for scientific and environmental research as well as to support their Arctic partners.
Additionally, the global competition between great powers manifests in the Arctic, with the primary U.S. competitor being Russia-although China is interested in increasing its presence. There are territorial disputes among various Arctic nations; these are stable at present, but could be associated with increasing tension in the future.
The most active intergovernmental associations in the Arctic are the Arctic Council, the Barents Euro-Arctic Council, and the Arctic Five. Participation in these organizations is determined by the presence of national boundaries in the Arctic region. Eight countries-Canada, Denmark (including Greenland), Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden, and the United States-have Arctic territory, while five countries (Canada, Denmark
[Greenland], Norway, Russia, and the U.S.) have Arctic Ocean coastline. Of note, Russia has the most expansive Arctic territory of any of these countries. 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
The principal international disputes are associated with territorial and maritime boundaries, continental shelves, and the economic rights associated with these claims. These include disputes between the U.S. and Canada, Canada and Denmark, Canada and Russia, Norway and Denmark, and Norway and Russia-though Russia and Norway signed a maritime boundary agreement in 2010. As of 2020, all parties were working cooperatively or through international legal channels for resolution. 
16
The military posture of Arctic nations reflects global and regional political dynamics and is also influenced by the climate and distribution of population centers and economic resources. Military activities center on search and rescue, sovereignty claims assertion, natural resource protection, and global competition. Of these, global competition is the predominant theme and occurs primarily between Russia and North Atlantic Treaty organization (NATO) members.
Russia maintains the largest military presence in the OE. Among U.S. RUSSIA. Russia is the only U.S. competitor with a permanent military presence in the Arctic. Russian Arctic military activity is part of a long-term strategy influenced by global rather than regional affairs, in which the Arctic is disproportionately emphasized compared to other Russian regional national security interests. Russia is actively preparing for conflict in the Arctic. 
19
• Maintaining strategic balance with nuclear forces (the preponderance of which are Arctic based), • Employing conventional power in the Barents region, and • Securing the NSR, particularly in the eastern littorals. 
20
21
CANADA. Canada is second only to Russia in Arctic territory and interests, approaching Arctic sovereignty and territorial issues unilaterally but diplomatically. Canada also takes a bilateral cooperative approach to hemispheric security, working with the U.S. for aerospace defense. Canada has been supporting NATO missions globally, but is reluctant to involve NATO in Arctic affairs because of concerns over sovereignty and possible provocation of Russia. 
22
23
24
25
26
Denmark's Arctic Command oversees Greenland and the Faroe Islands and is headquartered in Nuuk, Greenland. Its missions include exercise of sovereignty, search and rescue operations, marine environmental protection, and support to civilian authorities. Permanently assigned forces include personnel at Station Nord in northeastern Greenland, an air group at Kangerlussuaq in western Greenland, a home guard at Mestersvig in eastern Greenland, and a liaison unit at Thule in northwestern Greenland. 
27
Iceland has no military forces and little need or capability for territorial defense.
NATO allies assume responsibility for Iceland's defense and periodically conduct exercises in the country. 
28
29
Norway is the most proactive and robust European NATO ally in the Arctic, although its military strength is small when compared individually to Russia, which represents the country's only potential existential threat. 
30
31
32
33
34
35
The missions of the Finnish military are national defense, support to civil authorities, and support to international military crisis management. Finnish military power is based upon a reserve force with universal male conscription. It includes 8,000 regular military cadre, 21,000 conscripts, and 18,000 reservists, who are trained annually. Veterans continue service in the reserves. 
36
37
38
39
The missions of the Swedish armed forces are territorial sovereignty and defense, and support to civil authorities during disaster. Its military also deploys in support of international peacekeeping, but Sweden pursues a general policy of neutrality. Forces consist of 22,000 active and 34,000 reserve personnel, drawn from a mix of volunteers and conscripts. The army has 8 maneuver battalions with 19 support battalions. The home guard includes 22,000 reservists. The air force has three JAS 39C/D fighter wings. Naval forces include surveillance vessels, small surface combatants, submarines, and minesweepers. A ranger battalion, a combined arms regiment, an artillery regiment, and a fighter wing are assigned to northern Sweden. 
40
FORECAST AND IMPLICATIONS: Russia will have the largest and most capable specialized Arctic military forces and technology through 2035. European Arctic militaries are modernizing and improving their Arctic capabilities and interoperability in response to perceived Russian aggressiveness in areas such as Ukraine and Georgia. As long as European countries perceive Russia as aggressive, this can be expected to continue. However, European responses are unlikely to match-let alone achieve overmatch with-Russian forces in the region, as Russian investment in Arctic military capability outpaces all others. Although there are no indications the current framework of alliances and partnerships will change structurally, international military cooperation will likely continue to increase. Russia's military activity will continue to grow, with Arctic forces prioritizing maintenance of credible deterrence through Barents Sea area-based nuclear forces, defense of the Kola Peninsula and the Barents Sea region, and protection of increased Arctic economic activity. Russian forces already are increasing their presence and military infrastructure to ensure security of the NSR, and will likely continue to expand this presence as international shipping activity-and therefore revenue for Russia-continue to grow.
The Arctic economy is small compared to other regions of the world, because of low population and historic inaccessibility caused by the extremes of the physical environment. The principal economic activity is natural resource exploitation, and the Arctic Five nations have asserted the right to regulate economic activity even in international waters. The region has abundant untapped mineral wealth, including gold, lead, silver, zinc, copper, iron, nickel, diamonds, rare earth metals, and uranium, among others. 
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
As a consequence of environmental extremes, the Arctic population is small, dispersed, and isolated compared to the populations of other geographic regions. 
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
The information environment in the Arctic varies significantly with infrastructure, population centers, and political systems, which are themselves influenced by the physical environment and availability of economic resources. Consequently, the Western European Arctic is comparatively advanced compared to the more isolated North American Arctic and the strictly controlled as well as isolated Asian Arctic. In Scandinavia, even the most rural communities are connected to global networks. Television is the primary information medium in Russia. North American Arctic areas have access to all media, but connectivity is slow and expensive.
Denmark (including Greenland), Finland, Norway, and Sweden are within the top five countries for press freedom, and Canada ranks within the top twenty, according to Reporters without Borders. 
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
The remote, extreme environment shapes Arctic infrastructure, resulting in significant regional variations. Infrastructure follows population clusters and economic activity as in any other region; however, in the Arctic it is more difficult and expensive to build and maintain.
The Arctic climate increases demand and cost of electricity-often requiring communities to generate electricity locally-and reduces the practicality and ability to use other forms of energy. 
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
Infrastructure development investment will continue to grow in proportion to Arctic accessibility, resource potential, and political interest. In the short term, maritime port infrastructure will grow fastest of all sectors, with mineral resource extraction growing only as access improves. Development along the NSR will outpace development along the NWP because of preexisting infrastructure and accessibility. Costs to maintain and repair infrastructure will increase as permafrost melting continues, weakening and undermining existing structures. The northernmost communities will experience the most severe impact. This degradation will result in gradual but significant investment requirements. Russia, which has the largest Arctic population and more Arctic territory than all other countries combined, will experience the greatest economic impact. Diversion of resources to populated areas may slow the development of infrastructure between isolated communities. The comparatively mild climate of the European Arctic ensures that by 2035 it will remain more connected and developed than Asian or North American Arctic areas.
The Arctic OE is a unique physical environment that poses its own challenges. Maritime and land areas have conditions not present in other regions of the world. The climate is extreme. The electromagnetic and space environments have accentuated effects.
The Arctic is predominantly a maritime environment. Major bodies of water include the Arctic Ocean, the Chukchi Sea, the East Siberian Sea, the Laptev Sea, the Kara Sea, the Barents Sea, the Greenland Sea, the Beaufort Sea, the Bering Sea, and Baffin Bay. 
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
The combined result is a physical environment that has greater influence over other OE variables than is often encountered in lower latitudes. Some physical environment effects, such as climate, vary in amplitude between subregions. Other effects, such as day length and electromagnetic interference, remain consistent longitudinally but will vary with latitude. FORECAST AND IMPLICATIONS: Ice islands and icebergs will continue to be maritime hazards for the foreseeable future and Arctic shipping will remain seasonal through at least 2035. Although permafrost recession represents a future challenge, particularly in Russia, it is unclear if this will manifest significantly in the near future. Boreal forests will advance northward slightly but overall tundra will continue to predominate, with poor drainage in lowlands. Space support will remain challenging because of lack of geostationary satellite coverage, elevated charged particle levels, and extended periods of darkness.
The Arctic is a unique temporal region because of the combined effects of international conventions on times and dates as well as the axial tilt of the Earth itself. This variable results in physical, cognitive, and affective impacts on individual persons. It has also shaped the development of culture throughout the region. Time zones become less meaningful closer to the geographic North Pole, where all lines of longitude converge; by convention, Greenwich Mean Time (Zulu time) is used at the pole itself. Russia's Arctic regions span seven time zones; Greenland's and Canada's Arctic regions each span four. Arctic daylight hours are also exaggerated compared to lower latitudes. The sun does not rise at all near the winter solstice, with daylight limited to protracted periods of twilight, and does not completely set near the summer solstice.
The effect of this phenomenon is that measured time is dissociated from immediate perception. The long periods of darkness in winter and daylight in summer are associated with sleep disruption for personnel assigned to high latitudes. The extended periods of darkness in particular have deleterious effects on physical and psychological health and personnel performance. 
98
99
The Arctic will always remain a unique temporal region and its impacts will always affect forces operating in high latitudes. The Arctic crosses all time zones and multiple geographic combatant commands, operational forces cannot expect to have ideal contemporaneous battle rhythm with parent commands. Compared to other parts of the world, formations can expect to experience decreased efficiencies and elevated incidences of injury and illness, particularly during winter. Integrated planning and coordination with indigenous partner forces and local civil authorities may be challenging because of perceptions of expectations and communication of time.
As a direct result of the physical environment, the Arctic is changing rapidly but predictably. Population growth and infrastructure development will continue to be tied to economic activity. This will certainly include Russian ports and maritime facilities along the NSR, as Arctic shipping routes will see more volume and longer seasons as sea ice retreats. It will also likely include the areas most accessible for fossil fuel exploitation, although the rate of growth will be tied to global energy prices. Arctic countries will continue to be the largest investors. As resource exploitation becomes more lucrative, non-Arctic countries will increasingly conduct research and posture for future claims in international waters.
Security of economic resources will remain the principle driver of military activity for all parties, especially Russia, although the Arctic will continue to be used for global strategic military activities, such as deterrence. The overall governance of the Arctic will not change significantly. Some progress may be made in resolving international maritime claims and there will likely be growth in the number of interested parties commensurate with economic resource availability. Even remote Arctic areas will become increasingly interconnected to global telecommunications networks, particularly in areas with increased natural resource exploitation. Nevertheless, access will remain more expensive and less reliable than the rest of the world because of geographic constraints.
Barring an unexpected change in its domestic politics or economics, Russia will be the dominant Arctic power and U.S. competitor through 2035. It is unlikely that even combined efforts by the remaining Arctic actors will reach or surpass Russian levels of capability and capacity in the region. China's presence will continue to grow in the Arctic, primarily through investment in infrastructure associated with the Polar Silk Road and global communications. It is unlikely that China will conduct significant energy resource mining by 2035, although Chinese Arctic scientific research endeavors will likely grow in areas associated with fuel and mineral resources, as well as shipping routes.
Black swans are by definition unpredictable, but there are possible, though less likely, events that could lead to sudden changes in Arctic trends. New discoveries of resources or technology, such as robotics, which drastically change the accessibility or value of Arctic resources would accelerate international interest in the region. A rapid but enduring shift in global energy prices will also directly impact interest in Arctic resources. An unexpected change in the rate of global warming in the Arctic could also alter the tempo of international activity. A rapid cultural or political shift in one of the Arctic countries or alliances, e.g., a partner leaving NATO or a significant regime change in Russia, could decrease stability in the region.
The Arctic OE's uniqueness manifests in all warfighting domains. The availability and quality of space support is degraded. The cyberspace environment varies significantly depending upon locale. Air operations require additional support, specialized equipment, and augmented training. Seas dominate the region, but are generally unavailable. The terrestrial environment is characterized by all manner of climatological and geological extremes.
The Arctic poses a challenging OE for space support to military operations.
Geostationary weather and communications satellites neither provide coverage nor supplement low Earth orbit platforms. Long periods of darkness in winter and the variable albedo of snow and ice limit the capabilities of optical overhead imaging platforms. The Arctic is susceptible to greater atmospheric electromagnetic interference than lower latitudes, multiplying, extending, and exacerbating outages of all wireless communications. Position, navigation, and timing satellites also have degraded performance.
Cyberspace operations conducted in the Arctic will have to cope with comparatively poor quality communications infrastructure and dispersed, isolated population centers in all areas except the Western European Arctic. Cyberspace operations will require extensive reliance upon space assets and, in some cases, competitors' communications infrastructure. This could, in turn, affect the security of military information networks and complicate extending, maintaining, and sustaining networks. Offensive operations will have to account for disparate information regimes. The combined effects of extreme climate and isolated population centers means that cyberspace operations against infrastructure and services that would be disruptive in other regions could be lethal in the Arctic.
Air operations require cold-weather operational capability. With the exception of global strike assets, aircraft would have to be sea based or forward positioned in multiple partner nation territories; these countries would have varying ability and will to sustain air operations. Long periods of darkness in winter months will require ubiquitous night-vision capability for much of the year. Emplacements for ground-based radar are few and geographically dispersed because of limited infrastructure and the cold, predominantly maritime environment.
Maritime movement and sustainment will be restricted to a few months during the warmest times of the year. Even then, icebreakers may be required due to floating ice and unpredictable ice sheet variations. Regardless of country, sea basing for air and amphibious forces, local sea control, maritime sustainment, and maritime support to land forces will require ice-class ships and icebreaker escorts even during summer months in thin-ice waters. Year-round operations will only be possible for ships with the highest iceclass ratings available.
Arctic land operations require the capability to operate on diverse, extremely varied terrain that is dissimilar to the cold-weather mountain environments in which the U.S. has extensive recent experience. Operations require significant time and resources dedicated to survival and sustainment. Geographically dispersed population concentrations necessitate long sustainment lines and the ability to transition rapidly from operations in remote, rural areas to dense, urban areas.
The unique complexities of the Arctic OE across all domains will challenge the U.S. Army in each of the warfighting functions. In an Arctic conflict, forces would have to operate with degraded situational awareness, precision, and communications than are available in present-day contingency operations on more familiar terrain. Forces will have to traverse long distances across difficult terrain in hazardous conditions and conduct amphibious operations in remote locations. More effort will be devoted to survival rather than decisive action.
Command and control in Arctic operations will be characterized by unreliable communications and dispersion of forces, which will challenge maintaining a common operational picture, developing shared understanding, and expressing commander's intent. Interoperability and capacity challenges with partner forces, along with decreased precision and availability of supporting fires due to environmental factors as much as enemy disruption, will challenge building mutual trust. Disproportional expenditure of energy on survival will limit the force's ability to exercise initiative and accept risk. This will directly affect the tempo of combat, resulting in episodic battles and slow movement. Additionally, commanders will have to account for environmental hazards that are as lethal as-or more lethal than-enemy action.
Movement and maneuver will be slow, difficult, and require purpose-built equipment for success in the Arctic. Winter operations will require the ability to move and maneuver across snow and ice in the coldest conditions during long periods of darkness. Roads may be completely snow-covered during much of the year. Conversely, summer operations will require traversing ubiquitous lakes and peat bogs as well as varied, mountainous terrain. Summer operations will frequently have to be conducted without cover of darkness. Satellite navigation will be imprecise and unreliable at best and nonexistent in some cases. As a result, formations using nonspecialized equipment will have slow movement and limited ability to maneuver.
Effects of the Arctic environment will result in degraded intelligence compared to operations in lower latitudes. Limited satellite availability and communications interference will require organic resources for overhead informationgathering functions and will reduce the availability of cloud-based systems and analytic reach-back support. Lack of persistent, broad-area satellite coverage will decrease precision of weather forecasting, particularly long-range forecasts. Satellite mapping will require active sensor systems to offset the limitations of electro-optical systems in snowcovered terrain. There will likely be shortages of reliable interpreters and translators, particularly when conducting stability operations with indigenous circumpolar and crossborder peoples, who represent a disproportionately higher number of dispossessed communities.
Fires in Arctic operations will often be less precise than other places because of degraded electromagnetic communications and position, navigation, and timing satellite support. Sea-based tactical air support would be limited to summer months, if available at all. Lack of information infrastructure means nonlethal fires would have limited reach outside of Western European Arctic theaters. These conditions will make fires less effective and increase expenditures to achieve the desired effects.
SUSTAINMENT. Sustainment will be one of the biggest challenges in Arctic operations.
Much like movement and maneuver, sustainment will require purpose-built equipment to contend with the harsh conditions. Moreover, transportation will have to account for the unavailability of maritime support, long sustainment lines, and protracted operational timeframes. Logistics will have to account for increased fuel requirements and specialized materiel requirements across all classes of supply, and the challenging terrain will require additional maintenance support to equipment.
The Arctic OE will require robust protection measures to preserve the effectiveness and survivability of friendly forces, not only against adversaries but against the extreme environment, which will affect survivability as much as the enemy. Disruption of sustainment, even for a short period, can significantly degrade readiness and effectiveness of Arctic forces, particular during winter months.
Russia and China are the only U.S. competitors actively involved in the Arctic. Russia has the preponderance of Arctic interests by far, and is working to improve its already significant Arctic capabilities. These are primarily focused on protecting growing economic interests in the Russian Arctic rather than projecting power, except in its near abroad, which consists of former Soviet countries on the Russian periphery. There are no indications that this will change significantly by 2035. Conversely, China has a much smaller Arctic footprint but is actively working to establish itself as a major Arctic player. Like Russia, Chinese Arctic ambitions are primarily economic, although both countries will use all instruments of national power to seize opportunities that may emerge in the region to challenge U.S. global leadership. At present, this manifests in diplomatic, information, and economic power. By 2035, increased military presence by both countries can be expected. Russia and China are also willing to work together in the Arctic, as evinced by references to the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) in their respective national security and defense policies.
Russia will be confronting diverse strategic challenges in the near future. The country's projected economic growth will be challenged by unreliable global energy prices, international pressure, and probable domestic political instability. 101 Additionally, Russia is facing demographic decline, with uncertain implications for its economic and military power. It perceives significant threats to include NATO expansion, growing U.S. influence in its near abroad, improved U.S. global strike and ballistic missile defense capabilities, and destabilization near Russian territory. 102 Russia's policies toward the Arctic-in particular its claims and efforts to develop and exploit energy resources-indicate that it will rely upon Arctic resources to mitigate the country's strategic challenges.
Many of these global challenges converge in the Arctic. 
103
104
105
106
Russian national policy nests the Arctic within a broader global strategy, but it is disproportionately emphasized compared to other regions. 
107
According to Russia's 2016 Foreign Policy Concept, the country's stated Arctic policy is "aimed at preserving peace, stability and constructive international cooperation in the Arctic." 
109
110
Russia's 2015 National Maritime Doctrine addresses the Arctic more extensively than either of the preceding two documents. It identifies Russian Arctic policy drivers as-
• Ensuring Russian fleet access to the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
• Natural resources in the exclusive economic zone and continental shelf.
• Growth of the NSR.
• The Northern Fleet mission to defend Russia. 
111
112
Russia's Arctic posture aligns with these interests and strategy and suggests both intent and growing capability to use the OE variables unique to the Arctic to gain advantage. Russian military activity in the Arctic will play a prominent role in its overarching global strategy. 
114
115
Russia is working to establish information dominance in order to provide increased situational awareness, communications, and targeting for the military and to facilitate narrative control over Arctic rights and exclusivity. Physical measures include expanding Arctic satellite coverage, with an additional 12 Earth-imaging satellites planned to be in orbit by 2030. Improved satellite coverage will have dual applications for both military and civilian purposes. 
117
118
• Upgraded air defense.
• Improved vehicle capabilities.
• Enhanced drone and robotics technology for Arctic operations.
• Upgraded air and missile defense.
• Extensive training of forces to operate in the region. 
119
120
122
123
124
125
126
China's guiding national strategic interest is to preserve Communist party rule. 
127
130
131
133
134
135
136
China has been employing its instruments of national power to advance its strategic and military posture in the Arctic. Unable to become a member of the Arctic Council without having Arctic territory, China has managed to gain observer status. 
138
139
140
142
The intertwined dynamic forces of climate change and economic development shape the Arctic OE. As the Arctic continues to thaw, it will become increasingly accessible and lucrative. Shipping seasons will lengthen and resource exploitation will become more feasible, while loss of permafrost will undermine the strength and capacity of current infrastructure. The result will be growing activity in the Arctic by state and nonstate entities, which in turn will lead to increased investment in Arctic infrastructure. These changes will affect all OE variables. As interest in the Arctic grows, U.S. competitors could use disputes between allies over Arctic claims to exploit and foment division. Disputes over the Arctic could exacerbate strained relationships in competition and, in a worst case scenario, be a contributing factor to conflict.
Conflict over the Arctic is unlikely, but conflict in the Arctic is possible because it represents a significant theater in a broader great-power conflict. The most dangerous potential threat to the U.S. and its allies remains Russia's ballistic missiles-including nuclear weapons-which are based in the Arctic and would likely transit it in the event of a large-scale conflict. If such a conflict were to occur, a large-scale ground component in Scandinavia would also seem likely, as this is the shortest route to Russia's strategic Kola Peninsula. Additionally, there are potential naval and amphibious operations, particularly in the strategic maritime chokepoints of the Bering Sea or the Barents Sea Opening. China cannot compete militarily in the Arctic at present. However, Chinese ballistic missile submarine patrols in the Arctic could become a reality by 2035.
Throughout this forecast period, Russia will be a dominant force and will continue to be the U.S. competitor with the largest Arctic presence. The country's comparatively robust Arctic posture will ensure it maintains a greater presence in Arctic international affairs than any other individual country and, frequently, a louder voice than all other countries combined. Russia will be better situated to exploit the Arctic's increasingly lucrative resources and intends to do so.
Russia is presently capable of threatening NATO and other allies and partners in the Arctic across all warfighting domains; it will still have and will likely have improved this capability by 2035. The country is particularly interested in securing its near abroad, only a small part of which is in the Arctic. A lower-scale or irregular conflict involving Scandinavia is the most likely potential conflict scenario. The patchwork partnerships and alliances across Europe increase the likelihood of the U.S. being drawn into a conflict. Should this happen, interoperability with many of these partners would represent a challenge. Moreover, indigenous communities historically cross national boundaries; their mobility and access represent both opportunities and challenges to military operations. Isolated engagements are also possible in the Arctic, particularly in disputed spaces and near jurisdictional boundaries, but would require particularly egregious conduct to result in significant escalation.
The Russian military is experienced, trained, equipped, and well-positioned to fight in the Arctic. The country's investment in Arctic operational capabilities will enable its military forces to operate and sustain themselves for extended periods of time, year-round, in isolated locations in the Arctic-particularly in the Russian Arctic. Increased infrastructure interconnectedness between northwest Russia, Norway, and Finland will facilitate sustainment of forward-deployed Russian ground forces should a conflict occur. Multiple formations are permanently stationed in the Arctic and other units train in the Arctic yearround. High-latitude rotations are routine, rather than exceptional. Investment in icebreakers, primarily meant to support economic interests, also means Russia will be able to challenge or exert sea control year-round, as well as project and sustain power across Arctic waters to a significantly greater extent than any of its rivals. Consequently, Russia would have significant advantages within its territory and against any individual European Arctic country because of force strength, prepositioning, purpose-designed equipment, and extended ability to communicate and maneuver.
China's operational reach into the Arctic currently is itinerant and aspirational, but will grow as it improves its maritime capability and increases its Arctic presence. China will not abandon its desire for Arctic resources. In the short term, the country will have to temper its arguments to ensure Russian cooperation on military affairs and to guarantee access to the Russian-controlled NSR. By 2035, China may be able to use economic leverage to gain greater influence over this route. Instead of rapid expansion, significant Chinese exploitation of Arctic resources will only be attainable in the long term. By 2035, China may have ability to operate in and exploit Arctic resources comparable to some Arctic nations. Large-scale Chinese exploitation of resources is unlikely, but may be underway on a small scale, dependent upon cooperation with international partners.
The Arctic is as challenging an OE as any other on Earth. U.S. allies, partners, and potential adversaries all have growing and competing interests in the region. Global dynamics coalesce with growing economic value, varied critical and information infrastructure, and a rapidly changing physical environment. The two most capable U.S. competitors are particularly interested in solidifying and growing influence in the region, and Russia already has a large foothold. Access to and control of the Arctic and its resources are themselves unlikely to lead to armed conflict, at least through 2035. However, the Arctic is a potential theater for global or regional conflicts involving great powers and alliances, and it is unlikely that these would abandon their claims. As the U.S. Army marches toward the mid-21st Century, maintaining visibility and understanding of the Arctic OE could prove important in a potential conflict.   Experienced, trained, equipped, and well-positioned adversaries.  
Figure 1. Arctic
Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA)
theater in a broader greatpower conflict.