# ID: c33d2d210347461296d81c6c1ba6d989
# Title: The Defense Strategies of China and Russia: A Study of Effectiveness
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
Scholars today agree that China and Russia are among the strongest military powers in the world. 
1
2
These two states' pursuit of their national interests, combined with their comparative military prowess, has become a major factor in the global security environment. 
3
Clearly comprehending Chinese and Russian defense strategies and the relative effectiveness of those strategies is, therefore, an essential part of understanding how these states likely perceive and assess the global security environment and how their ambitions could affect the international order. However, thus far, little comparative analysis of these great powers' defense strategies has materialized in the literature. This thesis therefore seeks to answer the following question: What are the defense strategies of China and Russia, and are their defense strategies implemented effectively? This analysis is then used to examine a sub-question: What lessons might these defense strategies offer a smaller state-specifically, Mongolia-to improve its defense strategy in the context of the current global security environment? Both China and Russia are strategically important partners to Mongolia; geographically, landlocked Mongolia is sandwiched between China and Russia.
Therefore, Mongolia has chosen the Third Neighbor Policy to balance its influential neighbors. China and Russia perceive the chosen third neighbors of Mongoliaparticularly the United States and other Western countries-as the biggest threat to the existing world order, and vice versa. To manage these relationships, it is therefore crucial that Mongolia, as a young democracy and a relatively weak state, understand Chinese and Russian defense strategies and determine whether they are implemented effectively.
What are the defense strategies of China and Russia, and are their defense strategies implemented effectively?
Sub-question: What lessons might these defense strategies offer a smaller statespecifically, Mongolia-to improve its defense strategy in the context of the current global security environment?
Rising China and resurging Russia have become the major threats in their respective regions, especially to liberal democratic countries, due to both countries' security policies and expanding military capacities. 
4
Thus, this research is significant in this moment of possible changes in the international order since military power is the ultimate backup for the other means contained in the DIME paradigm. To understand how globally influential powers (in their respective capacities) China and Russia view the global security environment and how their defense strategy is tied to this view requires a thorough study of these states' defense strategies, which will enable a better understanding of how effectively these states are implementing their strategies.
This literature review examines scholarship in a number of areas related to defining and assessing defense strategy, setting forth the major themes these documents articulate, and outlining the stances of the two countries on their respective strategies. To assess whether Chinese and Russian defense strategies are implemented effectively, it is first necessary to define what a defense strategy is. According to former U.S. Joint Chief of Staff General Dempsey, "Strategy is about balancing ends, ways, and means; that is, our national objectives, our operational concepts, and the resources available to us." 
5
Finding generic criteria for comparing defense strategies of different countries is challenging. While many comparisons exist of military and national power between various states, the literature offers no standard or definitive way to measure the effectiveness of a defense strategy. 
6
7
Even with a consistent standard for measuring effectiveness, however, there is also the issue that the two states this research investigates-China and Russia-outline their defense strategies in different ways. The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the State Council, the top administrative units of China, determine China's defense-related strategies. Emerging strong political leader and Chinese president Xi Jinping is an influential figure in dictating the new strategies of China; his centralization of power is another feature of new Chinese strategies. 
8
9
10
11
22
23
24
28
29
Chinese behavior the norm in foreign countries. 
30
A number of scholars follow Russian military modernization as well; they state that the modernization process is continuing and has passed the difficult initial phases already. 
31
36
37
33
34 Valery Gerasimov, "Contemporary Warfare and Current Issues for the Defense of the Country," Military Review, December 2017, 22-27. 
35
36 Ivana Kottasová, "Russian Military Spending Drops for First Time in 20 Years," CNNMoney, May 2, 2018, http://money.cnn.com/2018/05/02/news/russia-defense-spending-plunge/index.html. 
37
international security environment-a consideration that will be instrumental in comparing strategy or doctrine with actual expenditures.
The research questions suggest essentially two possible outcomes. The first is that the defense strategies of China and/or Russia are not implemented effectively because the authoritarianism of both countries has produced a mismatch between defense strategies and defense expenditures; that is, the authoritarian governments can allocate more funding to defense than the economy can technically handle and can hide their level of defense spending by violating their own budget allocations. Alternatively, the defense strategies of China and/or Russia could be effective strategic documents in that most of their defense objectives and priorities are implemented as stated, with an adequate and sustainable supply of funding.
This thesis analyzes the published defense strategies of China and Russia through the methodological lens of assessing their strategies against their defense expenditures. The analysis is limited to open-access defense-related government documents. A qualitative analysis examines the Chinese and Russian defense strategies to determine whether these strategies have clear objectives and, if so, what those objectives are. A quantitative analysis looks for any indicators that these countries are spending in excess of their budgeted procurement costs in an attempt to realize their defense strategies.
Finally, based on the comparison of the two countries' defense strategies, the thesis provides critical analysis of potential lessons for Mongolia applicable to its future defense planning.
The remainder of this thesis consists of three chapters. Chapters II and III focus on China's and Russia's defense strategies, respectively. These chapters begin by outlining these countries' strategic objectives, identifying how they put forth their respective goals in their strategic documents. These two chapters then apply Young's framework to analyze to what extent the two countries' defense expenditures are able to support their strategy documents. Chapter IV highlights the key findings with respect to the effectiveness of China's and Russia's defense strategies. This final chapter also offers the implications of these findings for Mongolia's further defense planning. 
Most of the scholarship consulted for this thesis agrees that the three most significant and influential Chinese strategies in the modern era are active defense, limited regional war under high-technology conditions, and limited regional war of informatization.
Active defense, coined by Marshal Peng Dehuai in the mid-1950s, was the first defense strategy of the PRC. The core of this strategy was inherently defensive: China would only act in response to aggression or attack. 
39
40
This strategy was also successfully used against India during the border conflict in 1962, and it still has value in the current international order. Indeed, active defense has become the core guideline of China's current military strategy: today, China is advertising its peaceful development, which it considers mutually beneficial to the international community. The active defense strategy has thus developed into the current strategy.
39 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China. . 
40 Ji,
120;
Fravel,
47. 41
Limited regional war under hi-tech conditions was the only Chinese strategy not formed in response to an imminent threat against China; it is widely considered a very influential element of the current military strategy. The U.S. victory in the Gulf War in 1991 demonstrated that technological advancement would play a key role in modern warfare, and Chinese officials felt that the PLA was far behind the technological developmental curve. 
42
43
44
45
46
48
China has gathered a great deal of experience while setting and changing its different military strategies, and the current military strategy is basically an iteratively refined product of the Central Military Committee of China. Various considerations have motivated China to adopt new military strategies, and scholars explain the strategies differently. What is certain is that the PLA's transformation and modernization has occurred largely as a result of the staggering benefits of China's continued economic development. Furthermore, the changing mindset of defense personnel, along with the digitalization, informationization, and mechanization of the PLA, are all critical to the current strategy: "As pointed out by senior PLA officer, superiority lies not only in advanced technology but also in advanced ideas of military science." 49 Moreover, as Ji notes, "PLA researchers argue that new technology will not win wars without new combat theory. New theory will not be invented without fundamental changes to the mentality of PLA commanders and soldiers." 50 Nevertheless, China's unique political decision-making system under the CCP continues to allow the PLA to have a sole authority to develop its strategy-unlike in democratic countries where different parties come into power, shifting the political trends that shape defense strategy. All these different factors combine to shape China's current military strategy. 
47
48
49
50
China's defense white paper of 2015 is a strategic document that outlines China's military strategic goals and objectives. According to this document, China's overarching goal is to rejuvenate the nation and reach the Chinese Dream of hegemon status by achieving two centenary goals by 2021 and 2049.
The PLA is the key stakeholder in Chinese internal and external politics due to its role as the military wing of the CCP-a role that guarantees that the PLA will have priority in budget allocations, since the strategy firmly announces that China's armed forces are the only backup for the nation's core interests. What China is doing today to modernize its military is extremely expensive; nevertheless, China has been able to maintain the modernization of its military throughout the last two decades and has not shown any signs of stopping or slowing down this modernization. According to the current strategy, to achieve its overarching goal, China's military has put forth the following strategic tasks, which depict its strategic objectives and therefore, for the purposes of this research, stand in for those objectives: 
To participate in regional and international security cooperation and maintain regional and world peace;
 To strengthen efforts in operations against infiltration, separatism, and terrorism so as to maintain China's political security and social stability; and  To perform such tasks as emergency rescue and disaster relief, rights and interests protection, guard duties, and support for national economic and social development. 
51
Subsequent sections of the strategy develop supporting ideas and initiatives to accomplish these tasks, such as the principles the military would need to execute "active defense" strategic guidelines, the key approaches for developing the armed forces, the requirements  China's military reform has not only been executing the aforementioned overarching strategic objective but also running other objectives and tasks simultaneously.
China is exerting great effort to achieve its strategic objectives to the greatest degree possible in a short amount of time since president Xi Jinping has highlighted that China is in a period of opportunity. 
57
66
This creation of a continuous circle should be the main fuel of the Chinese Dream, but hard military power itself might not be sufficient to completely safeguard China's overseas interests; indeed, China's military buildup might undermine its interests by changing threat perspectives of the countries in the region. Hence, China's military strategy has other objectives to bring military means to the table in different ways: "To participate in regional and international security cooperation and maintain regional and world peace" and "To perform such tasks as emergency rescue and disaster relief, rights and interests protection, guard duties, and support for national economic and social development." 
67
68
The remaining objectives, "To strengthen efforts in operations against infiltration, separatism, and terrorism so as to maintain China's political security and social stability" 
70
Similarly, having nuclear deterrence and second-strike capability provides China a strategic posture that enables it to run ambitious military reform to increase conventional and nuclear capabilities in all security domains. M. Taylor Fravel argues that China does not change its nuclear strategy because it does not delegate nuclear authority to the military; rather, central leaders, scientists, and weapon designers play the key role in formulating this strategy. 
72
There are strong supporting links between the eight strategic objectives/tasks of China's armed forces. These links allow China to save time, resources, and effort as it pursues many of these objectives simultaneously, making this strategy seem well designed; understanding the strategy by looking at its historical background and reading the strategy itself does give such an impression. This view is largely shared by a number of scholars. China has continued to achieve its CMS objectives and military transformation uninterruptedly in the last few years, 
69
70
71
72 Fravel,
39,
40.
73
78
81
78
79
80
81
83
Quantitative analysis requires some bold assumptions to find answers about what China has done to achieve its military strategic objectives since the PRC government does not provide transparent information about its defense expenditures; China announces only an overall number for its defense expenditure for the year in March. 
84
86
More importantly, it supports the CCP's tendency to blur the line between civilian and military duties and increase the dependency of the PLA on the civilian side and vice versa.  China used to provide data to the United Nations regarding the composition of its budget, including personnel, training and maintenance, and equipment, until 2013, when it stopped. Nevertheless, Jane's draws a better estimate, including major trends of China's defense spending based on its own databases and other reports (see Table 
3
88
91
Beijing is extremely cautious about revealing any information related to military capability. Overall, the data shows that China is still hungry to build a strong modern military and that their numbers will likely increase as long as the Chinese economy can support the for its military. Unfortunately, it is not possible to clarify how much is spent for each of these different objectives, but based on the increasing defense expenditures of China, it would not be wrong to assume that CMS is being implemented effectively.
Qualitative and quantitative analyses of China's military strategy suggest that
Beijing is implementing the current CMS effectively. From the qualitative point of view, the CMS falls under the strong and achievable overarching goal of the Chinese Dream and its two centenary goals. All eight strategic objectives/tasks not only perfectly fit under the main goal but also support each other. Former military strategies and strategic guidelines serve as the firm foundation of the current CMS, which saves time and resources. Likewise, quantitative analysis offers no information suggesting that China cannot achieve military modernization. The CCP does not overload its defense department with "unachievable tasks": it divides the workload among other ministers, and they are all serving the sole goal of the Chinese Dream. Someone once said that China is strong when united, and its execution of the CMS is an example of why China is rising so fast under undemocratic rules against all odds.
This chapter seeks to define Russia's defense strategy (Russian Military Doctrine) and assess whether that strategy is currently being implemented effectively. To answer that question, this chapter employs the same method used in the previous chapter: here, too, Young's method for measuring the effectiveness of a defense strategy entails identifying the strategic objectives of Russia's defense strategy and then examining whether Russia's defense budget is sufficient to achieve those strategic objectives. This method therefore calls for qualitative and quantitative analyses of the current Russian Military Doctrine for and spends on its military, the quantitative analysis examines a variety of documents related to the defense budget and expenditures of Russia's military. Findings suggest that the RMD is not being effectively implemented because the Russian economy is not strong enough to the support strategic objectives of the RMD.
As was the case with the CMS in Chapter II, understanding the history of the RMD is essential to comprehending the current doctrine: as Mary E. Glantz argues, understanding this history could help predict future Russian military developments and can therefore give insight into the objectives and priorities of the current strategy. 
94
Before embarking on a history of Russian strategy, it is important to note that there is a difference in the Western and Russian military traditions regarding the term "doctrine."
In the West, doctrine refers to regulations such as those contained in a field manual, but for Russians, military doctrine encompasses high-level strategic documents. 
95
Frunze's offensive principle of military doctrine, Frunze's military-political and militarytechnical aspects of military doctrine, Soviet nuclear policy, and foresight/forecasting and correlation of force concepts. The following paragraphs explain the origins of these legacies and how they are implicated in the current RMD.
The very first military doctrine of the Soviet Union, adopted in 1924, was based on M. V. Frunze's offensive strategy-centered ideology, and this offensive military doctrine still echoes in the latest military doctrine of Russia. 
96
97
98
From a Western perspective, Russia's current aggressive behavior causes constant problems in the international security environment. Former Defense Intelligence Agency 
95
96
97
98 Glantz, 452.  director Lieutenant General Vincent R. Stewart has stated that "Moscow will continue to aggressively pursue its foreign policy and security objectives by employing the full spectrum of the state's capabilities. Its powerful military, coupled with actual or perceived threat of intervention, allows its whole-of-government efforts to resonate widely.  The process of gaining knowledge of possible changes in the area of military affairs, determination of the prospects of their future development. Knowledge of the objective patterns and mechanisms of war and dialecticalmaterialist analysis of events taking place in a given specific historical situation constitutes the basis of scientific foresight. 
112
114
An objective indicator of the combat power of opposing forces, which makes it possible to determine the degree of superiority of one force over the other. Correct calculations and estimates of relative strengths help make substantiated decisions, established in a timely manner and used to maintain the required superiority over the adversary in selected sectors. It is determined by comparing quantitative and qualitative characteristics of subunits, units, combined units, and armaments of friendly and enemy troops (forces). It is calculated on a strategic, operational, and tactical scale throughout an entire area of operations, in the main sector and in other sectors. 
115
While these historical concepts are essential to understanding the current RMD, even with a knowledge of those concepts in hand, clearly defining the objectives of the current RMD is not an easy task due to the opaqueness and generality of the doctrine, which allows it to be vague and malleable depending on the Russian administration's decisions about how to employ the doctrine. This section therefore looks at three different accounts of recent developments in RMD to draw out general objectives of the current RMD.  These three objectives have to be achieved under centralized command of the President of the Russian Federation and require simultaneous and concurrent measures to achieve, and the legacy concepts outlined in the previous section are still influential in achieving these objectives. 
117
The Russian Federation Ministry of Defense website condenses the Russian Armed Forces' objectives into four major dimensions:
1.
Deterring the military and political threats to the security or interests of the Russian Federation
Supporting economic and political interests of the Russian Federation
Mounting other-than-war enforcement operations 4.
Using military force 118
117 Russian Federation, "The Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation," 7.
118 "Objectives of the Russian Federation Armed Forces : Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation," accessed December 12, 2018, http://eng.mil.ru/en/mission/tasks.htm.
If one considers these four dimensions to include all the different tasks and duties described in the military doctrine, understandably, Russia's main means of deterrence is its offensive capability conferred by nuclear and conventional weapons, which has historically been the country's key deterrent against NATO and the United States (objective 1). In order to continue to successfully deter Western military power, Russia needs economic and political strength based in domestic and international support (objective 2). International support comes through extended security relationships with non-Western and peripheral countries, whereas domestic support will come from patriotically educated citizens. 
119
121
The next account, the Defense Intelligence Agency's Russia Military Power report, highlights some points that were not stated in previous RMDs, including the changing nature of modern conflict, the concept of non-nuclear deterrence, mobilization of the 119 Russian Federation, "The Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation," 21f. 
120
121 Russian Federation, 26.
readiness of the state, and strategic stability concepts. 
122
123
The concept of non-nuclear deterrence is also stressed in the report: "inflicting unacceptable damage on any adversary at any time," it says, is the key to employing nonnuclear deterrence (objective 1). 
124
125
126
The European Parliament's Policy Department analysis states that Russian security policy has drifted toward hard military power since 2014, clearly indicated by the fact that Russia changed all its security-related strategic documents in a shorter-than-normal timeframe. 
129
131
132
133
128 Russian Federation, 4.
129 Isabelle Facon, Russia's National Security Strategy and Military Doctrine and Their Implications for the EU, (Belgium: European Parliament Sub-committee on Security and Defence, February 1, 2017), 6. 
130 Facon,
11,
12.
132 Facon,
15,
16. 133 Facon,
17.
To assess whether Russia is effectively achieving these strategic objectives, the quantitative analysis begins with an overview of Russian military spending. Based on this information, it then assesses whether Russia is effectively implementing its defense strategy.
Julian Cooper, a British specialist on the Russian defense budget and military expenditures, states that the "Russian federal budget is characterized by a high degree of Regardless, none of these reputable sources' calculations differ by significant quantities, and more importantly, their numbers increase or decrease at the same time. Therefore, this analysis uses the Jane's by IHS Markit database as its benchmark for information on Russian defense expenditures. That said, some scholars criticize these sources, arguing that they miscalculate in their analyses of Russian defense spending. The present analysis therefore also looks at scholars' views to supplement the database information.
Jane's states that the Russian economy is very dependent on oil and gas prices, and in 2014-2016, sharp oil price declines, along with Western countries' economic sanctions imposed against Russia for its annexation of Crimea, caused the Russian economy to undergo a recession. 
135
136
137
5
6
140
141
Not all sources agree that Russia's chances to achieve its current SAP are so narrow, however. Michael Koffman, an expert on Russian military activities and defense funding, argues that the Russian defense budget is not decreasing to the extent that the Jane's and 
The three objectives of the RMD should have been three sides of a wheel. Without even sides, it cannot roll-cannot reach Russia's overall goal of Great Power status.
Unfortunately, too much use of one side of the wheel makes the sides uneven and causes the wheel to bump or even stop. The first objective of the RMD-pose a military threat to the West and its allies-has been a shield of Russia, and Moscow has been using it since the Cold War era. Unfortunately, too much use of military strength against its neighboring country, Ukraine, backfired on Russia's economic development, which was its only fuel for achievement of the three objectives of the RMD. Data shows that Russia's continued 12% annual economic growth stopped the year the Russian Federation annexed Crimea.
As a result, Russia's overall strategic goal of attaining great power status will not be achieved by 2020, which is the time specified in the RMD.
In terms of the second objective-extending security relationships and maintaining the Russian economy and public order in a supportable condition for military purposes-Russia has done a tremendous job of improving its military capability since 2008 with its military reforms, and Russian armed forces' capabilities are much better now than in 2008.
Even so, Russia still lacks strategic airlifts, tanker aircrafts, and blue water capabilities to become great power military, and it needs to overcome financial constraints, lack of qualified 
147
personnel, and defense industry problems during international sanctions and restrictions to get what it wants. 
148
The third objective-improving new-domain warfare technologies and establishing technologically and materially independent production in the defense industry-also faces financial difficulties to accomplish its strategic tasks. 
Qualitative and quantitative analyses of the RMD suggest that Russia is not implementing the current RMD effectively, largely due to Russian economic interdependence on market prices and Western countries' punitive actions against Russia for its aggressive military actions. The Young methodology's criterion for effectiveness is whether a military doctrine has sufficient funds to achieve its overall goal; Russia does not have sufficient funds. Qualitatively, historical legacies inspire Russia to hold on to "traditional military thinking," which promotes its use of aggressive military threats against its rivals to balance strategic deterrence. Sources suggest that Russia has no choice but to use adversarial activities against the West to denounce the current international order, which, according to Russia, does not give equal share to everyone. On the other hand, Russia has forgotten that it still benefits from the current international order today.
Internally, Russia promotes patriotism to solidify public support for its activities.
Unfortunately, this public support is not based on democratic principles that ensure everyone has equal opportunities but instead on authoritarian requirements to love and defend the homeland from the West. Therefore, it is not clear how long Moscow can maintain support from its own people, because the true victims of economic destabilization and sanctions from the West are not Russian decision makers and oligarchs but rather common people.
The quantitative data supports the aforementioned analysis. The Russian economy is sensitive enough to falter based on market price changes of its major exports and foreign countries' economic sanctions. Continued growth of the Russian economy since 2000 was interrupted by these causes right after Russia renewed all its strategic security documents to turn the country on "full aggressive mode." Scholars state that Russia has significantly improved its military, but they also say that such improvements are not enough to achieve the strategic goal of great power status. Military power does not provide protection from economic punishment.
As the previous chapters have discussed, Western scholars state that China and Russia are major spoilers that could cause serious disruption in the prevailing international security environment due to their conflicts of interest with the United States, which is the creator and beneficiary of the current international order and which therefore stands to check China's rise and Russia's resurgence. This thesis has aimed to add value to the literature about defense strategy implementation by China and Russia by providing a sideby-side view of the effect of these states' records of implementing their respective defense strategies. While there is no standard measurement of how effectively a defense strategy is being implemented, Young's method offers a way to assess whether a defense strategy has sufficient funds to achieve its stated objectives. Based on this method, this research finds that China has been effectively implementing its defense strategy, while Russia has not.
China has so far successfully implemented its defense strategy for three reasons. Unfortunately, Russian attempts to leverage its alliances have seen little success due to its assertive behavior and its failure to fulfill its promises to cooperating nations. Moreover, Russia could turn its face against alliances if needed. Therefore, the Russian approach has not succeeded either in its goal of degrading U.S. influence or at extending its security relationships with non-Western countries-a key objective of its defense strategy implementation.
Meanwhile, China has used mostly economic means to pull the interests of countries into its sphere of influence to reduce the position of the United States. Beijing's approach creates more resources and funding through trade and access to resources that support its defense strategy. Notably, China has been employing the Belt and Road
Initiative to reach out to Africa and Europe to open a new Silk Road under modern conditions through the land and sea, using their current economic boost to their advantage.
This approach offers economic development to China's partners and with no obvious security risks to partnering countries. This approach is in keeping with China's peaceful co-development rhetoric, which offers economic benefits, in contrast to empty Russian promises. After these economic advancements are consolidated, however, China's military force will back up its investments in the long run. Therefore, China's economy-based approach has become a strong bedrock to its defense strategy.
These two states are also in different situations in terms of developing and using new weapon technologies to balance U.S. military power, which has had a direct effect on their respective defense strategy implementation. Recently, both countries announced their weapon systems; his message was directly threatening the United States and NATO, which reveals two setbacks in Russia's position. First, an arms race and military coercion are the last and only cards Russia can play in the great power competition game. Second, this show-of-force behavior only causes continuing economic sanctions from the Western countries in order to limit possible Russian threats. This, in turn, causes a major hindrance to Russian defense strategy implementation since Russia's current national budget is not sufficient to run the SAP. Additionally, Russia's "Possible First Use" nuclear strategy is in a tense situation after the U.S. administration announced that it would withdraw from the Intermediate Range Nuclear Force treaty, leaving Russia with no other leverage than use of nuclear weapons. At the same time, China introduced its new weapon systems in a commercial air show, intended to send a message to the United States and other powers that China is not behind, but actually ahead in terms of some technology developments.
Such hybrid presentations of new weapon systems soften its posture to the international community so that it does not prompt a response that would disrupt its implementation of defense strategies. Additionally, China has enough resources and funding to successfully implement the technological requirements of its defense strategies so far. China is being extremely careful not to look threatening with its new weapon systems in the international community, much as with their nuclear policy of "No First Use," which again harmonizes with the peaceful development rhetoric fundamental to Chinese soft power, its path of successful defense strategy implementation.
Finally, stable economic growth from the end of the last century gave momentum to both countries to increase their economic and military powers. Yet, because Russia's economic improvement was largely dependent on energy export revenue, after the Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014, other countries have been able to impose sanctions that caused serious problems for the implementation of Russia's defense strategy. On the other hand, China developed its economy via high levels of manufacturing, which leads to more development by building infrastructure, increasing the number of consumers, and creating services. This development allows China to be economically independent, making other countries dependent on China's economy, thereby permitting China to increase its military power more independently than Russia.
The two countries' different approaches raise the question of why they approached these common issues differently. There are many possible reasons, but the strongest cause of their different approaches is funding to run their political and strategic objectives. At the same time, the Russian narrative is influenced by its historically aggressive great power stance, which hinders its defense strategy implementation, as its aggressiveness blocks resources to fund its strategy. By contrast, China's approach is mostly peaceful (for now) and oriented toward producing resources and funding that actually creates a foundation for implementing its strategies freely in the future. Therefore, funding becomes central to the defense strategy's success or failure, and Young's method of measuring effectiveness of defense strategy is the most trenchant way to analyze defense strategy implementation.
During the time of thesis work, the volatile international security situation has endured some changes, including a trade war between the United States and China and the U.S. administration's announcement of withdrawing from the Intermediate Range Nuclear Force Treaty, which has caused Russia to become more assertive. Therefore, two interesting questions arise: how long will China's successful defense strategy implementation continue? And is there any hope that the Russian defense strategy can revive?
There will have to be some impact on China's defense strategy implementation due to the current trade war between the United States and China since, as this thesis has shown, economic resources and funding are key to the success of defense strategy implementation.
It is clear that if the trade war causes a reduction in defense strategy funding, strategy implementation would suffer. On the other hand, Dr. Yukon Huang claims that there is no winner in the trade war and that the trade war equally punishes the United States and China, or even hurts the former more because China's economic dependency on trade is very low; conversely, U.S. companies pay this trade war's tariffs. 
154
The Was it only to keep the United States away from Russia's periphery, or to find an alliance against America in its "own backyard," using the instability of Venezuela, for a possible site for Russian missiles? Either way, Russia will not gain any economic advantage to improve its defense strategy implementation, unless Russia is trying to drain U.S. resources at the very moment when the that country has too many issues to worry about, including 
China's and Russia's defense strategies offer little that can be used to improve the defense strategies of smaller states such as Mongolia, since most smaller states do not have enough resources to keep their defense capabilities up to date. A defense strategy has to fit to a country as clothes fit a person. Too often, there are people who want excessive weaponry, believing that they can intimidate other countries, which could cause problems, just like a three-year-old child playing with a knife. Nevertheless, smaller states can use some of the principles of defense strategies of stronger nations if they fit. China's defense strategy was improved throughout its evolution by keeping what was effective and getting rid of what was ineffective. Also, the one-party policy of China has allowed its defense strategy to be more stable. The Russian defense strategy study suggests that its objectives have to be achievable, and, most importantly, there should not be any contradicting objectives that could cause defense strategy implementation to fail. Smaller countries should keep a friendly relationship with all countries if possible, meanwhile improving defense capabilities by increasing personnel capacity based on professionalism, as welltrained personnel are the highest value of a small army.
Mongolia has been actively participating in UN peacekeeping operations in Africa, Ukraine, and Georgia with individual peacekeepers and military contingents, and also in the global war on terrorism by sending its military contingents to Iraq and Afghanistan.
Additionally, the Mongolian Armed Forces has been organizing and participating in international and regional military exercises in various places with many countries. These activities strengthen Mongolia's third-neighbor foreign policy and increase personnel capacity to operate in a variety of places. Successful participation in these types of activities can be an important part of defense strategy implementation for relatively small and weak states, as these activities further enhance the capabilities of personnel. Additionally, highly skilled diplomats are required to keep the balance of great power competition pressure at an appropriate level for smaller states. Therefore, smaller states have to improve individual skills of soldiers and diplomats at the highest possible level in order to improve their defense strategy in the context of the current global security environment.
This study and comparative analysis of China's and Russia's defense strategies suggests that merely possessing military power does not equate to successful
13
12
32  
32  
53 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China. 54 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China 55 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China 56 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China. 57 Office of the Secretary of Defense of the United States, 37. 58 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.
53 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China. 54 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China 55 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China 56 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China. 57 Office of the Secretary of Defense of the United States, 37. 58 Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.
68 "Chinese Military Diplomacy, 2003-2016:  
68 "Chinese Military Diplomacy, 2003-2016:  


Therefore, this study seeks evidence from various sources about what China has spent in order to achieve each of its CMS objectives. The analysis begins by examining general information on China's defense budget and expenditures to identify the features of China's defense-related quantitative information. The International Institute for Strategic Studies, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Jane's, and various states' governments provide plenty of reliable security reports and information about China's military development and defense spending; however, China's defense expenditure looks different depending on what open-
Therefore, this study seeks evidence from various sources about what China has spent in order to achieve each of its CMS objectives. The analysis begins by examining general information on China's defense budget and expenditures to identify the features of China's defense-related quantitative information. The International Institute for Strategic Studies, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Jane's, and various states' governments provide plenty of reliable security reports and information about China's military development and defense spending; however, China's defense expenditure looks different depending on what open-
(All data shown in USD B)
87 Adapted from Caffrey.
87 Adapted from Caffrey.
90
90
shows service-branch expenditures, but it also shows that China did not allocate anything for the newly established People's Liberation Army Strategic Rocket Force and People's Liberation Army Strategic Support Force, which are administratively separate forces from the three service branches and are critical elements that require a significant amount of resources to establish and operate. Keeping any information on new security domains secret implies that Glosny's point is correct-that China is keeping its military capabilities vague to the public.
92
92
125  
125  
142
142
First, oneparty rule of this authoritarian country forces the whole nation's efforts into military development, which complements economic expansions abroad by backing up those expansions in the long run. Second, the coherent strategic objectives of the CMS under the overarching goal of the Chinese Dream allow China simultaneously to pursue all objectives at the same time. Third, and most importantly, China's economic growth has allowed China to have sufficient funding to enact huge military improvements. The Russian defense strategy, by contrast, has not been implemented effectively due to the country's lack of economic independence necessary to provide enough resources to achieve the RMD's relative levels of success in efforts both disparate and similar. Then, the chapter answers the sub-question of the thesis: What lessons might these defense strategies offer a smaller state-specifically,
153 "С.Лавров: Европын Холбоо Өөрийгөө ОХУ-Тай Утга Учиргүй Сөргөлдөхөөр Болголоо," [S.
153 "С.Лавров: Европын Холбоо Өөрийгөө ОХУ-Тай Утга Учиргүй Сөргөлдөхөөр Болголоо," [S.
International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), The MilitaryBalance, 2018, vol. 118, no. 1,  (London: Routledge, 2018),  
5, 6.   
Chuck Hagel, Quadrennial Defense Review (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2014), 2014, 59, http://www.defense.gov/pubs/2014_Quadrennial_Defense_Review.pdf.
"Comparison Countries Military Strength," accessed June 8, 2018, http://armedforces.eu/compare/country.
Thomas-Durell Young, "The Failure of Defense Planning in European Post-Communist Defense Institutions: Ascertaining Causation and Determining Solutions," Journal of Strategic Studies 41, no. 7 (April 11, 2017): 1031-1057, https://doi.org/10.1080/01402390.2017.1307743.
Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, China's Military Strategy (Full Text), May 27, 2015, http://english.gov.cn/archive/white_paper/2015/05/27/content_281475115610833.htm.
Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.
Alexander Neill, "Shangri-La Dialogue: How Xi's China Solution Works -Look at South China Sea Troubles," Straits Times, June 1, 2018, https://www.straitstimes.com/opinion/how-xis-china-solutionworks-look-at-south-china-sea-troubles.
17 Olga Oliker, "Unpacking Russia's New National Security Strategy," CSIS, accessed June 8, 2018, https://www.csis.org/analysis/unpacking-russias-new-national-security-
strategy.18  Valery Gerasimov, "The Value of Science Is in the Foresight: New Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying Out Combat Operations," Military Review, February
2016, 23-29.   19  United States Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations, Report No.DIA-11-1704-161 (
Washington, DC: DIA, 2017).
Kristi Raik et al., "The Security Strategies of the US, China, Russia and the EU," Finnish Institute of International Affairs (FIIA), June 15, 2018, 46, 47, https://www.fiia.fi/en/publication/the-securitystrategies-of-the-us-china-russia-and-the-eu.
21 "Russian-National-Security-Strategy," IEEE, December 31, 2015, 98, , http://www.ieee.es/Galerias/fichero/OtrasPublicaciones/Internacional/2016/Russian-National-Security-Strategy-31Dec2015.
pdf.22  Russian Federation, "The Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation," Посольство России в Великобритании. Accessed June 8, 2018. http://rusemb.org.uk/
press/2029.23  
Russian Federation.    24 Russian Federation.
Center for Strategic and International Studies, "The Erosion of China's Reform Era," ChinaPower (podcast 17), CSIS, released May 22, 2018, https://chinapower.csis.org/podcasts/the-erosion-of-chinasreform-era/.
  26  Center for Strategic and International Studies, "What Does China Really Spend on Its Military?," ChinaPower Project (blog), CSIS, last updated October 9, 2015, https://chinapower.csis.org/militaryspending/.
Office of the Secretary of Defense of the United States, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2017 (Washington, DC: Office of the Secretary of Defense, U.S. Dept. of Defense, May 15, 2017), Executive summary, https://www.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2017_China_Military_Power_Report.PDF.
"How China's 'Sharp Power' Is Muting Criticism Abroad," Economist, December 14, 2017, https://www.economist.com/briefing/2017/12/14/how-chinas-sharp-power-is-muting-criticism-abroad.
"How China's 'Sharp Power' Is Muting Criticism Abroad."    
United States Defense Intelligence Agency, 13.
Keir Giles, Assessing Russia's Reorganized and Rearmed Military, (Washington, DC:  Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, May 3, 2017), 5-7.
You Ji, China's Military Transformation: Politics and War  Preparation (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2016), 120; M. Taylor Fravel, "Shifts in Warfare and Party Unity: Explaining China's Changes in Military Strategy," International Security 42, no. 3 (2018): 37.
Roger Cliff, China's Military Power: Assessing Current and Future Capabilities (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2015), 21.
Ji, 118.    
M. Taylor Fravel, "China's New Military Strategy: 'Winning Informationized Local Wars,'" Jamestown Foundation, accessed January 18, 2019, https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-new-militarystrategy-winning-informationized-local-wars/.
  45  Ben Lowsen, "How China Fights: The PLA's Strategic Doctrine," Diplomat, accessed January 18, 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2016/04/how-china-fights-the-plas-strategic-doctrine
/.46  Fravel, "Shifts in Warfare and Party Unity," 79.
Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.
Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.
Adapted from "China," Chart summary, Jane's, accessed January 22, 2019, https://janes.ihs.com/dashboard/country/China.
Michael Glosny, "China's Assertiveness, Rebalancing/Pivot, and the Future of China's Rise" (lecture, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA,September 10, 2018).
Mary E. Glantz, "The Origins and Development of Soviet and Russian Military Doctrine," Journal of Slavic Military Studies 7, no. 3 (September 1994): 443, https://doi.org/10.1080/13518049408430154.
Julian Cooper, "The Funding of Nuclear Weapons in the Russian Federation," Oxford Changing Character of War Centre, October 2018, 1. https://static1.squarespace.com/static/55faab67e4b09141053471.
United Nations Office of Disarmament Affairs, "UN Report on Military Expenditures," UNODA, accessed December 12, 2018, https://www.un.org/disarmament/convarms/milex/CountryProfile.aspx?CountryId=163.`
"Russia Defence Budget."
"Russia Defence Budget."
"Russian Federation," Chart summary, accessed December 6, 2018, https://janes.ihs.com/dashboard/country/Russian%20Federation.
Michael Koffman, "The Collapsing Russian Defense Budget and Other Fairy Tales." Russia Matters, Harvard Kennedy School Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, accessed December 7, 2018, https://www.russiamatters.org/analysis/collapsing-russian-defense-budget-and-other-fairy-tales.
Anton Lavrov, "Russian Military  Reforms from Georgia to Syria," CSIS, November 15, 2018, 25, https://www.csis.org/analysis/russian-military-reforms-georgia-syria.
Alexei Nikolsky, Not Just Money Constraints Facing the Russian Armed Forces, CNA Occasional Paper series (Washington, DC: CAN, August 2018), 6, 7.
CNN Library, "Xi Jinping Fast Facts," CNN, accessed February 20, 2019, https://www.cnn.com/2013/01/04/world/asia/xi-jinping---fast-facts/index.html.
"The Thoughts of Chairman Xi," BBC News, accessed February 20, 2019, https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/resources/idt-sh/Thoughts_Chairman_Xi.
Deutsche Welle, "Vladimir Putin: How a Spy Rose to Power and Held on to It" DW.COM, March 18, 2018, https://www.dw.com/en/vladimir-putin-how-a-spy-rose-to-power-and-held-on-to-it/a-43030900; "The Beginning and Fraying of Vladimir Putin's Reign," Economist, January 12, 2019, https://www.economist.com/books-and-arts/2019/01/12/the-beginning-and-fraying-of-vladimir-putinsreign.
Yukon Huang and Markos Kounalakis, "Trading Blows: The U.S.-China Trade War," World Affairs Council (presentation), posted December 4, 2018, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_IfAzGKaSkA.
"Putin to U.S.: I'm Ready for Another Cuban Missile-Style Crisis If...," Reuters, February 21, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-putin-idUSKCN1QA1A3.
This thesis could not have been completed without the help and counsel of four people. First and foremost, thanks to my lovely wife, Bayarjargal, for providing steadfast support and taking care of our happiness in life, Garid and Tsogt, throughout my time in Monterey. Next, appreciation goes to 
Matthew Norton
NPS
Scott Jasper
Thomas-Durell Young
official policy or position of the 
Department of Defense
U.S. Government
Regarding the Russian State Armament Programs (SAP), Jane's states that Russia's midterm assessment of its SAP 2011-2020 and the aforementioned budget cuts forced Russia to amend SAP 2011-2020 in 2014, and a second, SAP 2018-2027, was approved earlier this year. SAP 2011-2020 aimed at ensuring 70% of all service equipment would be renewed to satisfy modern standards by 2020. SAP 2018-2027 required 20 trillion rubles to accomplish its goal of renewing 70% of all service equipment to modern standards by 2021. The new SAP goal is difficult to achieve given Russia's current economic condition; however, overall 10-year funding is possible to accomplish if no other economic hindrance comes up until 2027. 
143
7
144
7
Federation. 145
143 "Russia Defence Budget."
144 "Russia Defence Budget."
145 "Russian Federation," Chart summary.
the beginning of his career, Xi was a hardcore student of CCP policy and later became a strict producer and executioner of CCP policy; he believes that "unity and discipline under one-party rule is crucial in achieving" his promises to make China rich and strong. 151 Thus, both the president and the party move with the people toward the successful achievement of China's defense strategy in pursuit of the Chinese Dream. Conversely, president Putin quickly rose from being a mid-level KGB agent to chief of the Russian security service to president of the Russian Federation in just eight years. Moreover, a number of accounts describe how Putin gained power by eliminating his opponents at any cost-including their lives-and keeps the public misinformed by strictly controlling social media so that the public sees only good accounts of Putin. 
152
It therefore also secures no gain to the implementation of its defense strategy. Since the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia has been the leading nation of several international organizations, including the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India China, and South Africa), and the Eurasian Economic Committee (EurAsEC), which mainly aim to reduce U.S. influence. In addition to its involvement in implementation of a defense strategy. Without economic resources, it is not possible to implement any strategy. This outcome fits well with the common military phrase that "amateurs talk about tactics, but professionals discuss logistics." Moreover, no matter what the size of a country, it needs to have its own defense strategy, with an achievable goal and consistent objectives, along with the required resources for success.