# ID: c3b1cfe3689041d5b6e7b34fa307bb92
# Title: Iran's Military Interventions: Patterns, Drivers, and Signposts
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Next, we asked where Iran has intervened.
The geographic scope of Iranian military interventions and the presence of co-identity group populations in all these interventions is also worth discussing.
All of Iran's military interventions have taken place comparatively close to its borders (in the greater Middle Eastern region) and within regions and countries with significant co-identity group populations.
The interventions furthest from Iran were the antipiracy intervention in the Bab al-Mandab and Gulf of Aden (which do not involve Iranian co-identity groups) and multiple interventions in Lebanon and Syria, all still comparatively near to Iran.
This limited geographic scope stands in contrast to other actors with which U.S. policymakers are often concerned, such as China and Russia, that have used their military more globally or even North Korea, which undertook more-distant interventions in sub-Saharan Africa during the Cold War.
At least historically, Iranian military interventions have been notably geographically circumscribed.
This stems in part from Iran's desire to assert itself in its immediate neighborhood rather than build a profile globally.
It is also due to the constraints faced by the Islamic Republic.
Iran's military capabilities are limited, so its ability to intervene is more constrained than, for example, the United States.
Instead, it must keep its interventions, or at least its sizable ones, close to home.