# ID: c3b1cfe3689041d5b6e7b34fa307bb92
# Title: Iran's Military Interventions: Patterns, Drivers, and Signposts
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
The RAND Corporation is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help make communities throughout the world safer and more
Interventions (1979-2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xii S. 2
Interventions, Excluding Iran-Iraq War, by Activity Type (1979-2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii 3. 1. Number of Ongoing Iranian Military Interventions  (1979-2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Interventions (1979-2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Interventions, Excluding Iran-Iraq War (1979-2018) . . . . . . . . . . .
Activity Type (1979-2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Primary Activity Type (1979-2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Interventions, Excluding Iran-Iraq War, by Activity Type (1979-2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In recent years, Iran has risen as one of the most significant regional challenges faced by the United States. Both the 2018 U.S. National Defense Strategy and the 2017 National Security Strategy place Iran among four countries at the center of U.S. national security priorities. The 2018 National Strategy for Counterterrorism cites Iranianbacked groups as primary threats. 
1
xii Iran's Military Interventions: Patterns, Drivers, and Signposts meeting our definition of a foreign military intervention. 
2
2
In this report, we assess when, where, why, and how Iran conducts military interventions and identify key signposts of Iranian military interventions that can be used as early warning indicators for U.S. military planners and that can guide decisions about the use of forces in the Middle East region. We begin by identifying several factors from the prior literature as the most likely to shape Iran's military intervention decisions. In addition to reviewing past research on the factors that might influence Iranian military intervention decisions and a quantitative investigation of Iranian military interventions, we conduct two detailed case studies, of Iran's involvement in the ongoing Syrian civil war and Iran's post-2014 intervention in Iraq to counter the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), which inform our analysis. Using these tools, we note that Iran's decision to put conventional combat troops on the ground in Syria was a departure from its modus operandi. The Syrian case may become an exception rather than the rule in Iranian military interventions. However, should Tehran decide to approach its military interventions differently in the future than it has over the past four decades and treat other opportunities for intervention as it has treated Syria, this would present the United States in general and the U.S. Army in particular with an enhanced Iranian threat.
Our analysis shows that several factors are most indicative of possible Iranian military interventions. First and foremost, the presence of co-identity group populations appears to be nearly a prerequisite for Iranian interventions. All Iranian interventions identified by and considered in our study have taken place in countries and theaters where co-identity group populations are present. The presence of these groups, which tend to be more amenable to looking to Iran for guidance and support, allows Tehran to rely on its preferred intervention model, which uses advise-and-assist missions, and to increase Iranian influence while limiting the costs associated with involvement in foreign conflicts. Importantly, Tehran is often able to forgo committing ground troops in a combat capacity to foreign interventions as a result of the presence of these local partners. Second, our analysis emphasizes that external threats to sovereignty are an important factor in Iranian military interventions. Many of the instances of interventions we identified and explored in our study are intimately linked to and stem from an external threat perception. Moreover, we found that external threats have also mostly resulted in more-overt Iranian action, in large part because such action allows Iran to conduct a messaging campaign around its activities and reassure domestic audiences, send signals to regional and international friends and foes, and legitimize its intervention. Iran has also leveraged external threats to legitimize its actions, galvanizing support at home, and expanding influence abroad. These findings suggest that Iran's rationale for intervening in conflicts has historically been largely defensive, although this trend may be changing. Iran's track record in the region more recently suggests that Iran's primary objective lies in expanding influence abroad as part of its efforts to enhance its regional security. Although the desire to expand Iranian influence in the region is almost certainly a driver of Iranian intervention, the country has largely seen its involvement beyond its borders through the prism of defense.
Finally, we found regional balance of power and stability to be a key factor driving Iranian military interventions, in keeping with the prior observation. As a conventionally weak, majority Shia and majority Persian nation existing in a region dominated largely by Sunni Arabs, Iran sees itself as fundamentally vulnerable. This perception provides the backdrop against which Tehran assesses its external threat environment. Moreover, since losing the backing of the United States and its traditional partnerships after the 1979 revolution, Iran has had few state allies. Hence, from Iran's perspective, unless it is able to build a more favorable regional balance of power, it will remain isolated and potentially vulnerable to existential threats from its most capable adversaries: the United States and Israel.
Our analysis points to several signposts that could allow policymakers and military planners to identify and anticipate Iranian military interventions going forward. First, the presence of co-identity group populations is of predictive value in anticipating Iranian interventions. Coidentity groups provide a natural opening to Iran because they can lead to the cultivation of partnerships with state and nonstate actors. Iran is most inclined to intervene using the advisory model and usually leverages existing ties to develop a principle-agent relationship with prox-xvi Iran's Military Interventions: Patterns, Drivers, and Signposts ies, which it can support during a conflict. We note that Syria presents a partial departure from this model because Iran has also recruited nonlocal foreign fighters to deploy in combat. In the future, Tehran may have two models of interventions it could leverage, as follows:
• First, it may continue its historical approach, which largely leverages advisory missions and is centered on the use of local forces from co-identity group populations. This is likely to constitute the majority of Iranian interventions and would, in any case, underpin virtually all of Iran's wars. • Second (perhaps less frequently but more significantly), the Islamic Republic could use its Syrian intervention model, using its expansive network of proxies in an expeditionary manner, supplemented by its more-conventional forces.
Signposts for these types of interventions might include the presence of co-identity group populations, especially in instances in which these populations experience a change in status, such as facing a new threat to their livelihood or safety or the loss of political or other rights. Examples might include major political upheavals, arrests of political dissidents associated with these populations, gains and losses of political positions, and increases or decreases of attacks on these populations. Intervention may be especially likely in places where Iran has key partners and possible proxy groups with which to partner. The U.S. Army should monitor and attempt to disrupt flows of Iranian-backed forces used in an expeditionary manner and can use these signposts to identify those places where such activity may be likely.
Iran is also likely to commit troops in combat when it views the conflict as representing an external threat that is critical to its national security and regime survival and when it views the conflict as fairly low cost and a quick win. When threats and opportunities emerge simultaneously, Iran historically has been most likely to intervene. The collapse of regional governments, the onset of civil wars, and the rise and expansion of terrorist threats in the region are among the key threats that also present opportunities and lead to a likely Iranian intervention. Monitoring such events and considering especially the possible threat they may pose to Iran's sense of security and the opportunities created for an Iranian intervention could provide U.S. military planners with early warning of specific regional events likely to trigger aggressive Iranian action. Jihadist groups gaining ground both present such a threat and offer such an opportunity, making it more likely that Iran will intervene (especially when combined with the first signpost: the presence of co-identity groups).
Finally, Iran is more inclined to intervene in the region when doing so has the potential to tilt the balance of power in its favor. Hence, Iran is most likely to intervene in states where an Iranian intervention would produce potential leverage over their behavior and where doing so would be important to the regional balance, which in turn relies on the existence of a friendly government or influential nonstate partners. These states include those whose governments (or key nonstate actors) have served as Iranian allies or partners and countries whose alignment with Iranian rivals would negatively affect Tehran. However, Tehran is much more likely to intervene in those states with weak central authorities and important cleavages. Fragile and failed states and countries engaged in civil war are therefore particularly ripe for Iranian intervention.
Our analysis also yields several key findings with implications for the U.S. Army, many of which confirm previous assumptions about Iranian military thinking. First, the U.S. Army is unlikely to need to plan for and prepare to respond to Iranian interventions beyond the greater Middle East. Since May 2019, Iran has undertaken several air and naval operations in the Persian Gulf, Strait of Hormuz, and the Gulf of Oman, as well as airstrikes directly or via proxies in the Arabian Peninsula and in Iraq. This trend of growing aggressive action by Tehran might indicate a new willingness to challenge U.S. power and interests in the region. However, absent any major changes to our underlying assumptions about Iranian behavior and interests, the United States is unlikely to witness and be required to respond to Iranian interventions beyond U.S. Central Command.
Second, the trends and patterns in Iranian military interventions indicate that Tehran continues to view direct involvement in largescale combat missions as largely undesirable. Hence, unless Iran sees a threat as particularly pronounced, it is unlikely to commit its conventional ground assets to counter the threat directly, preferring instead to work by, with, and through proxies. Iran's track record of deploying troops in combat on only two occasions since 1979-the Iran-Iraq War and Syria-reinforces this point. In the case of the Iran-Iraq War, in which Iraq invaded Iranian territory, committing troops to combat was necessary and an action supported by the Iranian public. However, in the case of Syria, this deployment was highly controversial, partly because it was a war of choice. As a result, the U.S. Army is much more likely to encounter and engage with Iranian-backed nonstate partners in the region than it is to come face-to-face with Iranian personnel and troops. Where Iran does intervene, its preference historically has been to deploy air (mostly missiles and drones) and naval assets rather than conventional ground troops. The last time Tehran engaged in a large-scale combat intervention was more than three decades ago, when the country was attacked during the Iran-Iraq War. Hence, the main threats facing U.S. interests and partners and U.S. Army operations in the region most likely stem from Iran's missile and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) programs rather than its ground forces.
Third, the United States in general and the U.S. Army in particular would be well-served by considering the lessons of the previous two decades of American involvement in the region, including U.S. policies and military strategies in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria. Iranian decisionmakers and military planners have studied key events and adjusted their policies accordingly, which puts the onus on U.S. defense planners to stay a step ahead in this cat-and-mouse game. The combination of U.S. interventions in the region over the past two decades and instability resulting from the collapse of central authorities historically has paved the path for Iranian involvement in key countries. As the Iranian track record of military involvement in Iraq shows, Iran's interventions in Iraq were largely reduced to ad hoc airstrikes to target Mujahedin-e Khalq (MeK) and Kurdish positions (i.e., primarily the Kurdish Democratic Party of Iran, also known by the acronym KDP-I) there in the 1990s. However, following the 2003 U.S. intervention in Iraq, Iran gradually built its influence in that country. Overall, ethnic or sectarian tensions coupled with weak governments appear to facilitate Iranian interventionism. Accordingly, strong and inclusive central governments likely present an important bulwark against Iranian activities in the region.
The United States can use the signposts identified in this report to inform its use of military presence and activity in the region to deter Iran from undertaking a greater number of military interventions that threaten U.S. interests. In the short-to-medium term, the U.S. government in general and the U.S. Army in particular could leverage security cooperation with regional partners to prevent the weakening and collapse of central authorities and the threat of civil wars, which pave the way for Iranian involvement in the region. As noted earlier, particularly useful activities would be those that focus on capacity-building, such as training and transfer of equipment. The United States is already active in these areas with many of its regional partners, and this could be an area where additional effort and investment could be valuable. Increased numbers and types of exercises could have the dual purpose of increasing perceived readiness and actual readiness, deterring Iran on two fronts simultaneously.
Another near-term area of focus could be supporting jointness among regional allies so that they can operate more effectively as a collective against regional threats from Iran. Multilateral training initiatives alongside regional political and military cooperation could be effective in building stronger defense against Iranian provocation and activities. In terms of the types of training and equipment likely to be most valuable, emphasis on training and technology to defend against missile and UAV attacks may be important focal points of enhanced training and efforts at building multinational partnerships, since our analysis suggests these threats are especially likely. Given efforts to draw down U.S. forces in the region, this type of increased security cooperation activity could serve as a deterrent to Iranian intervention that has limited cost and requires limited additional investment of per-xx Iran's Military Interventions: Patterns, Drivers, and Signposts sonnel or resources. Such an approach would also allow for a visible U.S. presence that would enhance the deterrent signal.
In the medium-to-long term, the United States can promote more-inclusive policies in partner governments in the region to reduce possible instability and eliminate possible areas of grievance that might attract Iranian intervention. The U.S. Army could, for example, use its military assistance as an incentive to help its partners behave more inclusively or use military assistance to support policies that bolster inclusivity. Security cooperation activities that build the capacity of partner militaries represent one potential way to build inclusive practices in the region without presenting a direct, escalatory threat. Especially important would be ensuring the inclusion of minority Shia populations in both governance and military activities because the exclusion of these groups could make a country the target of Iranian activity. More-inclusive governments may also reduce the risk of civil war (or at least lessen instability in the region), further reducing vulnerabilities that attract Iranian intervention. This may also be an area where partnerships between the U.S. military and nongovernmental organizations could be valuable in building state capacity throughout the region and limiting opportunities for future Iranian intervention.
This report could also inform decisions about U.S. posture in the region and efforts to ensure that U.S. forces are positioned most effectively to deter without provoking. U.S. forces in the region have a complex task in dealing with Iranian militarized behavior. Direct Iranian military interventions have become notably more frequent following the sharp increase in U.S. presence after the 2003 invasion and occupation of Iraq. In part, this increase reflects opportunism by Iran, seizing the opportunity to expand its influence in an increasingly chaotic region, but it has also been defensive in nature, seeking to increase its leverage to deter a feared U.S. strike on Iran using these same forces. If U.S. forces in the region needed only to be concerned about direct Iranian military interventions against U.S. partners, such as Kuwait or the Gulf states, then they likely could help to enhance deterrence with only limited size and capabilities, focusing on anti-unmanned aerial system and missile capabilities, as noted earlier. Iran has shown a clear reluctance to commit its conventional forces to direct combat missions, and the prospects of a large-scale Iranian attack on a U.S. partner or ally appears remote. However, Iran's use of informal or proxy groups, while not the subject of this study, has often been substantially more opportunistic and more aggressive than its use of its formal military. U.S. forces in the region must deal with the risk of these types of Iranian activity as well, which may require a larger footprint and the ability to assist partners with advisory, training, and counterinsurgency capabilities. However, such forces need not necessarily be postured close to Iran's borders or be accompanied by higher-end conventional capabilities that would be seen as particularly threatening by Iran and could help touch off an escalation spiral, as both sides experienced in January 2020.
Finally, we note that some factors may change the Iranian way of war, including both internal and external factors. U.S. decisionmakers and military planners should track these developments and factors to ensure that the nature and threat posed by Iranian interventions does not fundamentally change without U.S. readiness to respond. Internally, perhaps the most significant change in Iranian military affairs may stem from the supreme leader succession. Ali Khamenei's death and the succession might have a deep impact on Iranian national security and defense thinking, including on the place and role of armed conflict, broad regional portfolios, and the dynamics between the clerical elements of the regime and the armed forces on the one hand and the different branches of the armed forces on the other. Hence, U.S. policy and military planners should pay close attention to the preparations for succession and its possible impact on Iranian military thinking.
Abroad, significant changes to the international system may result in Iranian motives changing and a recalibrated military intervention approach. The future of great-power competition and how it plays out in the Middle East, coupled with the regional landscape, are important factors that will shape how Iran sees its military activities. Increased Chinese and Russian military and economic presence in the region is likely to factor into Iranian calculations regarding the regional balance of power, and so is the dynamic among Beijing, Moscow, and Washington. Although a move away from a period of greater U.S. power xxii Iran's Military Interventions: Patterns, Drivers, and Signposts in the region would seem to provide fewer threats and more opportunities for Iran, the relations among these key states and how they affect Iranian perceptions of the regional balance of power bear careful monitoring.
Key U.S. adversaries, including Russia, China, and Iran, are becoming more active and more aggressive in deploying military forces beyond their borders. In the future, these adversary military interventions may become more common as great-power competition increases: Ongoing interventions might expand, and fresh ones might emerge in new areas, threatening U.S. interests and strategic goals. Yet relatively little prior analysis has been conducted to systematically and comprehensively compare why, when, where, and how America's key geopolitical rivals have historically intervened militarily. Understanding the historical factors that are most likely to drive leaders in these foreign capitals to deploy forces abroad can provide signposts for U.S. policymakers and military planners to anticipate future intervention behavior. This report, which is part of a series on several current U.S. adversaries, seeks to fill this gap through quantitative and qualitative analyses and provide U.S. Army strategic planning with recommendations to enhance anticipation of and posture readiness for future Iranian interventions.
In recent years, Iran has risen as one of the most significant regional challenges the United States faces. This rise is explained by myriad Iranian activities, including Tehran's nuclear and ballistic missile programs, support for terrorist groups and militias, cyber activities and influence operations, and military interventions in the region. The 2017 U.S. National Security Strategy (NSS) placed Iran along-side North Korea as dictatorships that are "determined to destabilize regions, threaten Americans and our allies, and brutalize their own people." 
1
2
Of concern for U.S. defense leadership, our analysis shows that despite a relatively low number of historical Iranian foreign military interventions-we could identify fewer than ten cases meeting our intervention definition since 1979, when Tehran became a U.S. adversary after decades of partnership-Iran seems to have increased the breadth and depth of these operations in recent years. The rate of success at which Tehran has achieved the political objectives of its military interventions seems to have also increased since the 1990s, though it must be noted that, given the small number of overall Iranian interventions, it is difficult to assess whether these increases are likely to be durable or not. Moreover, given the state of play in the region, including tensions between the United States and Iran in the Persian Gulf and broader Middle East region and the close proximity of U.S. and Iranian forces, partners, and proxies, understanding Tehran's playbook is more important than ever. Although much of the literature on the Iranian way of war still focuses on the Iran-Iraq War (1980-1988), the country's military strategy, doctrine, and operations have evolved since then. And although the Iran-Iraq War remains a formative experience that continues to shape Iranian thinking, it is critical to understand Iran's current military interventions to draw lessons for how they might affect ongoing and future U.S. Army operations in the region and broader U.S. government policy toward Iran and the Middle East. Since the Iran-Iraq War, Iran's pattern of military interventions has undergone major changes.
Aside from the Iran-Iraq War, which was initiated by Iraq, the first two decades of Iran's existence were largely marked by a reluctance to deploy troops outside the country's borders, with a particular reluctance to do so in combat missions. After the end of the war, the number of troops deployed in military interventions fell drastically. Airstrikes conducted throughout the 1990s in Iraq against key nonstate adversaries and the cultivation of and support for friendly nonstate actors were at the heart of Tehran's military activities abroad. The 2001 U.S. intervention in Afghanistan and subsequent 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq seemingly paved the way for a more robust Iranian military presence outside its borders. However, the country mostly continued to leverage its nonstate partners to build and grow its influence in the region. Hence, the 2000s were marked by Iranian covert operations in neighboring countries, mostly according to the advisory mission model, which would come to dominate Tehran's approach to military interventions. Iran has also engaged in counterinsurgency operations, as well as deterrence and interdiction missions.
This gradual expansion of Iranian military activities outside the country culminated in 2011 with the advent of the Arab Spring, which opened up new areas of operation for Iran and provided it with the opportunity to expand its presence in the Middle East. The 2014 rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) created a threat environment that, from Tehran's perspective, both necessitated and facilitated its growing regional presence. Since 2011, Iran has complemented its traditional advisory missions and airstrikes by deploying troops in a combat mission. Today, Iran leverages its military power in a more holistic way than it did in previous decades, although the threshold for Iran to deploy its ground troops in combat appears to be higher than that to deploy its naval and air assets. Nevertheless, Iran's preference remains to work by, with, and through proxies rather than to deploy its own forces to avoid stretching itself too thin, to be able to project power in more arenas, to build influence at a low cost, and to avoid backlash against its operations.
For this report, we focus on a specific subset of Iran's military activities: those meeting a size threshold and conducted by Iran's military directly. We define a military intervention as any deployment of military forces to another country (or international waters or airspace) during the period 1946-2018 in which two additional parameters were satisfied regarding (1) the size of the force involved and (2) the activities in which the force was engaged. In the case of Iran, we include only interventions that occurred after the 1979 revolution, at which point we consider Iran to have become a U.S. adversary.
The purpose of the size threshold was to create a universe of cases that could be comprehensively and reliably surveyed (smaller interventions may be more difficult to find information on and may be inconsistently reported) and to focus attention on those adversary interventions most likely to pose challenges for U.S. forces. To qualify as an intervention on the basis of ground forces, the deployment should have included military personnel from any service branch deployed for at least 100 person-years. This size threshold could include 100 troops deployed for one year or a larger number of troops deployed for a shorter period (e.g., 200 troops for six months or 1,200 troops for one month).
3
4
The purpose of the requirement that the forces involved be engaged in a particular set of activities was to eliminate cases in which a state may forward-deploy forces as a convenient alternative to basing them at home but in which the forces were otherwise engaged in the same activities they would have been doing if stationed domestically and not substantially interacting with or affecting the host state or population. Activities that warrant inclusion as an intervention include foreign internal defense, combat, counterinsurgency, stability operations, humanitarian assistance, deterrence, security, intelligence and reconnaissance, and lift. We provide additional detail and definitions of each activity type in Chapter Three.
In this report, we have chosen to forgo the discussion of proxies for several reasons. First, as we explain in the literature review, Iran's use of its own assets in military interventions has not received the same amount of attention as its use of proxies. Although several gaps still exist in the literature on Iranian nonstate partners, they deserve a separate treatment. Second, policymakers and military planners must understand when, where, why, and how Iran is most likely to intervene to formulate a coherent strategy to deter, contain, and counter the regime. Iranian forces and Iranian-backed nonstate actors present different sets of challenges, and the United States must develop specific responses to each. Third, nonstate partners and proxies cannot be considered as an integral part of the political and military establishments in Iran; these groups are not involved in the decisionmaking process, and they neither dictate the country's military strategy nor are they in charge of executing it. Instead, Iran-aligned and Iran-supported nonstate actors serve as an important tool in the regime's toolkit. Finally, we chose not to take proxies into account in this report for the sake of consistency across all the cases assessed in this series of reports (for example, our Russia and China reports also focus narrowly on those countries' armed forces).
These recent patterns in increased and more-aggressive Iranian military interventions heighten the importance of better understanding Tehran's strategic thinking. In particular, they raise the concern that Iran may gradually transition from conducting relatively low-cost and low-risk foreign operations (such as its intervention to fight ISIS in Iraq) to ones that carry a higher risk of direct, large-scale conflict with the United States (best illustrated by its intervention to support Bashar al-Assad's regime in Syria). By identifying characteristics of past Iranian military interventions-including trends and drivers shaping the decision to intervene-this report aims to inform U.S. Department of Defense and U.S. Army strategic planning and force posture decisionmaking.
The following research questions have driven our research and framed our study of Iranian military interventions: This report makes two main contributions to existing work on Iranian military interventions. First, it presents a more comprehensive quantitative account of Iranian use of military forces outside its borders, including the size of forces deployed and the activities conducted. The data used for these analyses are distinct in their level of detail and scope. Second, the report combines qualitative and quantitative analyses to explore the key factors shaping Iranian intervention decisions and uses these analyses to propose signposts that may warn of future Iranian interventions and identify corresponding metrics that can be used to track risk over time.
To identify and evaluate potential hypotheses to explain where, when, why, and whether Iran undertakes military interventions, we adopted a threefold research design that used mixed qualitative and quantitative methods. Our literature review provided a theoretical framework for factors affecting Iranian intervention decisionmaking, our quantitative analysis of historical cases added insight to support some of these hypotheses, and our supplementary use of case studies provided contextual depth and allowed for a more detailed analysis of theorized drivers.
First, through academic literature reviews focused on foreign military interventions broadly and on Iranian interventions specifically, the research team preliminarily identified possible explanatory factors driving adversary intervention behavior, including indicators and warnings for more-aggressive and/or more risk-acceptant behavior. The research team then developed a taxonomy of ten potential factors affecting the likelihood of adversary military interventions generally. This framework included geopolitical, domestic, and ideational factors, including
• national status and prestige • regional power balance and stability • external threats • alliance or partnership obligations and relations • domestic politics and regime legitimacy • economic interests • co-identity group populations in the host country • political and religious ideology • enabling military capabilities.
Second, these hypotheses were further informed by insights gained from quantitative analysis of the post-1979 Iranian military interventions (whose methodology and findings we discuss in more detail in Chapter Three), collected using the definition discussed earlier. Perhaps surprisingly, these criteria yielded a case universe of fewer than ten instances of military intervention by Iran since 1979. Nonetheless, these data-which include information on each intervention's ground, air, and naval size; duration; primary activities; and political objectives-revealed some key patterns and suggested some possible predictors of Iranian use of its military outside its borders.
Finally, to complement and supplement these quantitative analyses, we conducted in-depth case studies to provide a better contextual understanding of Iranian behavior and decisions regarding certain key military interventions. For this qualitative analysis, we selected two cases that provide variation on the key factors determining why and how-and possibly the comparative differences in where and when-Iranian forces are involved in interventions: Iran's intervention in the Syrian civil war (2011-present) and Iran's intervention to counter ISIS in Iraq (2014-present).
We selected these cases for several reasons. First, we decided to select ground interventions rather than purely air and naval interventions. Ground operations are Iran's strong suit and present the greatest challenge to the United States in general and the U.S. Army in particular. They are also better documented than Iranian air and naval operations, allowing for a more informed analysis. Second, these two case studies were selected because of their explanatory power. After eliminating air and naval cases, we were left with a handful of choices.
We did not use the Iran-Iraq War as a case study because the conflict is thoroughly documented and assessed in the existing scholarship and, short of a direct military conflict between the United States and Iran or a third-party invasion of Iran, it is unlikely to present a useful model for U.S. policymakers and military planners in considering the threat of future Iranian interventions. We also did not use the Lebanese Civil War as an example because it harbored many of the same characteristics as Iran's intervention in Iraq, but the latter was both more current and better documented, allowing us to provide a more useful example for U.S. policymakers and military planners.
Hence, we compared and contrasted two cases that share some similarities but whose differences shed light on Iran's toolbox pertaining to military interventions. That the two conflicts unfolded during more or less the same period with the same stated objective (although, in practice, the objectives varied greatly in the two countries) was also helpful in assessing the nuances of the Iranian military intervention model. The Iranian counter-ISIS operations in Iraq are illustrative of Tehran's military intervention model. Therefore, the case study sheds light on the Iranian way of war, which largely relies on advisory missions supporting local forces. The Iranian intervention in Syria departs from this model because it involved Iranian forces deployed in combat in addition to an advisory mission. Together, these cases provide a nuanced overview of the Iranian playbook, how Iran has conducted military interventions since 1979, and how it might do so in the future.
Our analyses face several limitations. First, access to information about Iranian decisionmaking is limited and shrouded in secrecy. Second, even when military activity exceeds our size threshold, there is often much uncertainty about the size and activities because the Iranian regime is rarely transparent about what it is doing with its military forces. What reporting does exist may be incomplete, and existing analyses are often biased or agenda-driven. Open-source research on the topic suffers from key shortcomings. For example, the reporting on Iranian military activities is often opaque, with sources disagreeing on even the most basic facts, such as the general scope of involvement: In various theaters, some sources place the number of Iranian forces deployed in the low hundreds, while others estimate the size to be in the tens of thousands. These challenges make it difficult to provide an accurate and complete picture of Iranian military activities outside its borders. 
5
6
In addition to these limitations, there are gaps in the academic research on this topic, meaning that although we endeavor to bring in relevant literature and existing work, there is relatively little existing research to draw on in some cases. Iran's military affairs and security policies have generated much debate among scholars and practitioners. Researchers have produced several books and articles on the country's standing and influence in the Middle East and South Asia, the Iranian military organizational structure and force posture, and the regime's operations in various regional theaters. However, there is a dearth of comprehensive assessments of the theoretical model for Iranian military interventions and of rigorous and systematic discussions of Iran's military interventions since 1979 and the factors that may have driven and shaped them.
As our data demonstrate, Iranian ground interventions in the period under consideration have been limited to two key time frames: the duration of the Iran-Iraq War and the post-2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq. Unsurprisingly, the Iran-Iraq War is fairly well documented. 
7
7
8
9
8 Karsh, 1980;
Tahir-Kheli and Ayubi,1983;
Chubin and Tripp, 1988;
Karsh, 1989;
Pelletiere and Johnson, 1991;
McNaugher, 1990;
Potter and Sick, 2004;
and Mohammad Ayatollai Tabaar, "Factional Politics in the Iran-Iraq War," Journal of Strategic Studies, Vol. 42, No. 3-4, 2019. 9
11
12
Finally, we endeavor to identify those factors that contribute to decisions to deploy military forces abroad, but in no case are we able to identify factors that definitively predict such interventions. In other words, our findings identify associations and correlations but not causation. Future work that is able to build a larger data set of noninterventions might be able to untangle these relationships further, though the small number of Iranian military interventions may continue to pose challenges. 
13
The remainder of this report is organized as follows. In Chapter Two, we analyze the existing literature to identify hypotheses on factors that have driven Iran to deploy military forces abroad since 1979. In Chapter Three, we provide the results of our comprehensive quantitative analysis of all Iranian military interventions abroad over this period; these data provide some plausible evidence to support some of the possible explanations identified in the previous chapter. Next, we present our case studies: We examine the Iranian intervention in the Syrian civil war (2011-present) in Chapter Four and analyze the Iranian counter-ISIS campaign in Iraq (2014-present) in Chapter Five. We begin both chapters by surveying the events that have shaped each conflict and the timeline of Iranian efforts there, then we assess the main factors leading to Iran's intervention. Finally, we conclude the report in Chapter Six by summarizing our findings, identifying potential signposts of Iranian military interventions, and exploring the implications of this research for U.S. Department of Defense and U.S. Army leaders and strategic planners.
In this chapter, we first briefly review the existing literature on why states intervene militarily outside their borders to develop a framework of key intervention drivers. The first half of this chapter provides a slightly modified version of the literature review and framework discussion in Chapter Two of the first report in this series, Anticipating Adversary Military Interventions. 
1
To identify potential factors that may have influenced Iranian interventions, we need a generalized framework of factors that are likely to influence intervention decisions across states. To develop this frame-work, we conducted a review of past research on the drivers of thirdparty intervention for all states. This literature underscores that interventions are more likely to occur when the intervening state sees a better chance of achieving its key objectives or pursuing its key interests by intervening than by remaining on the sidelines. Our review identified ten factors across four main categories that past work has identified as relevant to this calculation and that capture the main reasons that states have initiated military interventions. These factors are presented in Table 
2
2
The first set of key intervention drivers is geopolitical. Geopolitical factors are any that relate to the international system or relationships between countries that can drive the decision to intervene at a more macro level.
The logic for why external threats to sovereignty may drive states to initiate a military intervention is straightforward: States that perceive a direct threat to their sovereignty, their citizens, their territory, or their resources states might choose to deploy forces abroad to counter or reduce that threat. 
3
4
The second geopolitical factor shown to drive intervention decisions has to do with relationships between countries. States will often intervene to protect or support allies and partners. Past research is clear that the existence of an alliance or partnership is one of the strongest factors shaping intervention decisions. 
6
The most obvious reason is in response to a shared external threat or adversary (e.g., an intervention by a rival power, an internal guerilla movement), but the decision to intervene can also be driven by a set of shared interests or goals, historical ties, or the explicit terms of the alliance. 
7
7 Yoon, 1997;
Findley and Teo, 2006.
8
States may also intervene in an ongoing crisis or conflict to ensure a favorable balance of power in the region where they are intervening or in regard to the international system, whether this means maintaining the current balance of power or creating a balance of power that is more immediately favorable. 
9
11
12 8 Findley and Teo, 2006. 9
Shifts in the regional balance of power can be hard to measure objectively. The National Military Capabilities index is one possible metric that can be used to study changes in balance of power. An index of relative economic size is another option, among others. RAND researchers have also developed a metric useful for studying changes in the balance of power regionally. 
13
The fourth geopolitical rationale for intervention is national status. States may use interventions to underscore their capabilities, as a statement of national power or of military strength. Although again related to other geopolitical factors, national status is also distinct. National status is largely about reputation. States may use interventions to maintain or build their reputations. National status can drive an intervention even when there is no threat and no change in the balance of power. States concerned with national status may use interventions to demonstrate military strength or relevance or their relative place or rank in either the global or the regional order. 
14
13
15
16
States may also be motivated to intervene due to internal drivers: political, economic, or sociocultural factors that make interventions advantageous or desirable. There is some work that finds that the impact of domestic factors overwhelms that of geopolitical factors when explaining why states intervene. 18
The most commonly proposed domestic drivers of interventions are those having to do with domestic politics and legitimacy. According to this family of arguments, political leaders might use interventions and their timing for political purposes, to build support among their constituency, or to enhance their domestic political legitimacy. The "diversionary theory of war" suggests that leaders might use interventions to increase their chances of reelection, distract from economic or other problems at home, or shore up their support through a "rally around the flag" effect. Although these explanations are appealing in theory and seem to describe some individual cases fairly well, they have mixed empirical support. 
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
Past research also suggests that countries may be more likely to intervene to protect coethnic or coreligious group populations living elsewhere. 
28
29
30
31
32
33
The final domestic consideration focuses on economic interests. We consider economic interests as a domestic consideration because a state's economic pursuits, even those outside its borders, will advance its domestic economy. There are several possible ways in which economic interests could factor into state intervention decisionmaking.
First, states might use military interventions to protect their economic interests, especially when access to resources or national property overseas is threatened. 
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
There are several potential ways to measure economic interests as they relate to intervention decisions. First, one can look specifically at access to key strategic resources, such as warm water ports, oil, or other key resources. Second, one can use measures of economic growth and trade, especially over time, to understand how economic resources may relate to intervention decisionmaking. Notably, we distinguish between economic interests as defined here and such factors as regional power balance. Although changes in economic fortunes can shift the international balance of power, such an interpretation considers economics as one factor among many and in relative terms. Here, we focus specifically on a state's economic condition and opportunities, apart from those of other states.
The third category of factors that emerged from our review is ideational factors: factors that emerge not from politics or economics, but from ideas, personality, and other more-abstract, intangible factors. 
40
Ideology may also shape or determine intervention decisions, with states intervening to uphold or advance (or counter) a set of principles, beliefs, or norms. In the U.S. context, the most commonly cited ideological driver of military intervention is that of democracy promotion. The United States has used the cause of democracy as the rationale for intervention since its earliest days and as recently as the 2003 intervention in Iraq. Although democracy seems to be a relevant ideological driver of intervention, evidence that authoritarianism serves a similar purpose is more mixed. 
42
43
44
Literature on third-party intervention also identifies efforts to counter specific ideologies (e.g., Communism, jihadism) as strong motivators for intervention. Some past research finds that preventing the spread of communism during the Cold War years was, perhaps, the most significant and consistent driver of U.S. military interventions. For U.S. interventions in developing countries, for instance, one of the strongest drivers of intervention was whether the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was involved and whether there was a risk of communist victory. 
45
'" European Journal of Political Research, Vol. 54, No. 4, November 2015. 43
44
46
47
48
49
In addition to ideology, the personality of the leader making the intervention decisions has also been shown in past research to shape a state's intervention behavior. 
50
51
52
53
55
The final factor that emerged from our literature review did not have to do with state motivations at all, but instead focused on capabilities, primarily military and economic resources that allow a state to successfully launch and sustain a military intervention. Here, we refer to capabilities as enablers, meaning that they are resources that enable or allow a state to successfully launch a military intervention. Without sufficient economic resources to fund an intervention and to support the defense-related costs, and without the needed military technology and capabilities, states will not be able to undertake interventions they might otherwise prefer to. In particular, we focus on changes in capabilities: new economic resources or new military capabilities that may encourage states to launch interventions that they would not have otherwise. As with many of the individual motivations discussed earlier, such enablers are unlikely to drive an intervention decision on their own. For example, a state is not likely to decide to intervene simply because they have the economic or military capacity. A state would also likely need a motivation, such as those discussed earlier. However, given persistent motivations to intervene, changes in enabling capabilities can help to explain why a state intervenes at one point in time and not in another.
Military and economic capabilities might shape intervention decisions in a few key ways. First, military capabilities might shape intervention feasibility. A state might have the desire to intervene but ultimately decide not to do so because it lacks the military capabilities or the economic resources required to launch the intervention or because decisionmakers assess that they do not have the military or economic capability to achieve desired objectives. 
56
57
In terms of metrics used to assess these capabilities, there are many options. One approach would be to focus on changes in capabilities. Significant increases or decreases in economic resources or military technology could be identified and recorded as a marker of states that might suddenly be more able to conduct military interventions than in the past. Another approach would be to focus on absolutes. For example, military spending, military size, gross domestic product per capita, or variables that denote possession of key technologies (e.g., nuclear weapons) are all ways to measure capabilities as they pertain to the ability of a state to launch an intervention.
Table 
2
With this generalized framework defined, we reviewed research focused specifically on Iranian military interventions to determine which of the factors discussed in this chapter have historically been most relevant to this case. As part of this effort, we reviewed a diverse body of literature that included largely primary sources, such as official statements by political figures in Iran (e.g., the country's supreme leader and members of the executive and legislative branches), military commanders (including both the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps [IRGC] and conventional military, known as the Artesh), and Iranian media reporting (recognizing, of course, the potential biases contained in these records). In particular, we relied on Iranian state media, especially those outlets close to or affiliated with the Iranian armed forces (chiefly the IRGC). Although often clearly biased in their reporting, these sources provide an important window into Iranian thinking on and perceptions of the conflicts and the country's role in them. 
58
58
assessment is a persistent tension between factors encouraging military adventurism and ones affecting pragmatic restraint.
First, we note at the outset that, in general, scholars agree that an ideational factor, revolutionary ideology, and the domestic factor pertaining to the presence of co-identity group populations (specifically, Muslim Shias) play a foundational role in Iranian foreign and national security decisions-and in Tehran's military planning. 
59
The preamble to Iran's constitution identifies the religious nature of its military's mission, stating that the military will fulfill, "the ideological mission of jihad in God's way." The constitution formalizes Islam as the basis for doctrine, stating "In the formation and equipping of the country's defence forces, due attention must be paid to faith and ideology as the basic criteria." The constitution also quotes the Qur'an, in Surat al-Anfal, "Prepare against them whatever force you are able to muster, and horses ready for battle, striking fear into Gods [sic] enemy and your enemy, and others beyond them unknown to you but known to God." While inferring a theological basis for a defensive or deterrent military 
59
60
Yet as the literature also points out (and as we show in more detail in the quantitative analysis presented in Chapter Three), four decades of Iranian interventions paint a different picture from that of a purely ideologically driven revolutionary state. Thus, although some scholars assess that revolutionary ideology and religious (Muslim Shia) coidentity matter above all else as drivers of Iranian interventionism, others contend that the role of these two factors may actually be more limited than Iranian rhetoric sometimes suggests. 
61
62
63
64
Second, to the contrary, a significant school of thought posits that pragmatic geostrategic considerations-particularly over regional power balance concerns-drive Iranian foreign interventionism above all else, as opposed to primarily ideological, religious, domestic, and/or territorial expansionist factors. 
65
66
48, No. 4, 2006
. 65 Milani, 2006;
Juneau, 2020;
Esfandiary and Tabatabai, 2016;
Juneau, 2016.
67 Juneau, 2020;
Dina Esfandiary and Ariane Tabatabai, "Iran's ISIS Policy," International Affairs, Vol. 91, No. 1, 2015.
68
Specifically, these include the Iranian regime's security fears regarding (1) geopolitical "encirclement and strangulation" by the United States and its allies, ( 
2
4
69
70
Juneau, Squandered Opportunity: Neoclassical Realism and Iranian Foreign Policy, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2015;
Shahram Chubin and Charles Tripp, Iran-Saudi Arabia Relations and Regional Order, London: Routledge, 2014;
Esfandiary and Tabatabai, 2016;
Nader, 2015. 69
Wehrey, Thaler, et al., 2009, p. xiii. 70
71
72
73
71 Juneau, 2015, p. 6. 72
73
74
75
77
These observers argue that Iran "learned with the fall of Saddam that it could successfully exploit power vacuums for strategic gains" and that regional power projection has largely driven Iranian behavior since the U.S. invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq. 
78
According to these lines of argument, the post-9/11 wars and the Arab Spring provided the regime with an opportunity to shape the regional landscape to its advantage and liking, and these geopolitical 
74
75
76
77
78 Ostovar, 2016, p. 205;
Nader, 2015, pp. 12-13.
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
The literature also provides some (albeit weaker) support for miscellaneous secondary drivers of Iranian foreign interventions. For instance, Wehrey, Thaler, et al., 2009, posits that some of Tehran's political objectives behind its use of military force aim at "trying to effect far-reaching changes [even] on the . . . global stage [emphasis added]." 86 Moreover, some scholarship has suggested that individual leaders and personalities have played a significant, yet understudied role in shaping Iranian military interventions. 
87
88
89
90
91
92
89
90
Policy, Vol. 21, No. 4, Winter 2014. 92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
First, according to Adam Tarock and Mohsen Milani, whose respective articles on Iran-Afghanistan relations are staples of the scholarship on the topic, a large part of Iran's decision not to intervene in Afghanistan in retaliation for the Taliban's actions stemmed from the historical precedent set by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, which prompted the Iranians to believe that they may face a similar fate if they attacked Afghanistan. 
102
100 Milani, 2006, p. 245;
Gohel, 2010;
Nader et al., 2014.
Milani, 2006, pp. 244-245;
Gohel, 2010;
Nader et al., 2014
. 102 Milani, 2006, pp. 244-245
103
105
106
107
erature and short examinations of key cases found that several factors are likely to be more salient than others. Perhaps most acutely, these factors include broad geopolitical concerns about regional balance of power and external security threats. Further, according to our initial assessment of the literature, such factors as co-identity religious populations, supporting allies and partners, reducing Iran's international isolation, exporting revolutionary ideology and values, and maintaining domestic public opinion likely matter as well, but these drivers may be more likely to be of secondary significance. We did not find support for other possible explanations raised in the broader literature on the factors affecting military interventions for other states, including the potential roles of economic objectives (either narrow or broad), territorial ambitions or claims, individual personalities and leadership, internal regime politics, national prestige-building, or global or international norm-setting.
In the chapters that follow, we build on this preliminary factor framework. First, in Chapter Three, we conduct a quantitative analysis of overall trends and patterns in Iranian military interventions. Then, in Chapters Four and Five, we subject the relevance of each of these possible factors to additional scrutiny by examining them in the context of in-depth intervention case studies.
To help understand where and when Iran is likely to intervene militarily in the future, it would be helpful to first understand the historical record of Iranian interventions. To that end, this chapter reviews the results of our collection of a data set of every Iranian military intervention since 1979. 
1
As described in Chapter One, we define an Iranian military intervention as any deployment of military forces to another country (or international waters or airspace) during the 1979-2018 period in which two additional parameters were satisfied regarding (1) the size of the force involved and (2) the activities in which the force was engaged. 
2
In the case of Iran, we have included all interventions by the different branches of the country's armed forces: the paramilitary IRGC, the conventional military (or Artesh), and the volunteer militias known as the Basij. We excluded interventions by Iranian-aligned local and foreign fighters comprising proxy militias and non-Iranian paramilitary organizations. Although this approach has some limitations, we made the decision to exclude non-Iranian forces in order to focus on strictly Iranian interventions, which we identified as an important gap in the scholarly literature. The primary vehicle through which Iran conducts interventions is the use of other groups. Hence, the exclusion of proxies drastically reduces the number of Iranian interventions. In some theaters, Iran's foreign militias have served as a quasi-integral part of its armed forces, working under Iranian command and trained, War's country code list. Additionally, to determine whether individual adversary incursions into disputed territories constituted a foreign intervention per se, we referred to the Issue Correlates of War Territorial Claims data set to determine whether, in disputed territory, the actor was the target of the claim (in which case, it was assumed to have possession of the territory) or the challenger was the target of the claim (in which case, it was assumed not to have possession of the territory, and therefore it was assumed that this territory was a possible location for a military intervention). See Correlates of War Project, "State System Membership (v2016)," undated; and Bryan Frederick, Paul R. Hensel, and Christopher Macaulay, "The Issue Correlates of War Territorial Claims Data, 1816-2001," Journal of Peace Research,  Vol. 54, No. 1, 2017.  armed, and deployed by Iranians. Since the Arab Spring in particular, these militias have become "an extension of Iran's military power." 
3
4
6
7
8
To warrant inclusion, the deployed ground, naval, and/or air forces of the intervention force had to cross minimum size thresholds, which 
3
4
5 Wehrey, Thaler, et al., 2009, p. 83;
Esfandiary and
Tabatabai, 2016. 6 Wehrey, Thaler, et al., 2009, p
7 Wehrey, Thaler, et al., 2009, p.
8 Ostovar, 2019.
9
10
To qualify as an intervention on the basis of the naval forces involved, the deployment had to involve the presence of a substantial portion of Iran's naval forces rather than the isolated deployment of one or two ships. This relatively higher bar for inclusion (in comparison with ground forces) was adopted because of the inherently more mobile nature of naval forces to avoid coding a large number of naval-only interventions involving the deployment of one or two ships that may not even have been explicitly decided on or authorized by national-level decisionmakers. In the RAND U.S. Military Intervention Dataset, which this effort was modeled on, a U.S. carrier strike group or larger force was required for a naval intervention to be identified. 
11
We took a similar approach to coding an intervention on the basis of the air forces involved. Whereas the deployment for the United States was required to involve roughly one wing-year of aircraft (e.g., 80 planes employed for a year, 160 planes for six months), the size threshold was interpreted proportionally when identifying Iranian interventions according to the relative disparity in baseline air force sizes. In addition, substantial instances of air-to-air or air-to-ground combat or strikes were included without needing to meet the planeyear size threshold. 
12
Beyond meeting these size parameters, the forces involved must have conducted at least one of the following ten activity types to satisfy our definition of a military intervention. Intentionally absent from this activity type taxonomy are categories for noncombatant evacuation operations, as well as general logistics, support, and communications. Additionally, we do not include in our definition of foreign interventions general forward deployments of troops and/or supplies and weapons depots, unless they also satisfy one of the activity types (e.g., a clear deterrent function). The list of activity types are In some cases, only one or two activity types may have been relevant to a given case; in others, more than three could arguably apply. For each intervention, the adversary database thus codes up to three activity types for each force type involved in the case (ground, naval, air), denoting the dominant or most common activity for each force, followed by the secondary and tertiary activity for each.
To identify the universe of Iranian cases satisfying these definitions, our research proceeded in three broad steps. First, with the intent of casting a wide initial net, we collected and aggregated case information from a variety of respected data sets on historical military interventions. 
14
Second, this preliminary list of Iranian interventions was divided among RAND subject-matter experts, who expanded, vetted, and refined it with primary and secondary resources. During this secondary stage of in-depth, case-by-case investigation, many preliminarily identified potential events were deemed not to meet all of the parameters described earlier and were ultimately excluded from the case universe. As an example, we examined Iran's activities in Afghanistan in the 1980s extensively before ultimately deciding to exclude the case. The main driver behind our decisionmaking was that it was not clear from the reports we examined that Iran met the requirements to qualify as an intervention in Afghanistan. We found inconclusive evidence about Iranian presence during the 1990s and post-2001. Available evidence seems to indicate that most of the activities were conducted indirectly and by supporting various third parties. A second example is Iran's involvement in the Balkans in the 1990s, where we found clear evidence of Iranian involvement but no authoritative evidence that the size threshold was met. The same challenges led us to exclude current Iranian activities in Venezuela and Somalia. 
15
Having identified a case of Iranian military intervention, we then collected several additional pieces of information about each case. Some of these variables have already been noted: detailed information about the size of the information and the activities in which the forces were engaged. This information was collected at both the intervention level (including typical or average values) and the location-year level, enabling an understanding of how the size or activities of an intervention force may have changed over time. This also allowed us to specify the forces and activities associated with specific countries in instances where an intervention might take place in multiple countries. We should, however, stress again that the lack of adequate and accurate data on these conflicts in the open-source data limited our ability to fully account for all Iranian interventions and their scope.
Beyond the size and activity type variables, we also collected detailed information on the political objectives motivating the intervention and the degree of success that Iran had in achieving them. 
16
17
16
Kavanagh, Frederick, Chandler, et al., 2021. 17
Having identified the set of political objectives states pursued in each intervention, we then coded the degree of success they had in achieving them. We coded success using a straightforward, three-part scale: success, some success, and no success. The success of each objective was assessed by multiple coders with familiarity with the case, and discrepancies were adjudicated by the larger project team. The data on political objectives and success do not bear directly on the key questions in this report of anticipating when and where Iran is likely to undertake future military interventions, but we present descriptive statistics of these data in the following section and aim to pursue the implications of these data further in future research.
Using this approach, we identified eight Iranian military interventions undertaken from 1979 to 2018. A complete list of the interventions we identified is found in Table 
3
The first question that we used our data to address was how often Iran intervened militarily.  f The precise number of Iranian troops in Syria remains disputed, with some estimates including proxy forces (which we exclude for the purposes of this study) and others underestimating the numbers. Here, we include our best estimate using months of data collection. g Reporting on these strikes has been limited and largely traced back to Israeli media. Overall, these numbers remain relatively limited, mostly fluctuating between 3,000 and 7,000 troops total, but they still represent a clear increase over Iranian interventions before 2003-although it must be said that the reliability of the data remained a core concern for our research team. There are several plausible (likely mutually reinforcing) explanations for this uptick in Iranian interventions. First, the 1990s were a period of reconstruction and reform in Iran and left the country with little bandwidth for foreign interventions. After the Iran-Iraq War, the regime was narrowly focused on consolidating political power, introducing military reforms, and rebuilding the country's economy and infrastructure. 
18
19
Next, we asked where Iran has intervened. The geographic scope of Iranian military interventions and the presence of co-identity group populations in all these interventions is also worth discussing. All of Iran's military interventions have taken place comparatively close to its borders (in the greater Middle Eastern region) and within regions and countries with significant co-identity group populations. The interventions furthest from Iran were the antipiracy intervention in the Bab al-Mandab and Gulf of Aden (which do not involve Iranian co-identity groups) and multiple interventions in Lebanon and Syria, all still comparatively near to Iran. This limited geographic scope stands in contrast to other actors with which U.S. policymakers are often concerned, such as China and Russia, that have used their military more globally or even North Korea, which undertook more-distant interventions in sub-Saharan Africa during the Cold War. At least historically, Iranian military interventions have been notably geographically circumscribed. This stems in part from Iran's desire to assert itself in its immediate neighborhood rather than build a profile globally. It is also due to the constraints faced by the Islamic Republic. Iran's military capabilities are limited, so its ability to intervene is more constrained than, for example, the United States. Instead, it must keep its interventions, or at least its sizable ones, close to home.
Finally, we considered what types of activities Iranian forces have engaged in while deployed. On this measure, Iranian interventions have been fairly diverse, as shown in Figure 
3
The breadth of activities in which Iran's forces have been engaged is somewhat notable, given the small number of military interventions that the country has undertaken. From large-scale combat to smallerscale advisory roles and primarily naval interdictions, Iranian military forces have been deployed in a flexible range of contexts, despite their much more limited geographic scope. For example,
• the Iran-Iraq War entailed combat and advisory components • Iran's intervention in Iraq following the U.S. occupation and to counter ISIS encompasses advisory and counterinsurgency missions  were also engaged in combat operations; however, their primary activity was advisory. If we look at the scale of the forces committed to these activities, however, we have already seen in Figure 
3
3
Excluding the massive commitment of forces to the Iran-Iraq War combat intervention, Iranian ground forces have been deployed to conduct a wide variety of activities, with no clearly dominant or larger activity. Iranian forces committed to advisory, deterrence, and counterinsurgency missions over the past two decades have been roughly similar in scale, at around a few thousand troops. The antipiracy inter- diction mission in the Gulf of Aden involves primarily naval assets and therefore does not register in Figure 
3
Iran is one of four countries singled out in the U.S. NSS and NDS as posing a critical threat to U.S. interests. 
In this case study, we assess key hypotheses identified in Chapters Two and Three by evaluating six specific factors that may have affected the likelihood of an Iranian intervention in Syria in response to the outbreak of the civil war in 2011. 
1
Instead, Iran has largely chosen to conduct small-scale and targeted airstrikes and engage in advisory missions (training, advising, and equipping its partners). Iran's decision to put conventional combat troops on the ground in Syria was a departure from this modus operandi, thus constituting the only example not predicted by the data. Although the Syrian case may remain an exception rather than the rule in Iranian military interventions, especially given how divisive the 
1
The six potential factors examined in this case study as drivers of the Iranian decision to intervene include (1) regional power balance and stability, (2) alliance or partnership with host, (3) co-identity group populations in host, (4) national status concerns, ( 
5
6
In March 2011, several regions in Syria began to witness protests in the context of popular uprisings brewing across the region, a political moment known collectively as the Arab Spring. The protests in Syria initially flared as grievances in opposition to the rule of Bashar al-Assad, who had governed the country since 2000, when his father Hafez al-Assad (the founder of the Ba'athist Syrian Arab Republic) died. Soon, these protests in marginalized and underdeveloped regions turned into countrywide uprisings. 
2
3
4
5
Two years prior to the beginning of the events of the Arab Spring, Tehran, a key Syrian ally, had experienced similar unrests following the 2009 presidential elections and had successfully crushed the opposition. 
6
7
8
9
By 2012, Iran had started the second phase of its involvement in Syria, when it began to dispatch ground troops to the theater. In May 2012, the IRGC-the paramilitary branch of the Iranian military in charge of the country's regional activities-appears to have first admitted to having deployed its forces in Syria. 
11
12
13
14
15
11 Ian Black, "Iran Confirms It Has Forces in Syria and Will Take Military Action If Pushed," The Guardian, September 16, 2012. 
12
13
14
15 Sherlock, 2014. 
16
Throughout early 2014, Tehran officially continued to deny its presence on the ground in Syria because of the campaign's unpopularity; this would change, however, with the rise of ISIS.
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Pourdastan also explained why the Artesh had not been deployed to Syria in equal numbers to the IRGC, noting "We do not see Da'esh as sizable and significant enough to deploy an entire military unit. Our main adversary is the United States and we prepare ourselves adequately [to match them]." 
24
25
At the same time, Iran began to leverage its proxies, particularly Lebanese Hezbollah, in the conflict and, later, created new foreign fighter units to increase manpower. In particular, the Iraniansupported Afghan Fatemiyoun and Pakistani Zaynabiyoun joined the efforts by 2014. 
26
27
28
29
30
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
In the sections that follow, we assess previously identified hypotheses regarding where, when, and why Iran intervenes by analyzing the factors that most directly affected Tehran's decision to become involved in Syria in 2011. Table 
4
31
32
33 Sadjadpour, 2013.
According to our analysis, four factors played a less important role in shaping Iran's decision to intervene in Syria; these potential factors are not discussed in detail in the remainder of this case study. Here, we briefly outline why. Although external threat played a greater role in shaping Iran's thinking in Syria after the rise of ISIS, this was not directly a significant contributing factor to the original Iranian decision to intervene in the conflict, given the existence of a physical buffer between the two countries. In fact, as we describe in the following sections, Iran welcomes some degree of insecurity in Syria. However, other external threats that Iran faced gave the country an incentive to use the Syrian conflict as an opportunity to train and improve its military forces, as we will discuss later.
With respect to economic interests, Syria for the majority of the conflict's duration has been more of an economic burden than boon for Iran, which had to commit significant resources to help secure Assad. However, Iran has gradually started to try to monetize its support for Assad by taking ownership of reconstruction projects in the war-torn country, particularly with the U.S. reimposition of sanctions starting in 2018. Iran also arguably intervened in Syria in part to lessen the cost of its support for Lebanese Hezbollah by using land routes to Lebanon and the Mediterranean. Nevertheless, economic gains were not a key incentive driving Iranian involvement in Syria for most of the conflict. Neither were changes in Iranian military capabilities: Iran has possessed the capability to undertake an intervention along the lines of what it did in Syria for some time.
Finally, ideational factors were less significant in shaping Iran's Syrian intervention than other geostrategic and domestic considerations. Although Iran remains a revolutionary actor, driven in part by ideology, its decisions to intervene militarily have largely been determined by pragmatic geopolitical considerations. Ideology, by contrast, has generally served as a means of rallying domestic constituents (chiefly recruiting volunteers in Iran to fight in conflicts) and galvanizing partners (particularly nonstate partners). Similarly, although key figures within Iran have certainly shaped the decision to intervene in conflicts, the Syrian case in particular demonstrates a systemwide bargaining game shaping the decision to intervene.
The primary driver behind Iran's decision to intervene in Syria lies in its desire to shape the regional power balance to its advantage. Iran's Syrian intervention to secure regional power balance was mostly aimed at maintaining the status quo and protecting the Iranian position. That it would also advance its strategic position seems like an unintended or unanticipated side effect. Iran's tolerance for instability in nearby countries varies depending on the proximity of those countries to its border, the level of ethnic and religious population overlap, and, as a result, the impact on its security.
Although Tehran seeks to avoid chaos in neighboring countries, such as Afghanistan and Iraq, where turmoil and insecurity have direct implications for Iranian security, that is not necessarily the case in Syria. 
36
37
38
Iran intervened in Syria in pursuit of two key objectives. First, Tehran wished to create and maintain a favorable balance of power in the region and, by doing so, preserve its access and influence in Syria, which enables its access and influence in Lebanon and Gaza. Second, Iran sought to stabilize its immediate neighborhood by ensuring Assad's survival and, later, containing ISIS in Syria. For Tehran, confining the ISIS threat in Syria would decrease chances of spillover into Iraq and, ultimately, Iran. Syria in general and Assad in particular were key to these endeavors. The Islamic Republic framed its intervention in Syria primarily along two lines: counterterrorism and the protection of Shia holy sites in that country, both of which also are core 
36
37
38 Juneau, 2020, p. 28.
The significance of the Assad regime's fate to Iran's regional power status can be traced to the start of the Islamic Republic: Since 1979, the Assads' Syria has been the only Arab country in the Middle East to consistently side with Iran in regional conflict. 
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
Iran had entered the war hoping to keep Syria on its side and avoid the balance of power tilting in its adversaries' favor. But securing Syria as an Iranian ally also meant increasing Iran's strategic depth. 
50
In particular, land access to Hezbollah and the provision of assistance to the group as it became involved in Syria factored into Iran's decision to intervene in Syria. Iran's network of foreign fighters in Syria was also instrumental in making sure that any conflict between Iran and Israel (and its ally, the United States) would not remain contained, dragging in other forces from the region. 
51
51
52
Iran's historical alliance with the Assad family also played a critical role in shaping its decision to intervene in Syria. The alliance-withhost factor came into play in Iran's Syrian intervention in three phases. During phase one, Iran made the initial decision to intervene in 2011 to secure its ally, one of the only Arab countries in the Middle East to have consistently sided with Iran since 1979, as discussed earlier. By 2012, a second phase had begun, in which Iran (like much of the international community) saw Assad as declining fast. Tehran began to question whether the costs of maintaining him in place outweighed the benefits. As a result, Iranian decisionmakers were exploring alternatives that would allow them to keep Syria on their side without necessarily committing to Assad, because his fate seemed increasingly sealed. At the same time, Iran was largely handcuffed; it had already paid important reputational costs to support Assad, and it could not find viable alternatives to secure its interests in Syria. However, the combination of the rise of ISIS and the Russian intervention in 2015 ushered in the third phase of Iranian intervention in support of Assad: Having beaten all odds and lasted in power, Assad was there to stay, and fewer governments were calling on him to step down. Some had even taken steps to normalize relations again. 
53
54
55
By 2013, it was reported that Iran and Hezbollah were cultivating a network of militias in Syria to protect their interests in the event of Assad's fall. 
56
54 Mohsen Milani, 2013, p. 84. 55
56
57
58
59
As noted previously, ISIS did not factor into Iran's initial decision to intervene. However, ISIS did strengthen the rationale for maintaining the alliance and supporting Assad later. For Iran, the rise of ISIS was an immense security challenge in Iraq, but it was an opportunity 57 DeYoung and Warrick, 2013. 
58
59 Juneau, 2020, p. 30.
60
Another significant boost for Iran's support for Assad came when Russia entered the conflict in 2015. Moscow lent Assad and his backers critical air capabilities and helped deisolate Tehran thanks to its weight on the international stage. The conflict began to turn in Assad's (and, consequently, Iran's) favor. Assad's rule proved more resilient than many (including in Iran) had anticipated. After the battle of Mosul, Iran redirected some of its ground forces to Syria. 
61
62
60
61
62
The fear of Assad's collapse and the emergence of new leaders who are less sympathetic to Iran was a key driver behind Iran's initial decision to intervene in Syria. Soon, however, Iran would display flexibility by planning for contingency rather than seeking to keep Assad in power at all cost: Assad may fall, but Syria would have to remain in friendly hands. When Assad kept his grip on power against all odds, and with Russia now throwing its weight behind the dictator, Iran was able not just to secure a friendly Syria but also the continuation of Assad.
Iran almost exclusively deploys troops in host countries with which it shares a significant co-identity group population: A few states in the region have strong ethnic ties to the Iranian population, while many countries have a Shia minority, thus explaining why Iran's interventions remain regional and do not seem to expand beyond its neighborhood. As noted in Chapter Three, our data suggest all Iranian ground interventions have taken place in theaters and countries where the country has some co-identity group populations (the advisory mission in the Iran-Iraq War, the Lebanon War, Iranian forces in Iraq post-Saddam, and the Syrian civil war). Such ethnic and religious ties raise the stakes for Iran and increase the probability of intervention, all else equal. The country's regional clout is highly dependent on its co-identity groups, which form the basis of its network of nonstate partners (one of Iran's only formidable security assets, making up for its lack of adequate conventional capabilities) and ties to governments across the region. 
63
Different Shia groups in the region are among Iran's natural audiences and allies. Even prior to the establishment of the Islamic Republic, whose revolutionary ideology is often seen as a determining factor in its cultivation of Shia allies, the Shah leveraged the country's religious ties to Shia groups in the region. 
64
65
However, religious ties have factored into the Assad regime's relationship to Tehran. As members of a minority religious group that has ruled with an iron fist over a majority of the population for decades, the Assad family has an incentive to forge ties with groups and governments whose religious identity it shares. For Iran, whose position as one of a few Shia-majority countries in an overwhelmingly Sunni (and Arab) region makes it inherently vulnerable, the potential collapse of one of the only Shia-governed states in the Middle East and its possible replacement by a Sunni government-which could then forge stronger ties to Iran's Sunni rivals (particularly, Saudi Arabia)-could entail cataclysmic regional repercussions.
From the start of the intervention, Iran prioritized its support on protecting and training Shia co-identity populations. As Hossein Hamedani, an IRGC commander who was killed in an ISIS attack in Aleppo in 2015, explained, Qassem Soleimani and he flew to Damascus and began to organize 2,000 Alawite "youths." 
66
67
68
According to some Iranian sources (which should not necessarily be taken at face value), Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei advised Damascus to minimize casualties on both sides, noting that the other side, like the Syrian forces, was also composed of young Muslims, albeit young Muslims who had been fooled into joining takfiris. 69 66 "Aghaz-e bohran-e Surieh be revayat-e Shahid Hossein Hamedani," 2016.
67 "Aghaz-e bohran-e Surieh be revayat-e Shahid Hossein Hamedani," 2016.
68 "Aghaz-e bohran-e Surieh be revayat-e Shahid Hossein Hamedani," 2016.
69 "Aghaz-e bohran-e Surieh be revayat-e Shahid Hossein Hamedani," 2016.  If true, this account would signal an Iranian concern about the danger of the sectarian nature of the conflict. However, this did not stop Iran from intervening and remaining engaged in a bloody conflict pitting the Alawite dictator against a largely Sunni population. And unlike in Iraq, where Iran worked with Shias and Kurds while trying to recruit some Sunni fighters against ISIS (with limited success), Iran seems to have largely banked on the Alawites in Syria.
That Iran factors sectarian identity into the way it defines its interests in Syria is confirmed by two other developments. The first is Iranian proselytization among tribes in eastern Syria. Iranian religious groups were successful at converting some members of the Baggara tribe in Deir Ezzour to Shiism prior to Syria's civil war, an effort which allowed Iran to seed support in areas otherwise inhospitable to its influence. 
70
71
72
Co-identity group populations in Syria served as an important driver behind the Iranian involvement in Syria and the means by which the regime intervened there. However, they also presented a challenge to Tehran: Iran intervened in Syria in support of and alongside a regime representing the Alawite minority and cracking down on the Sunni majority. This further exacerbated the Islamic Republic's image as a sectarian actor in Syria and in the region more broadly.
A fourth factor motivating Iran to intervene in Syria lies in its perception of external threats to Iranian territorial sovereignty: specifically, Israel and other regional partners of the United States. In addition to statements by military leaders describing the threat created by Israel and others, this perceived external threat is evidenced by Iran's motivation to build stronger military capabilities. This motivation is most clearly demonstrated in Iran's eagerness to expose its troops to combat, enhance jointness and cohesion, and gain combat experience. For Iran, expanding its strategic depth and developing and testing capabilities in an actual conflict was a practical way to prevent and prepare for a potential conflict with the United States and for regional contingencies. Iran sees the United States as the greatest threat to its regime survival and national security. As a result, it has largely designed its military doctrine and strategy around the principles of deterrence and defense against Israel primarily and the United States secondarily. Although Tehran did not obtain new capabilities in the lead-up to the conflict, the intervention became an opportunity for improved capabilities, jointness, and battlefield effectiveness.
Given the significant perceived external threat, the opportunity for Iranian conventional, special, and irregular forces to gain their first joint-combined battlefield experience since 1988 was an incentive weighing (perhaps paradoxically) in favor of the decision to intervene. Initially, Tehran supported Damascus by largely adhering to its traditional playbook of indirect support. It sent advisers and provided weapons and equipment to the Assad regime. However, as the unrest grew into a conflict, Iran gradually increased its support for Assad, deploying forces to participate in the conflict by 2012. 
73
Until Syria, most of Iran's military operations were limited to airstrikes and advisory missions aimed at supporting nonstate and state partners by supplying them with advice, training, weapons and equipment, and financing. Beyond its borders, the country had mostly leveraged the IRGC in these missions, confining the Artesh (Iran's conventional forces). The Syrian conflict provided Iran with the opportunity to deploy forces in combat and to do so by bringing both the IRGC and Artesh together to allow them to build cohesion. Similarly, Syria was also an opportunity for Tehran to conduct combined operations between its armed forces and its proxies.
Following the Iran-Iraq War, some Iranian military commanders and political officials acknowledged that their country's armed forces lacked cohesion during the war. 
74
73 Black, 2012.
75
According to Pourdastan, the Artesh ground forces insisted on having "a presence in Syria," although he argued that the Artesh only sent volunteers and played an advisory role there. 
76
77
78
79
76 "Amir Pourdasatan tashrih kar joz'eyat-e hozoor-e Artesh-e Iran dar Araq va Surieh," 2018; Majara-ye gofteh nashodeh az bombaran-e mavaze'-e DAESH tavasot-e jangadeha-ye Artesh," 2017.
Iran has had since the end of the Iran-Iraq War to operate in combat in several domains.
This unparalleled volume of Iranian activity on foreign soil and emphasis on scope of jointness also extended to other IRGC units and the Basij volunteer force. The IRGC deployed several units to Syria. The Quds Force was responsible for the command and oversight of most Iranian and Iranian-backed forces in Syria. However, the IRGC's Saberin Unit, a special battalion, was also deployed to theater. 
80
81
80
81 "Emruz keshvarha darbareh-ye Surieh nachar be mozakereh ba Iran hastand / dar hal-e gostaresh-e 'Gordan-e Fatehin' dar kol-e keshvar hastim," Tasnim News, October 21, 2016; "Khun-e shohada-ye modafe'-e haram-e yegan-e Tafehin masir-e harakat-e ayandeh ra tarsim mikonad," Tasnim News, February 1, 2016.   82 "Hozur-e sardar Soleimani dar kenar-e razmandehgan-e Fatemiyoun dar khatt-e moqadam-e jebheh-ye Surieh + film," Bashgah-e khabarnegaran-e javan, March 28, 2018.  ever, the Artesh also played a role in the command of certain nonstate clients, including the Fatemiyoun. As Pourdastan observed, the Artesh special forces were involved in commanding the Fatemiyoun. 
83
As discussed previously, Iran (like Russia and China) sees itself as the heir to a great civilization and a rightful regional power. 
85
83 "Amir Pourdasatan tashrih kar joz'eyat-e hozoor-e Artesh-e Iran dar Araq va Surieh," 2018. 
84
85
Moscow siding with Tehran and playing a critical role in preserving the regime in Damascus (which the majority of the international community deemed unsalvageable and undesirable) may have served to restore and possibly enhance perceived Iranian power and status, although Iran continues to be seen in the region and beyond as a nefarious actor whose support facilitated continued mass atrocities by the Assad regime. Iran's intervention forced the West to negotiate with it on the future of Syria. In early diplomatic processes (Geneva I, for instance), Iran was excluded. Later, Iran was invited (e.g., in the International Syria Support Group and the Vienna process). This was in grudging recognition by the West, including the Obama administration, that Iran was critical to the future of Syria. Second, Iran, Russia, and Turkey led the Astana process, also a product of the influence Iran achieved through its military intervention. Nevertheless, any gains in prestige were a byproduct of the war and not a result Iran knew it could expect from its involvement in Syria.
As noted previously, Iran sought to keep its involvement in Syria covert during the initial phase of the conflict. This was in part to avoid a possible backlash at home, driven by the public's outrage at the country taking sides in a domestic matter and doing so on the side of a brutal dictator. However, when it became public that Iran was supporting Assad, the Iranian leadership tried to present a compelling narrative legitimizing Iran's actions in Syria to its constituency and abroad. This narrative presented Assad as a stabilizing force in a chaotic region and his opponents as terrorists, whose operations had to be confined to that conflict lest they spill into Iran. As Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei put it, these individuals who leave here to go to Iraq or Syria in the name of defending the sites of the Prophet's family in the face of the takfiris, are in reality defending their own cities. Of course, their intent is [to serve] God. But the reality of the situation is this: it is the defense of Iran. 
86
Nevertheless, domestic politics and legitimacy have largely presented obstacles to be managed rather than factors that shape Iranian considerations on the Syrian conflict. The rise of ISIS helped manage this challenge more effectively. Fears of an ISIS spillover into Iran and the public's concerns were part of the Iranian calculations on Syria since 2014; however, they were also a convenient excuse and an opportunity for Tehran's continued assistance to Assad.
The Syrian civil war is perhaps the most significant conflict in contemporary Iranian history since the end of the Iran-Iraq War. Unlike the ISIS insurgency in Iraq, the Syrian conflict did not have direct implications for Iranian security (such as a potential spillover of the conflict into the country). Yet Tehran committed more resources to Syria than it had to any other conflict since the end of the Iran-Iraq War. In particular, the fact that Iran committed ground forces (from the IRGC and Artesh alike) rather than relying on an advisory mission as it typi-cally does makes Syria an unusual case. It is not yet clear whether Syria will provide a new model of Iranian intervention or whether the country will return to mostly conducting advisory missions in the future. However, it appears that Tehran has largely benefited from the war in strategic terms.
In addition to meeting its primary objective of keeping its ally Assad in power, Tehran has acquired significant combat experience from the war, including IRGC-Artesh and Iranian and proxy joint operations. Moreover, Iran was able to preserve (and perhaps even enhance) its land bridge to Lebanon to facilitate logistical support to Lebanese Hezbollah, which it sees as its primary deterrent against Israel. Iran also was able to project power and increase its strategic depth thanks to the war. Table 
4
Case Study: Iranian Intervention in the Syrian Civil War 99 • National identity perceptions of Iran as the heir to a great civilization and a rightful regional power; also as a victim of historical humiliations by other great powers • Improving prestige and status in international community are important policy drivers
• No major revanchist territorial ambitions (unlike Russia, China, North Korea) • Iran initially denied its involvement, which it likely viewed as risking more reputational costs than advancing prestige benefits • Iran's revisionist political and cultural impulses are possibly less acute than those in other key adversarial states. This factor seemingly is secondary to more-pragmatic foreign policy considerations regarding the decision to intervene Domestic politics and legitimacy
• Tehran initially sought to obfuscate its involvement, suggesting some sensitivity to domestic opinion • Proliferation of social media and democratization of news media likely increase regime sensitivity to public opinion • Later, Tehran pivoted to propagating an image of Iran as a stabilizing force in the region In this case study, we assess a somewhat different set of the hypotheses identified in Chapters Two and Three by evaluating six factors that appear to best explain the Iranian decision to intervene in Iraq in response to the rise of ISIS in 2014. We selected this case study for three reasons. First, this case is typical of Iran's modus operandi: a small-footprint, low-visibility, and mostly advisory force, leveraging proxies. This case allows us to assess the factors that may be most likely to drive interventions of this type. Second, this case is potentially generalizable to other Iranian interventions because it represents a typical Iranian intervention. As a result, understanding this case is significant beyond ongoing U.S. Army operations in Iraq, a theater that will continue to remain of importance to the United States and a candidate for possible U.S.-Iran confrontation. Finally, the case is critical to U.S. Army planners' ability to forecast and possibly respond to other future Iranian interventions. In particular, the contrast and comparison of the Syrian and Iraqi cases provide interesting insights into the range of Iran's military interventions. 
1
5
6
From Iran's perspective, Iraq is one of the most significant countries to its national security. The two neighbors share a 910-mile porous border and have significant ethnic and religious ties: specifically, substantial Kurdish populations and a Shia majority in a region dominated by majority Sunni states. As a result, since the 1979 Islamic Revolution (at which point Tehran became a U.S. adversary), Iran has been engaged in Iraq in some capacity for more than three decades. Iran's first major postrevolution military intervention was the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq War: an eight-year, bloody conflict initiated by Saddam Hussein's Iraq, who sought to exploit the chaos created by the revolution and the U.S. hostage crisis (which isolated Iran internationally and signaled the formal end of the U.S.-Iran partnership) to annex parts of Southwestern Iran while checking revolutionary Iran, whose leadership had called for a Shia revival and had stated its objective of exporting its ideology. 
2
3
Islamic Revolution in Iraq-later known as the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq-in Iran and began to organize there; following the fall of Saddam Hussein in 2003, many of these elements returned to Iraq to operate in militias or join the new government. 
4
5
6
7
8
9
15
16
17
organization captured international attention because of its highly visible military successes (including public images of Iraqi security forces dropping weapons and fleeing advancing blitzkriegs) and rapid geographical expansion, ability to hold onto seized territories, brutality displayed by its members (including public beheadings), and sophistication in disseminating propaganda, recruiting foreign fighters, and exploiting multiple local and foreign revenue sources. 
18
19
For Tehran, the prospect of an adversarial force like ISIS-whose leadership had placed Iran among its top targets-gathering within the borders of its historical enemy constituted an imminent national security threat. 
20
21
22
Iran's presence in Iraq was predominantly secured through the IRGC: the paramilitary branch of the Iranian armed forces focused on regional activities. In fact, the Iraq portfolio in Iran was mostly managed by Soleimani, whose personal relationships with key figures in the Shia and Kurdish communities in Iraq made him a natural facilitator 22 Martin Chulov, "Iran Sends Troops into Iraq to Aid Fight Against ISIS Militants," The Guardian, June 14, 2014. Because of these official denials, obtaining reliable data on Iranian forces in Iraq is notoriously difficult. According to another source, for instance, this initial deployment in mid-June 2014 consisted of two battalions of IRGC units, which were tasked with defending Baghdad and the holy cities of Najaf and Karbala. Still another source, citing a senior Iranian cleric, claimed that between June and December 2014, Iran sent "more than 1,000 military advisers to Iraq, as well as elite units." See Farnaz Fassihi, "Iran Deploys Forces to Fight al Qaeda-Inspired Militants in Iraq," Wall Street Journal, June 12, 2014; Missy Ryan and Loveday Morris, "The U.S. and Iran Are Aligned in Iraq Against the Islamic State -For Now," Washington Post, December 27, 2014; and Nima Adelkhah, "Iranian Intervention in Iraq Against the Islamic State: Strategy, Tactics, and Impact," Terrorism Monitor, Vol. 13, No. 2, January 23, 2015.  there. 
23
However, Iran's involvement in Iraq (while sizable) was significantly smaller than the forces Iran deployed into Syria, even though the ISIS threat in Iraq potentially represented an existential threat to the stability of the Iranian regime. This was in part because Iran could rely on the international coalition, which was already active against ISIS in Iraq and whose operational objectives it largely shared. In that sense, Iran was able to conserve its ground forces to support Assad in Syria while protecting its political influence in Iraq with a minimal presence. In a similar sense, Iran's intervention in Iraq since 2014 appears more in line with the country's usual pattern of interventions-mostly relying on advisory missions-while the Syrian case is seemingly a departure from Tehran's modus operandi.
In addition to training, arming, and advising forces in Iraq, Iran has conducted several airstrikes in that country since the rise of ISIS. 
24
25
26
In the sections that follow, we test previously identified hypotheses regarding where, when, and why Iran intervenes by analyzing the factors that appear to have most directly affected Tehran's decision to become involved in Iraq to counter ISIS starting in 2014. Table 
5
6
Finally, we note that four potential factors (economic interests, ideology, adversary leadership and personality, and adversary military capabilities) were assessed to be of lower importance; these factors are not addressed in great detail in our presentation of this case study. Here, we briefly outline why in each case.
Iran and Iraq have considerable economic ties. However, we did not find economic interests to be one of the defining factors in shaping the Iranian decision to intervene in Iraq. Instead, we view economic interdependence as an important byproduct of Iranian involvement in Iraq and a significant factor in the two neighbors' relations. Tehran's decision to intervene in Iraq to combat ISIS was largely shaped by security and geopolitical, not economic, factors.
Ideational factors were less significant in shaping Iran's Iraq intervention. Although Iran remains a revolutionary actor, driven in part by ideology, its decisions to intervene militarily have largely been determined by pragmatic geopolitical considerations. Ideology, by contrast, has generally served as a means of rallying domestic constituents (chiefly recruiting volunteers in Iran to fight in conflicts) and galvanizing partners (particularly nonstate partners) after the decision to intervene has already been made. Similarly, although key figures within Iran have certainly shaped the decision to intervene in conflicts, the Iraqi case, in particular, demonstrates a systemwide consensus shaping the decision to intervene.
Iran's military capabilities, while of course relevant to the intervention, neither hindered nor encouraged the intervention.
The strongest factor influencing Tehran's decision to intervene in Iraq in 2014 was arguably its most basic: mitigating a potentially existential threat to its national territorial sovereignty posed by groups operating within its neighbor. As Iranian leaders and commanders would often claim throughout the conflict, "Today, Iran is fighting ISIS in Iraq so that it does not have to fight them in Tehran tomorrow." 
27
ISIS's ability to quickly capture and hold onto swaths of territory, its access to resources, and its control of populations in Iraq, coupled with the group's violent extremist ideology and use of notoriously brutal tactics, raised security concerns across the globe in 2014. 
28
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
The distinct external threat posed by ISIS also affected the options for how Iran intervened in Iraq. The Islamic Republic has long repelled the domestic threat posed by various transnational terrorist groups by engaging in tactical cooperation with them. For example, Tehran tried to mitigate the threat posed by al-Qaeda to its security by providing the group with some minimal benefits, including access to its territory for the purpose of funneling money and operatives. 
36
The group's vehemently anti-Shia ideology, Iran's position as a top target for the group, and its degree of brutality removed this option from Iranian decisionmakers' toolkit. For Iran, the only viable method by which it could counter the group was to combat it. Qassem Soleimani, before his death, and other Iranian commanders have long argued that the "best defense" is offense-a lesson they learned in the Iran-Iraq War. 
37
38
39
40
41
42
On the other hand, some evidence suggests that the external threat posed by ISIS may have been exaggerated and thus less of a critical factor than is commonly assumed. Critically, Tehran has long used counterterrorism as an excuse to build influence beyond its borders and crush domestic dissent. Hence, there are limits to the veracity of Iran's narrative that its efforts in the counter-ISIS campaign were solely 37 Ali Akbari-Mazdabadi, Hajj Qassem: A Quest in Hajj Qassem Soleimani's Memoirs, Tehran: Ya Zahra Publishers, 2015, p. 165. 
38
39
40 Bozorgmehr Sharafedin, "Iran Smashes 'Terrorist Cell', Warning of Threat from Islamic State," Reuters, November 18, 2015. 
41
Sharafedin, 2015. 42
The likelihood of a 2014 Iranian intervention in Iraq was also strongly affected by geopolitical considerations pertaining to regional power balance and stability. A military intervention would enhance Iran's ability to shape the geopolitical alignment of one of the most important countries in the Middle East and would ensure that it remained a powerful broker in regional counter-ISIS efforts for years to come, a gain that Tehran would seek to leverage following the U.S. reimposition of sanctions on its economy and efforts to isolate the country politically. 
43
Geostrategically, the intervention might also secure freedom of access to Syria and Lebanon, via a land bridge through northern and/or western Iraq, allowing Iran to support its main proxy, Hezbollah, and gain proximity to its chief regional adversary, Israel, more easily and at a lower cost. 
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
By the time ISIS was losing its territorial caliphate in 2016, Iran had made significant gains in Iraq and had seemingly improved its relative position in the balance of power in its favor in the region. Photos of Iranian forces helping secure and stabilize Iraq were widely disseminated on various social media platforms, highlighting Tehran's desire to capitalize on the intervention as an opportunity to improve its regional image. 
52
53
54
55
56
Walk into almost any market in Iraq and the shelves are filled with goods from Iran -milk, yogurt, chicken. Turn on the television and channel after channel broadcasts programs sympathetic to Iran. A new building goes up? It is likely that the cement and bricks came from Iran . . . Politically, Iran has a large number of allies in Iraq's Parliament who can help secure its goals . . . Perhaps most crucial, Parliament passed a law last year that effectively made the constellation of Shiite militias a permanent fixture of Iraq's security forces. This ensures Iraqi funding for the groups while effectively maintaining Iran's control over some of the most powerful units . . . To gain advantage on the airwaves, new television channels set up with Iranian money and linked to Shiite militias broadcast news coverage portraying Iran as Iraq's protector and the United States as a devious interloper. 
57
58
59
58
60
61
Tehran's partnership with Baghdad in the post-Saddam era-particularly after the U.S. withdrawal in 2011-was another important factor shaping the decision to intervene militarily to counter the rise of ISIS. Although the two countries had signed more than 100 cooperation agreements between the fall of Saddam and early 2010, Iran was not compelled to intervene because of formal or informal mutual defense obligations. 
62
63
64
65
66
67
Recent fieldwork suggests that this risk is in fact what occurred between 2014 and 2018: Whereas "Iran's popularity increased significantly in Iraq from 2003 until 2014, . . . new public opinion survey evidence shows that Iran's honeymoon with Iraqi Shiites is rapidly fading." 68 According to polling conducted by the Al-Mustakella research group, for instance, the share of Iraqi Shiites who identified Iran as a "reliable partner" decreased from 76 percent to 43 percent between 2015 and 2018, while the share of Iraqi Shiites holding a "favorable attitude toward Iran" decreased from 88 percent to 47 percent over the same period. The number of Iraqi Shiites who viewed Iran as a "real threat to Iraqi sovereignty" increased from 25 percent to 58 percent between 2016 and 2018. 
69
Monitor, Vol. 12, No. 14, July 10, 2014, p. 8. 68
Post, November 16, 2018. 69
The Iranians supported the Iraqi central government's efforts to render the referendum useless. As part of these efforts, Iran dispatched Soleimani to hold talks with the Kurds. Soleimani, for example, held meetings with the president of the Kurdistan Region, Masoud Barzani, prior to the referendum to gauge the situation and, presumably, advise Barzani to postpone the plebiscite. 
70
For decades, the Iraqi Shia constituency had been effectively sidelined and repressed by a secular autocrat representing the Sunni majority. Saddam distrusted Iraqi Shias, viewing them as vulnerable to Iran's influence. 
73
74
75
76
77
On the one hand, by leveraging co-identity group populations, Tehran has become an important facilitator and broker in Iraq. Tehran has been able to successfully broker deals and help settle disputes among various stakeholders in Iraq. 
78
79
On the other hand, Iran's ties to co-identity group populations were also a shortcoming of the Iranian intervention in Iraq. For example, although Iranian forces were able recruit and cooperate with Shias and Kurds, their attempts to avoid appearing as a sectarian player by forging ties with Sunnis yielded only limited results. Despite some efforts, Iran was not able (by Iranian officials' own admission) to recruit more than just a few hundred Sunnis to support its intervention in Iraq and to cooperate against ISIS. 
80
Iran's support for co-identity group populations has also revealed challenges as some of these groups, emboldened by their participation in the conflict, have sought to assert themselves politically and to undermine and break away from the central authority, thus presenting a threat to Iran's primary objective of preserving Iraqi territo- 
78 Nader, 2015.
80
The Kurds' strengthened political image and capital resulting from their military successes in the counter-ISIS fight (in part facilitated by Tehran) bolstered their claim for their own state. This, in turn, posed a significant challenge to Iran, which had long worked with Iraqi Kurds thanks to-but also despite-their connections to Iran's Kurdish minority, whose separatist elements the central authority feared. Soleimani traveled to Iraq on several occasions to warn the Kurds against moving forward with the secession plans: He reportedly told the Kurds that Iran would withdraw its strategic support for them and that there could even be conflict if they moved forward. 
81
Factor 5: Domestic Politics and Legitimacy Domestic political concerns were another factor affecting Tehran's decision to intervene in Iraq. According to Zogby polling conducted in September-October 2014 (just months after ISIS declared a caliphate), for instance, the Iranian public held a greater threat perception of ISIS than any of the seven other domestic audiences surveyed in the region, including the Iraqi public; 86 percent of Iranians polled in late 2014 considered ISIS a threat to Iran (of which 63 percent characterized ISIS as a "very grave threat"), and 85 percent considered ISIS a threat to the region (of which 53 percent characterized ISIS as a "very grave threat"). 
82
83
84
86
87
88
85 Akbarzadeh, 2015, p. 44.
Esfandiary and Tabatabai, 2015, p. 5. 87
88
National status concerns comprise a more limited factor in the Iranian intervention in Iraq to counter ISIS. Iran has leveraged its contribution to the counter-ISIS campaign to present itself as a responsible power, whose efforts are instrumental in stopping a brutal terrorist organization (which, in the Iranian narrative, has been created according to Saudi ideology and thanks to funding from U.S. regional partners). As Iran's Foreign Minister Javad Zarif argued on Twitter when the United States designated the IRGC as a Foreign Terrorist Organization:
When @realdonaldtrump insisted that 'Iran is killing ISIS', exactly who did he think was doing the fighting & making the sacrifice? ISIS would've held two Arab capitals & fielded a Terrorist Army on Europe's doorstep had #IRGC not fought alongside brave peoples of Iraq & Syria. 
89
90
The Iranian counter-ISIS campaign in Iraq since 2014 is a good example of Tehran's modus operandi with respect to its military interventions. The campaign largely leverages the Iranian playbook, relying mostly on an advisory mission to advance political objectives that are shaped largely by geopolitical and domestic factors. For Iran, ISIS presented a significant threat to its security. From Tehran's perspective, the implications from the rise of ISIS were immediate and severe. The likelihood of the conflict's spillover into Iran, ISIS efforts to recruit operatives and perpetrate attacks in the country, and the possibility of an Iraqi disintegration that would also create threats to Iranian territorial integrity and national unity were among the key considerations leading to an Iranian intervention in Iraq.
However, as the conflict progressed, it provided Iran with the opportunity to make gains beyond preserving the status quo. By 2018, Tehran had firmly secured its proxies in Iraq, some of which had entered the Iraqi political landscape and further entrenched Iran in Iraq. Adding to Iran's ability to project power was the fact that the country had intervened with and through local partners rather than as part of the U.S.-led international coalition countering ISIS. According to the Iranian narrative, Soleimani and his men were facing the same adversary as the United States and its partners. However, whereas the U.S.-led coalition (composed of world powers) was committing its state-of-the-art technology and employing heavy weaponry to fight the terrorist group, Iran worked mostly with its local partners.
Table 
5
At the outset, we identified ten possible factors with the potential to affect the likelihood of Iranian military interventions. The results of our literature review, quantitative investigations, and case studies point to several factors as more influential than the others in explaining the Iranian military interventions model: the presence of co-identity group populations in the host nation, opportunities to affect the regional power balance and stability, the perception of external threats, and the existence of alliances or partnerships with the host government. The most important factors affecting the likelihood of Iranian interventions, perhaps contrary to conventional wisdom, are geopolitical and domestic in nature, not ideational or economic.
Several key conclusions can be drawn from this analysis (a summary of evidence for the factors leading to Iranian interventions can be found in Table 
6
However, in general and as discussed previously, all Iranian ground interventions identified in this study have occurred in theaters and countries with co-identity group populations. 
1
1
There is some evidence that leadership and personality have played a role in shaping Iranian decisions on military interventions (mostly captured in the literature in the case of the Iran-Iraq War).
The literature on this factor remains poorly populated, and the opacity of the system makes it difficult to identify the key proponents and dissenters and the degree of their influence over the process as a whole. well as ethnic, religious, linguistic, and/or cultural ties that allow it to identity possible collaborators. As we discussed in Chapter Five, Iran has at times attempted to create a working relationship with governments and nonstate actors with which it does not share any cultural, ethnic, or religious ties. However, it has not been able to do so as successfully. Hence, Iran rarely intervenes outside of the areas in which it has co-identity group populations.
Regional power balance and stability is also a critical factor affecting the likelihood of adversary military interventions. Iran views itself as a fundamentally vulnerable state. It is a majority Persian and Shia nation in a predominantly Arab and Sunni region, where it has historically felt othered and often attacked. From Iran's perspective, unless the balance of power is in its favor, the country could once again become a target for adversarial forces, as was the case in the 1980s, when the unfavorable balance of power in the region encouraged and facilitated an Iraqi invasion of Iran, during which nearly all Middle Eastern powers sided with Baghdad over and against Tehran. Hence, the simple pursuit of the preservation of the status quo is not enough for Iran; the country seeks to tilt the balance of power in its favor, and it does so by leveraging co-identity group populations.
A key strategy pursued by Iran to ensure a favorable balance of power is to ensure that no central authority is strong enough to present a threat to or resist influence by Iran. Since the rise of ISIS, however, it has become clear to Iranian decisionmakers and military planners that a conflicting objective must also be achieved: ensuring that no central authority is too weak as to collapse and leave a power vacuum that can be leveraged by adversarial nonstate actors. These two strategies are difficult to balance because they can be at odds with one another.
Finally, external threats are an important factor in Iranian military interventions. Many of Iran's military interventions have resulted from an external threat perception caused by state or nonstate adversaries. External threats have also mostly resulted in more-overt demonstrations of military might by Tehran. For example, although Iran was less inclined to publicize its involvement in Iraq and Syria prior to 2014, it has become less reluctant to do so since the rise of ISIS, because it has been able to justify these interventions on the grounds that it is responding to an external threat. This is not to say that external threats cannot also yield benefits. For Iran, some of the most acute threats in recent history have also provided tremendous strategic opportunities. The rise of ISIS, in particular, is an important example of a major external threat that was also an opportunity for Iran, allowing the country to project power, increase its strategic depth, cultivate nonstate clients, and preserve and build its influence in key countries and beyond its borders.
Our investigations yielded two additional key takeaways about Iranian military interventions. First, they indicate that Iran almost always deploys special forces (mostly from the IRGC) rather than conventional ones and favors committing IRGC forces rather than Artesh personnel and troops to military interventions; the two notable exceptions are the Iran-Iraq War and Syria (although here, too, the IRGC led the operations, not the Artesh). Table 
6
Second, training and assistance has been a component of many Iranian military interventions, although Iranian forces have engaged in a variety of activities, the diversity of which is surprising given the limited number of Iranian interventions. Less surprising is Iran's little-tono experience with or capability of projecting force beyond its region. The country lacks significant lift and transport capabilities, though it may have somewhat enhanced these capabilities thanks to its Syrian involvement. Perhaps more importantly, Iran also lacks any allies with significant lift and transport capabilities to help it project power beyond the near abroad (with perhaps the exception of Russia, which qualifies as a partner rather than an ally and only supports Iranian efforts when the two countries' strategic objectives align). In addition to the absence of capabilities, Iran is mostly interested in asserting itself as a regional rather than a global player. The country has had few naval interventions (most notably in the context of the Tanker War and the ongoing antipiracy mission in the Gulf of Aden, Gulf of Oman, and Bab al-Mandab) but has a track record of a persistent use of limited airstrikes. Overall, Iranian interventions (though few in number) and their aggressiveness appear to be increasing modestly, which may or may not indicate a growing risk tolerance in Tehran. Nevertheless, the overall deployed numbers remain small today, making it difficult to identify trends and patterns with as much confidence as in the Russian and Chinese cases examined in the companion volumes to this report.
These results point to several signposts that could allow policymakers and military planners to identify and anticipate Iranian military interventions going forward. First, the presence of co-identity group populations is, of course, of predictive value in anticipating Iranian interventions. Co-identity groups provide a natural opening to Iran because they can lead to the cultivation of partnerships with state and nonstate actors. Iran is most inclined to intervene using the advisory model and usually leverages existing ties to develop a principle-agent relationship with proxies, which it can support during a conflict. We note that Syria presents a partial departure from this model, because Iran has also recruited nonlocal foreign fighters to deploy in combat. Nevertheless, for the foreseeable future, Tehran's most likely approach to advisory missions will remain centered on the use of local forces from co-identity group populations. Hence, when assessing where Iran may intervene militarily, the U.S. Army should focus closely on areas with significant populations sharing ethnic, religious, cultural, or linguistic ties to Iran.
Although the ubiquity of Shia populations throughout the Middle East may render this signpost of only limited utility for pre-dicting future Iranian interventions in its near abroad, it is nonetheless a helpful signpost in that it highlights Iran's historical reluctance (in part because of constraints on its military capabilities) to intervene beyond the country's immediate neighborhood. And although Iran has become involved in countries without Shia populations (in some cases, where Tehran did not have co-identity groups whatsoever), it is telling that none of these conflicts made it into our universe of cases. Beyond the mere presence of coethnic populations, policymakers should look for more-specific events involving these groups as potential signposts. For example, changes in the political landscapes of countries that lead to an increase or decrease of the political power, welfare, and security of coethnic groups (such as major political upheavals including these groups; arrests of political dissidents associated with these populations; gains and losses of political positions, such as parliamentary seats; and increase or decrease of attacks on these populations) appear to affect the likelihood of Iranian interventions. For U.S. forces in the region seeking to protect key U.S. allies from attack by Iran, looking for threats to the status or safety of coethnic populations could serve as a key early indicator of future Iranian activity. The United States might also keep the status of these populations in mind when building ties and working with key partners in the region, because proactive efforts to prevent provocation might be a useful way to support regional stability.
Second, Iran is most likely to commit troops in combat when it views the conflict as representing an external threat that is critical to its national security and regime survival and when it views the conflict as fairly low cost and a quick win. When threats and opportunities emerge at once (as was the case in both our case studies), Iran has historically been most likely to intervene. The collapse of regional governments, civil wars, and the rise and expansion of terrorist threats in the region are among the key threats that also present opportunities and could lead to an Iranian intervention. Jihadist groups gaining ground present such a threat and offer such an opportunity, making it more likely that Iran will intervene (especially when combined with the first signpost: the presence of co-identity groups). This signpost also has important implications for U.S. forces operating in the region. Wherever it deploys forces overseas, the United States must balance activities that are intended to deter with those that may be seen as provocative and threatening by adversaries. In the Middle East, this balance seems especially fragile and important to monitor. As the United States works to deter Iranian activities and build relationships with key regional allies, it should avoid actions that could be perceived as threats to Iranian sovereignty or as encroaching on Iranian borders. This does not mean that the United States should shy away from confrontation if needed or that it should let Iranian influence spread unchecked, but the United States may wish to avoid stepping over Iranian redlines and to consider carefully the types of exercises it runs and the types and amounts of equipment it sells to regional partners.
Notably, porous borders may add urgency to threats perceived by Iran and inject new opportunities. In addition, should Iran see a breakdown in order in key regional states (such as Saudi Arabia), it would likely have a strong incentive to intervene to gain leverage over the future disposition of a country that is central to the regional balance of power, even if the two countries do not share porous borders. In the case of key U.S. partners, U.S. forces in the region could act as a guarantor of stability, seeking to prevent new regional instability from triggering Iranian action.
Finally, Iran is more inclined to intervene in the region when doing so has the potential to tilt the balance of power in its favor. Hence, Iran is most likely to intervene in states where an Iranian intervention would produce potential leverage over their behavior and where doing so would be important to the regional balance, which in turn relies on the existence of a friendly government or influential nonstate partners. These states include those whose governments (or key nonstate actors) have served as Iranian allies or partners and countries whose alignment with Iranian rivals would negatively affect Tehran. However, Tehran is much more likely to intervene in those states with weak central authorities and important cleavages. Fragile and failed states and countries engaged in civil war are therefore particularly ripe for Iranian intervention. The relevance of this signpost also argues for maintaining a U.S. presence in the region, both to preserve stability and to support partners in the region with training and equipment that reduce their vulnerability to Iranian attack.
The U.S. Army is engaged in several theaters where Iranian forces and proxies are involved. In Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria, both countries are operating in close proximity. The U.S. Army also has personnel and service members in the Persian Gulf region and in the broader Middle East. Hence, better understanding patterns and drivers of past Iranian interventions in the region is critical to U.S. Army planners' ability to anticipate (1) where and how Tehran can play spoiler, where its interests may align with those of the United States, and which arenas it may ignore altogether in ongoing operations in the region, and (2) if, when, where, and how the Army may confront Iran in the future.
Our analysis yields several key findings with implications for the U.S. Army (many of which confirm previous assumptions about Iranian military thinking). First, the U.S. Army is unlikely to need to plan for and prepare to respond to Iranian interventions beyond the greater Middle East. Since May 2019, Iran has undertaken several air and naval operations in the Persian Gulf, Strait of Hormuz, and Gulf of Oman, as well as airstrikes directly or via proxies in the Arabian Peninsula and in Iraq. This trend of growing aggressive action by Tehran may indicate a new willingness to challenge U.S. power and interests in the region. However, absent any major changes to our underlying assumptions about Iranian behavior and interests, the United States is unlikely to witness or be required to respond to Iranian interventions beyond the Middle East.
Second, the trends and patterns in Iranian military interventions indicate that Tehran continues to view direct involvement in combat missions as largely undesirable. Hence, unless Iran sees a threat as particularly pronounced, it is unlikely to commit its conventional ground assets to countering the threat using force, preferring instead to work with and through proxies. Iran's track record of deploying troops in combat on only two occasions since 1979-the Iran-Iraq War and Syria-provides evidence for this trend. In the case of the Iran-Iraq War, committing troops to combat was necessary and largely undisputed domestically. However, the deployment in Syria was highly controversial. Therefore, the U.S. Army is much more likely to encounter and engage with Iranian-backed nonstate partners in the region than it is to come face-to-face with Iranian personnel and troops.
Third, Iranian interventions are generally limited in scope and scale. This may stem from Iran's intentions as well as a lack of adequate conventional capabilities. Iran is more likely to deploy air (mostly missiles and drones) and naval assets than conventional ground troops. The last time Tehran engaged in a large-scale combat intervention was more than three decades ago, when the country was attacked during the Iran-Iraq War. Iran's largest intervention since that war took place in Syria. However, even there, Iran did not use large formations. Hence, the main threats facing American interests and partners and U.S. Army operations in the region most likely stem from Iran's missile and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) programs rather than its ground forces.
There is little evidence that U.S. Army planners should need to prepare for large-scale Iranian ground interventions unless a major event changes the current international system or fundamentally alters the course of U.S.-Iran relations, including a potential U.S. attack on Iran or a potential Iranian acquisition of nuclear capabilities. Even if the Iranian intervention in Syria marks a new era of Iranian interventions rather than a sui generis case, Iran's interventions are unlikely to present a challenge the United States cannot tackle even at its current posture level. Instead, Iranian forces are most likely to intervene in tandem with proxies, which should warrant greater attention from U.S. military planners in terms of countering Iran. Tehran's interventions with and through proxies are most likely to have a third-party spoiler effect and complicate U.S. forward presence and military operations in the region via low-level activity, in contrast with the more limited direct threat of an Iranian large-scale military intervention in areas key to U.S. interests.
Fourth, the United States in general and the U.S. Army in particular would be well-served by considering the lessons of the previous two decades of U.S. involvement in the region, including its policies in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria, because Iranian decisionmakers and military planners have studied key events and adjusted their policies accordingly. The combination of U.S. interventions in the region over the past two decades and instability resulting from the collapse of central authorities has paved the path for Iranian involvement in key countries. As the Iranian track record of military involvement in Iraq shows, its interventions in Iraq were largely reduced to ad hoc airstrikes to target MeK and Kurdish positions there in the 1990s. However, following the 2003 U.S. intervention in Iraq, Iran gradually built its influence in that country. Overall, ethnic or sectarian tensions coupled with weak governments appear to facilitate Iranian interventionism. Accordingly, strong and inclusive central governments likely present an important bulwark against Iranian activities in the region.
The United States could use the signposts identified in this report to inform the use of military presence and activity in the region to deter Iran from undertaking a greater number of military interventions that threaten U.S. interests. In the short-to-medium term, the U.S. government in general and the U.S. Army in particular can leverage security cooperation with regional partners to prevent the weakening and collapse of central authorities and the threat of civil wars, which pave the way for Iranian involvement in the region. As noted earlier, particularly useful activities would be those that focus on capacity-building, such as training and transfer of equipment. The United States is already active in these areas with many of its regional partners, and additional effort and investment in these areas could be valuable. Increased numbers and types of exercises could have the dual purpose of increasing perceived readiness and actual readiness, deterring Iran on two fronts simultaneously. Another near-term area of focus would be supporting jointness among regional allies so that they can operate more effectively as a unit against regional threats from Iran. Multilateral training initiatives alongside regional, political, and military cooperation could be effective in building stronger defense to Iranian provocation and activities. Because our analysis suggests missile and UAV attacks are especially likely, emphasis on training and technology to defend against these threats may be important focal points of enhanced training and efforts at regional multilateral cooperation. This type of increased security cooperation activity could serve as a deterrent to Iranian intervention that has limited cost and requires limited additional investment of personnel or resources, given efforts to draw down U.S. forces in the region. Such an approach would also allow for a visible U.S. presence that would enhance the deterrent signal.
In the medium-to-long term, the United States can promote moreinclusive policies in the region. More-inclusive governments whose populations do not harbor significant grievances that can be exploited by Iran can serve as a bulwark against Iranian military interventions in the region. The U.S. Army can, for example, use its military assistance as an incentive to help its partners behave more inclusively or to support policies that bolster inclusivity. Security cooperation activities that build the capacity of partner militaries (described earlier in some detail) represent one potential way to build inclusive practices in the region without presenting a direct, escalatory threat. Especially important will be ensuring the inclusion of minority Shia populations in both governance and military activities in countries with majority Sunni populations and leadership, because the exclusion of these groups can make a country the target of Iranian activity.
More-inclusive governments may also reduce the risk of civil war or at least lessen instability in the region, further reducing vulnerabilities that attract Iranian intervention. This may also be an area where partnerships between the U.S. military and nongovernmental organizations could be valuable in building state capacity throughout the region and limiting opportunities for future Iranian intervention.
This report can also inform decisions about U.S. posture in the region and efforts to ensure that U.S. forces are positioned most effectively to deter without provoking. U.S. forces in the region have a complex task in dealing with Iranian militarized behavior. Direct Iranian military interventions have become notably more frequent following the sharp increase in U.S. presence after the 2003 invasion and occupation of Iraq. In part, this reflects opportunism by Iran, seizing the opportunity to expand its influence in an increasingly chaotic region, but it has also been defensive in nature, seeking to increase its leverage to deter a feared U.S. strike on Iran using these same forces. If U.S. forces in the region needed only to be concerned about direct Iranian military interventions against U.S. partners, such as Kuwait or the Gulf states, then they could likely help to enhance deterrence with only limited size and capabilities, focusing on anti-unmanned aerial system and missile capabilities, as noted earlier. Iran has shown a clear reluctance to commit its conventional forces to direct combat missions, and the prospects of a large-scale Iranian attack on a U.S. partner or ally appear remote. However, Iran's use of informal or proxy groups, while not the subject of this study, has often been substantially more opportunistic and aggressive than its use of its formal military. U.S. forces in the region must deal with the risk of these types of Iranian activity as well, which may require a larger footprint and the ability to assist partners with advisory, training, and counterinsurgency capabilities. However, such forces need not necessarily be postured close to Iran's borders or be accompanied by higher-end conventional capabilities that would be seen as particularly threatening by Iran and that could contribute to an escalation spiral, as both sides already experienced in January 2020.
Finally, we note that some factors, both internal and external, may change the Iranian way of war (with implications for the preceding analysis). U.S. decisionmakers and military planners should track these developments and factors to ensure that the nature and threat posed by Iranian interventions does not fundamentally change without changes on the part of the United States to ensure continued U.S. readiness to respond. Internally, perhaps the most significant change in Iranian military affairs stems from the supreme leader succession. Khamenei's death and the following succession may have a deep effect on Iranian national security and defense thinking, including on the place and role of armed conflict, broad regional portfolios, and the dynamics between the clerical elements of both the regime and the armed forces on the one hand and the various branches of the armed forces on the other. Hence, U.S. policy and military planners should pay close attention to the preparations for succession and its possible impact on Iranian military thinking.
For example, the accession of an individual aligned with the IRGC (such as the hardline head of the judiciary, Ebrahim Raisi) may lead to an increased presence in the political realm by the Revolutionary Guards and their affiliates, fewer checks on their behavior, and the allocation of more resources to the force. Conversely, a more reform-minded individual (such as Rouhani) may be more inclined to empower the Artesh and impose more checks on the Revolutionary Guards. Monitoring the trajectory of key candidates for the role and their ties to the Revolutionary Guards and positions on ongoing interventions will prepare the United States for any eventuality.
Abroad, significant changes to the international system may change Iranian motives and catalyze a recalibrated military intervention approach. The future of (1) great-power competition and how it plays out in the Middle East and (2) the regional landscape are important factors that will shape how Iran sees its military activities. Increased Chinese and Russian military and economic presence in the region is likely to factor into Iranian calculations regarding the regional balance of power, as is the dynamic between Beijing, Moscow, and Washington. Although a move away from a period of greater U.S. power in the region would seem to provide fewer threats and more opportunities for Iran, the relations among these key states and how they affect Iranian perceptions of the regional balance of power bear careful monitoring.
NOTE: Other cases considered but ultimately excluded because of the lack of adequate data or because they did not meet our criteria (in terms of size, presence in theater, and activity type) include Iran's involvement in Afghanistan, Sudan, and the Balkans in the 1990s. a This case includes Iranian ground forces deployed to Iraqi Kurdistan in advisory and training roles as well as forces deployed to areas in southern Iraq, such as the Faw Peninsula, during the Iran-Iraq War. b Different ground troop estimates exist in the literature and reporting about Iran's intervention in the Lebanon War. We have used our best estimate in this table. c Although this naval conflict (the so-called Tanker War) is intimately related to the Iran-
The main combat operation, the Iran-Iraq War, is not included because of its scale. We code Iranian activity in Iraq in recent years as primarily counterinsurgency, captured in Figure3.4.
White House, National Security Strategy of the United States of America, Washington, D.C., December
2017, p. 2. 2 Jim Mattis, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military's Competitive Edge, Arlington, Va.: U.S. Department of Defense, 2018, p. 2.
In some rare instances, force levels during a multiyear intervention might temporarily have fallen below this threshold for an isolated year (and then again risen above it); as a general rule of thumb, we would nonetheless code the intervention as a continuous mission. However, if there were long periods beneath this threshold, either after the withdrawal of major forces or in the run-up to the deployment of major forces, then the intervention would be broken up into different cases or we would otherwise exclude these years.
  4  In the Iranian case, the exclusions of proxy and small-scale intervention omits a large amount of activity. This is a limitation of this report, but it is an intentional one. We chose to focus here on Iran's use of its military. Iran's use of proxy forces is deserving of its own analysis and report. 6 Iran's Military Interventions: Patterns, Drivers, and Signposts
To overcome these challenges, we used reporting from multiple sources-Iranian official sources, unclassified U.S. government and military sources, and media reporting-and collected three sets of data: low, high, and best estimates of Iranian troop deployments.
6 Pierre Razoux, The Iran-Iraq War, trans. Nicholas Elliott, Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2015; Dilip Hiro, The Longest War: The Iran-Iraq Military Conflict, London: Grafton, 1989; and Williamson Murray and Kevin Woods, The Iran-Iraq War: A Military and Strategic History, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Jennifer Kavanagh, Bryan Frederick, Nathan Chandler, Samuel Charap, Timothy Heath,  Ariane Tabatabai, Edward Geist, and Christian Curriden, Anticipating Adversary Military  Interventions, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A444-1,
Importantly, the ten factors identified here are ones that appear to contribute to intervention decisions by third-party states according to a review of existing qualitative and quantitative research, but they do not guarantee an intervention. State decisionmaking on the use of military forces is complex, and single factors in isolation are rarely sufficient to guarantee a particular intervention decision. Instead, these factors should be viewed as potentially increasing or decreasing the risk of an intervention. As an example, the existence of a partnership between two states might encourage one to intervene to defend the other, but it does not necessitate such an intervention. The state could still choose to abstain from intervening, assessing that other factors outweigh its commitment to the partnership, though the partnership makes the intervention more likely than it would otherwise have been.
Hans J. Morgenthau, "To Intervene or Not to Intervene," Foreign Affairs, Vol.
45, No. 3,  April 1967.   4  Stephen A.Kocs, "Territorial Disputes and Interstate War, 1945-1987," Journal of Politics, Vol. 57, No. 1, February 1995.   
Bruce Bueno de Mesquita, Alastair Smith, Randolph M. Siverson, and James D. Morrow, The Logic of Political Survival, paperback ed., Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
2005; Amber Aubone, "Explaining US Unilateral Military Intervention in Civil Conflicts: A Review of theLiterature," International Politics, Vol. 50, No. 2, 2013; Brett Ashley Leeds and David R.  Davis, "Domestic Political Vulnerability and International Disputes," Journal of Conflict  Resolution, Vol. 41, No. 6, December 1997.   20  Karl R. DeRouen, Jr., and Jeffrey Peake, "The Dynamics of Diversion: The Domestic Implications of Presidential Use of Force," International Interactions, Vol. 28, No. 2, 2002; Kyle Haynes, "Diversionary Conflict: Demonizing Enemies or Demonstrating Competence?" Conflict Management and Peace Science, Vol. 34, No. 4, 2017; Stephen E. Gent, "Scapegoating Strategically: Reselection, Strategic Interaction, and the Diversionary Theory of War," International Interactions, Vol. 35, No. 1, 2009; Ostrom and Job, 1986; Bueno de Mesquita et al., 2005. 21 Aubone, 2013; Tim Groeling and Matthew A. Baum, "Crossing the Water's Edge: Elite Rhetoric, Media Coverage, and the Rally-Round-the-Flag Phenomenon," Journal of Politics, Vol. 70, No. 4, October 2008. 22 James Meernik, "Domestic Politics and the Political Use of Military Force by the United States," Political Research Quarterly, Vol. 54, No. 4, December 2001.
There is also an extensive body of literature on the topic of what drives public support for military operations and interventions. Past research has identified
(1)
Juliet Kaarbo, "Prime Minister Leadership Style and the Role of Parliament in Security Policy," British Journal ofPolitics and International Relations, Vol. 20, No. 1, 2018; and   Wolfgang Wagner, "Is There a Parliamentary Peace? Parliamentary Veto Power and Military Interventions from Kosovo to Daesh," British Journal ofPolitics and International Relations,  Vol. 20, No. 1, 2018.   
Jessica L. Weeks, "Strongmen and Straw Men: Authoritarian Regimes and the Initiation of International Conflict," American Political ScienceReview, Vol. 106, No. 2, May 2012;
Bueno de Mesquita et al., 2005.
Ada Huibregtse, "External Intervention in Ethnic Conflict," International Interactions,  Vol. 36, No. 3, 2010.    
Martin Austvoll Nome, "Transnational Ethnic Ties and Military Intervention: Taking Sides in Civil Conflicts in Europe,Asia and North Africa, 1944-99," European Journal of  International Relations, Vol. 19, No. 4, 2013.    
Nicolas Rost and J. Michael Greig, "Taking Matters into Their Own Hands: An Analysis of the Determinants of State-Conducted Peacekeeping in Civil Wars," Journal of PeaceResearch, Vol. 48, No. 2, 2011.  
33
Benjamin O. Fordham, "Power or Plenty? Economic Interests, Security Concerns, and American Intervention," International Studies Quarterly,Vol. 52, No. 4, December 2008;
Yoon, 1997.
Vincenzo Bove, Kristian Skrede Gleditsch, and Petros G. Sekeris, "'Oil Above Water': Economic Interdependence and Third-Party Intervention," Journal of ConflictResolution,  Vol. 60, No. 7, 2016.    
Michael G. Findley and Josiah F. Marineau, "Lootable Resources and Third-Party Intervention into Civil Wars," Conflict Management and PeaceScience, Vol. 32, No. 5, 2015.  
  37 Fordham, 2008;
Trenin,
2016.38  
Kavanagh, Frederick, Povlock, et al., 2017
Resolution, Vol. 39, No. 4, December 1995.   39  This final motivation bleeds into the domestic arena, but we keep it in this section so as not to split up economic interests in many places.
Tim Dunne, "Liberalism, International Terrorism, and Democratic Wars," International  Relations, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2009.    
Stephen Van Evera, "Hypotheses on Nationalism and War," International Security,Vol. 18, No. 4, Spring 1994.    
Van Evera, 1994;
Kavanagh, Frederick, Povlock, et al., 2017.
Elizabeth N. Saunders, Leaders at War: How Presidents Shape Military Interventions, Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2011.
Elizabeth N. Saunders, "Transformative Choices: Leaders and the Origins of Intervention Strategy," International Security, Vol.34, No. 2, Fall 2009.   
Michael C. Horowitz and Allan C. Stam, "How Prior Military Experience Influences the Future Militarized Behavior of Leaders," International Organization, Vol. 68, No. 3, Summer 2014.
Benjamin A. Most and Harvey Starr, Inquiry, Logic and International Politics, Columbia,  S.C.: University of South Carolina Press, 1989.    
Rost and Greig, 2011;
-1988
Erik A. Olson, "Iran's Path Dependent Military Doctrine," Strategic Studies Quarterly,  Vol. 10, No. 2, Summer 2016, p. 68.   
Esfandiary and Tabatabai, 2016;
Army, 2019b;
Juneau, 2016;
Juneau, 2020.
Brandon Friedman, "Iran's Hezbollah Model in Iraq and Syria: Fait Accompli?" Orbis,  Vol. 62, No. 3, 2018;
James Dobbins, Philip Gordon, and
David Menashri, Post-Revolutionary Politics in Iran: Religion, Society and Power, London:  Routledge, 2001, p. 233.   
This effort is part of a larger effort to collect all military interventions by U.S. adversaries, detailed inKavanagh, Frederick, Chandler, et al.,  
2
Our definition and thresholds for inclusion for military interventions in this report are chosen to be consistent with previous RAND work on U.S. military interventions (see
Kavanagh, Frederick, Povlock, et al., 2017)
Charap et al., 2021;
Heath et al., 2021;
  10  In some rare instances, force levels during a multiyear intervention might temporarily have fallen below this threshold for an isolated year (and then again risen above it); as a general rule of thumb, we would nonetheless code it as a continuous mission. However, if there were long periods beneath this threshold either after the withdrawal of major forces or in the run-up to the deployment of major forces, then the intervention would be broken into different cases or otherwise exclude these
years. 11 Jennifer Kavanagh, Bryan Frederick, Alexandra Stark, Nathan Chandler, Meagan L. Smith, Matthew Povlock, Lynn E. Davis, and Edward Geist, Characteristics of Successful U.S. Military Interventions, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-3062-A, 2019.
Minor air-to-air incidents, such as the downing of a single fighter in contested airspace, would not meet this threshold. Likewise, in most cases, instances involving limited artillery or mortar fires across international borders at random targets would generally not constitute a foreign intervention, absent other conditions.
Joint Publication 3-24, Counterinsurgency, Washington, D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, April 25, 2018, p. iii.
Another example is that of Sudan in the 1990s, which was a borderline case in which we had evidence of Iranian involvement but no clear evidence that the required threshold was met.
Human Rights Council, "Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the Situation of Human Rights in the Syrian Arab Republic," United Nations
Human Rights Council, 2011, pp. 20-24.  See also Human Rights Watch, World Report 2019: Syria, Events of 2018, New York, 2019.
Robert F. Worth and Nazila Fathi, "Protests Flare in Tehran as Opposition Disputes Vote," New York Times,June 13, 2009; Human Rights Watch, "Iran: Halt the Crackdown,"  June 19, 2009.    
Simon Tisdall, "Iran Helping Syrian Regime Crack Down on Protesters, Say Diplomats," The Guardian, May
8, 2011.   8  Louis Charbonneau, "Exclusive: Iran Flouts U.S. Sanctions, Sends Arms to Syria: Panel," Reuters, May 16, 2012.9 Charbonneau, 2012.   
Bozorgmehr Sharafedin, "Death Toll Among Iran's Forces in Syrian War Passes 1,000," Reuters, November 22, 2016.
Sharafedin, 2016.
Sharafedin,  
For additional details on Iranian and other regional popular threat perceptions of ISIS in fall 2014, see Zogby Research Services, Today's Middle East: Pressures and Challenges, Washington, D.C., November 2014. 20 Sarah Almukhtar, "Most Chemical Attacks in Syria Get Little Attention. Here Are 34 Confirmed Cases," New York Times, April 13, 2018; Human Rights Watch, 2017; and Human Rights Watch, Attacks on Ghouta: Analysis of Alleged Use of Chemical Weapons in Syria, New York, September 2013. 21 "Amir Pourdasatan tashrih kar joz'eyat-e hozoor-e Artesh-e Iran dar Araq va Surieh," Fararu, January 21, 2018.
"Joz'eyat-e dargiri-ye kolah sabzha-ye Artesh ba terrorist-ha dar Halab/ Halakat-e 200 takfiri," Tasnim News,
April 12, 2016.
"Amir Pourdasatan tashrih kar joz'eyat-e hozoor-e Artesh-e Iran dar Araq va Surieh," 2018.
"Joz'eyat-e dargiri-ye kolah sabzha-ye Artesh ba terrorist-ha dar Halab/ Halakat-e 200 takfiri," 2016.
"Kolah sabzha-ye Artesh tebq-e kodam qanun be Surieh raftand?" Tasnim News, April 23, 2016.
Ali Khamenei, "Bayaniat dar didar-e khanevadeh-haye shohada-ye haftom-e Tir va Jam'ee az khanevadeh-haye shohada-ye modafe'e haram,"Khamenei.ir, June 25, 2016.    
"Amir Pourdasatan tashrih kar joz'eyat-e hozoor-e Artesh-e Iran dar Araq va Surieh," 2018.
Raja Abdulrahim and Benoit Faucon, "Iran Moves to Cement Its Influence in Syria," Wall Street Journal, March 26, 2019; Ahmad Shuja Jamal, The Fatemiyoun Army: Reintegration into Afghan Society, Washington, D.C.: United States Institute of Peace, March 2019, p. 3; Ali Alfoneh, "Using Syria as a Training Ground: The Case of the Pakistani Zeinabiyoun Brigade," Arab Gulf States Institute in Washington, July 17, 2018; Ali Alfoneh, "Tehran's Shia Foreign Legions," Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, January 30,
2018.
53
Although Iran's proxies in some cases do not share cultural, ethnic, religious, or linguistic ties but rather have a shared adversary, as is the case with Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
Abbas William Samii, "The Shah's Lebanon Policy: The Role of the SAVAK," Middle EasternStudies, Vol. 33, No. 1, January 1997; and Arash Reisinezhad, The Shah of Iran, the  Iraqi Kurds, and the Lebanese Shia, Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019, p. 2.   
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2016, p. 1.
Nicholas A. Heras, Bassam Barabandi, and Nidal Betare, "Deir Azzour Tribal Mapping Project," Center for a New American Security, September 2017.
Isabel Coles, "Iran Supplied Weapons to Iraqi Kurds; Baghdad BombKills 12," Reuters,  August 26, 2014a.   
"Amir Pourdasatan tashrih kar joz'eyat-e hozoor-e Artesh-e Iran dar Araq va Surieh," 2018.
"Ezam-e mostashari-e takavaran-e type 65 nohad be Surieh / takavaran-e niroo-ye zamini dar Surieh mostaqar shodand," Tasnim News, April 16, 2016; "Amir Pourdasatan tashrih kar joz'eyat-e hozoor-e Artesh-e Iran dar Araq va Surieh," 2018.
"Amir Pourdasatan tashrih kar joz'eyat-e hozoor-e Artesh-e Iran dar Araq va Surieh," 2018.
Khamenei, 2016.
It is also worth noting that we had few candidates from which to choose, given the number of cases of Iranian military interventions available to us. The research team considered the Iranian intervention in Lebanon in 1982 because it would also be in line with Iran's modus operandi but decided against that case for several reasons. First, the limited reporting and literature available on the case made it difficult to present an informed and well-sourced analysis and to identify and examine several factors in a comprehensive manner. Second, although the intervention is typical of Iran's modus operandi, it took place less than three years after the establishment of the Islamic Republic and during the IRGC's nascent days.
For a detailed discussion of the origins of the war, see
Murray and Woods, 2014.
Michael Eisenstadt, "Iran and Iraq," in Robin Wright, ed., The Iran Primer: Power, Politics, and U.S. Policy, Washington, D.C.: United States Institute of Peace, 2010.
Eisenstadt, 2010.    
The MeK, also known as the People's Mujahedeen of Iran, is an Iranian resistance group that was exiled after the revolution. During the Iran-Iraq War, the MeK fought alongside Saddam's troops. Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, MeK terrorists continued to conduct attacks against Iranian targets.
William McCants, "Who Is Islamic State Leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi?" BBC News, March 8, 2016.
Gold, 2017, pp. 15-16.    
Mapping Militant Organizations, 2018.  According to RAND estimates, the Islamic State at its peak in late 2014 controlled roughly 100,000 km 2 of territory containing some 11 million people, mostly in Iraq and Syria. For perspective, the combined areas and populations of the two countries in 2014 were about 625,000 km 2 and 54 million people. At its peak, ISIS may have controlled on the order of 16 percent and 20 percent of Syria and Iraq's combined territory and populations, respectively. ISIS began to lose territory in 2015 (Seth G. Jones, James Dobbins, Daniel Byman, Christopher S. Chivvis, Ben Connable, Jeffrey Martini, Eric Robinson, and Nathan Chandler, Rolling Back the Islamic State, Santa
Roula Khalaf and Sam Jones, "Selling Terror: How Isis Details Its Brutality," Financial Times, June 17, 2014.
Alissa J. Rubin, "Militant Leader in Rare Appearance in Iraq," New York Times, July 5,
20 Golnaz Esfandiari, "IS Propaganda Increasingly Targeting Iran and Its Sunnis," Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, June 6, 2017; and "Iraq Says it Shared Information That France, U.S., Iran Were Targets," Reuters, November 15,
Soufan, 2018.    
"Bombaran-e Da'esh dar Araq va Surieh ba pahpadha-ye Sepah," Tabnak, November 21, 2018; John Irish and Ahmed Rasheed, "Exclusive: Iran Moves Missiles to Iraq in Warning to Enemies," Reuters,
August 31, 2018.
The last Iranian airstrike prior to the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq occurred in 2001, according to our analysis of available data; however, it is possible that unreported airstrikes continued until 2003.
ISIS achieved its first successful attacks on Iranian soil on June 7, 2017, when six terrorists conducted twin, high-profile attacks in Tehran against the Iranian parliament and the mausoleum of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, founder of the Islamic Republic. See Ariane M. Tabatabai, "ISIS Hits Iran: Terror Comes to the Islamic Republic," Foreign Affairs, July 4, 2017; and Suzanne Maloney, "ISIS Attacks Iran and Accusations Fly," Markaz, Brookings Institution blog,
June 9, 2017.
For example, see this propaganda video published by Mashregh News, which includes footage of Soleimani on the battlefront with local partners: "Tasavir-e didehnashodeh az Sardar Soleimani dar jang ba Daesh," Masregh News, November 22, 2017.
"Faseleh-ye Daesh az 'marzha-ye Iran' cheghadr ast? + naqsheh va tasvir," Bashgah-e khabarnegaran-e javan,
March 30, 2016.
"Faseleh-ye Daesh az 'marzha-ye Iran' cheghadr ast? + naqsheh va tasvir," 2016.
Samia Nakhoul, "Iran Expands Regional 'Empire' Ahead of Nuclear Deal," Reuters,  March 23, 2015.   
At one point in 2016, Instagram even blocked Soleimani's account (Oded Yaron "No Selfies for Soleimani: Instagram Briefly Blocks Iranian General's Account," Haaretz,
May 27, 2016.
Cooper, 2015.
Jones, 2019, p. 11.   
Michael Georgy and Ahmed Rasheed, "Iranian Commander Issued Stark Warning to  Iraqi Kurds over Kirkuk," Reuters, October 20, 2017.   
Javad Zarif [@JZarif], "When @realdonaldtrump insisted that 'Iran is killing ISIS', exactly who did he think was doing the fighting & making the sacrifice? ISIS would've held two Arab capitals & fielded a Terrorist Army on Europe's doorstep had #IRGC not fought alongside brave peoples of Iraq & Syria." Twitter post, April 10, 2019.
"Zarif Video Message from Vienna," Iran Primer, United States Institute of Peace blog, July 3, 2015.
The authors would like to thank 
MG Bradley Gericke
MG Christopher McPadden
Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff
G-3/5/7
U.S. Army
Tony Vanderbeek
COL Jay Charland
Cherie Emerson
Sally Sleeper
Stephen Watts
RAND Corporation
Afshon Ostovar
Naval Post Graduate School
Jeffrey Martini
RAND
See Nils Petter Gleditsch
Peter Wallensteen
Mikael Eriksson
Margareta Sollenberg
Håvard Strand
Michael Brecher
Jonathan Wilkenfeld
A Study
Ann Arbor
Frank Wayman
Inter-State
Extra-State
Intra-State
Non-State Wars
1816-2007
Washington
Glenn Palmer
Vito D'Orazio
Michael Kenwick
Matthew Lane
Conflict Management
Peace Science
Vol. 32
Faten Ghosn
Glenn Palmer
Stuart Bremer
Coding Rules
Conflict Management
Peace Science
Vol. 21
Daniel M. Jones
Stuart A. Bremer
J. David Singer
Militarized Interstate Disputes
1816-1992
Rationale
Coding Rules
Empirical Patterns
Conflict Management
Peace Science
Vol. 15
Patricia L. Sullivan
Michael T. Koch
Military Intervention by Powerful States
1945-2003
Frederic S. Pearson
Robert A. Baumann
International Military Intervention
1946-1988
Ann Arbor
Interventions and Aggression, sponsored by the 
Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff
G-3/5/7
U.S. Army
RAND Arroyo Center's Strategy, Doctrine, and Resources Program. RAND Arroyo Center
RAND Corporation
United States Army
RAND operates under a "
Federal-Wide Assurance
FWA00003425
Code of Federal Regulations for the Protection of Human Subjects Under United States Law
45 CFR 46
3216.02
RAND's Institutional Review Board
Human Subjects Protection Committee
U.S. Army
Various iterations of the group now known as ISIS had existed in Iraq for over a decade prior to the organization's catalyzing offensives in early to mid-2014. Led by Abu Mus'ab al-Zarqawi, 10 ISIS's original predecessor organization-Jamaat al-Tawhid wal-Jihad (TwJ, or The Monotheism and the Holy War Group)-was rebranded as an al-Qaeda affiliate in October 2004: al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI, or al-Qaeda in the Land of the Two Rivers). 
11
12
14
RR-A444-2
www.rand.org $33.00 