# ID: c41fffed71d745ee9d0397b6111124ca
# Title: American Culture, Military Services' Cultures, and Military Strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1998.0
# Fulltext:
The knowledge of one's culture is critical for success in statecraft and strategy. Yet, perhaps because it is so pervasive, the influence of one's own culture on strategy, defense preparation, and the conduct of war tends to escape notice. The influence of American culture on strategy, however, does not escape the notice of America's potential enemies. This thesis explores the American approach to strategy from a cultural perspective. It examines characteristics of American culture and the cultures of the four U.S. military services, which influence the U.S. strategy-making process. It explains how these characteristics formed and how they might influence American strategy. Unlike traditional explanations of the U.S. military cultures, such as Carl Builder's The Masks of War, this analysis examines the services' cultures from a more operational perspective. This thesis emphasizes the role the services' respective operating environments play in shaping their divergent perspectives on strategy, joint command structures, and doctrine. Cultural selfknowledge allows American strategists to recognize when aspects of American culture and the cultures of the j services may make some strategies possible, desirable, or unimaginable. It allows American strategists to recognize when political leaders' goals and the services' strategies may be poorly matched.
14.
I take great pleasure in acknowledging my advisors, Jim Wirtz and Dan Moran.
They challenged me to pursue excellence, endured my lapses of doubt, and meticulously edited this product. They have set an example for academic pursuit, thoughtful command of war and strategy, and enthusiastic mentoring that I hope someday to emulate. I will have fond memories of my time spent under their tutelage.
Throughout my graduate studies I have drawn my strength from an enduring faith in God, family, and country. I thank God, for He deserves credit for any talent I possess or accomplishments I achieve. I thank my lovely wife, Monica, for her overwhelming support and love. The loving encouragement of my wife and our children continually sustains me.
Strategy is not made in purely rational terms. Rationality is inherently conditioned by one's culture. Culture consists of a set of general and ordered beliefs, attitudes, and assumptions that establish pervasive and long-standing preferences. Culture is a sociologically based, ideational framework that either presents decision-makers with a limited range of options or acts as a lens that alters the appearance and efficacy of different choices. These cultures shape perceptions and affect what individuals notice and how they interpret it. It screens out some parts of reality while magnifying others.
Because it imposes a degree of restraint on behavior, culture may make it difficult for states and militaries to develop sensible and realistic approaches to the strategic problems that confront them.
This thesis explores the American approach to strategy from a cultural perspective. It examines characteristics of American culture and the cultures of the four U.S. military services. It argues that cultural self-knowledge is critical for success in statecraft and strategy. Perhaps because it is so pervasive, the influence of one's own culture on strategy, defense preparation, and the conduct of war tend to escape notice.
The influence of American culture on strategy, however, does not escape the notice of America's potential enemies. Strategists who fail to question their assumptions cannot be expected to expose strategic vulnerabilities. A strategist lacking cultural self-knowledge is likely to recommend strategies that may not be plausibly attained through socially XI acceptable means and methods. Because strategy is the relating of military power to political objectives, however, strategists cannot focus solely on their society's culture.
The cultures of a nation's military organizations are important because they have a pervasive impact on state behavior. Their long-standing preferences in strategies and weapons systems inherently limit the options of the political leaders. The rationality of the President's uniformed advisors is conditioned by their respective service cultures. A strategist who is unable to understand the sources of ideas that undergirds the national military organizations' deeply-rooted preferences in strategies may not recognize occasions when political leaders' goals and services' strategies may be poorly matched. A strategist lacking knowledge of the services' cultures will have a difficult time recognizing when culture make some undertakings possible, desirable, or unimaginable.
America's experiences during the seventeenth and"eighteenth centuries shaped at least seven characteristics of American culture that influence the U.S. strategy-making process. Marked by physical and political survival during brutal wars, revolution, and national independence, this formative period saw the rise of cultural beliefs such as (a) the virtuous will ultimately triumph, (b) wars are to be brought to a successful and absolute conclusion, and (c) the United States is destined as the "city on the hill" providing a beacon of liberal democracy
The nineteenth and twentieth centuries saw the formation of at least eight characteristics of American culture. Characteristics such as Americans' highly technical, mechanical, and direct approach to war and strategy, inability to view war and strategy in a holistic manner, and ignorance of the need for strategy were formed amidst industrial xu growth, technological change, the rise of the middle class and hortatory concepts such as nationalism and social Darwinism, and the preeminence of the United States.
The United States is likely to perform more effectively in large-scale wars and in wars where absolute victories can be obtained. Planning and execution of a D-Day-style landing, of nuclear deterrence, an intricate Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP), or of a large-scale conventional war with redundant paths to victory all exploit America's strengths. The United States may have difficulties in operations such as those conducted in Bosnia, Haiti, and Somalia that require subtlety in statecraft and strategy. Success in these kinds of operations requires a level knowledge of culture, languages, and history that was conspicuously absent in Americans' efforts in Vietnam. Adopting a direct approach in operations other than war such as conflicts in Bosnia, Haiti, and Somalia may well prove ineffectual. These kinds of conflict in particular require Americans' to acknowledge that the most sophisticated information technology and precision-guided weapons may not be enough to overcome the will and strategic skills of the enemy.
A.
Cultural self-knowledge is critical for success in statecraft and strategy. Yet, perhaps because it is so pervasive, the influence of one's own culture on strategy, defense preparation, and the conduct of war tends to escape notice. U.S. strategic vulnerabilities will not escape the notice of those intent on becoming the next General Giap. American cultural tendencies towards technology as a military panacea is creating just such a , vulnerability in the notion of a revolution in military affairs (RMA) in information warfare (IW).
Cultural anthropologists note that American culture is a preponderantly monochrome culture. It considers challenges one at a time, in isolation, pragmatically. 
1
1
with comparatively low cost. The battleship, the Norden bombsight, the atomic bomb, and now the information-led RMA epitomize the search for technical answers to strategic questions. Indeed, the concept of an RMA is itself highly ethnocentric. . The premise of the RMA is that technology (and concomitant changes in organization and operational concepts) drives strategic history. 
2
War and strategy have a variety of dimensions such as ethics, society, geography, politics, political and military leadership, economics, logistics, training, operations, intelligence, and friction. Some, like technology and leadership, may be more important than others, but none can be taken for granted. Some, like technology, tend to change more than others, but that does not lesson the importance of elements such as culture that do not change, or change ever so slowly. Cultural yearnings towards technology obfuscates , Americans' perspective on the totality of war and strategy. Such yearnings have engendered a narrow Jominian paradigm that comes perilously close to equating a theory of discrete destruction with a theory of success in war. As demonstrated in Vietnam, however, technological superiority may win battles but may not guarantee victory. As demonstrated in Vietnam, technical superiority risks overestimating one's own capabilities and underestimating the ability of one's opponents to see such vulnerabilities and short-circuit one's technological advantages. Americans' experiences in that war should have exposed the lack of a holistic approach to war and strategy. It should have demonstrated that military effectiveness may have little bearing on the outcome of the war. It should have institutionalized in the U.S. military an awareness of Americans' technological hubris. Unfortunately, it did neither of these. The assumption that the link between technology and military effectiveness and that conclusive strategic effect for victory is as self-evident as it is direct has survived the deaths of fifty-eight thousand Americans. Its resurgence since the Gulf War is indicative of the strength of this cultural tendency and its influence on American strategy. This thesis seeks answers to three questions: What characteristics of American culture and the cultures of the U.S. military services influence the U.S. strategy-making process? How did these characteristics form? How might they influence American strategy? These are relevant questions, for the resurgence of the sin of unfettered technological hubris is indicative of the lack of self-knowledge among American strategists. As Sun Tzu advised, self-knowledge is critical for success in strategy. 
3
The cultures of a nation's military organizations are important because they have a pervasive impact on state behavior. Their long-standing preferences in strategies and weapons systems inherently limit the options of the political leaders. The rationality of the President's uniformed advisors is conditioned by their respective service cultures. A strategist who is unable to understand the sources of ideas that undergird the nation's military organizations' deeply-rooted preferences in strategies may not recognize occasions when political leaders' goals and services' strategies may be poorly matched. A strategist lacking knowledge of the services' cultures will have a difficult time recognizing when culture makes some undertakings possible, desirable, or unimaginable. 
3
6
In theoretical terms, the relationship between culture and behavior is not one of extreme determinism. Many countries with accreted cultures have in modern times chosen not to behave according to their alleged tendencies. During the First World War, for example, Britain fielded a continental-sized army and waged anything but a limited war. In 1947, the United States chose to join NATO and subsequently organized and maintained a balance of power system for fifty years. One cannot conclude, however, that culture will not have much effect on behavior at all-culture has a significant behavioral effect. In a broad, societal sense, it influences the context in which policy and strategy choices are debated. It influences the decision-makers' ability to understand the range of options and to perceive which are more viable. Taking the realist edifice as a target, those belonging to one culture think and act differently than those of another when faced with similar circumstances and choices. The following anecdote by Victor Suvorov, a defector who commanded a Soviet Army motorized-rifle company during the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia, illustrates how Soviet/Russian culture shapes its military's behavior:
When I lecture to Western officers on tactics in the Soviet Army, I often close my talk by putting a question to them-always the same one-in order to be sure that they have understood men correctly. The question is trivial and elementary. Three Soviet motor-rifle companies are on the move • in the same sector. The first has come under murderous fire and its attack has crumbled,, the second is advancing slowly, with heavy losses, the third has suffered an enemy counter-attack and, having lost all its command personnel, is retreating. The commander of the regiment to which these companies belong has three tank companies and three artillery batteries in reserve.... "You are to guess," I say, "what steps a Soviet regimental commander would take, not a Western one but a Soviet, a Soviet, a Soviet one." I have yet to receive the correct reply. 
7
8
Since organizations with rapid turnover such as sororities and fraternities are able to maintain their cultures, it should not be surprising that military organizations, with their long-term membership and powerful assimilation mechanisms, develop strong and enduring cultures. 
9
7
Macmillan, 1982), vii-viii. 8
common language and esprit de corps testify to the strength of a service's culture.
Militaries do not hire people with outside experience. Those desiring to be part of a military organization must first pass the organization's selection process. They are then trained and educated by the same organization during which the novitiates begin to absorb the service's values and beliefs. Service members subsequently spend the majority of their careers in the same organization. Members who are more willing to conform to the prevailing standards of their superiors tend to be rewarded with continued promotion.
Those who dismiss or question such standards will not be as trusted. Members train together, at times they sleep in the same area, and they also fight together.
Fighting is a group exercise; combat requires decisions to be made, understood, accepted, and effected in a rapid and instinctual fashion. Collective understanding, or a culture, makes this possible. A shared framework decreases uncertainty in war and increases the ability of its members to respond quickly. To develop a shared framework, militaries must inculcate values and beliefs such as integrity, instant obedience, trust, taking responsibility for one's actions, and loyalty to the organization. A military organization must stamp out to some extent societal values that might threaten the group's integrity such as fairness, equality, independence, and the rights of an individual. 
10
10
Because they act as a template for organizational cohesiveness, much the same way a paradigm can shape intellectual thought, 11 military cultures-shaped primarily by their historical experiences, respective operating environments, and aspects of their nation's culture-once established tend to endure. They endure through all but the most traumatic of experiences and even then they may remain intact. They endure through changes in leadership and persist even when domestic and international circumstances, technology, or individual preferences seem to indicate they should change. New weapons and concepts are accommodated within the structure of existing, time-tested, and preferably battle-experienced doctrine and forces. Types of warfare that are incompatible with the dominant culture are accepted only in cases of extreme danger to the state when political leaders are apt to intervene and reorient the service's priorities.
The concept of "culture" is inevitably a loose one that defies rigor and precision and remains open to endless reinterpretation. 
12
Despite the dangers of crude reductionism, insensitivity to cultural changes, and ascribing causative power to distinctive, yet non-relevant cultural characteristics, the cultural paradigm remains an indispensable guide to the strategist's decisions. It guides how the 
11
Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2 nd ed., enl. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970)
12 N. J. Rengger, "Culture, Society, and Order in World Politics," in Dilemmas of World Politics: International Issues in a Changing World, John Baylis and N.J. Rengger (Oxford, England:  Clarendon, 1992), 85.   strategist interprets the facts and lends potency to one's intuition. Since rationality is inherently conditioned by culture, the study of culture is an inseparable part of strategy.
The "naturall condition" of mankind as described by Thomas Hobbes in Leviathan has not changed much in the intervening years. Despite scholarly enthusiasm, the addition of more democratic governments to an increasingly economically interdependent world has yet to awaken a somnambulant Kantian "common Power." 13 Consequently, the first duty of government remains to protect the nation from the consequences of war. At a minimum, every state desires to minimize the possibility of domination by another state.
No matter how modest, virtually every government in the world has a defense structure designed to forestall this possibility.
Historically, the ultima ratio of a state, the most relevant means to deliver power in extreme circumstances is the controlled use of violence. The relation of power to political purpose is critical to the existence of a country. From this, Carl von Clausewitz concluded, "War is simply a continuation of political intercourse, with the addition of other means." 14 Strategy-the relating of power to political purpose and vice versa-is therefore an inescapable reality of life in a Hobbesian world. Strategy resides in the realm 13 "Here it is manifest, that during the time men live without a common Power to keep them in awe, they are in that condition is called Warre; and such a warre, as is of every man, against every man." Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. Richard Tuck (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991; first pub. 1651), 88. 
14 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976;
first pub. 1832), 605.
15
Chapter II argues that Americans' experiences during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries shaped at least seven characteristics of American culture that influence the U.S. strategy-making process. Marked by physical and political survival during brutal wars, revolution, and national independence, this formative period saw the rise of cultural beliefs such as that the virtuous will ultimately triumph, that wars are to be brought to a successful and absolute conclusion, and that the United States is destined as the "city on the hill" providing a beacon of liberal democracy
Chapter III examines eight characteristics of American culture formed during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries that influence American strategy. This chapter explains how characteristics such as Americans' highly technical, mechanical, and direct approach to war and strategy, inability to view war and strategy in a holistic manner, and ignorance of the need for strategy were formed amidst industrial growth, technological change, the rise of the middle class and such hortatory concepts as nationalism and social Darwinism, and the preeminence of the United States.
Chapters IV, V, VI, and VII addresses cultural aspects of the U.S. Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps, respectively. Their deeply-rooted cultures have been shaped by bloody battles and attritional campaigns, fiscal constraints, poisonous interservice relations (by international comparison), societal disinterest, and institutional identity crises caused by changes in technology and in the international security environment. The services also have been profoundly shaped by the character of their respective operational environments. Unlike traditional explanations of the U.S. military cultures, such as Carl Builder's The Masks of War, that undervalues the operational mindset that undergirds those cultures, 16 this analysis examines the services' cultures from a more operational perspective. This thesis emphasizes the role the services' respective operating environment plays in shaping their divergent views on strategy and joint command structures and operational doctrine. Examining how their respective operating environment shapes their divergent perspectives explains why they differ better than the common matrix-like approach.
Chapter IV argues that there are seven Army cultural characteristics that influence the American strategy-making process. Some aspects, such as a direct approach to strategy, obedience to the people and the government, and reluctance to commit to largescale wars without the support of society, are a result of American cultural-historical factors. Army officers' reluctance to commit to new concepts, their sense of teamwork,  is its abiding sense of vulnerability as an institution. Consequently, the Marine Corps is continually exploring the future security environment to determine which missions and roles will be important to the United States in the future. It then adopts itself to missions the other services do not want or cannot see, such as amphibious warfare or fighting America's small wars.
Finally, the conclusion will review the arguments on the need for cultural self- 
The seventeenth and eighteenth centuries represent not merely an age of colonialism, but the formative period of American history. It was a period marked by violence and ruthless wars amidst a struggle for political if not physical survival up until the War of 1812 (1812-1815). It was a time characterized by a continuous level of perceived anxiety and vulnerability without the luxury of a clear definition of the threat. It was an age when European wars fought in the New World caused death and suffering among settlers who were powerless to prevent the conflicts. These centuries presented Americans with serious military problems which gave rise to considerable anxiety and shaped ways of thinking about peace and war.
Seventeenth century history reveals Europe to be astonishingly violent and ideologically polarized. The Thirty Years War (1618-1648) proved such a frightful experience that European rulers saw the need to erect a balance-of-power system to maintain the status quo of governments and nations, establish large, professional armies, and institute standards of political and military conduct intended to mitigate the effects of wide-scale war on the general populace. The English civil war (1642-1649) and the English colonization of Ireland (1660s and 1670s) were particularly notable for their brutality amidst violent religious and political conflict. Albeit on a smaller scale, seventeenth century colonial life was just as violent. As John Shy noted:
The early history of any seventeenth-century colony, even as late as the settlement of Pennsylvania and South Carolina, reveals that these were dangerous times, with violent people and tough leaders who felt the dangers keenly and were ready to use violence themselves.... [Their leaders] knew very well that their ventures in the Western Hemisphere were semi-military, semi-piratical intrusions on the established empire of Spain and the antecedent colonial claims of France.'
The likelihood of violence was consequently not far from the thoughts of settlers, who were not hesitant to use force to secure their objectives. The danger, however, did not materialize from the Spanish or the French, but from an unexpected quarter.
The colonists had placed considerable hopes in converting the native Americans into Christians. The relationship between the two sides, however, became marked not by conversion and worship but by English condescension and incredibly barbaric warfare.
The isolated and vulnerable English colonists began waging war with tribes that were more militarily formidable than those the colonies' leaders had encountered in Ireland. The advantages of having a larger and more prosperous population did not give the English settlers a quick victory in their intermittent conflicts with the Native Americans.
Moreover, the English colonies were not a tightly-knit homogenous society. They were a group of distinct societies separated by distance as well as beliefs. Only when they were forced to cooperate during the French and Indian War (1755-1763) did the colonies start to overcome suspicions of each other and become dimly aware of their status as "Americans."
1 John Shy, "The American Military Experience: History and Learning," The Journal of Interdisciplinary History 1, no. 2 (Winter 1971): 212. Americans tend to forget that many of the expeditions' leaders were veterans of Irish pacification. It is not surprising then that English colonization in Ireland and in America were closely related in method, problems, and personnel. As a colonizer in Ireland and later in the America, for example, Sir Humphrey Gilbert tolerated no opposition from those natives that failed to accept their subservient roles and chose instead to rebel. In Ireland, Gilbert was known to have lined the path to his tent with the severed heads of Irish peasants.
The French and Indian War was the last of four major wars (totaling thirty-seven years of conflict) which were fought between at least six European powers (Austria, Holland, France, Spain, Prussia, and Britain) and which spilled over onto American soil.
Between 1689 to 1763, settlers and Native Americans were constantly enmeshed in imperial European politics acted out in the forests and on the plains of North America.
During the French and Indian War, the relative weakness of the more thinly populated French settlements and costliness and inefficiency of transporting regular troops forced French officials to become more dependent on Indian allies than the British. 
2
3
The alarmed colonists believed that the yells of the savages mingled with every fitful gust of wind that issued from the interminable forests of the west. The terrific character of their merciless enemies increased immeasurably the natural horrors of warfare. Numberless recent massacres were still vivid in their recollections; nor was there any ear in the provinces so deaf as not to have drunk in with avidity the narrative of some fearful tale of midnight murder, in which the natives of the forests were the principal and barbarous actors. As the credulous and excited traveler related the hazardous chances of the wilderness, the blood of the timid curdled with terror, and mothers cast anxious glances even at those children which slumbered within the security of the largest towns. In short, the magnifying influence of fear began to set at naught the calculations of • , 
2 Shy,
213.
4
The colonists' cooperation with the British during the French and Indian War was unprecedented. The colonists supplied almost twenty thousand troops and over £2 million to the war effort. In one year, the colony of Massachusetts enlisted five thousand personnel out of a male population of about fifty thousand. 
5
6
Because of the enormous debt accumulated in waging the French and Indian War (over half of the national budget went to pay the interest on it), the British attempted to reassert the authority of Parliament in taxing the well-established representative provincial assemblies. What began as a gentrified tax rebellion was transformed into a mass movement in which the people became intimately involved in securing and shaping their nation's destiny. Indeed, many forget that, proportionate to the population, a  and Present, 4' ed. (New York: HarperCollins, 1995), 127. This was a commitment which meant that the war was being waged on a scale comparable to the world wars.
6 Keegan, 103.
greater percentage of Americans died during the Revolution than in any other war in American history with the exception of the Civil War (1861-1865). The experience of the Revolutionary War consequently represented another traumatic period. The experience of victory over a powerful country brought proof of Americans' beliefs that the virtuous would ultimately triumph, that wars are to be brought to a successful and absolute conclusion, and that the United States is destined as the "city on the hill," providing a beacon of liberal democracy.
These centuries were a formative period in which American beliefs on war and strategy were formed and mythologized. In the behavior of these early Americans, during this time, there were at least seven enduring and interrelated characteristics of American culture.
First, the Americans were wont to demand absolute solutions to their military problems. They were strong in numbers, yet vulnerable. The colonists were angered and frightened by repeated and brutal attacks that materialized seemingly out of nowhere.
They neither were parties to the causes of European wars fought in the New World nor were they able to prevent them. 7 Consequently, they made extreme proposals for solutions to the military problems. Such problems were an irritant that threatened what they believed was their right to live life free of mental angst caused by outside interference. Such problems were to be extirpated as quickly as possible to allow a return to normalcy. There was, understandably, little patience for limited political solutions or negotiated settlements. For settlers, war was not a continuation of politics by other means. 
8
The American tendency for absolutism originated in their early experiences in war.
By 1763, as Shy notes, "All the French and Spanish power on the North American continent east of the Mississippi was actually 'extirpated'." 9 Indeed, it is quite remarkable that in almost every instance-including the early, formative French and Indian War which saw the French driven from the mainland of North America, the Revolutionary War, and the War of 1812-Americans realized an "absolute" solution to their wars. While it was not an unreasonable response to difficult security problems, the cultural tendency to want absolute solutions was and remains unrealistic in terms of normal European and Middle Eastern relations in which limited solutions and negotiated settlements are common. 
10
11
Second, the early Americans turned wars into crusades. Because of their experiences living in England, they were contemptuous of the idea of professional, 
8
9
10
11
Standing armies (though the settlers probably could not even have raised one given the economic state of early America). During the sporadic calls to arms, local communities were inclined to take action only in retaliation for attacks that they believed-rightly or wrongly-immediately threatened their existence. However, public support for action would invariably increase if such attacks were believed to have been perpetrated with extreme violence, prejudice, asocial, or criminal behavior.
Historically, whether soldiers on the Rio Grande, passengers on the Lusitania, or sailors on a battleship in Havana or Pearl Harbor, once Americans have been attacked and killed, arguments about the causes, the political objectives of war, and the means have become secondary considerations. 
12
Third, when the early Americans resorted to force, it tended to be belated but massive. The following characteristics of the United States suggest that it is not well-suited to agile military force: Americans' disinclination to wage war against all but the most immediate threats; their resistance to committing to long-term conflicts because of the reliance on militias; their belief that war is abnormal and is instigated only by evil men and causes; and their belief that military problems were to be extirpated in a decisive manner, without resorting to limited political solutions or negotiated settlements. 
13
Attempts to wage war without the blessing of American society are likely to fail. For any enterprise lacking obvious life or death implications, the government... can expect public support only if the military operation is brief, successful, and attended by few casualties. 
14
Indeed, the cycle of the early Americans' early experiences in war-early defeats, societal reaction, military recovery, perseverance, and ultimate victory-came to be accepted as their wartime modus operandi.
Fourth, the early Americans came to confuse their successes in war with virtuousness. Beginning with the French and Indian War, each new conflict saw their nascent community sink to the depths of despair only to gather its strength and seize remarkable victories. Notwithstanding other, more fundamental, reasons for the withdrawal of European forces (such as balance-of-power politics in Europe or factors internal to the enemy), each victory apparently offered proof that good causes triumph and that American ideas on economics and governance were superior. From the beginning 13 Colin S. Gray, "Strategy in the Nuclear Age: The United States, 1945-1991," in The Making  of Strategy: Rulers, States, and War, ed. Williamson Murray, MacGregor Knox, and Alvin Bernstein  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 596.
14 Ibid.
of the republic, Americans came to be deeply convinced that the world is destined to be governed by the guiding light of American liberal democracy. The result of these early victories, therefore, was the illusion that America was all important. 
15
16
Alfred Thayer Mahan remarked that: "Historical instances, by their concrete force, are worth reams of dissertation." Is not "history...the experience of others, recorded for our use"? 17 15 Shy, 216. Writing in 1971, Shy noted: "Disappointment and disgust, as much as moral and political disapproval, have provided the emotional fuel for antiwar action. Even the outrage of the young indicates how far they were taught to expect a smoother, cleaner American military performance [in Vietnam] and how little prepared they were to face the prospect of failure.... Many...think that they and the nation will ride it out, that the Ten Years War is only a bad dream which will soon be over and forgotten, that the social and psychic damage can be limited, and that other issues, other dangers are really more urgent. Perhaps so; all gloomy prediction is mere speculation. Nothing, however, in the historical record gives much support to their modest optimism. On the contrary, the American military past, if I have interpreted correctly, warns us that the effects of confessed failure are likely to be protracted, unpredictable, and severe." 
Shy,
228. 16
Whether the industrial, the atomic, or the information age, Americans' cultural yearnings towards technological panaceas has resulted in an increase in technical training at the expense of an education in history or in the social sciences. 18 Americans' ability to see the experiences of the past as a guide to the future has seriously atrophied. Americans will find new ways of committing the oldest of strategic errors. Americans will continue to confront a problem on its own merits, solve it in the spirit of a problem-solver, and then move on to the next challenge.
American prophets of information warfare may have an excellent case to advance.
Yet some education in history might alert them that a heavy emphasis on engineering and hard science is not conducive to innovation. 
19
20
18
20
Sixth, because wars in the early, expansive North America were characterized by dispersed forts and settlements, defenseless borders, and quasi-guerrilla warfare, early Americans lacked a clear definition of the threat they faced. Without the benefit of a clear threat, the vulnerable and isolated Americans worried themselves into a constant state of military insecurity. In time, as Shy observed:
There was a growing accumulation of potential military power, with no apparent economic or demographic limits on how much military power it might be possible to accumulate. The limits of American power were thus not seen to be intrinsic.. .but rather were to be set by the political process, which presumably would establish them on the basis of some strategic calculation. But without clearly defined dangers, such calculations could not be made, at least convincingly, and any politically established level of military power inevitably seemed arbitrary. 
21
22
Seventh, early American society did not regard its professional military establishment as an important state institution. It was widely believed, rather, that the 21 Shy, 211. 
22
23
Left to the vagaries of fickle administrations and Congressional assemblies that would just as soon not deal with intractable international problems until a threat became evident, the U.S. military services formulated theories according to their own doctrine and their own view of the nation's interests. 
24
Many of the cultural tendencies borne of this period involve the political aspects of strategy. This period shaped how Americans wars were to begin and end. During this period, the relationship between society, government, and the military was formed. 
23
Shy,
216. 24
The nineteenth and twentieth centuries saw America's coming of age. It was a period marked by civil war, the conquering of the frontier, massive industrialization, and world wars. It was a time characterized less by external threats and more by overcoming problems befitting a nation growing in size and industrial capacity. These centuries did not fundamentally alter how Americans thought about peace and war. The tendencies formed during this period are more about the means, not the political objectives of American strategy.
Americans moved West for many reasons. Some wanted adventure. Some sought their fortune among the growing number of mines, advancing railroads, and ranches.
Others wanted to escape the factories of the East. A few moved to Utah to escape religious persecution. Most simply wanted to better their lives. Whatever their reasons, the experience of a moving frontier had a lasting influence on American strategic culture. This period shaped how Americans approach problems. It shaped how Americans approach war and strategy. Amidst this formative experience, Americans experienced another in the coming of the industrial age.
While the frontier was being conquered, the United States was fast becoming an industrial society. At the start of the Civil War, the country lagged well behind industrializing nations such as Great Britain, France, and Germany. By the turn of the century, it had vaulted far ahead of these European competitors. American manufacturing output exceeded the combined output of its European rivals. During this time, cities grew and farm production rose. Developments in manufacturing, transportation and communications changed American society. The typewriter, Elisha Otis's new elevator, and the telephone were the products of an ever-improving and growing civilization. 
1
2
The wars of modern American did a great deal to strengthen established facets of the way Americans think about war. With their faith and competence in technology, managerial and problem-solving skills, insularity, and unmatched industrial capacity, Americans were able to substitute both sheer quantities of assets and the power of machines for strategic skills and lives. This is not to say that Americans were averse to suffering terrible losses or that they left others to do the real fighting. If guilt has to be assuaged, history records enough occasions when American leaders did not hesitate sending soldiers into attritional battles or campaigns. Whether along the shattered fences of Fredericksburg, in the twisted forests of Saint-Mihiel, in the cold skies over Nazi Germany, or among the Solomon Islands, Americans have shown as much a determination to fight and, if necessary, die in numbers as the next citizen soldier. Notwithstanding the American belief that members of the nation's armed forces are also members of American society who have value in their own right, democratic governments inherently are inclined towards saving the lives of the sons and daughters of the electorate rather than those of the enemy. Americans prefer firepower over manpower in war.
These two centuries represent a formative period in which many of the eight influential characteristics of American culture influenced how America means to effect strategy, and fight wars.
First, the relative absence of societal support on the frontier and the requirements of overcoming the technical problems encountered during industrialization bred a spirit of pragmatism and engineering problem-solving that is reflected in how Americans solve strategic problems. Americans' approach to war is, consequently, more reflective of Baron Antoine Henri de Jomini than Clausewitz. Americans strategists such as Herman Kahn, Thomas Schelling, and Robert McNamara and strategic analysis organizations such as .RAND epitomize Americans' engineering approach to solving the more intractable problems of strategy. 
3
4
The McNamara revolution of the 1960s effected the domination of quantitatively expressible analysis. As a result, American defense leaders often become preoccupied debating the technical merits of large weapons systems. As a result, the primacy of policy as a guide for strategy and of strategy as a guide of military power and weapons systems has been reversed. The introduction of almost every major weapons system renews a paroxysm of debate that sends the defense-intellectual community back to the conceptual drawing board, and all too frequently temporarily suspends strategic planning. The tendency to confuse tactical and technical issues with what is assumed to be self- 
3
Gray, Strategic Studies: A Critical Assessment (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1982), 18-19. 4
explanatory strategy prompted James Billington to note, "We ought to be seeking tentative answers to fundamental questions, rather than definitive answers to trivial ones."
5
6
7
Third, because of its size, its historical experiences of success in war, and the impatient manner of its people, America has developed a way of strategy that is fundamentally continentalist and direct. 
9
10
9
the case of Union General William Sherman's strategy to take the horrors of modern war to the Southerners during his drive to the Atlantic Ocean during the Civil War, 1 ' and the case of General Curtis LeMay's strategic bombing campaign over Japan in the Second World War. Termed military realism, this approach assumes that the country that starts the conflict commits a criminal act and in doing so forfeits any rights they might have had to protection under the law. In other words, one cannot violate the rule of law in pursuit of selfish interests and then turn around during the conflict to seek protection under the law, when those who were violated decide when and how to strike back.
Given its insularity, albeit on a grand scale, the United States cannot wage its wars unless its navy maintains the sea lines of communication. Indeed, American seapower arguably midwifed American victories (including the Civil War) during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Despite this, as Gray notes, "the United States is neither a natural seapower nor does a maritime perspective and precepts dominate its strategic culture." 
12
Fourth, because of their continental isolation, weak neighbors, and belated yet massive responses, Americans have tended to become preoccupied with developing 
11
deterrence strategies and weapons systems, which may not be entirely effective in war, 
13
14
12
13
14 Ibid., 595.
(particularly those during the siege of Leningrad). Societies that undergo such experiences and that do not possess the geographical and industrial advantages of the United States are more fatalistic about the dangers of war and more aware of the need not to neglect strategy. In contrast, American history tends to teach its citizens that war is episodic and is waged abroad, and that the United States will eventually win regardless of the quality or quantity of strategy and military preparedness before the war. 
15
States tends not to view war and strategy in a holistic manner. Wars are planned for and waged by different military services reflecting three distinctly different operating environments-air, land, and sea. The inferable success of each of the services in their respective mediums against Imperial Japan, Nazi Germany and Iraq further reinforces the tendency to be relatively disinterested in gaining an understanding of the totality of war.
This predilection precludes the defense establishment from gaining a deeper appreciation of the advantages of fighting jointly. It precludes them from understanding when the military should fight jointly and be more accommodating when geographic, political, or military factors will dictate the need to fight separately. Due to fiscal, geographic, and political constraints, the United States may not have the luxury of pursuing redundant paths to future victory.
Seventh, the different perspectives of elected officials and military officers hinder the ability of each to recognize when political goals and military capabilities may be 
15
poorly matched. Strategy in America lies awkwardly between the profession of politics and the profession of arms. It is the bridge that connects them, yet is neither of those activities. 
16
Because of the diffusion of political authority inherent in the American system of government and the divergent interests of policy-makers, policy in times of peace may be formed without due considerations to military requirements. For the military, the problem lies in viewing the strategic side of national security increasingly as the domain of politicians and diplomats, and the operational and tactical sides as the domain of the military, free from civilian "meddling." 17 When asked by political leaders, U.S. military officers will tend to confine their advice on strategy to purely essential military matters.
Indeed, within all the armed services, there is a strong bias against officers as "strategists."
One does not hope to be labeled as such without first accumulating an impeccable operational record.
The effects of divergent civilian and military perspectives on the strategy-making process was evident during the Vietnam War. Resentful of the intrusive civilian strategic  Eighth, perhaps because of their continental isolation and success in war against weaker adversaries, Americans tend to be blind to cultural differences. Notwithstanding the heritage of immigration, Americans have generally not studied the cultures of other societies. In the most traumatic of U.S. wars-the Revolutionary War and the Civil War-the cultures of the combatants were too similar to have made Americans aware of the dangers of ethnocentrism. 
19
19
20
holistic approach to strategy, and precludes an appreciation of when to and when not to fight in an overly joint manner.
The nineteenth and twentieth formed many cultural tendencies that at times have had a deleterious effect on the U.S. strategy-making process. The Vietnam experience certainly laid bare ignorance and indifference to other cultures; the waging of a limited war with excessive reliance on machines, firepower, and logistics; and the inability to recognize when political goals and military capabilities may be poorly matched.
Yet other cultural aspects also ensure that certain military enterprises are embarked on admirably. Fortunately, many of these enterprises include larger, more orthodox tasks that bear upon war and peace. Planning and execution of a D-Day landing, of nuclear deterrence, an intricate SIOP plan, or of large-scale conventional war with redundant paths to victory, all exploit America's strengths and avoid the worst of America's weaknesses. Because strategy is the process of relating military power to political objectives, a strategist cannot afford to ignore the deeply-rooted cultures of those that wield the nation's military power.
The essence of Army culture is defined by its traditional slogan: "Duty, Honor, Country." The Army sees its own honor in its role as the nation's obedient and loyal servant. It views its duty as maintaining the skills that must be taught to the citizenry when America's citizen-soldiers are called on to fight. It sees its purpose as responding to the tasks the American people will ask of it and, more importantly, as preparing to win the nation's wars by forging America's citizenry into an expeditionary force. 
1
First, the Army is the most obedient and loyal of the nation's services. While they were suspicious of all standing military forces, early Americans viewed the Army with particular suspicion. By virtue of their missions and size, the Navy and Marine Corps tended not to be viewed as threats to the republic. As a result of such scrutiny, the Army became-and remains-extremely sensitive to Americans' suspicion of standing professional armies. 
2
3
services may be that the Army has participated in a multitude of politically contentious tasks such as Southern reconstruction, fighting the Native Americans, labor disputes, the Spanish War, Cuban occupation, Philippine pacification, construction and operation of the Panama Canal, and the Mexican punitive expedition. As a result, the Army developed an image of itself as the government's obedient servant, divested of political responsibility. 
4
2
3
While it has undergone numerous identity crises, the Army has never doubted its future; it is secure in the belief that the nation will always need an army regardless of its size and whether it is composed of professionals or professionally led citizen-soldiers. The Army is more accepting of the government's political decisions than the other services. With little or no remonstration, the Army also is more accepting of such policies as race and gender integration, post-war defense cuts, and service integration. It may even be more accepting of the government's wartime political objectives.
Second, the Army is reluctant to commit to war without societal support. During the Vietnam War, President Johnson refused to mobilize the reserves because of the alarm that it might have set off in society. After the war, Army leaders pledged that the service would never again commit itself to war without the people's support. The Army made a conscious decision to integrate its reserves so deeply into the active-force structure that it would be almost impossible to deploy significant forces without calling up the reserves. 
5
6
7
Third, the Army advocates a direct approach to strategy. For example, the first two sentences of the current Army Field Manual (FM) 100-5 state:
The mission of the United States Army is to protect and defend the Constitution of the United States. The Army does this by deterring war and, when deterrence fails, by achieving quick, decisive victory.. .. 
8
Yet the desire for a quick victory also may be a reflection of the nature of land warfare. Few places on earth are as horrible as a battlefield. Whether along the shattered fences of Fredericksburg, in the twisted and broken forests of Saint-Mihiel, or on bloodsoaked Omaha beach, the horror of war is ubiquitous for American soldiers who, as Schultz, "Citizen-soldiers and America's Army: Learning from the Past-Preparing for the Future," Army Times, 6 July 1998, p. 36. 
6
7
9
10
9
10
1 ' Because of the nature of hostilities at sea, navies can afford the luxury of following "civilized" rules. The nature of combat for navies tends to be characterized by fighting between large weapons systems at great distances (instead of with fellow humans at more discernable distances). Victory at sea tends to be one of absolutes. Enemy ships, submarines, and aircraft remain a threat until sent to the bottom. The flotsam of their demise will include fellow humans who are exhausted, traumatized, are at the mercy of their victors and, more importantly, cannot pose a threat to their captors' large platforms. Furthermore, unlike land warfare, the isolation of war at sea or from the sea tends to relieve sailors from moral dilemmas posed by the presence of noncombatants, terrorists, or guerilla soldiers. Three reasons may explain why Air Force the war using appropriate means can threaten an entire military endeavor. Remembering the lessons of My Lai, Army officers are extremely sensitive to devising and following appropriate jus in bello n md criteria particularly when noncombatants are involved.
As a result of these cultural tendencies, the Army is more circumspect about committing to a large war. Its members are more risk-averse when contemplating options.
They advocate strategies and a level of combat power that can effect quick and decisive victories to keep the level of American casualties to a minimum, to avoid the possibility that society may turn against the war effort. At the same time, the Army is sensitive to its soldiers' inappropriate behavior because these actions may have an adverse effect on their ability to win.
Fourth, the Army is more reluctant to commit itself to new concepts than the Navy and the Air Force. War at sea or in the air is more rapid and reactive than is war on land. The nature of combat for navies and air forces is one of a separated series of encounters characterized by meeting, fighting, and retiring. Because overly detailed orders officers may not be as interested in the relationship between strategy and ethical behavior. First, the nature of combat for air forces-fighting between weapons systems or dropping bombs at great heights-isolates its participants from the consequences of their actions. Second, when examining the U.S. Air Force and its raison d'etre, strategic bombing, the notion of humanness seems to conflate with institutional self-interest in the search for a decisive and casualty averse strategy to bring hostilities to a quick and successful conclusion. To its advocates, airpower promises to end wars quicker with less loss of life on both sides than more conventional land and sea military strategies. Third, and more importantly, the majority of Americans did not seem to mind the deaths of hundreds of thousands of German and Japanese noncombatants. Yet the political fallout in the aftermath of the raid on the Al Firdos bunker in Baghdad during Desert Storm (in which a large number of Iraqi civilians were killed along with a senior Iraqi security official and a third of his staff) that saw a curtailment of the strategic bombing campaign and less Air Force control over the target lists has made the Air Force and the Navy more aware of the effects of what is perceived to be unethical behavior upon the war effort. and instructions, if adhered to, may limit an officer's ability to react in this dynamic environment, the Navy and Air Force do not have prescriptive operational doctrines. In contrast, an army cannot move-let alone fight-without detailed, ubiquitous doctrine that allows for coordination between units ranging in size from squads to corps, and in type from artillery, infantry, air defense, armor, and supply to aviation.
The importance of doctrine to the Army cannot be overemphasized. Doctrine is a definitive guide for all units. 
13
The U.S. Army had prepared for two decades before the Viet Nam war to carry out the "Army Concept," which focused on the conventional deployment of massive mechanized formations that relied on firepower to avoid casualties. This it proceeded to do-unsuccessfully-in the jungles of Southeast Asia, against an unconventional enemy, in the face of evidence that other methods, such as the Marine Corps' Combined Action Platoons, would be more effective. 
14
The terms of war for armies is almost invariably chosen by others-by political leaders or the enemy. 
15
16
15
16
18
19
20
Another reason why the Army at times has a passive view of technology is because of its effect on doctrine. As technology improves so will the complexity of aircraft. In contrast, the Army resorted to painting inverted "v"s on the side of their vehicles to distinguish them from those of the enemy.
21 U.S. Department of the Army, FM 100-5, Operations (Washington, D.C.: Department of the Army, 1993), 14-3.
doctrine. The Army may have a difficult time keeping doctrine from becoming too complex and detailed for a soldier-let alone a citizen-soldier-to grasp and use in combat. Given a combined arms approach, a change in the artillery's doctrine to take advantage of the Global Positioning System, for example, will require concomitant changes in the doctrines of the other members of the combined arms team. Technological advances also increase the natural tension between the need for authoritative operational doctrine and the need to keep that doctrine open to new ideas.
The primacy of the human dimension in war means that the Army will be much more sensitive to the more human aspects of war and strategy, such as leadership, ethics, politics, and culture. Army officers have a more holistic view of war and strategy than Navy and Air Force officers and will tend to be much more aware of factors that may influence war and strategy other than those related to technology or weapons systems.
Sixth, Army culture is imbued with a sense of teamwork and the need for integration. A newly-fledged lieutenant learns very quickly that one can make no movement without coordination. One cannot operate one's platoon without informing the platoons on one's right and left, one's company commander, the artillery, and the supply trains. Others depend on the lieutenant following their direction and the lieutenant depends upon them for support. Consequently, one's unit has very little independent discretion within the larger battlespace. 22 (This does not change as a soldier becomes more senior. A major general in charge of a division has less autonomy than a Navy commander in command of a ship.). The need for teamwork facilitates interaction between branches.
Each of the branches consequently has a grasp of how the other branches operate. 
23
24
Seventh, Army culture is conducive to producing superb strategists. Army officers recognize the significance of Clausewitz's remarkable trinity-the government, the army, and the people. They recognize that Americans' aversion to wartime casualties and their perception that land wars risk high casualty rates mean that employing the 
23
24
Army overseas in almost any capacity is a highly political undertaking and underscores the need to be circumspect, given the high level of commitment that that endeavor entails.
They recognize that the goals of war on land are intimately related to the conflict's political objectives. The primary reason why the Army produces superb strategists may be because of the nature of land warfare.
In combat, the Army has to rely not only on doctrine, but also on detailed plans.
Such plans are required to define and coordinate the objectives and actions of large numbers of disparate forces. The Army has to specify the goals and coordinate the actions for every unit, from squad to corps. It has to integrate plans among artillery, infantry, air defense, armor, supply, and aviation units. This need for a priori knowledge reduces war's friction by imparting an understanding throughout the chain of command about the rationale behind plans, including the commander's intention.
The need to coordinate the courses of action of almost every unit resulted in the ubiquitous presence of staff and staff schools. At every level of command above company level, the staff examines its objectives as defined by its immediately senior staff, examines different courses of action according to the strengths and weaknesses of its resources, and develops the objectives and the coordination plans of each of its units. For example, a company commander in the Army examines the goals his battalion staff has set for his unit, develops a plan that assigns attainable goals for each of his platoon officers using the resources at his disposal, and then executes his plan. Army officers consequently have a keen understanding of the vertical interrelationships between the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of war as well as the expertise of their respective horizontal level. 
25
Army culture promotes such traits as obedience to the people and government, sensitivity to the views of society, a sense of circumspection, and keen strategy skills.
Political leaders and civilian defense officials recognize these strategic skills of Army generals and have come to rely on them for balanced and cogent strategic advice. More so than the flag officers of other services, Army generals have traditionally been major contributors to the formulation of national strategy and national military strategy. 
26
25
26
Most Americans have never been to sea on a ship or outside the sight of land.
They have little experience about things maritime. 
1
2
services tend to dismiss aspects of its culture as aberrant. The lack of firsthand knowledge of operations at sea engenders an opinion in the defense community that, as Henry Stimson noted, the Navy "frequently seem[s] to retire from the realm of logic into a dim and religious world in which Neptune was God, Mahan his prophet and the United States Navy the only true church." 
3
4
2
5
6
Insular powers like the United States can do little with independent naval forces to hurt a land power like the Soviet Union. This point was demonstrated in both world wars, when Britain's Navy had little effect on Germany's ability to wage war. To the extent that there was an impact, it involved the much over-rated naval blockade of World War I. 
7
9
10
12
As a result of its belief that only sailors should plan and execute naval strategy, Navy officers are reluctant to have representatives from other services develop naval campaign strategies, let alone execute such plans. While it does develop contingency plans, the Navy does not collectively codify them as doctrine for fear that their decisionmaking prerogatives will be appropriated by leaders in Washington. In marked contrast to the Army and Air Force, the Navy is reluctant to go outside its ranks and let American defense intellectuals develop and articulate assumptions and strategic concepts for the Navy. 
13
12
13
14
15
16
15 Kenneth J. Hagan, American Gunboat Diplomacy and the Old Navy, 1877-1889 (Westport: Greenwood, 1973), 8-9.
16 As Kenneth Allard noted: "The writings of Alfred Thayer Mahan gave the U.S. Navy a strategic vision of itself and its role in the nation's defense so profound that it deserves to be called a Navy still views itself as the guarantor of America's international status. In the eyes of sailors, the Navy is the most important and flexible kind of military power for the United States. It is the predominant instrument of American foreign policy in peacetime.
Because they believe that American strategists do not know how to wield seapower or appreciate the worth of a large navy and its connection with keeping America a great nation, Navy officers defer grudgingly to civilian authorities and nonnaval military leaders. The Navy may become obstinate and resist authority when it believes the defense establishment, the President, or Congress are advocating policies or strategies that are not in accord with the Navy's view of the national interests.
Third, the Navy seeks to maintain internally balanced, multi-purpose forces and advocates strategically and tactically offensive strategies. The air, surface, and submarine communities compete with each other for funding and prominence within the Navy. 
17
17
(New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1994), 226-228. 19
Fourth, the Navy emphasizes deploying its forces at sea and developing strategies based on actual operational experience. 
21
Navy developed a strong operational orientation. Continuous overseas deployments begun after the war were institutionalized in the 1950s and became the standard operating pattern of the American navy. 
22
23
21
22 Rosenberg,
"Process,
" 155. 23
The technical demands of service at sea also mean that the shore tours of most officers consist of either technical schools or technical, budget, or manpower-oriented program offices. There is little room in a Navy officer's career path to study the finer points of naval history and naval strategy. Navy officers consequently acquire an understanding of naval strategy based on their operational experiences. They approach strategy not from a theoretical or historical perspective, but from their own narrow operational experience. 
24
25
24
25
27
26
27 Among the U.S. services, the Navy most readily accepted the interpretation that the Gulf War should not be viewed as a model for the future. In the view of the Navy, its roles in the war-sea control (including the enforcing the embargo and securing the flanks of the peninsula), tactical air strikes, amphibious operations, transport, supply-and its ability to operate without foreign bases are fundamental characteristics of the U.S. sea services and were greater (though intangible and less visible) determinants of ultimate victory than the war's alleged revolutionary aspects. As Rosenberg noted: "Naval strategy, as understood by naval officers, may consist not so much in overarching, erudite theories as in day by day policy and program choices, backed up by thorough training and experience in operations and tactics, and missile defense, and effect offensive sea control, such as nuclear propulsion, are welcomed, while those that threaten traditional operations (e.g., nuclear weapons 28 ) are viewed more equivocally.
Fifth, the Navy is reluctant to centralize command structures or develop detailed operational doctrine. Viewed by a Navy officer, war on land is systemic and linear. It stresses coordinated timetables and the need for a lock-step mentality. It moves ahead in lines parallel to the front which will ensure a safe rear area. It involves the use of concepts such as limits of advance, phase lines, coordinating points, contact points, restrictive fire lines, and "on-order" missions. War on land is inwardly focused. It emphasizes the need of soldiers to be in the designated place, in the proper sequence, and at the prescribed time in relation to other friendly units. 
29
30
28
" Rosenberg,
"Process,
" 154. 29
30
Sea warfare is more rapid and reactive than land warfare. Naval warfare is inherently maneuver warfare. It is inherently non-linear; that is, without well-defined forward and rear areas and therefore no safe areas. In such an environment, coordination cannot be achieved by plans, a hierarchical command structure, or prescriptive doctrine. Cultural inhibitions against centralization also affect how the Navy approaches information technologies. As James FitzSimonds noted, although wireless equipment was made readily available to the Navy, it saw little operational use for nearly two decades. 32
In the view of Navy officers, the operational advantages of radio were outweighed by the reduction of individual authority. A high degree of centralized control that wireless offered threatened to interfere with the actions of commanders accustomed to virtual independence. Since the Navy began to make operational use of wireless on the eve of the First World War, command authority has indeed gravitated upward. Despite introduction of contemporary computer-to-computer tactical data links and satellite communication, commanding officers have retained much of their independence. When one examines the implications of pervasive high speed information exchange made possible by the technologies of an information-led RMA, however, the transition to network warfare 33 31 Baer, 369. As Admiral Arleigh Burke wrote: "Decentralization means we offer officers the opportunity to rise to positions of responsibility, of decision, of identity and stature-if they want it, and as soon as they can take it. We believe in command, not staff. We believe we have "real" things to do.... We decentralize and capitalize on the capabilities of our individual people rather than centralize and make automatons of them. This builds that essential pride of service and sense of accomplishment. 33 For a description of the Navy's concept on network warfare, see Arthur K. Cebrowski and John J. Garstka, "Network-Centric Warfare: Its Origins and Future," U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings (January 1998): 28-35. may be prolonged and may have to rely on the determined efforts of a few key individuals as in the case of the transition to wireless.
Much like its institutional dislike for centralized command, the Navy is reluctant to develop detailed joint operational doctrine. To Navy officers, unified doctrine means one accepted style of doctrine-the methodical, plodding, and command-limiting doctrine of land warfare. Because it shies away from articulating its own operational doctrine, Navy doctrine has evolved much like the British Constitution-largely unwritten but thoroughly understood by its practitioners. 
34
The Navy is the most difficult of the services to understand. The nature of warfare at sea has engendered characteristics that make it difficult for the Navy to integrate itself into a more interdependent military. The inability of others to realize that the mind-set of sailors is different than those of soldiers, however, has further isolated a navy that has little physical contact with the rest of the military. The inability to understand how sea warfare differs from land warfare risks not exploiting the potential of the world's most powerful navy and not realizing the full potential of joint integration.
To say that the Army produces superb strategists is not to imply that the Navy does not. The Navy produces outstanding naval strategists. To accept this realization is to begin to view American strategy in a more holistic manner.
Regardless of their difficulties in adapting to a more joint military or of their difficulty in articulating and defending the differences between the principles of warfare at sea and warfare on land, or even of the challenges of moving away from open-ocean warfighting, sailors deployed for up to six months off the world's coastlines remain confident in the knowledge that while few understand the need for a navy, the nation's leaders will in the near future ask the question, "Where are the carriers?" and will again rely heavily on the navy's operational abilities, its overseas presence, and the ability of a carrier battlegroup to deliver in unambiguous terms the nation's intentions and resolve.
Air Force culture lacks the cohesion that is characteristic of the other services' cultures. It does not have two or three centuries of accrued experiences. Indeed, the existence of the Air Force spans only two generations. The struggle to establish an independent American air service only goes back as far as three generations. Mere time, however, may not be the only reason why Air Force culture lacks cohesion.
Like modern corporations, the Air Force is characterized by a high-technology, multiple-subculture organization. Because of the wing concept and the nature of Air Force operations, there is little interaction among its fighter, bomber, tanker, reconnaissance, theater airlift, global airlift, and ballistic-missile communities. Because of this isolation, each of these communities has its own highly developed culture. Support personnel, removed from the flightline and silo, are closely integrated with civilian specialists and tend to identify themselves more by their occupational identifications than by their affiliation with the Air Force. Air Force technological research-and-development units are virtually indistinguishable from civilian research-änd-development institutions. 
1
2
The Air Force is a different kind of military institution. By its very nature, the Air Force has to expend more energy than the other services to develop and sell a cogent and unifying vision of itself to maintain institutional cohesion and remain an effective military organization. Consequently, one should not judge the Air Force from the perspective of how a "military institution" is supposed to behave based on the other, older services. Indeed, the forefathers of the Air Force defined their service and their careers against Army tradition. It is therefore possible to identify as least six characteristics of Air Force culture that reflect air operations and the need for a strong unifying vision.
First, the Air Force is still plagued by paranoia about its survival as a service even after most sensible people have long accepted the strategic utility of airpower. 
3
5
6
Constructive criticism or good-natured ribbing elicit a knee-jerk defense mechanism among Air Force officers that is as unattractive as it is unwarranted. 7 Within the institution, 
4
5
6 For example, Philip Gold complained that: "Today, nobody questions the Marines because the British failed at the Gallipoli landing in 1915, or sneers at modern warships because a claque of long-dead admirals resisted the shift from sail to steam. Yet the Air Force finds itself constantly attacked because of what some British or Italian (or American) zealot proposed 50 or 70 years ago... or because of some rippedout-of-context Air Force comments in the aftermath of Desert Storm." Philip Gold, "What the Air Force Can Do for You," Washington Times, 6 July 1998. 
7
airmen's inability to tolerate self-criticism results in a highly charged, reactionary environment. 
8
9
11
9
10
1 ' To note that the Air Force has published twelve doctrines is not to say that there have been twelve different theoretical concepts. The Air Force has had three major doctrines over that period: strategic revelatory terms as "What we hold true about aerospace power," 
12
13
As result of its theoretical mind-set, the Air Force, by its own hand, finds itself in a Catch-22. It can only justify its existence based on the theory that airpower is decisive by itself. To have been equivocal on that point during its struggle for independence might have implied uncertainty about the early advocates' cause. Yet the theory that airpower is decisive is nearly impossible to prove because it, like naval power, is enabling in nature.
By definition, since people live on land, the effect of airpower and seapower on the course and outcome of war can only be indirect. Indirect, however, does not necessarily mean secondary or indecisive. Indeed, airpower has been a decisive element in almost all of America's major wars of this century. The intuitive mind of a Navy officer is comfortable with the intangible nature of seapower and airpower. The narrow, theoretical mind of an Air Force officer, however, has difficulty accepting the intangible nature of nuclear bombing (1953-1971); a shift to tactical airpower (1971-1992); and no overarching universal formula (1992-present). Szafranski, 59 (note 20).
12 Department of the Air Force, Air Force Manual (AFM) I-I, Basic Aerospace Doctrine of the United States Air Force (Washington, D.C.: Department of the Air Force, March 1992), vii.
13 For an example of such reasoning, see Szafranski, "Interservice Rivalry in Action."
airpower and its successes. In the engineering mind of Air Force officers, airpower is a problem that needs solving.
With such institutional interests vested in a single theory, Air Force officers are not content with anything less than decisive victory delivered solely by Air Force aircraft.
The inferable nature of its successes over Nazi Germany, Imperial Japan, Vietnam, and
Iraq drives the Air Force to maniacal lengths to prove to itself and its detractors once and for all that airpower by itself can be decisive. Like Yossarian, the Air Force "has decided to live forever or die in the attempt." 14 While few can conceive of a conflict where airpower would not be useful, let alone indirectly decisive, the drive to prove that airpower acting independently of other kinds of forces can deliver victory drives a wedge between the air service and the other services, provides a lightening rod for its detractors' arguments, and feeds a gnawing sense of institutional insecurity within the Air Force.
Third, more so than any other service, the Air Force is enamoured with technology. If flight is a gift of technology, and if technology poses the only limits on the freedoms of that gift, then it is to be expected that technology will be pursued by those who love to fly. 
15
14 Joseph Heller, Catch-22 (New York: Scriber, 1994; first pub. 1955), 36. 
15
Air Force use of advanced technology as a panacea is, of course, reflective of American culture. The Army and Marine Corps possess a balanced view of technology.' 6
The Navy enjoys technology in the context of operations.
17
18
As a consequence of its dogged pursuit of technology, the Air Force has an insatiable appetite for newer and more technologically advanced aircraft. A trade of more of the less sophisticated F-16s for F-15s, for example, was not a welcome choice. It considers fathers and sons flying the same B-52 a national disgrace. 
19
Fourth, the Air Force displays a cultural identification with piloted aircraft and an organizational bias against unmanned vehicles. Pilots led the struggle to create an American air force. They led American air forces in war. They came to dominate Air Force leadership. As a result, Air Force culture is characterized by a two-caste system-the elite pilots (and to a lesser extent the non-pilot officers such as navigators and bombardiers) and everybody else. 
20
21
As a result of this bias, Air Force leaders may find it hard to see the revolutionary implications of unmanned vehicles. They may explicitly resist technological innovation, such as ballistic or cruise missiles, that threaten the role of premier Air Force aircraft.
Meanwhile, they may promote innovations such as unmanned reconnaissance aircraft, for example, which do not threaten premier Air Force platforms. Another consequence of this bias is that Air Force leaders may choose piloted aircraft over non-piloted weapons systems, even though the latter may be better able to prove the assertion that wars can be won from the air. In terms of the RMA, the predilection for piloted aircraft is so strong that the Air Force will have tremendous difficulties in transferring the share of its strike capabilities from bombers to precision-guided unmanned missiles that will not require the services of airborne launch platforms. 
22
Fifth, the Air Force emphasizes offensive air operations and the need to gain air superiority. Like sea warfare, taking an offensive posture is much easier in the air than taking a defensive stance. As deduced by Guilio Douhet, Hugh Trenchard, and Billy
Mitchell, the offensive use of airpower allows one to take the fight to the enemy. The enemy's armies, population and war-making centers can be bombed to the point where the enemy no longer retains the ability or the will to wage war.
Air Force strategies stress power projection, but not at the expense of establishing and maintaining command of the air. Like sea-control to the Navy, the Air Force sees the need to gain air superiority as a central issue. The Air Force cannot bring airpower to bear effectively against the enemy unless command of the air is achieved (air superiority cannot be achieved, as the early advocates argued, by an air arm supporting and subordinated to ground commanders). The Air Force believes that air superiority is best achieved not through defensive measures such as anti-aircraft fire or missiles (which may not be able to secure command of the air over enemy territory), but through offensive air operations conducted by fighter aircraft.
Because it emphasizes offensive air operations, those means of warfare that are compatible with power projection such as F-15Es, F-l 17s, and B-2s (and their air-tosurface munitions) are funded more so than tanker, theater or global-airlift programs.
Because of the overarching need for command of the air, moreover, there is also much emphasis on developing and constructing advanced air superiority fighters such as F-15C/Ds and F-22s (and their air-to-air missiles) and, to a lesser extent, surveillance aircraft such as the E-3B/C Sentry Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS). The disdain for air defenses means that the enemy's surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) and antiaircraft artillery are not as highly regarded as enemy fighters. There is therefore much less emphasis on types of platforms designed to combat enemy air defenses and their SAMs, such as the retired F-4G Wild Weasel and the recently retired EF-111A Raven.
Sixth, due to its experiences in the Cold War, the Air Force views itself as the nation's predominant strategic instrument. In 1947, the National Security Act which established the Air Force as an independent service, required that it prepare forces for a
Force, what is stopping the missiliers and space advocates from arguing, as did the Air Force forefathers before them, that these means should be independently controlled for their effective development and use? mix of "independent" functions such as air superiority, strategic bombardment, and strategic reconnaissance, and "cooperative" functions, such as air defense, air transport, i support of joint amphibious and airborne operations, and assisting the Army and the
In what would become the raison d'etre of the Air Force from 1947 until the late 1980s, the National Security Act also required the Air Force to "support national interests." 
23
24
25
Because it views itself as the nation's predominant strategic instrument, the Air Force focuses its spending and systems development on strategic and high-end operational systems such as the B-52, B-2, and F-117 and then adapts these systems for lower-spectrum missions when necessary. 
26
Seventh, the Air Force emphasizes that Air Force airpower should be executed in a decentralized fashion, yet centrally controlled by pilots. Because air warfare is much more rapid and reactive than land warfare, combat effectiveness in the air is more efficient when led at the lowest possible level of command. The concept of strategic bombardment rests on a logistical concept of warfighting. From the early 1920s, airmen have been taught to discover, prioritize, and destroy those elements of "vital centers" or "centers of 
25
26
gravity" that are essential to the enemy's ability to wage war. Central planning and execution will assure that maximum effort will be brought to bear on these elements, whose destruction will result in decisive victory. In the view of airmen, airpower must not be squandered or its potential wasted by parceling it across the battlefront to many commanders. The strategic air campaigns over Nazi Germany, North Vietnam, and Iraq, and the development of the SIOP all reflect the Air Force predilection for central planning.
Because the Air Force emphasizes that Air Force airpower should be controlled by airmen and from an airman's perspective, the Air Force dominates the air-campaign planning process. 
27
28
27
28
Eighth, the Air Force has a more expansive perspective of the battlefield than either the Army or the Marine Corps. Air Force pilots tend to think in strategic terms because they believe the Air Force is the nation's predominant strategic instrument. They tend to think in strategic terms because of their institution's drive to prove the decisiveness of strategic bombardment. But the main reason they think in strategic terms is that they view the battlefield from above, with the benefit of wide vision and extensive reach. Their theater-wide perspective is of a scope, scale, and focus that is much different from soldiers and Marines. The range of the ground services' perceptions is limited to the battlefield in front of their forces, which is much smaller in scale than the theater-wide scale of the Air Force operational mind-set. In advancing to their objectives, soldiers and Marines tend to focus on threats that loom on the battlefield as they must first safeguard their forces. The ground units must attacks things in comparative sequence because they cannot reach targets to the depths available to the Air Force. In the Air Force view, there is much more to war than destroying the nearest tank column; air superiority must be achieved and maintained, enemy supply routes must be interdicted; and enemy commandand-control capabilities must be rendered useless. The operational mind-set of a pilot is focused on what targets, if destroyed, will most contribute to winning the war, then the campaign, and then the battle. In the Air Force view, airpower can win battles or it can win wars.
As a result of its comparatively more expansive operational mind-set, the Air Force is reluctant to develop detailed, joint operational doctrine not only because prescriptive doctrine, if adhered to, restricts the ability of Air Force aviators to fight in such a dynamic environment, but also because of the divergent perspectives of the Air Force and the ground services. Because it reflects Army doctrine more than the other services' doctrines, joint operational doctrine reflects the perspective of the commander of the Army's principle maneuver unit, the division. The range of the division commander's perceptions of the battlefield is based on a division's operational area:
roughly 300 by 100 miles, depending on the terrain and disposition of the enemy. The division commander, facing a direct and present threat, focuses on the immediate battlefield. 
29
30
■ The Air Force has had difficulty writing operational doctrine, in contrast to the Army and Marine Corps, and to a lesser extent the Navy. Only recently has the Air Force begun to articulate the mind-set of the airman and demonstrate how airpower can best be used. Unless the Air Force continues to describe its style of fighting in a joint doctrinal context, joint operational doctrine will remain highly reflective of the limited ground-service perspective.
The Air Force cultural mind-set is difficult to understand. The Air Force is a different kind of military institution. Air Force institutional insecurity and the nature of air warfare make it difficult on the Air Force to integrate itself into a more joint military.
The Air Force has to work hard at explaining a cogent vision of airpower to airmen and to the other services without appearing to proselytize. It is ironic that the Air Force is so troubled because the United States is primarily an air power rather than a land power, sea power, space power, or nuclear power. America is an air-using society with a large and longstanding scientific-industrial base to develop commercial and military air power. 
31
Marine Corps culture is more tightly-knit and homogeneous than the other services' cultures. Its history as an institution is marked by bloody battles on the periphery of U.S. interests and by constant political struggles to secure its existence. Its history, small size, 
1
2
3
Marines see the need to have only one officer for 8.8 enlistees. That is a.wider ratio than any of the other services. The Air Force, at the other end of the spectrum, has one officer for four enlistees. Some 49 percent of Marines are in the service's three lowest ranks (E-1, E-2, and E-3). This is almost twice the percentage in the other three services. 
4
There are at least five aspects of Marine Corps culture that influence the development of U.S. strategy. First, partly because of their sense of vulnerability, Marine culture-like Japanese culture-cultivates a sense of candid self-review that makes it more willing to entertain internal and external criticism. Both cultures are concerned not so much with laying blame as with identifying problems. Rather than sweep faults and weakness under the rug, Marines tend to view them as possible threats to the institution.
This candor is present in all ranks within the Marine Corps. It surprises Army and Air
Force officers how honest Marines in the field can be, and even more surprising that Marine officers are willing to let their troops be so candid. 
5
A system of candid self-review results in a continuous learning process in the Marine Corps. The Marine Corps is the most innovative service in terms of examining and testing new operational concepts. Marines are constantly engaged in innovative experiments such as the Hunter Warrior concept that integrates advanced information technology with dispersed rifle squads using other ground and aerial observers and sensors. 
6
Second, the Marine Corps has a balanced view of the role technology plays in strategy. The Marine Corps operates at sea and in air with just one purpose in mind, to support its principal weapons system, the rifleman on the ground. 7 Consequently, the Marine Corps places more emphasis on increasing its Marines' combat skills than on Marines' equipment. Like the Army, the Marine Corps believes the human dimension of war to be more important than the technological dimension. 8
The centrality of the human dimension in war means that the Marine Corps is sensitive to the human aspects of war and strategy. Its principle doctrine, FMFM 1:
Warfighting, emphasizes friction, the chaotic environment of war, the enemy's will to wage war, the need for surprise, and boldness in combat. 
9
10
Over the last thirty years, however, as American culture has become more fragmented, individualistic, and consumerist, the Marines have become more withdrawn ,0 In the late 1980s, then Commandant of the Marine Corps, General Al Gray introduced a formal reading list, not just for officers but for all ranks. As Ricks noted: "Staff sergeants and first lieutenants, the men who run platoons, were told to read, among other books, [James] Webb's Fields of Fire. First sergeants tackled Sun Tzu's The Art of War. Captains, who run rifle companies, were assigned Tom Peter's Thriving on Chaos. Majors, who typically are mired in staff jobs, had to look at life differently by reading Mao Tse-tung's On Guerrilla Warfare, for which the author was listed, in typical Marine style, as "Mao, T.," as if he were one more shavehead recruit. Lieutenant colonels were asked to look at the very big picture: Solzhenitsyn's August 1914, Thucydides's Pelonnesian War, and Tolstoy's War and Peace. Most pointedly, colonels were yanked back to reality by having their noses rubbed in a library of military failure: Neil Sheehan's Bright and Shining Lie, about the U.S. war effort in Vietnam; General Giap's How We Won the War, a view from the victor's side ofthat conflict; Paul Kennedy's Rise and Fall of Great Powers, about how military spending can undercut national security; and C.S. Forester's undeservedly obscure The General, a gloomy meditation on how good but unimaginative officers could lead a generation of British youth to slaughter in World War I. " Ricks, 145-146.  from society. 
11
12
13
The Marines' movement toward a new kind of open and active political conservatism should not be viewed as an indicator of where the rest of the military is today, but instead of where it might be heading. With the end of the Cold War, the other 
11 Ibid.,
22.
Consequently, the U.S. military might come to play a more active role in political decisions and, in doing so, might reawaken American societal suspicions against its professional military.
Fourth, Marines are the least inclined to operate with the other U.S. military services. The deep culture that distinguishes and sustains the Corps also engenders a narrow perspective captured in the Marine aphorism that: "There is a right way, a wrong way, and the Marine way." The Marine culture and the Marine way of doing things runs so deep that Marines do not readily accommodate elements of other services that are different from their own. During the Korean and Vietnam wars and the Grenada operation, for example, the Marine Corps was reluctant to let the Army use its helicopters. During the Somalia operations in the early 1990s, Army women, accustomed to sleeping in the same barracks as their male counterparts, were upset when the Marine commander overseeing the operation ordered the women to move to segregated sleeping areas. In the same operation, Marine commanders again unthinkingly imposed Marine rules by denying Air Force personnel per diem payments which the airmen had been receiving since the start of the operation. 
14
16
The Marine Corps may vocalize its views in strong terms when it sees the military establishment advocate top-down concepts or visions that are supposed to serve as a template to channel the collective efforts of the armed forces. For example, the Marine Corps has been vocal in its opposition to Joint Vision 2010. Marines believe that it is overly dependent on technology, misdirected towards high-intensity conflict, and offers a potentially grave strategy-capability mismatch in fighting America's small and limited conflicts such as those conducted in Haiti, Bosnia, and Somalia.
17
There is, however, another more important aspect to the Marines' paranoia. While it needs an army, navy, and even an air force, the United States does not need a Marine Corps-the United States wants a Marine Corps. If the country changes its mind, if it thinks the Marine Corps has lost its usefulness to society, the Marine Corps-like any organization in society that has lost its edge-will cease to exist. As a result, Marines are driven by the need to deliver success in combat. The Marine Corps has made itself into a highly responsive, flexible, and adaptable institution. The Marine Corps is continually exploring the future security environment to determine which missions and roles will be important to the United States in the future. It then adapts itself to missions the other services do not want or cannot see, such as amphibious warfare or fighting America's small wars. The history of the Marine Corps is essentially a history of institutional . survival and adaptation.
Marine culture is the richest culture in the U.S. military: formalistic, isolated, elitist, with a deep anchor in their own history and mythology. 
23
24
This analysis suggests that American culture and the cultures of the U.S. military services influence the American process of formulating strategy. If these cultural characteristics are strong, persistent, and ubiquitous, then they should be guides to future events. The United States is likely to perform more effectively in large-scale wars and in wars where absolute victories can be obtained. Planning and execution of a D-Day-style landing, of nuclear deterrence, of an intricate SI OP plan, or of a large-scale conventional war with redundant paths to victory would exploit America's strengths. In short, U.S.
military power is a powerful but blunt instrument. 
1
2
3
Besides facing situations where doctrine needs to be flexible or where direct approaches to absolute victories may not work, the Army may find its greatest challenge to be convincing others that war is a contest of human wills and not machines and that soldiers will continue to be needed as much in the future as in the past. • , American strategists need an understanding of how the services' cultures may influence future strategies. American strategists need to recognize occasions when Army predilections towards adopting a direct approach in conflicts characterized as operations-other-than-war may prove ineffective. American strategists need to understand when the Navy would be better served by funding more mine-countermeasure ships or fast sea-lift ships instead of more offensive, sea-control platforms. They need to be aware when Air , Force tendencies towards piloted attack aircraft may needlessly endanger the lives of U.S.
aviators. American strategists need to recognize occasions when the Army may be better suited for operations with coalition forces, even if the Marine Corps volunteers for such missions. Strategists who do not understand the sources of ideas that undergird their military organizations' deeply-rooted preferences may not recognize occasions when the political leaders' goals and the services' strategies may be poorly matched. Such strategists will have a difficult time recognizing when the services' cultures makes some endeavors unimaginable, possible, or desirable.
American strategists should not be content with studying just the cultures of America's potential enemies. Those responsible for developing and executing U.S.
strategies need to see America and the U.S. military services through the eyes of the next potential General Giap. As Lao-Tzu wrote: "He who knows others is clever; He who knows himself has discernment."
4
regimental staffs result in an overall appreciation of how naval forces can better enable victory on land?
Military officers gain an appreciation of how officers from the other services think largely through interaction on joint-staff tours and in joint professional military education programs. Unfortunately, interaction in such sterile environments may not convey enough inter-service knowledge and appreciation to improve the ability of the military to fight in a joint manner. Understanding how the other services think from an operational perspective may engender a more holistic approach to war and strategy. Moreover, understanding how the other services think from an operational perspective may lead to an appreciation of when to fight jointly and be more accommodating when geographic, political, or military factors dictate the need not to fight jointly. The potential advantages to be gained by examining service cultures from an operational perspective appear to be at least initially too attractive to ignore.
Follow-up research also might be designed to determine if differences in the services' cultures may be used in a constructive manner. Such research could test some of the hypotheses made about the skills engendered by the services' cultures. For example, are Army and Marine Corps officers better strategists than Air Force and Navy officers?
Are Navy officers better at understanding the relationship between technology and operations? Are Air Force officers better at envisioning how technology may affect future battlefields? Studies demonstrating that different U.S. military service cultures engender different skills raise larger questions of how the military might use such skills in a constructive manner. Should Army and Marine Corps officers be assigned to particular important to policymakers of democratic states in which military values and attitudes should echo and not challenge the principles on which the country is based. 
5
Possibly the most effective manner through which to change aspects of a service's culture is through education. If service members and those who must deal with the services understand why the services behave the way they do, then that behavior is likely to become modified. 
6
7
It is unclear just how helpful studies on American culture and the cultures of the U.S. military services may prove to be. The determined researcher can usually find impressive empirical evidence in identifying which aspects of these cultures influence the U.S. strategy-making process, how these characteristics form, or how they might influence American strategy. It does not seem unduly optimistic, however, to assert the following benefits gained from examining American culture, U.S. military service cultures, and how such cultures influence American strategy:
8
• An appreciation of the importance of strategy in all its dimensions;
• An appreciation of the need for cultural knowledge and cultural selfknowledge;
• An improved understanding of how such cultures might be shaped; and
• An improved understanding of how such culture can influence strategy, defense preparation, and the conduct of war.
Despite the limitations and problems of using it as an analytical tool, culture is an indispensable guide to the strategist. The paradigm of national or organizational culture can be useful in identifying hidden assumptions behind a defense community's strategy, in understanding the sources of ideas that underlie those assumptions, and in tracing the effects ofthose assumptions on the behavior of its members. 
9
The resurgence of the American military's technical hubris in the form of an information-led "revolution" in military affairs is indicative of the continued lack of selfknowledge among American strategists and a lack of a more holistic perspective on war and strategy. 
10
11
In 1025, the Byzantine Empire found itself more secure than it had been for nearly five hundred years. After nearly four decades of war, the Byzantines had routed the Bulgarians in the Balkans and dictated terms to the Saracen powers in the East. It secured its preeminence as the West's only superpower and was in position to effect the Byzantine epoch. Forty-six years later, however, the empire suffered such a defeat that it never truly recovered as a great power. What had happened between 1025 and the Battle of Manzikert in 1071? Above all else, the politicians and intellectuals in Constantinople became indifferent to the exigencies of strategy. 
12
12
The premature end of what Time magazine founder Henry Lane termed the American century has been declared more than once by disciples of decline. In truth, the 21 st century, not the twentieth, will turn out to be the period of America's greatest preeminence. Information is the new coin of the international realm, and the United States is better positioned than any other country to multiply the potency of its hard and soft power resources through information. 
13
Without fundamental changes in the international system, strategy-like war-will remain an inescapable reality of life in a Hobbesian world. Strategy is a matter of vital importance to the state. It lies in the province of life or death. It lies in the realm of national survival or ruin. 
13
14
Vll
Vll
16  
16  
7  
7  
Colin S. Gray, "Nuclear Weapons and the Revolution in Military Affairs," in The Absolute Weapon Revisited: Nuclear Arms and the Emerging International Order, ed. T.V. Paul, Richard J. Harknett, and James J. Wirtz (Ann Arbor: University of MichiganPress, 1998), 111-113.   
Williamson Murray and Mark Grimsley, "Introduction: On Strategy,"  in The Making of Strategy: Rulers, States, and War, ed.Williamson Murray, MacGregor Knox, and Alvin Bernstein  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 3.   
For Clifford Geertz and other anthropologists, culture involves genetics as well as sociology. See Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures(New York: Basic Books, 1973), 89.
Alexander George, "The Causal Nexus between Cognitive Beliefs and Decision-MakingBehavior: The 'Operational Code' Belief System," in Psychological Models in International Politics, ed. Laurence S.Falkowski (Boulder; Colo.: Westview, 1979), 113.   
Elizabeth Kier, Imagining War: French and British Military Doctrine  Between the Wars (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997), 28.
Colin S.Gray, "On Strategic Performance," Joint Force Quarterly, no. 10 (Winter 1995-96):   
John Keegan noted that: "Intertribal warfare was a fact of American Indian life long before the coming of the Europeans, as in so many 'hard primitive' societies; Indians fought for honour, revenge, excitement, and in order to replace the casualties of war by seizing and 'adopting' captives from the enemy." John Keegan, Fields of Battle: The Wars for North America (New York: Vintage Books, 1995), 103.
Shy, 214.   
Shy, 217.   
Robert D. Divine, T.H. Breen, George M. Fredrickson, and R. Hal Williams, American Past and Present, 4 ed. (New York: HarperCollins, 1995), 536.
Ibid.   
James H. Billington, quoted in Ann Geracimos, "New Librarian Called Fundamental Scholar," The Washington Times, 14 September 1987; quoted inGray, War, Peace, and Victory,
9.
Colin S. Gray, "Strategy in the Nuclear Age: The United States, 1945-1991." in The Making of Strategy: Rulers, States, and War, ed. Williamson Murray, MacGregor Knox, and Alvin Bernstein (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 590.
Denis W. Brogan, The American Character (New York: privately printed, 1944), 150; quoted in Gray, "Strategy in the Nuclear Age," 590.
As Gray noted: "The insouciance with which German staff officers approached the supply planning and execution of great campaigns in two world wars-and the consequences ofthat
Michael E. Doubler, Closing with the Enemy: How GIs Fought the War inEurope,  1944
-1945
Carl H. Builder, The Masks of War: American Military Styles in Strategy and Analysis (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989), 33.
Samuel P. Huntington, The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of Civil-Military Relations (Cambridge: Belknap Press, Harvard University Press, 1957), 261.
U.S. Department of the Army, FM 100-5, Operations (Washington, D.C.: Department of the Army, 1993), iv. Emphasis added.
Jus adbellum (justice of war) concerns the conditions that make the use of force permissible and is primarily a political responsibility. Jus in bello (justice in war) concerns the rules governing how war should be conducted, and is largely a military responsibility. See Paul Christopher, The Ethics of War and Peace: An Introduction to Legal and Moral Issues (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall 1994)1-16  and 228.   
There are different meanings of "doctrine" in the U.S. military. For the Army, doctrine is authoritative, but requires judgement in application. The Navy sees doctrine as a shared way of thinking that is not directive. In the Air Force, doctrine is the theoretical rationale behind the purpose of the Air Force. Marine Corps doctrine sets forth a way of thinking about war and strategy. It is more codification of its essence rather than a detailed body of knowledge to be consulted, even though in some aspects it is authoritative when discussing tactics. See Douglas C. Lovelace, Jr. and Thomas-Durell Young, "Joint Doctrine Development: Overcoming a Legacy" Joint Force Quarterly, no.
(Winter 1996-97)
In the Gulf War, for example, all U.S. aircraft were equipped with an electronic identification system called Mode IV that allowed U.S. surveillance platforms to distinguish between friend or foe
James M. Smith, "Service Cultures, Joint Cultures, and the US Military," Airman-Scholar 4, no. 1 (Winter 1998): 6.
David Alan Rosenberg, "Process: The Realities of Formulating Modern Naval Strategy," in Mahan is Not Enough: The Proceedings of a Conference on the Works of Sir Julian Corbett and Admiral Sir Herbert Richmond, ed. James Goldrick and John B. Hattendorf (Newport, R.I.: U.S. Naval War College Press, 1993), 173.
Regarding naval strategy, Admiral Arleigh Burke remarked that: "The Navy is very much in the same position with regard to public relations as a virtuous woman. Virtue seldom is spectacular and less often causes long editorials. Naval philosophy and maritime strategy are not spectacular. They offer no panaceas. Their success depends upon long, dull hours of hard work in which no one action is clearly decisive by itself. Its final success depends upon a series of small successes." Arleigh Burke to Robert
Gray, War, Peace, and Victory, 63.    
Ibid., 67.   
Pierce, 26.   
Franklin D. Margiotta, "Changing Military Manpower Realities: Implications for the Next Decade," in Changing U.S. Military Manpower Realities, ed. Franklin D. Margiotta, James Brown, and  Michael J. Collins (Boulder, Colo: Westview, 1983),
22-24.   
For recent studies on the unifying role of airpower in the Air Forces, see Carl H. Builder, The Icarus Syndrome: The Role of Air Power Theory in the Evolution and Fate of the U.S. Air Force (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1994) and Mike Worden, Rise of the Fighter Generals: The Problem of Air ForceLeadership, 1945
-1982
James Mowbray noted that the Air Force's paranoia is virtually a "sacred legacy of the service." James A. Mowbray, "Air Force Doctrine Problems: 1926-Present," Airpower Journal 9, no.
(Winter  1995): 41 (note 127).
The contrast between the Army's emphasis on the soldier and the Air Force's attachment to technology is readily seen on the grounds of their military academies. The West Point plain is bordered by statues of Washington, MacArthur, Eisenhower, and Patton. In contrast, the central area of the Air Force Academy is bordered by four static displays of an F-4 and F-105 from Vietnam and an F-16 and F-15 from the Gulf War.
The contrast between the Navy's emphasis on operations which allows little time for education, and the Air Force's emphasis on technology and concomitant technical education can be seen in the number of doctoral degrees held by their serving line officers. In 1997, the Navy was reported to have only seventy-seven serving line officers with doctoral degrees while the Air Force has nearly nine hundred. Scott Wilson, "Instructors at Academy Fear Changes," Baltimore Sun, 17 July 1997; quoted in James M. Smith, USAF Culture and Cohesion: Building an Air and Space Force for the 21 s ' Century, USAF Institute for National Security Studies Occasional Paper 19(Colorado Springs, Colo.: INSS, 1998), 21.   
Martin Van Creveld, Technology and War (New York: The Free Press,
1989), 228-229.19  Builder, The Icarus Syndrome, 157.
It is interesting that the non-pilot flying officers in the Navy and Marine Corps appear to be accorded much more respect within their services than are their counterparts in the Air Force. For example, Builder noted that: "An Air Force officer who had served as the radar officer on the E-3 A WACS observed' that the pilot was the mission commander; while on the Navy's E-2 Hawkeye the radar officer was the mission commander. He asked me whether I thought the flying or surveillance was the principal mission of these aircraft." Builder, The Icarus Syndrome, 227.    
Edmund Beard, Developing the ICBM: A Study in Bureaucratic Politics (New York: Columbia University Press, 1976), 230-231.
If the means of air power continues to be narrowly limited to primarily piloted vehicles and if Air Force missiliers and space technicians continue to be excluded from the executive leadership of the Air
Ibid.,[19][20] 
Ibid., 19.   
Colin S.Gray, Explorations in Strategy (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1996), 85.
Ibid., 19.   
Ibid., 192.    
For an assessment of the Hunter Warrior concept by a Marine officer, see John F. Schmitt, "A Critique of the HUNTER WARRIOR Concept, Marine Corps Gazette 82, no. 6 (June 1998): 13-19.
Ricks,[202][203] 
Partly because of their experiences in Vietnam, Marines are particularly suspicious of Army operational strategies and tactics. In that conflict, the Marines were discouraged from applying their knowledge of counterinsurgency operations. Despite their vast experience in fighting small wars which are characterized by limited goal and means, the Marines in Vietnam were pushed by General William Westmoreland into waging an attritional, defensive style of warfare.
See Paul K. Van Riper, "More on Innovation and Jointness," Marine Corps Gazette 82, no 3 (March 1998): 55-57.
Victor H. Krulak, First to Fight: An Inside View of the U.S. Marine Corps (Annapolis, Md.: U.S. Naval Institute, 1884), 7.
Allan R.Millet, Semper Fidelis:  The History of the U.S. Marine Corps(New York- Macmillan, 1980), 456-457.   
Ibid., 19.   
Colin S. Gray, "Strategy in the Nuclear Age: The UnitedStates, 1945States,  -1991," ,"  in The Making of Strategy: Rulers, States, and War, ed.Williamson Murray, MacGregor Knox, and Alvin Bernstein  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 613.   
During their revolutionary struggle against France and the United States, the North Vietnamese displayed in-depth knowledge of culture and history. See Vo Nguyen Giap and Van Tien Dung, How We Won the War (Philadelphia: Recon, 1976).
As Williamson Murray noted: "What matters most in war is what is in the mind of one's adversary, from command post to battlefield point-of-contact. This is a truth well illustrated by a scene from the Gulf War: As a number of U.S. Marine generals stood over a relatively undamaged and wellstocked Iraqi bunker complex that coalition forces had captured with minimum casualties and a large haul of prisoners, one quietly commented: 'Thank God the North Vietnamese weren't here'."Williamson  Murray, "Clausewitz Out, Computer In: Military Culture and Technological Hubris," The National  Interest, no
. 48 (Summer 1997): 63-64.
Lao-Tzu, Tao-te-ching, trans. T. C. Lau, bk. 1, chap. 33 (n.p., 1963), in The Columbia Dictionary of Quotations [CD-ROM] (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993).
Elizabeth Kier, Imagining War: French and British Military Doctrine  Between the Wars (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997), 160.
Carl H. Builder, The Masks of War: American Military Styles in Strategy and Analysis (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989), 205.
Ibid.   
Colin S.Gray, Nuclear Strategy and National Style (Lanham, Md.: Hamilton /Abt, 1986), 38.   
I would like to thank my professors at the 
Naval Postgraduate school
Bert Patenaude
detailed and prescriptive. By contrast, the doctrines of the Navy and Air Force are loose and descriptive. Joint commands reflect the hierarchical and centralized command structures of the Army and not the highly decentralized structures of the Navy. To admit , that the joint world is more reflective of Army culture is, however, not to admit failure in any way. Indeed, the Army's sense of teamwork has facilitated more "jointness' than many observers had thought possible.
Perhaps because it is highly reflective of American society's values and beliefs, Army culture is the most straightforward and open of the military's cultures. It has also engendered characteristics that should make it easier for the Army to create sensible and realistic approaches to its strategic problems and the strategic problems of the nation.
The importance of culture is an empirical question. Consequently, further research could contribute greatly to understanding the relationship between American strategy and American culture, and between American strategy and the U.S. military service cultures.
Further research on how the services' respective environments shape their respective mind-sets could contribute to a better understanding of the American military institutions.
There are at least three avenues for follow-up research.
One might embark on an inquiry into qualifying the differences between the service cultures using the characteristics identified in this study as a guide. Such research could develop and test some of the hypotheses made about the divergent perspectives of the services. For example, how much does a service's operational environment shape the mind-sets of its officers? A study that compares the perspectives of Air Force fighter Force officers be assigned to joint future-concept branches?
The inclusion of cases of non-U.S. military organizations might lead to the ability to identify different typologies in functional areas. In other words, is it likely that all armies will tend to be much more aware of the relationship between policy, strategy, and technology? Will all armies have a passive view of advanced technology? Will armies tend to be more obedient than navies or air forces? Do all air forces inherently display a drive for advanced technology? Are navies more independent-minded than armies or air forces?
If it could be established that certain fundamental attitudes are exhibited by certain services regardless of nationality, the United States might be able to exploit such characteristics in areas such as arms control and nuclear non-proliferation. For example, could policies be designed that would keep a rival nation's air force preoccupied with developing advanced piloted aircraft instead of using its resources to construct an unmanned ballistic missile? By offering training and conventional arms that are compatible with their war-fighting culture, can generals or admirals be convinced not to support or provide security for their government's nuclear proliferation projects? The notion that the operating environment engenders a particular mind-set which can be exploited appears to warrant further research.
Further research could investigate the manner and circumstances in which service cultures change, as well as shed light on how to change a military's culture. These issues are important to policymakers interested in changing a service's strategies and weapons systems to ensure a match with their political goals. These issues are particularly 