# ID: c4483de4029744a69be403dfd607c998
# Title: The Ongoing War between the United States National Counter-Terrorism Structure and Militant Islamists: Is the Next 9/11 Preventable?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2008.0
# Fulltext:
The purpose of this paper is to investigate the militant Islamist threat within the United States, to determine whether the current United States National Counter-Terrorism Structure can prevent the next significant terror attack in the homeland, and recommend improvements to the National Counter-Terrorism Structure organization and practices.
The first two chapters define militant Islam and explore the likelihood that it remains a persistent threat within the United States. The paper focuses on militant Islamists rather than all ideological threats in the United States and on the most damaging of potential terror attacks. A selection of six terrorist events illustrates the history of militant Islamist actions in the United States from 1993 to 2007, defines the threat, and aids in the analysis and evaluation of the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure later in the paper. Support for a persistent and plausible militant Islamist threat inside the United States and the six-year absence of a significant terror attack in the homeland is shown to be a result of slow, patient militant Islamist planning for an attack more powerful than that of 9/11.
Using the defined threat as a foundation, the third chapter describes the existing National Counter-Terrorism Structure comprised of federal, state, and local law enforcement and homeland security organizations. The chapter focuses upon the Structure's policy, procedure, and resource implementation; communications and information sharing; and contingency plans and rehearsals.
On the morning of 9/11, we saw that the terrorists have to be right only once to kill our people, while we have to be right every time to stop them… Nine-Eleven lifted the veil on a threat that is far broader and more dangerous than we saw that morning, an enemy that was not sated by the destruction inflicted that day and is determined to strike again. To answer this threat and protect our people, we need more than retaliation; we need more than a reaction to the last attack; we need to do everything in our power to stop the next attack. 1 -George W.
The fourth chapter analyzes whether the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure can defend the homeland against the next militant Islamist terror attack in the homeland. The analysis uses selected Principles of War from the US Army's Field Manual 3-0 and focuses upon the extent to which national, state, and local law enforcement and homeland security organizations coordinate and share information about known and potential terrorist threats and learn through their examining and rehearsing threat plans and scenarios. This chapter also makes recommendations to improve any problems in the organization and practices of the National Counter-Terrorism Structure discovered during the analysis. The importance of identifying seams in the Structure is seen when looking at the context of the 9/11 terror attacks. Prior to September 2001, a significant seam in the Counter-Terrorism Structure existed because the CIA and FBI did not conduct synchronized information sharing and coordination. That seam aided al-Qaeda on 9/11. Proposed recommendations concerning the National Counter-Terrorism Structure are evaluated with the same Principles of War as was used during the evaluation of the existing structure.
The United States is at war in the homeland with militant Islamists-the enemy threat that already exists within our borders. They enter through the porous US borders with Canada and Mexico or are homegrown from citizens and long-term residents of the United States within those same borders. The forces fighting on behalf of the United States are the law enforcement and homeland security organizations who make up the United States National Counter-Terrorism Structure. That Structure is comprised of the Department of Homeland Security, Northern Command, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation at the federal level, similar organizations at the state level, and city and county law enforcement and security personnel at the local level.
The addition of new counter-terrorism organizations as well as new and better information sharing and collaboration centers in the United States allows the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure to provide better security than before September 11, 2001. Is it good enough to prevent the next militant Islamist terror attack on the scale of 9/11 within the homeland?
When militant Islamists flew airplanes into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001, terrorism became real to citizens of the United States (US). 2 Before then, terror attacks were events that happened abroad. Even the 1993 World Trade Center attack and the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing did not wake most Americans to the reality that there were potentially thousands of people around the world and within the US who would conduct terror attacks on American soil. 
3
Picture Columbus, Ohio bustling with typical Tuesday morning college-town activity.
Students, business owners, and visitors are doing what people do in a university town. Then, in a house at the corner of Maryland Avenue and Lowell Road, a small nuclear bomb detonates.
Because of its low nuclear yield, it only destroys a few city blocks; however, it is a crucial section of the city as the destruction and fallout spreads onto the Defense Logistics yard and the 1 President, Address, "Remarks to the Georgia Public Policy Foundation in Atlanta, Georgia," Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents 42, no. 36 (September 7, 2006): 1581.
2 Daniel Pipes, "A New Round of Anger and Humiliation: Islam after 9/11," danielpipes.org, http://www.danielpipes.org/article/417 (accessed February 12, 2008). Daniel Pipes refers to militant Islam as Islamism and that it takes the religion of Islam and turns it into the basis of a totalitarian ideology that shares much with prior versions, namely fascism and Marxism-Leninism. Like them, for example, it seeks to replace capitalism and liberalism as the reigning world system.
Columbus Airport just to the east and northeast. The blast also severs East Broad Street, the main artery in and out of the campus. As word of the nuclear attack spreads throughout the United States and the world, American hubris, regained during years without a successful terror attack in the homeland, is shattered. Because of the attack in Columbus, the US economy and the way Americans prioritize their security and their civil liberties would all change significantly. The stresses experienced after 9/11 pale in comparison to those that would follow this hypothetical scenario.
One may argue that the Columbus, Ohio nuclear blast scenario is not realistic. On September 10, 2001, many people thought that suicidal terrorists flying commercial airplanes into buildings inside the United States was too farfetched, but it happened. Stephen Flynn, senior fellow in National Security Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations, provided a plausible scenario describing militant Islamist terrorists executing four simultaneous weapons of mass effect within the United States. 
4
5
6
7
If another terror attack does occur in the United States, it would not likely resemble the 9/11 attacks, or the other terror plots since then, because of the reactive security measures implemented by the US Counter-Terrorism Structure. 
8
9
10
11
12
13
Although the primary focus of this paper is on the seams, or problem areas, within the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure, the security improvements since September 11, 2001 cannot be ignored. First, the fact that many would acknowledge a Counter-Terrorism Structure exists is an improvement. There are also two new headquarters within this structure; namely, the Department of Homeland Security and Northern Command (NORTHCOM). The former is a new cabinet level position with a Secretary head who reports directly to the President. NORTHCOM is the newest combatant command within the Department of Defense with a geographic responsibility for the continental United States, Canada, and their surrounding waters. The FBI too has improved. Before 9/11, Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF) offices existed in only a handful of locations in the United States and now every FBI office in the United States has a JTTF within it. The JTTF is a collaboration center where information on current and potential terror threats is shared among federal, state, county, local, and private industry law enforcement and homeland security organizations. At lower levels of the Counter-Terrorism structure, fusion centers exist within nearly all fifty states. This is a completely new concept since 9/11 and they mirror much of the information sharing and collaboration attributes of the JTTF. As this short section has shown, not all the news is bad concerning the United States National Counter-Terrorism Structure. However, this paper will focus predominantly in the areas within the Counter-Terrorism Structure where recommendations may offer solutions to problems or seams that exist.
The purpose of this paper is to investigate the militant Islamist threat within the United States, to determine whether the current United States National Counter-Terrorism Structure can prevent the next significant terror attack in the homeland, and recommend improvements to the National Counter-Terrorism Structure organization and practices.
The first two chapters define militant Islam and explore the likelihood that it remains a persistent threat within the United States. The definition of militant Islam comes from established subject matter expert authors on Islam, most notably Daniel Pipes and Stephen   Coughlin. The following portion explains the paper's focus on militant Islamists rather than all ideological threats in the United States and its focus on the most damaging of potential terror attacks. A selection of six terrorist events briefly illustrates the history of militant Islamist actions in the United States from 1993 to 2007. The six events are neither exhaustive nor are they all similar in their methods or results. In addition to their historical value, the events have specific attributes that make them important to defining the threat and to the analysis and evaluation of the 
The Atlantic and Pacific oceans no longer provide the security against attacks on the United States mainland that they once did. The events of September 11 th , 2001 proved that point.
The enemy on that day was al-Qaeda, a radical Sunni sect of Islam led by Osama Bin Laden that is the most visible face for the new threat called militant Islam and the replacement for the Cold War threat of Communism.
15
In the opening pages of this paper, Mr. Pipes' defined militant Islam or Islamism as a totalitarian ideology and compared it to fascism. 
16
17
By separating out the 10-15 percent of fundamentalists, Mr. …the Current Approach's starting point that "true" Islam is (doctrinally) "moderate" and that the enemy has taken "extreme" interpretations of Islam to support its doctrinal views. This is the universally accepted, unchallenged assumption…the terms "extreme" and "moderate" are stripped of their ability to make meaningful distinctions concerning either the actual enemy or his threat doctrine. 
19
20
On February 26, 1993, a Ryder van filled with a very powerful bomb exploded in the parking garage under the World Trade Center (WTC). The blast killed six people, injured more than a thousand others, caused approximately $300 million in property damage, and cut all electricity, heat, emergency power, running water, and communications to both towers of the WTC. The bomb consisted of 1,000 pounds of urea and 105 gallons of nitric acid for the bomb's main charge; 60 gallons of sulfuric acid for nitroglycerin boosters; one gallon of ethyl alcohol to stabilize the nitroglycerin; and a 25-pound bag of sodium carbonate to neutralize acids during the mixing process. The detonators contained a 16-ounce can of smokeless powder. 
23
The details of the militant Islamist attacks on the United States on September 11, 2001   are well known to most Americans. Of the nineteen attackers, fifteen men were from Saudi Arabia, two from the United Arab Emirates, one from Egypt, and one from Lebanon. They boarded American Airlines Flight 11 (AA 11) and United Airlines 175 (UA 175) in Boston, Massachusetts; American Airlines Flight 77 (AA 77) in Dulles, Virginia; United Airlines Flight 93 (UA 93) in Newark, New Jersey. 
25
26
Passengers on Flight UA 93 overtook their aircraft from the terrorists to prevent its use as a weapon. Before they could regain control, the terrorist piloting the airplane crashed it near Shanksville, Pennsylvania. 
27
28
25
Kean and Hamilton,
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
28 Daniel Pipes, Militant Islam Reaches America, (New York: Norton Publishing, 2003), xi.  commercial flights from September 11-12, 2001, and cost the lives of nearly 3,000 men, women, and children. 
29
Lackawanna Six refers to six Yemeni-Americans and US citizens from Lackawanna, New York arrested in September 2002 and later charged with terrorism related crimes. The six were Mukhtar Al-Bakri, Sahim Alwan, Faysal Galab, Shafal Mosed, Yaseinn Taher, and Yahya Goba. Although this incident was labeled the Lackawanna (or Buffalo) Six, the cell actually included eight active members. The seventh member, Jaber A. Elbaneh, is still at large after escaping from a Yemeni prison in February 2006. 
32
He had ties to al-Qaeda and sought out devout men at the Lackawanna mosque. 
33
34
After one-on-one recruiting, he eventually convinced the seven other men to travel to Afghanistan Goba, al-Bakri, Elbaneh, and Derwish completed their training, but only Goba and al-Bakri returned to the United States. 
37
38
An anonymous letter arrived at the Buffalo, New York FBI building that said, "Two terrorist [s]   came to Lackawanna…for recruiting the Yemenite youth" in addition to naming the eight who had gone to a bin Laden camp. 
39
40
On May 7, 2007, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) arrested six foreign-born men who were planning to kill as many US Army soldiers as possible at Fort Dix, New Jersey using assault rifles and grenades. The FBI described five of the men-Eljvir Duka, Dritan Duka, Shain Duka, Mohamad Ibrahim Shnewer, and Serdar Tatar-as "radical Islamists" not linked to al-Qaeda. 
43
They conducted weapons training at a firing range in the Pocono Mountains and recorded 40 Ibid., 8-10. 
41
Silber and Bhatt,
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]
[60]
[61]
[62]
[63]
[64]
43
44
The six attempted and successful attacks from this chapter provide a brief overview of terrorism within the United States over the past fifteen years. The events are much more relevant and useful than simply historical data, because they can help evaluate the National Counter-Terrorism structure. As already stated, the events are not exhaustive of the history of terrorism within the United States since 1993. Collectively, the events suggest important attributes about the methods, the motivations, the men, and the materials for the attempted and successful attacks.
The tactics, weapons, and planning that went into the attacks differ in nearly all of the cases. The Muslim men came from both abroad and from US citizens who were homegrown. Their backgrounds, their recruitment to militant Islam, and their motivations all provide important information that can help identify future militant Islamists and possibly find the means to prevent men (and potentially women) from becoming militant Islamists. The success or failure of their attacks offers the most valuable data when attempting to prevent another terror attack within the United States in the future. The failed attacks reveal holes or seams that may exist in future militant Islamist plots that the National Counter-Terrorism Structure can exploit just as the successful terror attacks can show weaknesses within the structure. Lastly, the six events impart crucial details that can likely illuminate the current militant Islamist threat within the United 44 Ibid. 
45
States.
The future scenario in Columbus, Ohio proposed at the beginning of this paper is valid if there is still a plausible militant Islamist threat to the United States homeland. If such a threat exists, then what is the explanation of the absence of a significant terror attack since 9/11? An examination of five possible explanations will show that a militant Islamist threat still exists and is likely on the most dangerous end of the terror attack spectrum shown in Figure 
1
The last possibility is the most dangerous and most terrifying.
Although the US Counter-Terrorism structure is more capable than before 9/11 and the wars have siphoned militant Islamist desire and capabilities, the next five sections of this chapter will show that the first four reasons do not fully explain six years without a militant Islamist attack in the homeland. The failure of the first four explanations and support for the fifth will show that there is a militant Islamist threat in the United States and the most dangerous threat is the most likely.
This first explanation for the six-year absence of a significant terror attack in the United States is a waning militant Islamist desire to strike in the US homeland. Stated differently, al-Qaeda and its related organizations have grown tired of fighting the United States military around the world and against the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure in the homeland. If Osama Bin Laden and other Islamic sources are no longer calling for attacks against the United States, then a loss of desire is a valid explanation for the lack of significant terror attacks within the United States.
The truth is that there is no end to the rhetoric from leaders of al-Qaeda and other extremist Islamic terrorist organizations. Many of the calls for attacks, support, or other guidance are specific to a certain location and current events, but many have broad aims to reach a wide intended audience. Osama Bin Laden's Declaration of Jihad, also known as his Declaration of War Against the Americans Occupying the Land of the Two Holy Places, is al-Qaeda's first call to arms for Muslims to join in a jihad against the United States. 
46
47
49
The ruling to kill the Americans and their allies -civilians and military -is an individual duty for every Muslim who can do it in any country in which it is 
46
47
48
49
50
51
The American people are the ones who pay the taxes that fund the planes that bomb us in Afghanistan, the tanks that strike and destroy our homes in Palestine, the armies that occupy our lands…, and the fleets that ensure the blockade of Iraq…the American Army is part of the American people…who employ both their men and their women in the Armed Forces. 
54
50 Williams,
217. 51
52
53
54
In spite of his Islamic religious banter, Osama Bin Laden listed many aspects of American cultural that he called immoral. Usury, gambling, pornography, the sex trade, exploiting women as consumer products, destroying nature, and lastly President Clinton's immoral acts in the Oval Office were all examples OBL used to portray the United States as immoral and spiritually lost. 
55
The three letters from Osama Bin Laden in the preceding paragraphs are from 1996, 1998, and 2002 respectively and laid the foundation for the jihad against America and its citizens.
In a more current communiqué, released in September 2007, Osama Bin Laden directed a video message at the people of America. In it, he explained that the main reason why the United States has not won in Iraq or Afghanistan and did not win in Vietnam is because the owners of the major corporations and their cohorts in the government have it in their best interest to continue wars.
As in his 2002 letter, OBL claimed that the blood of Muslims in Iraq and Afghanistan is on the hands of all Americans who do not convert to Islam. He elaborated how Muslims believe that rabbis and monks altered the Torah and Bible and that only the Qur'an is unaltered and perfect. This Bin Laden correspondence does not explicitly call for Muslims to kill the next American they see, but rather makes an implicit argument for continued jihad against the United States because of the ascendancy of Islam and Americans' refusal to submit to its perfect message. 
56
55
56
57
To this point, the only Islamic point of view on the subject of war, or jihad, provided has been Osama Bin Laden's. Former Pakistani Army Brigadier General S.K. Malik published an important book on jihad in 1979: The Quranic Concept of War. General Malik described the Qur'an as "…a source of eternal guidance for mankind… [and that it] gives us a philosophy of war as well", a divine theory of war doctrine. 
59
60
57
63
Perhaps a potential militant Islamist is seeking more than the interpretations of men concerning jihad. In that case, the Qur'an is rife with calls to jihad for the Muslim. In addition to the Qur'anic quotes from General Malik on jihad, the following are all from the Qur'an: "Fight them until there is no more (disbelief) and religion is only for Allah…"; "And do not relent in pursuing the enemy."; "Fight and kill the disbelievers wherever you find them, take them captive, harass them, lie in wait and ambush them using every stratagem of war."; and "Fight those who do not believe until they all surrender…" 
64
63
64
A lack of sufficient materials to conduct an attack on the scale of 9/11 or greater and the militant Islamist men is a plausible explanation for the lack of a terror attack since 9/11 in the United States. The converse is also true; the availability of willing militant Islamists, either homegrown or from abroad, and the availability of the necessary components for a terror weapon will demonstrate that a lack of capability is not a valid explanation for the six plus years without a significant terror attack within the United States.
For the fictitious nuclear bomb detonation in Columbus, Ohio at the beginning of this paper to be plausible, a small, easily carried nuclear device and the means of getting the bomb into the country must exist. As for the bomb, former Soviet officials have lost accountability of up to 36 suitcase nuclear devices from Cold War days. 
65
67
65
66
70
71
72
68
69
70
71
72
There are people around the world who would do harm to the United States; fifteen minutes spent listening to a news program or reading CNN.com makes that an obvious fact. Of the six terror plots and attacks described earlier, some or all the militant Islamists were from abroad. 
73
Habis Saoub, born in Jordan, was the leader of the Portland Seven militant Islamist cell. All six men involved in the plot to attack Fort Dix soldiers were foreign-born men, some of whom lived in the United States for years before becoming radicalized to militant Islam. All were foreign men who executed, or attempted to execute attacks, within or enroute to the United States.
If militant Islamists can no longer enter the United States, the previous events are irrelevant. Unfortunately, the borders with Canada and Mexico offer little hindrance to militant Islamists who wish to enter the United States. FBI director Robert Mueller, Jr. concurred when he revealed that, "individuals from countries with known al-Qaeda connections have attempted to enter the United States illegally using alien smuggling rings and assuming Hispanic appearances."
74
73
Arizona. 
75
76
89
S Counter-Terrorism Structure, a significant terror attack is still likely inside the United S nations dishonors Muslims and can incite them to join in jihad.
This section showed that militant Islamists have ample men and material for another terror attack and that the United States is often an unintentional partner in militant Islamist recruiting. These facts mean that militant Islamists have the capability to conduct a 9/11-like attack; ergo, this is not a plausibl ood Guys Got Them All
The US National Counter-Terrorism Structure, made up of federal, state, and local police and homeland defense organizations, has thwarted nineteen terrorist attacks that are public knowledge (three of which were discussed in previously) within the United States since September 11, 2001. 
90
In sports, some victories come when you win and some come when your opponent's mistakes loses the game for them. Put in the context of the war between militant Islamists and the US Counter-Terrorism Structure, the United States won in some of the nineteen terrorist efforts, but the rest the militant Islamists lost. Three of the historical events from this chapter are examples of this situation. In the case of the Lackawanna Six, the FBI benefited from the fact that, although the cell had made it to an Afghanistan terror training camp, four from the cell left training early and returned to the United States. It seems their "…exposure to militant jihad at a stage in their radicalization before they had yet to fully be indoctrinated in a holy warrior…mindset may have impeded their progression to the jihadization stage." 
91
Another example of a militant Islamist loss was when the Portland Seven attempted to get to Afghanistan by way of China without the proper travel papers. Had the Chinese military not stopped them from entering Pakistan, those men would have been fighting US Soldiers in Afghanistan. 
92
Those plotting to attack Fort Dix took the video cassette of their firing weapons and chanting jihad to a public vendor to convert it to a DVD format, thereby making quite public their plans for attack. 
93
91
It is also likely that the US public is unaware of many more thwarted plots. The arguments offered to this point propose that a successful terror attack remains possible, even with the improved Counter-Terrorism Structure. It is also possible that it has simply been lucky or worse is being deceived into believing an attack on the scale of those of September 11, 2001 is not being planned and coordinated. For these reasons, the improvement of the Counter-
Another explanation for the six and a half year terror attack gap in the United States asserts that the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan draw militant Islamists from around the world to those two countries, limiting their availability to fight elsewhere. In other words, the bright, shiny wars in Asia are distracting militant Islamist terror attack planning and coordinating in the United States. President Bush stated that, "…he is determined to keep U.S. troops in Iraq as he says it is better to fight terrorists abroad than to fight them at home." 
95
It is not enough to have shown that the first four explanations are incapable of properly explaini well in the Muslim world while doing maximum damage to the United he, but would ng the six years of peace within the United States; this section will show that the reason for that period of peace is that the militant Islamists are planning an attack as damaging as those on September 11, 2001, or worse.
There are two reasons that the next terror attack in the United States will be on the more violent end of the Threat Spectrum shown in Figure 
1
96
97
After six and a half years of removing their shoes and hearing about "elevated threat levels," the average American is growing weary and will soon demand proof a real threat on par with those of 9/11 still exists. In a situation of increasing threat-weariness, militant Islamists, men who studied the details and flaws of previous terror attack plans, could be patiently and meticul nt Islamists could carry out attacks similar to those of the Virginia Tech shooter, the Nebraska mall shooter, or the Washington DC sniper duo.
The militant Islamists have reasons to avoid attacks of that sort in order to remain out of sight for their planning of the next s ously planning and executing the next spectacular attack. Although this explanation may not be as plausible as the one in the previous paragraph, it is a possible explanation for the six year gap in terror attacks here in the United States.
Using only readily available weapons milita pectacular terror attacks. 
Based on the description of the threat, the United States, more specifically the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure, is at war wi Two authors of future war concepts and an important classical war theorist have hypothetical and theoretical definitions for war that support the assertion that the United States and militant Islamists are at war in the US homeland.  …transcend[ing] all boundaries and limits…It means that all weapons and technology can be superimposed at will, it means that all the boundaries lying between the two worlds of war and non-war, of military and non-military, will be totally destroyed, and it also means that many of the current principles of combat will be modified, and even that the rules of war may need to be rewritten. 102   ounties that replied that their organization did have secure secure, and with a high level of trust between the organizations. The Departm uses a term, information security (INFOSEC), to describe:
The protection and defense of information and unauthorized access or modification of information, whether in storage, processing, or transit…Information security includes those measures necessary to detect, document, and counter such threats. Information security is composed of computer security and communications security. 
111
Federal agencies have the capability to secure voice, data, and email communications internal to their organizations and between them.
112
113
114
Updates to these CONPLANs occur on a recurring basis and are tested using wargames or exercises to ensure they are valid, updated, and address the issue accordingly. CONPLANs are not restricted to conflict scenarios or the military; many federal, state, and local organizations have plans prepared for natural disasters, influenza outbreaks, and terrorism scenarios. The surveys that were sent to states, counties, and cities asked whether their organization conducted readiness exercises to ensure their internal counter-terror contingency plans are up to date, adequate, and covered the full spectrum of possible threats in their area of responsibility. The state survey also asked if the state conducted readiness exercises and checks of subordinate Learning Organizations: Wargaming and Readiness Exercises organization counter-terror contingency plans to ensure they are up to date, spectrum of possible threats in their area of responsibility.
115 Stated differently, this paper will not examine any organizations whose missions focus departments; this paper focuses on the most important to counter-terrorism.
At the federal level, the three organizations examined are the Department of Homeland Security (DHS); the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) from the Department of Justice; and Northern Command (NORTHCOM), the newest Combatant Command Headquarters within the DoD. They are the most important because they provide the foundation to the defense of the United States homeland as their primary responsibility.
Other US federal government agencies contribute to the nation's defense, but this is not their primary mission.
President We will lead the unified national effort to secure America. We will prevent and d the nation. We will ensure safe and secure borders, welcome lawful immigrants predomi w.northcom.mil/About /index.ht 117 DHS Press Secretary, "President's Remarks at Homeland Security Bill Signing," Department of Hom nantly after a successful terror attack and will not examine any organizations that do not address counter-terrorism as one of its primary missions. NORTHCOM has increased the US Government's ability to react to the next disaster or attack, but is hampered from many of the tasks that may be required to be more proactive in the war with
State counter-terror organizations differ from state to state based on population density and geographic location. Their counter-terror offices resemble the federal level much more than they do their local resentation on their region's JTTF Executive Board. That state office shares information directly with the federal Department of Homeland Security as well as with counties and cities within their state.
concept. The fusion centers share information with Federal agencies in order to complete the information sharing structure from the federal to the local counter-terror organization. 
126
128
127
2
Because states have far less input into the creating of counter-terror policy and funding decisions, they have used collective organizations to get their homeland security priorities addressed at the national level. All fifty states and five territory governors are members of the National Governors Association (NGA), a bipartisan organization of state governors that share best practices and speak with a unified voice at the federal level. Some of the more important policies concerning homeland security that the NGA addresses a
The local level of the Counter-Terrorism Structure is as varied as the citizens that live in the communities. As shown in the diagram, city counter-terror representatives do not report to or through county counter-terror representatives. Rather both city and county are contained within a state's CT structure. In large urban areas, cities and counties also maintain representation in the JTTF for their region. The Kansas City JTTF is an example of a large JTTF with local law enforcement membership. It is has law enforcement personnel from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, Indepen in order to share counter-terror information with public and private organizations.
Commission recommendations to increase funding for high-risk urban areas, emergency dence, Missouri, Kansas City, Kansas and Kansas City Missouri as well as counties in both western Missouri and eastern Kansas. 
129
New York City has a large robust counter-terror organization. The New York Police Department has its own intelligence bureau and a unit within it, the NYPD Shield, which produces terrorism analysis reports h terror analysis report is an important resource for the homegrown threat depicted in this monograph. 
130
133
134
As mentioned, the United States is at war with the militant Islamists within the homeland.
133 Ibid. 
134 Bullock,
et al.,
[131]
[132]
[133]
[134]
[135]
This is simply recogni n the will of the people necessary to attain the national strategic end state. 
Although this paper focuses upon areas within the National Counter-Terrorism Structure where improvement is desired, significant progress has been made since 9/11. In this section, there will be no recommendations following the discussion of the issues.
tion that not all is wrong with the National Counter-Terrorism Structure. functions that were formerly spread throughout the Bureau. 
144
A fourth example of what works is the significantly better intelligence sharing and collaboration through the National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC), Joint Terrorism Task Forces (JTTF), and fusion centers. These organizations support Security because they improve the collective knowledge of individual and the overall threat throughout the Counter-Terrorism Structure. They also support Economy of Force, because organizations will not duplicate collection and analysis functions. Information gained by a law enforcement or homeland security organization that is shared within a JTTF or fusion center will lessen the likelihood that another member of that collaboration cell will use its own assets to do the work that is already complete or ongoing. The NCTC, JTTF, and fusion centers also support the Principle of War Offensive, because the organizations within them have increased threat awareness, which increases their initiative and decreases their surprise at militant Islamist actions.
The previous section showed four examples of progress made within the National Counter-Terrorism Structure since 9/11, but does not answer whether it can prevent the next terror attack in the United States. This section will analyze selected problem areas or seams in the Structure and provide recommendations following the discussion of the issues.
The first problem is the existence of three different federal-level headquarters for the National Counter-Terrorism Structure to command and control the war with militant Islamists within the United States. This situation violates the Principles of Unity of Command and will have a difficult task of implementing any policy that requires sacrifice from the people. Of course, this quote is not a summary of every American's attitude, but as the wars overseas and the lack of focus on the war in the homeland drag on, it will be harder and harder to provide the proper budgeting and government focus. The National Counter-Terrorism Structure will be hurt by losses of funding and focus, which will play into the hands of the militant Islamists who are patiently waiting for our guard to be sufficiently lowered. The militant Islamists can then execute an attack that may take more than a few buildings in two cities like those of 9/11. The United States' porous borders that allow militant Islamists to smuggle men and material for the next terror attack violates the Principle of Security. That is because it is gives the militant Islamists the advantage of entering the United States at times and in numbers for which the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure do not have awareness. Special Agent Cudmore stated that once the militant Islamists are inside the United States it is possible for them to remain off the counter-terror radar if they do nothing that is illegal. In that situation, law enforcement and homeland security organizations would have no reason to watch them or their actions or to even know they exist within the country. Those militant Islamists who enter the US undetected can plan and execute the next terror attack relatively freely. The borders of the United States must be sealed to militant Islamist entry. Placing a fence on the borders would take years and potentially billions of dollars. Also, a fence on the border does nothing more than a military obstacle that does not have friendly forces watching it. A border fence is not only exceptionally expensive, but if it remains unwatched, then determined militant Islamists will simply go over or under it eventually. There are too few Customs and Border Protection (CBP) personnel on the borders under the current "no fence" scenario. There are still not enough to watch a fence. Afghanistan must be resolved to the point that sufficient units could be redeployed.
Another problem with the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure is that NORTHCOM is nearly entirely reactive in its primary roles. Within the NORTHCOM mission statement are proactive security phrases such as anticipates and conducts homeland defense.
147
There is a lack of secure communications across the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure. The situation violates Security because wireless phone calls and data transmissions can be intercepted. Even landline communications can be intercepted or tapped. Among the completed surveys, there was no duplication of secure communications solutions between any two. That means that each lower level organization could present new and unique connectivity problems for a JTTF, fusion center, or higher level organization with whom the local organization is attempting to communicate. The Homeland Security Information Network (HSIN) was designed to create an information sharing network for the entire Counter-Terrorism Structure. A 2007 Government Accounting Office report stated that, because the DHS rushed to deploy HSIN after 9/11, …the department did not fully develop joint strategies and coordinated policies, [did] not develop a comprehensive inventory of key state and local informationsharing initiatives, and it did not achieve a full understanding of the relevance of the Regional Information Sharing Systems program to homeland security information sharing. 
148
149
150
There are significant areas within the United States Counter-Terrorism Structure that need improvement immediately. The situation on the US-Canada and US-Mexico borders simply must be fixed. More combat forces than the US Customs and Border Patrol are required to properly secure both borders and the use of active duty military is the quickest and cheapest 150 Survey respondent from Alabama who asked not to be quoted. option. The United States must look at the conflict in the homeland between the Counter-Terrorism Structure and militant Islamists as a war and mentally prepare for an extended conflict.
The advantages for the United States from its improved collaboration and information sharing centers within the Counter-Terrorism Structure can be quickly reversed if communications between its organizations are not secure and information is not secured. The HSIN must be standardized and implemented as quickly as is possible.
The United States is at war with militant Islamists and if significant changes are not made in the policies and procedures within the United States and its National Counter-Terrorism Structure, the next terror attack will occur and will be more powerful than those on September 11, The borders of the United States must be sealed to militant Islamist entry. Placing a fence on the border does nothing more than a military obstacle that does not have friendly forces watching it. A border fence is not only exceptionally expensive, but if it remains unwatched, then determined militant Islamists will simply go over or under it eventually. In order to use active duty soldiers to control the borders of the United States, the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan must be resolved to the point that sufficient units could be redeployed. The use of active duty military on our borders would also have to overcome the limitations emplaced by the antiquated Posse Comitatus Act. Until the borders with Canada and Mexico are sealed to militant Islamist traffic, the United States is at an incredible risk to another terror attack. The United States is more vulnerable with so much of its military tied down in counter-insurgencies and nation-building in Iraq and Afghanistan. The US is distracted; and not just the DoD, with the fights in those nations.
Threats to the United States are potentially a matter of national survival therefore acts of war and not criminal activity. The attitude of the American public toward the war between militant Islamists and the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure must be refocused. The reality of the threat and the potential severity of the next attack must be made real to citizens of the United States. The President said this will be a long war and no one disagrees. The attitude Americans had toward the Soviet Union during the Cold War should be the model. Containment worked against that enemy because the threat was made and kept real. The threat of nuclear annihilation was real enough to the average citizen that he was willing to have missiles in their state or large portions of the United States budget go towards defense initiatives. The continued defeat of the militant Islamist threat requires the same sustained commitment from all Americans.
Without buy in from all Americans, preventative measures, especially costly ones, will not have the long-term support from Americans and therefore, eventually will not have the long-term support of their congressional representatives. This survey is a Microsoft Word document and I have provided only two blank lines between questions. I expect anyone answering the survey will need more space. If it being answered electronically, they can get more space by using the "Enter" key to move the remaining questions further down the document. If possible, please use a different color and/or font to differentiate your answers from my questions.
Although I am sure that speaking to personnel in your organization about this survey would be helpful to my research, I need an electronic copy returned to me. That is because I will likely have a myriad of responses from the hundreds of law enforcement agencies to which I am sending this survey.
Please return by as soon as possible. The original requested date was February 12, 2008. I much prefer to receive responses by email to the address above. If you have additional information or data that you would like to share that you cannot email, then please use the postal address above. If you find that there is useful information about which I did not ask, please include as much as you would prefer.
If there are subordinate or peer-level organizations from which valuable data could be obtained for my paper, feel free to forward this survey and the introduction letter to them or give me their contact information when you return this survey. 10. Does your state conduct readiness exercises to ensure your internal counter-terror contingency plans are up to date, adequate, and cover the full spectrum of possible threats in your area of responsibility? Yes / No. If your answer to this question is "Yes", go to Question 10a and if your answer is "No", go to Question 10b. In either case, answer Question 10c. Answer: 10a. What is the type and frequency of counter-terror readiness exercises your state conducts to test your internal contingency plans? Answer: 10b. How does your state ensure that its counter-terror contingency plans are up to date, adequate, and cover the full spectrum of possible threats in your state? Answer: 10c. When gaps are discovered in your state's counter-terror contingency plans, what steps are taken to correct problems and how quickly are they remedied? Answer: 11. Does your state conduct exercises and checks of subordinate organization counter-terror contingency plans to ensure they are current, adequate, and cover the full spectrum of possible threats in their area of responsibility? Yes / No. If your answer to this question is "Yes", go to Question 11a and if your answer is "No", go to Question 11b. In either case, answer Question 11c. Answer: 11a. What is the type and frequency of counter-terror readiness exercises your state conducts to test your subordinate organization contingency plans? Answer: 11b. How does your state ensure that its subordinate organization counter-terror contingency plans are up to date, adequate, and cover the full spectrum of possible threats in their area of responsibility? Answer: 11c. When gaps are discovered in your subordinate organization's counter-terror contingency plans, what steps are taken to correct problems and how quickly are they remedied? Answer:
12. Do civil liberties organizations or established laws hinder your state's ability to actively prevent terror activities in your area of responsibility? If so, please elaborate. Answer: 13. What is the worst case scenario threat that your state counter-terror organization actively works to prevent within your state? Answer: 14. In your opinion, is your state counter-terror organization able to prevent all potential threats within your state? Please elaborate in either case. Answer: 15. If there is any other information that you think would be useful for me to use to accurately portray the Counter-Terrorism Structure and its effectiveness within your state, please include it herein or contact me with details on how to acquire it. END OF SURVEY -THANK YOU use unrestricted warfare to neutralize the United States and cover their tracks by engineering the evidence to make it appear as though global militant Islamists conducted the attacks.
Step One (Agro-Terrorism) The Russian's first front would be a protracted attack on the US economy designed to distract US attention for a long period of time. Packed in the suitcases of several Russian operatives, dressed to look like unassuming Russian tourists, are sealed bags of clothing soaked with bovine saliva that is contaminated with foot-and-mouth disease (FMD). Once the Russian operatives safely land in Kansas City, Denver, Chicago, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, they hand off the contaminated material to Russian mob employees who work in the US beef industry. The latter's positions put them in contact with a significant percentage of the US beef industry.
Within two weeks of infecting the first cattle, the signs that something is wrong with herds of cows begin to show. By the third week, the entire beef industry is in chaos as interstate movement of cattle is halted and wholesale shipments of beef cattle are burned because of real or potential contamination.
Step Two (Cyber Warfare)
In the middle of the food supply crisis in the United States, a massive and thorough cyber attack is launched. The attacks come on a Monday and range from simple distributed denial of service attacks to full penetration of secure government networks. The cyber war front focuses first against the Department of Defense, then shifts to the Department of State, and finally rages against Wall Street. The cyber attacks last only a few hours and do no long-term harm; however, the story dominates the news and adds to the confusion in the United States.
Step Three (Assassinations)
The morning following the cyber attacks, the wives of two Army Generals and the son of a Navy Captain are shot dead in or around their vehicles as they conducted normal activities outside their respective military installations. The gunmen, more Russian operatives, identified
31  
31  
39
93  
93  
Daniel Pipes, Militant Islam Reaches America, (New York: Norton Publishing, 2003), xi.
Stephen Flynn, America the Vulnerable: How Our Government is Failing to Protect Us from Terrorism(New York: HarperCollins, 2005), 17-35.    
Encarta Dictionary, "dirty bomb," Encarta, http://encarta.msn.com/dictionary_701705604/ dirty_bomb.html(accessed January 18, 2008). Encarta defines a dirty bomb as: a bomb spreading radioactive material dispersed by means of conventional explosives.
Anthony Lake, 6  Nightmares: Real Threats in a Dangerous World and How America can Meet Them(Boston, New York, London: Little, Brown and Company, 2000), 1-12, 33-37, 66-74.    
Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon, The Next Attack (New York: Henry Holt and Company, LLC, 2005), xiii.
The term United States National Counter-Terrorism Structure refers to all of the federal, state, and local law enforcement and homeland security organizations as a single entity united in one of their primary missions of countering terrorism. For variation and brevity, Counter-Terrorism Structure or Structure may be used for the full version.
Thomas H.Kean (Chair)  and Lee H. Hamilton (Vice Chair), The 9/11 Commission Report (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2004), 1-46.
Cable News Network, "Agent infiltrated terror cell, U.S. says," CNN.com, http://www.cnn.com/ 2006/US/08/10/us.security/index.html(accessed February 11, 2008).
Leslie Miller, "Getting  Sensible About Airline Carry-on Restrictions," Time.com, http://www. time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,1538747,00.html (accessed February 11, 2008).
Bill Gertz, Breakdown: How America's Intelligence Failures Led to September 11 (Washington:  Regnery Publishing, INC, 2002), 36-37. The book details failure after failure of both the CIA and the FBI
Robert Taylor, "Containment: A Viable Strategy for Success in the GWOT" (monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, 2007), 1.
Daniel Pipes, "A New Round of Anger and Humiliation: Islam after 9/11," danielpipes.org, http://www.danielpipes.org/article/417(accessed February 12, 2008).
Daniel Pipes, Militant Islam Reaches America (New York: Norton, 2003), 3.
Stephen Coughlin, "'To Our Great Detriment': Ignoring What Extremists Say About Jihad"
Stephen Coughlin, "'To Our Great Detriment': Ignoring What Extremists Say About Jihad" (master's thesis, National Defense Intelligence College,
2007), 22. 20 Daniel Pipes, "A New Round of Anger and Humiliation: Islam after 9/11," danielpipes.org, http://www.danielpipes.org/article/417 (accessed February 12, 2008).
Robert Looney, "Economic Costs to the United States Stemming From the 9/11 Attacks," Strategic Insights 1, no. 6 (August 2002): 1.
The figure is author-created and does not exhaust all potential terror attack threats. The arrangement of the individual attacks is the author's opinion except for the 9/11 Attacks and Agro-terrorism where data from the two references are used to rank the latter as more damaging than the former because of its significantly higher costs and nation-wide impact.
FBI Press Release, "Recent Escapees from Yemen Prison Added to Most Wanted Terrorists and Seeking Information -War on Terrorism Lists," FBI.gov, http://www.fbi.gov/pressrel/pressrel06/ mwtl_yemen022306.htm(accessed February 14, 2008).
Lowell Bergman and Matthew Purdy, "Where the Trail Led: Between Evidence and Suspicion; Unclear Danger: Inside the Lackawanna Terror Case," http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res= 9E0CE1DF133FF931A25753C1A9659C8B63 (accessed March 23, 2008), 3-5.
Mitchell D. Silber and Arvin Bhatt, Radicalization in the West: The Homegrown Threat (New York: NYPD, 2007), 59. The context shows the authors mean Jihadi Safafi Islam or militant Islam.
Ibid.,[56][57][58][59][60][61][62][63][64] 
Oliver North, "Back Door to Terror," Fox News, http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,22289 7,00.html(Accessed March 31, 2008).
James Jay Carafano, "U.S. Thwarts 19 Terrorist Attacks Against America Since 9/11," The Heritage Foundation, http://www.heritage.org/Research/HomelandDefense/bg2085.cfm(accessed March 2,  2008). The author wrote this article on November 13, 2007 and acknowledged his list only includes publicly known (not classified SECRET) plots.
David Cudmore, FBI Special Agent from the Kansas City, Missouri FBI office, interview by author, Kansas City,MO, February 7, 2008.   
George Bush, "Address to a Joint Session of Congress and the American People," Whitehouse.
Figure2shows the NCTC, JTTF, and fusion center as well as the homeland security organizations that coordinate and share information within each.
NCTC, About the National Counterterrorism Center," Nat http://www.nctc.gov/about_us/about_nctc.html(accessed April 17, 2008).
PM-ISE, Information Shari of National Intelligence, 2006], 71.
David Cudmore, FBI Special Ag
Headquarters, Department of the Army, Field Manual 1-02: Operational Terms and Graphics [Washington: Department of the Army, 2004], 1-99.
David Cudmore, interview by author, Kansas City,MO, February 7, 2008.    
DHS, "Fact Sheet: Homeland Security Information Network" Department of Homeland Security, http://www.dhs.gov/xnews/releases/press_release_0418.shtm[accessed February 26, 2008].
State survey responses January-March 2008.
For the mission statements for the three organizations, see FBI, "About Us -Quick Facts," Federal Bureau of Investigation, http://www.fbi.gov/quickfacts.htm (Accessed February 02, 2008); NORTHCOM, "About USNORTHCOM," Northern Command, http://ww ml [accessed February 25, 2008]; and DHS, "Strategic Plan: Securing Our Homeland," DHS, http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/strategicplan/index.shtm [accessed February 26, 2008]. eland Security, http://www.dhs.gov/xnews/speeches/speech_0073.shtm [accessed February 26, 2008].
DHS, "Strategic Plan: Securing Our Homeland," Department of Homeland Security, http://ww ligence is shared with the CIA; perhaps as a result of the intelligence failures before the 9/11 terror attacks. ent from the Kansas City, Missouri FBI office, interview by author, K w.dhs.gov/xabout/strategicplan/index.shtm [accessed February 26, 2008].
David Cudmore, interview by author, Kansas City,MO, February 7, 2008.    
Federal Bureau of Investigation, "Facts and Figures," The Federal Bureau of Investigation, http://www.fbi.gov/priorities/priorities.htm(Accessed February 2, 2008). This citation explicitly mentions that intel
David Cudmore, FBI Special Ag ansas City,MO, February 7, 2008.   
US Northern Command Mission, "About USNORTHCOM," Northern Command, http://ww
Elizabeth Bazan, The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act [Washington: Congressional  Research Service, 2007], 9-10.
Thomas McNamara, Information Sharing Environment Implementation Plan [Washington: Office of the Director of National Intelligence, 2006], 71-73.
Todd Masse, Siobhan O'Neil, and John Rollins, Fusion Centers: Issues and Options for  Congress [Washington: Congressional Research Service, 2007], 2.
Jane Bullock, et al., Introduction to Homeland Security, [Burlington: Butterworth-Heinemann,  2006], 135-139.
The United States Conference of Mayors, "Mayors' 10-Point Plan '08," United States Conference of Mayors, http://usmayors.org/uscm/news/press_releases/documents/10-PointPlan_1107.pdf [accessed February 24, 2008], 8.
DHS, "Missions: Ready Today...Preparing for Tomorrow," United States Coast Guard, http:// www.uscg.mil/top/missions [accessed February 26, 2008].
DHS, "CBP Border Security Spotlight," United States Customs and Border Protection, http:// www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/border_security [accessed February 26, 2008].
DHS, "Layers of Security," Transportation Security Administration, http://www.tsa.gov/ what_we_do/layers/index.shtm[accessed February 26, 2008].
Federal Bureau of Investigation, "National Security Branch," Federal Bureau of Investigation, http://www.fbi.gov/hq/nsb/nsb.htm[accessed March 10, 2008].
US Northern Command, "About USNORTHCOM," Northern Command, http://www. northcom.mil/About/index.html[accessed February 25, 2008].
David Powner, Information Technology: Homeland  Security Information Network Needs to Be Better Coordinated with Key State and Local Initiatives [Washington: Government Accounting Office, 2007], ii-2.
Ibid., 2.
The rhetorical questions asked at the start of the previous chapter contained the definitions for the US Army's Principles of War from its Field Manual (FM) 3-0. For that chapter, those principles were the lens required to view the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure. In this chapter, more formal and better defined Principles of War are the criteria for the evaluation of the United States Counter-Terrorism Structure that has emerged. 
135
All twelve of the Principles of War relate to the counter-terror conflict to some degree; however, some are more relevant to this war than others are. The eight Principles with the most logical connection included for this evaluation are Offensive, Mass, Economy of Force, Unity of Command, Security, Simplicity, Perseverance, and Legitimacy. Offensive is the act of seizing, retaining, and exploiting the initiative. For the United States, Offensive pertains to taking the necessary steps to prevent the next terror attack in the homeland. Wargaming, mission planning, and thorough information sharing are all forms of the initiative required to beat the militant Islamists to their objective. Mass is the concentration of the effects of combat power at the decisive place and time while economy of force is the allocation of minimum essential combat power to secondary efforts. Those two Principles are related in that each adversary has finite capabilities and must choose when and where to use it for the maximum effect. Applying an organization's full power requires Unity of Command. Cooperation and coordination are important, but giving one responsible commander the required authority is the most effective way to achieve unity of effort. 
136
136
The three headquarters-the DHS, DoJ, and DoD-all have a significant piece of the counter-terror fight. There must be one headquarters within the United States government that leads this fight.
The solution could be to move the National Security Branch from the FBI to the DHS and to place NORTCOM under the control of DHS. The latter command structure would be complex, but would have all forces under one responsible commander, the definition of Unity of Command, for all forces engaged in the war with militant Islamists.
The next seam in the US National Counter-Terrorism Structure is the attitude of the citizens and the government of the United States. Although the American people are not part of the Structure, they affect the conduct of the war with militant Islamists a great deal. Their willingness to support counter-terrorism initiatives in order to make the nation more secure cannot be underestimated. Because the President of the United States is failing to label the conflict between the National Counter-Terrorism Structure and militant Islamists a war, he runs the risk of losing the support of the American people for security improvements and new policies that may require sacrifice from the citizenry. This violates the Principles of Legitimacy and Perseverance. The United States has shown excellent perseverance to date, but is wavering abroad and at home. Just nine days after the events of 9/11, President Bush told the citizens of the United States to keep on shopping. 
145
146
The following section is a potential scenario of a complex terror attack within the United States at a time in the future. The warfare methods that the adversary uses in the scenario are all methods of attack listed in Unrestricted Warfare by Qiao Lang and Wang Ziangsui. 
151
For the United States, the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan are going well enough to allow considerable combat forces to be withdrawn without negative consequences in either country.
The Posse Comitatus Act and the "don't tap my phone" bloc in the United States are still hindering the incorporation of those redeployed forces into the homeland defense of the country.
The US economy continues to stagnate well past the 2008 election.
Conversely, things are going very well in Russia. Its economy, fueled by new oil and natural gas discoveries, continues to grow. Russia has been using that economic muscle to reinvigorate its military and sees the weakened US economy and military as having created the perfect time to regain buffers against the West. Russian leaders do not want a military confrontation with the United States, but they need the latter to be sufficiently distracted and weakened to allow Russia to correct some of the mistakes and affronts from the 1990s. How can Russia make this a reality?
Several talented Russian Army officers from their revitalized military-having read Unrestricted Warfare, an article written in 1999 by Chinese Army officers Qiao Lang and Wang Ziangsui-propose the use of its tenants for Mother Russia's purposes. Russian leaders decide to 151 their targets easily because of the prominently displayed blue stars and blue eagle stickers in the respective windshields of their vehicles.
Step Four (Terror Warfare) At 12:13 pm the same day as the assassinations, five men, Russian mob men, walk into the Dayton Mall on Miamisburg Centerville Road in Dayton, Ohio. Two of the men walk to the center of the mall, while the three remaining men each move to one of the mall's main exits.
They keep their heads down to avoid security cameras but avoid scrutiny because of their conservative business suits and briefcases; they could be coming to the mall's food court for lunch. In one motion the two gunmen in the center of the mall put on masks and shoot the only two security guards on duty while shouting "God is great" in Arabic. Panic-stricken shoppers race toward the exits but are met by a hail of bullets from the other, now masked, operatives stationed at the three aforementioned main exits. After only one minute the five men stop firing their handguns having reloaded several times per weapon. Bodies lie everywhere as the men jump into a plain white van, having left their explosives laden briefcases set for detonation randomly from three to thirteen minutes. The van drives a short distance down Mad River Road, turns left onto Shady Water Lane, and finally turns left into the driveway and backyard of a house on that street. The five men set booby traps on the van, having earlier done the same on both doors of the house, and enter a recently stolen taxi stored in the garage. As explosions rip the mall, no one thinks about the taxi heading toward Interstate-75 and out of sight. The stolen taxi is found later that day with militant Islamist literature, printed off of the Internet. A phone bill also left in the taxi, addressed to the house on Shady Water Lane, lead police to the booby-trapped house and van and further carnage.
Step Five (Psychological Warfare) On Wednesday, Russian operatives, acting as al-Qaeda, release a statement to al-Jazeera that claims responsibility for the attacks within the United States. The communiqué goes on to say that the attacks to date are just the beginning of an onslaught of justice against the United States and its corrupted citizens. Later that day an official Russian release is barely noticed; it condemns the terrorist actions within the United States and offers its help in finding the guilty parties. The Russian statement goes on to say that the unstable conditions within Kazakhstan, Georgia, and Belarus require attention of the world's leadership.
Step Six (Conventional Warfare) Citing the chaos in the United States and the need for immediate action, Russian military forces move into the three "troubled" former Soviet Republics to keep the peace on its borders.
With the world's attention focused on the situation in the United States little more than the objections from the "assisted" nations' former governments are registered in the United Nations.
When Russian and Belarusian forces cross into Ukraine, it is obvious Russia is taking advantage of the chaos in the United States. When the "USA" beacon is beamed onto the clouds in a desperate cry for help to stop the Russian juggernaut, the world's lone hegemonic power is too preoccupied at home to answer the call.