# ID: c49410924f084ff1b36b0cb33842fd7e
# Title: The Evolution of Modern Russian Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
The purpose of this work is to examine current Russian military methods of waging non-linear warfare through the lens of Soviet operations beginning in 1941 through modern operations. Therefore, what defines the present has a long history. The full spectrum of western definitions characterizing today's actions by Russia as some form of new warfare is inaccurate and demonstrates a lack of appreciation for the actual nature of war. This purposeful obfuscation reveals Russia's willingness to see warfare as a system of systems, something defined as extending beyond a call to arms. When the political or economic systems are accomplishing their objective, the military is not used. These systems are interchangeable. This lesson has long roots and prevalent in modern Russian warfare. As these threats multiply and diversify as increasingly "hybrid," "asymmetric," and "ambiguous," it is critical for US military thinkers, politicians, and strategists to first understand Russia to further their understanding of Russian warfare.
For the past fifteen plus years, U.S. Armed Forces were focused on the conflicts of Iraq and Afghanistan, including Special Operations. While U.S. service members fought and supported the war on terrorism, great Russian military thinkers, such as General of Army Valeri Gerasimov, were reviewing works from Clausewitz, Isserson, and Svechin. They were studying Russian military history to garner lessons learned from past conflicts, both good and bad. The Russian President Vladimir Putin vowed to amalgamate the former Soviet satellite countries into the Soviet Union and become, once again, a world superpower. While Putin certainly wants to be on the world stage, realistically and for the time being he is content with being a regional power. Currently, Putin lacks the manpower and resources to make Russia what it was at one time during the Soviet Union.
To do this, the Russians had to reinvent their military from a conventionally focused, rigid system of training and command and control and out dated equipment to a more modern fighting force. The Russians had to revamp their planning process and they way they defined the characteristics of war. The key to this was the preparation of Russian general staff, their detailed operational planning, coordination, and effective implementation of all facets of government power, with a strategic surprise being paramount to the effectiveness of the campaign. The U.S. and its western allies are dumbfounded by the actions of the Russian military because the perception was that what the Russians were doing was not effective. Russia is demonstrating how warfare effectively conceals the use of the whole of government approach (diplomacy, information, military, and economic -D.I.M.E. -a system of systems) to minimize or avoid even deploying combat troops. Due to the recent successes of Russia in Georgia and Crimea, an increasing number of state and non-state actors will likely incorporate non-linear warfare into their military doctrine and operations. As these threats multiply and diversify as increasingly "hybrid," "asymmetric," and "ambiguous," it is critical for military thinkers, politicians, and strategists to first understand Russia to further their understanding of Russian warfare. This work is written with one audience in mind: the professional US soldier. The research done for this work is drawn from open source information. Although the option to use classified material to support my argument was tempting, I found that there is more than enough information on the internet, libraries, and other forms of media. I received excellent guidance and support from Lieutenant Colonel Andrew DelGaudio, USMC and Doctor Matthew Flynn, both from the Marine Corps University Command and Staff College faculty. The purpose of this work is to examine current Russian military methods of waging non-linear warfare through the lens of Soviet operations beginning in 1941 through modern operations. Therefore, what defines the present has a long history. The full spectrum of western definitions characterizing today's actions by Russia as some form of new warfare is inaccurate and demonstrates a lack of appreciation for the actual nature of war. This purposeful obfuscation reveals Russia's willingness to see warfare as a system of systems, something defined as extending beyond a call to arms. When the political or economic systems are accomplishing their objective, the military is not used. These systems are interchangeable. This lesson has long roots and prevalent in modern Russian warfare. As these threats multiply and diversify as increasingly "hybrid," "asymmetric," and "ambiguous," it is critical for US military thinkers, politicians, and strategists to first understand Russia to further their understanding of Russian warfare.
According to the United States (U.S.) Marine Corps Doctrinal Publication 1 (MCDP-1)
Warfighting, "war is a violent clash of interests between or among organized groups characterized by the use of military forces. These groups have traditionally been established nation-states, but they may also include any non-state group -such as an international coalition or a faction within or outside of an existing state -with its own political interests and the ability to generate organized violence on a scale sufficient to have sufficient political consequences." 1
Both state and non-state change their tactics, techniques, and procedures in the planning and executing of military operations to respond to an evolving dynamic environment; the nature of war is consistent, while the character of war changes with the times. Although the fundamental law driving military conflict remains the same (hegemony, sovereignty, resources, religion, etc.)
the gradual transition from a complicated environment to a complex environment is challenging military leaders around the world and most recently, in Eastern Europe. 
2
3
Unconventional warfare (UW) is defined in Joint doctrine as "activities conducted to enable a resistance movement or insurgency to coerce, disrupt or overthrow a government or occupying power by operating through or with an underground, auxiliary and guerrilla force in a denied area." 
4
5
12
13
Additionally, these forces provided supplies and other support to partisan operations. These paratroopers destroyed German and Romanian infrastructure such as rail lines, bridges, roads, and pipelines to create panic, identify German sympathizers, and demoralize German troops.
These missions were carried out by relatively small six to eight man units where almost all of them were from the districts in which they were operating, giving them a significant advantage over the enemy and increasing their will to accomplish the mission due to the resolve to defend their homes. However, these units were poorly trained, too often inaccurately inserted, and had marginal success. 
14
15
16
18
19
In case of the forced retreat of Red Army units, rolling stock must be evacuated; the enemy must not be left a single engine, a single railroad car, not even a single pound of grain of or gallon of fuel.
Collective farmers must drive off their cattle, and turn over their grain to safekeeping of the state authorities for transportation to the rear. All valuable property, including non-ferrous metals, grain, and fuel that cannot be withdrawn must be destroyed without fail. In areas occupied by the enemy, partisan units, mounted or on foot, must be formed; sabotage groups must be organized to combat the enemy units, to foment partisan warfare everywhere, blow up bridges and roads, damage telephone and telegraph lines, set fires to the forests, stores, and transport. In occupied regions, conditions must be made unbearable for the enemy and all his accomplices. They must be hounded and annihilated at every step, and all their measures frustrated. 
20
21
The Soviet government formalized the training, employment, and oversight of the partisans in occupied territories. Central oversight provided synergy and amplified the partisans and Red Army into something much greater than the sum of their parts, but required the Soviet government to view the operating environment as a multidimensional entity. This allowed the Soviet government to view the assigned area and forces as a single, fused entity in relation to time, events, space, or purpose. Furthermore, it allowed the Soviet government to connect the effects of its forces to all aspects of the operational environment, enabling it to assess all the kinetic and non-kinetic effects of the partisan and Red Army's actions (single battle concept).
Partisan members constituted staffs within the Red Army field commands and Soviet Army intelligence. NKVD counter-intelligence personnel were attached to partisan staffs to control all Soviet intelligence operations in German occupied areas. These attachments also assisted the partisans with espionage, reconnaissance in support of combat operations, reconnaissance of base security, and political espionage. In addition, guidebooks supplanted training covering topics such as political espionage, intelligence gathering, anti-partisan tactics, partisan propaganda, German use of native personnel, and methods of partisan recruitment. 
22
Individuals were trained as editors, writers, printers, and artists to broadcast and disseminate propaganda material in German occupied areas and over the illegal partisan radio stations. The subject matter consisted of Red Army and partisan victories, German intentions to reduce Russia to a colonial status, stories of German atrocities, the German slave labor program, and the promise the Red Army would prevail. The target of the propaganda was primarily indigenous native units in German service. By late spring of 1942, these units had prompted massive defections, and therefore hampered German security and intelligence operations. 
23
The movement also helped develop tactics, techniques, and procedures in the conduct of unconventional warfare. 
24
On 23 August 1939, the Soviet Union and Germany signed the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, a treaty of non-aggression. The Soviets, in response to the deteriorating European security situation, hoped to buy the Red Army time to retrain before the assumed inevitable clash with Germany. 
25
27
The Lithuanians, however, resisted these attempts, and successfully prevented the establishment of a Lithuanian SS formation in the service of Germany, unlike the other Baltic States. 
28
29
30
Initially, learning nothing from the Germans, Soviet countermeasures were heavy-handed.
In 1944, Red Army commanders seriously considered a proposal to deport the entire Lithuanian population to Siberia. 
32
33
34
35
36
37
Russian military involvement in Afghanistan has a long history, going back to Tsarist expansions in the so-called "Great Game" between Russia and Britain. This interest in the region continued on through the Soviet era, with billions in economic and military aid sent to Afghanistan between 1955 and 1978. However, few in the west took notice until the Soviets took the city of Kabul in 1979. This was the first time in several decades that the Russians fought an unconventional war against an enemy that used guerrilla style tactics. Up to this point, the Russians had successfully conducted and thwarted unconventional means of warfare.
However, during the Soviet-Afghan War, the Russians made significant mistakes to include not reviewing past lessons learned and not preparing for the type of war they would be fighting in, causing strategic defeat. Additionally, the Russians failed to learn from their mistakes in World
War II in terms of emphasizing politics to thwart the resistance movement but instead resorted to violence.
After World War II, the Soviet Union made a concerted effort, often in competition with western powers, to win over Afghanistan and bring them into the Soviet sphere of influence. As of 1946, the Afghan government could be characterized as a limited democracy headed by a monarch but governed under a parliamentary structure. 
38
Additionally, the Soviet Union improved the infrastructure of the country spending an excess of 1 billion US dollars by the mid-1970s. 
39
40
41
Amin perpetuated a policy of rapid modernization along socialist principles, antagonizing an already uncertain population that remained devoted to the Muslim way of life. 
42
43
Very quickly, the Soviets realized that the populace despised the current government, fueling the insurgency, and therefore the insurgency dwarfed the DRA army's capacity and resources to respond effectively. Paradoxically, the Soviet intervention intensified the struggle by providing a terribly fragmented and unorganized resistance with a common focus and enemy, just as the Russians did during the German invasion of World War II. Additionally, the Soviet intervention denied the DRA the credibility necessary for DRA legitimacy and survival. Ignoring past successes in dealing with resistance movements, specifically knowing the type of war they are fighting and knowing their enemy, the Soviets made a number of assumptions based on "like" areas of operation they studied, specifically Iran. They failed to use their ties with their Afghan allies and Russian personnel on the ground to answer specific questions about the enemy (disposition, motivation, organization, size, source(s) of support, etc.).
The Russian heavy handedness with the local populace caused violent reaction and further support for the insurgency as it did with the Lithuanian partisans decades before. The The overall effect of the presence of Soviet troops and their participation in combat operations clearly proved negative. We ourselves handed the counter-revolutionary forces some powerful means of influencing public perceptions. The foreign intervention stirred patriotism, and the appearance of infidels spawned religious intolerance. On such a field, even a tie would have been miraculous. 
45
Following Georgian independence in 1991, secessionists seeking to remain part of Russia seized control of the majority of Abkhazia and portions of South Ossetia before cease-fire agreements were reached in 1992 and 1994. 
46
47
48
The Russians rediscovered the need for political action as the primary purpose in war.
On the surface, cyber power would not appear to be particularly useful in a war with Georgia. Only seven percent of the citizens used the internet daily, 
49
50
51
52
53
Georgia. The first phase commenced on the evening of 7 August when Russian hackers targeted Georgian news and government websites. 
54
55
In the first phase of the attack, the Russian hackers primarily launched distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks. 
56
57
58
In this first phase, the attacks primarily targeted Georgian government and media websites.
The Russian botnets relied on a brute force DDoS to attack these targets. 
59
60
61
62
In conjunction with an effective cyber campaign, the Russians took full advantage of local discontent among Russian speakers in Abkhazia and South Ossetia to promote internal opposition that diverted national governments and created a permanent (internal) front, very similar to the partisans of World War II who operated behind German lines. Through these partisans, Russia empowered the regimes in Abkhazia and South Ossetia and pursued aggressive information operations in both territories to create Georgia as an enemy among the local population. Russia also attempted to change the ethnic landscape in Abkhazia by bringing Russian military personal and their families to reside in Abkhazia, therefore creating the basis for long-term influence. 
63
64
The failure of the Western security system to respond swiftly to Russia's attempt to forcibly revise the borders of a member country of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) revealed the system's weaknesses. 
65
The overall success of the conflict was due in part to the preparation of Russian generalstaff, their detailed operational planning, coordination and effective implementation of all facets of government power, with a strategic surprise being paramount to the effectiveness of the campaign all designed to keep the war at a limited level to making politics decisive. Ruslan Pukhov, the director of the Center for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies said that "the victory over the Georgian army ... should become for Russia not a cause for euphoria and excessive joy, but serve to speed up military transformations." 
66
The Russian Campaign in Crimea was an impressive demonstration of strategic communication employment, sharing many similarities with their intervention in South Ossetia and Abkhazia in 2008, while at the same time being essentially different, reflecting the operationalization of the new military guidelines to be fully implemented by 2020. This successful non-linear campaign or "New Generation Warfare" was executed without a shot fired and by the destruction of the morale of the Ukrainian military leading to all of their 190 bases surrendered. 
67
68
69
On February 27, 2014 pro-Russian resistance force assisted by spetsnaz captured several government buildings including the parliament in Simferopol and demonstrates this effort. 
70
71
2
Overt media outlets (e.g. internet, radio, television, social media, etc.) in order to secure their popular support for military actions in Ukraine. 
73
Simultaneously, the Russians utilized cyberspace to influence, cripple, and demoralize Ukrainian leadership, military, and society. What western observers call something short of outright war, the Russians call war.
The head of Ukraine's Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-UA) during the Ukrainian revolution and Russian invasion, Nikolay Koval, states that cyber attacks rose in parallel with ongoing political events, in both number and severity. 
75
The newly established Command of Special Operations Forces, together with Russian GRU spetsnaz, Airborne Forces (VDV), and Marines, played a decisive role in Russia's actions in Crimea. 
76
77
However, the US inaccurately labels techniques of war as a new type of war such as "hybrid" war and "unrestricted" war. The US needs to discontinue the use of "trendy" terminology to classify the ancient practice of war as something new as it creates undue confusion and friction across the services and the government. This confusion and friction make it difficult for military leadership to get the strategy right to serve policy.
Despite their success, Russia has struggled as much as the United States in accepting the asymmetrical "norm", that is, battle that feeds political goals attached to acts of war. This similarity may make the West anxious, but whole of government short of an outright declaration of war is the United States post-1945 to the present. So Russia has caught up, not started something new.
"coerce, disrupt through and with an Indigenous force"
Additionally, Eastern Europe was divided into German and Soviet spheres of influence. Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Bessarabia were apportioned to the Soviet sphere by the "secret protocols." Poland was to be divided, and the areas east of the rivers Narev, Vistula, and San went to the Soviet Union, while Germany would occupy the west. On September 28, 1939, the three Baltic States were given no choice but to sign a pact of "Defense and Mutual Assistance," which permitted the Soviet Union to station troops in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. The same day, a supplementary German-Soviet directive transferred most of Lithuania from the German to the Soviet sphere of interest. This pact gave the Soviet Union the land buffer that it desired to the west, prevented the Soviet Union from entering the war against The Soviet Union, aware of the civil dissonance because of annexation, focused its efforts on identifying and registering formal political figures and other potential, anti-Soviet, influential individuals. These people faced imprisonment, torture, or deportation to Siberia.
Additionally, Eastern Europe was divided into German and Soviet spheres of influence. Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Bessarabia were apportioned to the Soviet sphere by the "secret protocols." Poland was to be divided, and the areas east of the rivers Narev, Vistula, and San went to the Soviet Union, while Germany would occupy the west. On September 28, 1939, the three Baltic States were given no choice but to sign a pact of "Defense and Mutual Assistance," which permitted the Soviet Union to station troops in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. The same day, a supplementary German-Soviet directive transferred most of Lithuania from the German to the Soviet sphere of interest. This pact gave the Soviet Union the land buffer that it desired to the west, prevented the Soviet Union from entering the war against The Soviet Union, aware of the civil dissonance because of annexation, focused its efforts on identifying and registering formal political figures and other potential, anti-Soviet, influential individuals. These people faced imprisonment, torture, or deportation to Siberia.
Threaton & Prepare for Invasion Destroy lsol.ited Govt. ForCti
Threaton & Prepare for Invasion Destroy lsol.ited Govt. ForCti
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any