# ID: c49410924f084ff1b36b0cb33842fd7e
# Title: The Evolution of Modern Russian Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
To do this, the Russians had to reinvent their military from a conventionally focused, rigid system of training and command and control and out dated equipment to a more modern fighting force.
The Russians had to revamp their planning process and they way they defined the characteristics of war.
The key to this was the preparation of Russian general staff, their detailed operational planning, coordination, and effective implementation of all facets of government power, with a strategic surprise being paramount to the effectiveness of the campaign.
The U.S. and its western allies are dumbfounded by the actions of the Russian military because the perception was that what the Russians were doing was not effective.
Russia is demonstrating how warfare effectively conceals the use of the whole of government approach (diplomacy, information, military, and economic -D.I.M.E. -a system of systems) to minimize or avoid even deploying combat troops.
Due to the recent successes of Russia in Georgia and Crimea, an increasing number of state and non-state actors will likely incorporate non-linear warfare into their military doctrine and operations.
As these threats multiply and diversify as increasingly "hybrid," "asymmetric," and "ambiguous," it is critical for military thinkers, politicians, and strategists to first understand Russia to further their understanding of Russian warfare.
This work is written with one audience in mind: the professional US soldier.
The research done for this work is drawn from open source information.
Although the option to use classified material to support my argument was tempting, I found that there is more than enough information on the internet, libraries, and other forms of media.
I received excellent guidance and support from Lieutenant Colonel Andrew DelGaudio, USMC and Doctor Matthew Flynn, both from the Marine Corps University Command and Staff College faculty.
The purpose of this work is to examine current Russian military methods of waging non-linear warfare through the lens of Soviet operations beginning in 1941 through modern operations.
Therefore, what defines the present has a long history.
The full spectrum of western definitions characterizing today's actions by Russia as some form of new warfare is inaccurate and demonstrates a lack of appreciation for the actual nature of war.
This purposeful obfuscation reveals Russia's willingness to see warfare as a system of systems, something defined as extending beyond a call to arms.
When the political or economic systems are accomplishing their objective, the military is not used.
These systems are interchangeable.
This lesson has long roots and prevalent in modern Russian warfare.
As these threats multiply and diversify as increasingly "hybrid," "asymmetric," and "ambiguous," it is critical for US military thinkers, politicians, and strategists to first understand Russia to further their understanding of Russian warfare.