# ID: c4a5d073fb9348db9e3c4820acdf7a7e
# Title: Global Trends and Future Warfare (Strategic Insights. Special Issue, October 2011)
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2011.0
# Fulltext:
• Today's Russia, even reduced territorially, economically and demographically from its Soviet and Tsarist Russian predecessors, is still an empire.
Ethnic Russians constitute about 80 percent of the population of the Russian Federation.
The remaining 20 percent identify with the Russian state to a lesser degree, especially the Muslim minorities of the North Caucasus. •
The Russians have been traditionally preoccupied with defensive space.
After 1991, they have added to this preoccupation a post-imperial neurosis focused on the former Soviet republics and, to a lesser degree, former Eastern European satellites.
Even though often dependent on Russia economically and even militarily, none of these states has become a reliable ally of Russia, as demonstrated by their failure to recognize the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in the aftermath of the Russo-Georgian war in August 2008. •
Russia is unique among other major energy exporters.
It can fully provide for its own energy security.
Russia is a nuclear superpower, which puts it, as far as the measurement of its destructive might, in the same category as the United States.
Russia has a tradition (which it wants to maintain) of being an active international actor on the global scene, something not characteristic of other major energy exporters.
Russia is a very significant arms exporter, in fact, second after the United States.
It is also a space power with some unmatched capabilities: once the space shuttle is retired in 2011, Russia will be the only country with the reliable capability to put humans into space. •
Russia is experiencing severe demographic problems-even if its population did not decline in 2009 (for the first time since 1993), experts predict that the population will begin to decline again.
1 • Russia's size and location mean that its security interests are so varied that it would be nearly impossible to accommodate them within a system of international security not centered on Russia.