# ID: c4a5d073fb9348db9e3c4820acdf7a7e
# Title: Global Trends and Future Warfare (Strategic Insights. Special Issue, October 2011)
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2011.0
# Fulltext:
In closing, there are several key points about the IDF's experiences with Hezbollah and Hamas that are relevant to the United States as it looks to the future.
First, America's potential adversaries are working to counter US strengths with asymmetric approaches.
Second, non-state hybrid adversaries are combining state capabilities with irregular organizations.
This is not necessarily new.
There was a hybrid war in South Vietnam during the Vietnam War, pitting US forces against well-armed Viet Cong insurgents and North Vietnamese Army units, largely armed and supplied by Russia and China.
Third, although hybrid warfare is not a new phenomenon, we have not thought enough about how we are going to adapt our capabilities to deal with this problem, which is persistent for Israel and could become a problem for the United States and other nations.
We have largely become a bipolar military: highly capable in irregular and state warfare, but with little recent experience "in the middle."
Fourth, the likely challenges the United States will face in the future will require highly integrated air-ground-ISR capabilities whose tailoring must be highly relevant to the specific enemy and operational context to be effective.
What worked on the West Bank against the intifada did not work in Lebanon; what toppled the regime of Saddam Hussein did not bring stability to Iraq.
Clearly, we need to continue to develop the joint doctrines, processes, organizations, and interservice and interagency relationships that will enable success across the full range of military challenges.