# ID: c4c33668eec74f7f972238e2f3d8dee1
# Title: Trust, the Critical Element for the Adoption of Mission Command Philosophy.
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching
The origin and the evolution of mission command 4
The critical element of mission command Building a trust environment
In my military experience, I have covered different types of assignments. First, I was posted in the Lagunari Regiment as a lieutenant and captain having the honor to command, for more than nine years at home and abroad, the most efficient and motivated soldiers of the Italian Army. After that, I had the fantastic opportunity to serve as an instructor at the Italian Military Academy, where I observed with privileged eyes the process that guides a young university student to become a man, and after that, an officer. Finally, I was selected as a staff officer in the Italian Army General
Staff and assigned to the Planning Division, where officers think about how to shape the future structure of the Italian Army trying to improve its military capacities and fill its eventual gaps.
From the beginning of my career, I have always wondered about the elements that could have helped me to improve my command style or, more in general, that would have been useful in fortifying military organizations.
After multiple failures attempting to strengthen conventional aspects of military organizations, such as doctrine or training, looking at some civilian organizations, and reading about some military visionaries that focused their efforts on human factors, I was convinced that the organizational culture could strengthen the military organization.
Toxic leadership, fearful commanders, a sluggish planning phase, a zero-mistake approach, and unenthusiastic and unmotivated junior leaders are concerns that have plagued various armies but that have not been solved with a new textbook or new doctrine. These problems require a new shape of command philosophy totally immersed in the culture of trust, an indispensable prerogative to remain competitive in the current and future scenarios.
For this paper's development, I am grateful to Doctor Paolo Tripodi and USMC Lt. Col.
Kenneth Jones. Both of them have encouraged me to keep writing. In particular, Dr. Tripodi helped me to remain focused on the point and to approach critically complex problems related to the vii human beings' attitudes; without his guidance, I would not have completed this paper. My last thanks go to my wife Paola and my daughter Alice, from whom I know I have stolen many family moments so difficult to recover.
At the start of the 18 th century Germany, and Prussia in particular, began to introduce a leadership framework that would continue to influence the conduct of military operations until the present day. This model, called Auftragstaktik 3 (which translates to mission oriented tactics or mission command), was not a doctrinal dogma, nor a tactical principle, but a cultural inspiration that would have led the German Army in chaotic and dubious circumstances, with the sole aim of maintaining its operational tempo. 
4
5
6
McCrystal in the description of his experience in Afghanistan: "shared consciousness" and "empowered execution." 7 With these terms, the General acknowledged that military organizations (team of teams) 8 need to change to deal with the complexity of current and future scenarios. On the one hand, the need for "transparent information sharing" 9 improves the situational awareness among the different people engaged in military action (shared consciousness). On the other hand, "decentralized decision-making authority" 10 empowers commanders to make decisions in the best modalities (empowered execution). In fact, these concepts are fundamental indicators that the new phase of mission command does not call for a spectacular and massive revolution of doctrine and training; rather, a practical mission command is linked to human factors and their relations.
Studying the elements that have characterized the German officers in the application of Auftragstaktik 11 such as loyalty, trust, and fidelity and matching these with the reflections of military visionaries such as Gen. Trust encourages subordinates to think creatively and act decisively without fear of negative judgment. The cultivation of trust and the associated empowerment of subordinates in a work environment can greatly reduce the incidence of toxic leadership. 
13
The paper is divided into four parts. The first chapter focuses on the history of mission command, highlighting its origin, describing how the main armies have completely shattered its nature and essence. The second chapter describes the potentiality of the trust and how a culture of trust can be decisive in enhancing the correct application of this philosophy and increasing the effectiveness of the military organization. The third chapter discusses the possibility to create a trust environment. Finally, the conclusion highlights that the role of commanders and educators are essential to instill and develop this culture of trust as a normal precondition in the application of mission command philosophy.
Mission command, born under the German name Auftragstaktik (literally tasks tactics 15 but subsequently translated into English as mission command/mission tactics), has multiple definitions, but probably one of the most important definitions came from MCDP-1 Warfighting of the US Marine Corps:
Mission tactics is just as the name implies: the tactics of assigning a subordinate mission without specifying how the mission must be accomplished. We leave the manner of accomplishing the mission to the subordinate, thereby allowing the freedom-and establishing the duty-for the subordinate to take whatever steps deemed necessary based on the situation. Mission tactics relies on a subordinate's exercise of initiative framed by proper guidance and understanding. 
16
18
19
Inconsistent definitions of mission command, many times different from the original concept of Auftragstaktik and more than once combined with the definition of command and control core function (C2), have caused considerable confusion in military organizations. This misunderstanding was so significant that the US Army in the Army Doctrine Publication 6-0 defines the mission command as a synonym of command and control. As the publication reports:
The use of the term mission command to describe multiple things-the warfighting function, the system, and a philosophy-created unforeseen ambiguity. Mission command replaced command and control, but in practical application it often meant the same thing. 
23
24
25
26
1
There are different examples along the course of history that are useful to contrast and compare decentralized command with centralized command, but there is an example that can highlight the potentiality of the first over the latter better than others. This historical event came from the Italian Army front during WWI where the relief in place between Gen. Luigi Cadorna and Gen. Armando Diaz (see figure 
2
Cadorna was famous for his "ferocious discipline and inflexibility". 
28
29
Source: Adopted from l'Adigetto "Che fine hanno fatto i Generali al termine della Grande Guerra?" https://www.ladigetto.it/rubriche/centenario-della-grande-guerra/85264-che-fine-hanno-fatto-i-generali-altermine-della-grande-guerra.html
After two years of limited success following the disaster of Caporetto, he was replaced by Gen. Diaz, who led a kind of revolution in the Italian Army, thanks to his style of command. After Caporetto, morale in the Italian Army was low and victory was uncertain. However, General Diaz began this period with great positivity. He adopted a style of command very different from General
Cadorna. First, he divided Cadorna's centralized power, appointing General Badoglio and General Giardino as deputy chiefs. 
30
Every past, current, and future war, independently of the grade of technology the future armies will have, identifies in the management of command and control (C2) the critical element for planning, conducting, and winning the war for three main reasons. First, it allows the rest of the functions to operate effectively and synchronized. 
34
35
36
However, it is only at the beginning of the XIX century that the effects produced by styles of command started to be studied under an academic lens to analyze the connections between the performance of soldiers and the style of command adopted. With the advent of Napoleonic Wars in the early 1800s, two styles of command emerged: the decentralized and the centralized command models. 
38
39
41
Army. 42
44
Even though the US has tried many times to replicate the German model, the lack of investment in the importance of human factors and the absence of any serious education reform to reorganize the American organizational culture have not produced tangible results. 
45
Gen. Mattis and Gen. McCrystal in fact, according to their experiences in Iraq and in Afghanistan, have updated and successfully used the mission command, restoring the importance of the human relations based on the culture of trust as the main element of a new organizational culture.
The future operational environment represents an important challenge for the mission command. The next scenario of 2035, defined by NATO as a "congested, contested, cluttered, connected, and constrained environment" 46 , strongly challenges military organizations to introduce, adopt, and practice the mission command more than in the past. Indeed, if until now the mission command has been seen as an opportunity to enhance the performance of the military organization, in the future this philosophy could be considered fundamental for the survival of military organizations. In fact, the campaigns in Afghanistan and Iraq demonstrate that the increment of the threat's complexity requires an agile approach, such as mission command, to manage a system that Gen McCrystal defines as chaotic. 
47
The widespread adoption of mission command and a consequent change to organizational culture is an option that could be considered in order to adapt an organization to face the challenges of the future. However, innovating the organizational culture of military organizations is not as common and easy as changing its doctrine or developing a new warfighting capability for troops; First, an (military) organization must have an awareness of its need to transform and adapt its organizational culture. This is an essential precondition for successful adoption of a mission command, which is becoming an increasingly central part of the future operating concepts of many modern armies. From the American doctrine 49 to the Swedish 50 and the British 51 doctrine, military organizations deem the organizational culture an important element for the adoption of mission command.
Second, the structure and characteristics of this organizational culture are often linked to human factors with a particular focus on the value of trust. Taking for example one of the most critical future concepts of NATO, Framework for Future Alliance Operations, it is clear that the word trust inspires a crucial part of the document. In particular, about the architecture of NATO, the document reports "NATO cohesion relies on two pillars trust and reciprocity." 
52
The experience of two military visionaries, Gen. First, both introduced the importance of establishing a harmonious work environment.
In contrast to many different military units or staff where people don't have the possibility to contradict the leader, these two military geniuses collocated harmony as a fundamental factor to achieve efficiency and speed in the conduction of operations. Thus, while Gen. Mattis focus on harmony as result of the cohesion of military units 56 , General McCrystal points out that the responsibility for creating and fostering this harmony-based environment is entirely in the hands of leaders. 
57
60
The leader's first responsibility is to the whole. A leader's word matter, but actions ultimately do more to reinforce or undermine the implementation of a team of teams.
Instead of exploiting technology to monitor employee performance at levels that would have warmed Frederick Taylor's heart, the leader must allow team members to monitor him. More than directing, leaders must exhibit personal transparency. This is the new deal. 
61
McCrystal point out that the success of their units depended to a large extent on the authentic and loyal human relations that they had instilled from the beginning of their commander experiences.
The creation of such relationships during the conduct of operations in Iraq or Afghanistan could help to break down the formal barriers that often serve to impede the flow of information and so increase the awareness of leaders. 
64
Gen. Mattis and Gen. McCrystal are two visionaries that represent a unique exception for the military arena. However, their success in Iraq and Afghanistan are significant not only for the results of the operations but also for the leadership model that they were able to introduce, support, and adopt in their units. For the first time, in fact, thanks to their incredible charisma and capacity to understand and anticipate the complexity of the events, they were able to change the cultural organization of their units, introducing a new leadership model that allows the spread of mission command. From their fruitful experiences based mainly on human factors, it is fundamental to understand how it is possible to replicate their models without charismatic leaders like Gen Mattis or Gen. McCrystal. In a few words, how is it possible to have a universal application of this philosophy? How is it possible to reach a new, universally adopted model of mission command?
In order to apply a new model of mission command, it is necessary to create a new organizational culture based on trust.
During the transformation process for military and non-military organizations, it is normal to observe a significant discord between what they would like to become and what they actually are. If, on the one hand, they would like to change their cultural approach adopting mission command to face the new complex environment, on the other hand, they are incapable of avoiding the main limitations of this philosophy, i.e. micromanagement, risk-aversion, and the zero-defects mentality. 
66
the culture of a group can be defined as the accumulated shared learning of that group as it solves its problems of external adaptation and internal integration; which has worked well enough to be considered valid and, therefore, to be taught to new members as the correct way to perceive, think, feel, and behave in relation on those problems.
This accumulated learning is a pattern or system of beliefs, values, and behavioral norms that come to be taken for granted as basic assumptions and eventually drop out of awareness. 
69
and the second the ideas/goals of the organization (the espoused beliefs), the third element is the "unconscious, taken-for-granted beliefs and value that determine behavior, perception, thought and feeling" 71 and for this reason the crucial element to influence the entire organization. Establishing a culture based on the authentic value of trust will modify military organizations, enabling the mission command to function.
Trust is the main value of building a new cultural organization for three main reasons.
First, trust is a prerequisite for the attainment of important values such as honesty, transparency, and respect inside an organization. 
72
73
74
75
Trust eliminates bureaucracy and redundancy. 
76
In addition, this element contrasts the phenomenon of office politics, which represents "interdepartmental rivalries, backbiting, and sabotage initiative between colleagues." 77 Moreover, the absence of tactics and strategies to gain power improves the organization's transparency, directly affecting talent management 78 based on the evident merit.
Furthermore, trust can be an appropriate solution to avoid the disengagement of employees who have lost the ambition and motivation to operate within a system that does not professionally fulfill their legitimate aspirations. 
79
Finally, trust affects fraud, eliminating any attempts at "dishonesty, sabotage, obstruction, and deception and disruption" within the organization. 
80
Adopting these results introduced by Covey in the military environment could have tremendous effects on military organizations with a direct effect on the mission command.
Generally, the adoption of trust in military organizations could create huge benefits in term of speed, transparency, and eliminating the zero mistakes approach. Particularly, the DOTLMPF i i The acronym is commonly used to give to the lecturer an all-inclusive vision about a general problem. In fact, any type of problem is analyzed under doctrine, organization, training, leadership, material, personnel, and facilities.
matrix, a common instrument frequently used in the military organization, could be an effective tool to summarize the potential impact of trust culture in military organizations (see figure 
3
Trust could reduce the number of directives to monitor and control the achievement of the results. Doctrine could become simple, easy, and adherent to the true needs of military organizations.
Trust could remove all redundant military structures that represent an unnecessary level of management. Light and adaptable military structures could be more versatile and flexible and respond with more efficacy to the future operational challenges that are characterized by uncertainty and mutability.
Trust could enable leaders of all levels to make their decisions without fear of possible failures or negative judgments that could compromise their promotions. Trust could allow leaders to take responsibility in the exclusive interest of the military organization without thinking about their decision's indirect impact on their careers. Moreover, training could be more realistic because no one will be afraid to reduce the level of risk of the training to maintain his status quo.
Trust could guarantee merit, transparency, and appropriate talent management. Trust prevents toxic leadership and ensures the achievement of organizational goals.
Trust could encourage the adoption of agile processes to lead the acquisition of new capabilities or modern equipment. Thanks to the process stimulated by trust, it could be possible to equip military organizations with better products in less time.
The spirit of trust could transform an impersonal organization into a real family giving to soldiers the opportunity to build close relationships.
Having the opportunity to discuss critically different points of view with superiors and colleagues and adopting coaching methodology along the chain of command could strengthen the efficiency of military organizations and prevents phenomena such as fraud and disengagement.
Cutbacks of redundancy and bureaucracy as well as the decrement of management levels could allow military organizations to save their financial resources and re-invest them in sectors that traditionally are considered weak and less financed (training, infrastructures, and logistics). 
The previous chapter highlighted the beneficial effects of trust on civil and military organizations, underlining how this value can represent a real game-changer for implementing mission command and an incredible multiplayer in terms of efficiency and performance. This chapter explains the modalities of building an organizational culture based on trust as a precondition for properly applying the mission command philosophy. Following these modalities will provide two effects for military organizations. First, a successful adoption of mission command philosophy, which exploits trust, will delate the misconceptions or the wrong tentative of the past. Second, it will be possible to promote mission command independently of the attitude or capacity of leaders who are in charge of a military organization at a given time. This new modality to enable mission command intends to overcome the King definition of mission command 2.0 81 (characterized by the brilliant initiatives of Gen. McCrystal or Mattis) fostering the creation of a universal application of this philosophy to all military organizations because of the fundamental importance of trust. Therefore, the next section provides answers to this question:
how is it possible to create a military environment devoted to the value of trust?
Even if trust is a sociological value, thanks to neuroscience, it is scientifically proven that a human hormone, called oxytocin, can stimulate trust between human beings. As Paul Zak says in his book Trust Factor, this hormone, defined by the author as a "moral molecule," 82 plays a fundamental role in social relations. It is responsible for creating empathy, a familiar and harmonious environment, and human interactions within organizations. 
83
84
4
The first factor is the "ovation" 85 , which is the enthusiastic recognition of work. Having a tangible and personal ovation in correspondence with the completion of an important project, especially in front of family members or in public, is an element that stimulates the production of oxytocin and therefore creates a trusting environment. 
86
The second factor is "expectation." 
87
88
Three lines of effort are fundamental to achieve this result. Primarily, the maximum level of transparency in the assessment criteria, which must remain stable for a long time, is crucial. On the one hand, having transparency avoids false expectations or potential misapprehensions in advance; on the other hand, it shows soldiers the vision, the goal, and the policy to follow for achieving concrete and positive results. The second line of effort could be related to the frequency of the assessment. To replace the anxiety produced by an annual report, it would be easier to have a monthly counseling with a direct leader in which a soldier could frequently assess his performance with the possibility of correcting the potential error faster than before. More frequent oral reports decrease the bureaucracy and increase empathy between leaders and subordinates.
Finally, providing coaching leadership to achieve goals in line with personal expectations could establish a mentoring relationship between old and young leaders/soldiers (very similar to the relations that officers have inside of the military academy).
The third factor is the "yield". 
89
90
91
92
The fourth factor is the "caring." 
94
95
96
The fifth factor is "natural". 
97
98
99
Consequently, leaders who are too sensitive or too human could have adverse effects on the units.
Operating with crystalline transparency, especially when commanders have to reward or punish someone, remaining open to direct confrontation with subordinates, and being easily approachable remain the key to produce this attitude that is fundamental to shape a trust-driven work environment.
The last important factor is "openness." 101 Having an inclusive attitude, making all employees aware of the organization's strategy for achieving common goals, and practicing genuine transparency between different levels of management are crucial elements for this factor. 102 Therefore, there are many concrete approaches to encourage the adoption of this value within organizations and corporations. For example, a company that would like to operate according to this concept must forge its architecture on the openness. Open spaces, glass doors, shared drives where it is possible to work collaboratively, and weekly appointments that can analyze the status of a project increase the value of openness and have a massive impact on the culture of trust. 
103
5
The second component is a different use of unit management technology. The openness (according to information security) requires the creation of a new network where it is possible to share documents without restrictions, collaborate at the same time on the same document, and constantly monitor the status of a project. This network infrastructure automatically generates collaboration and improves information sharing, increasing the quality of the product (the best example of that is the generation of an order or a briefing). Finally, the last element (particularly functional in headquarters) is the adoption of an agile methodology to replace the waterfall methodology. 
105
Military organizations require an organizational culture based on trust as the best modalities for adopting the mission command. This important aspect in fact, assures the implementation of this philosophy and generates significant indirect benefits in terms of efficacy and speed in the military world.
Moreover, this decision to invest in the mission command philosophy is becoming more than a cultural desire or stylistic ambition of some commanders and is an important operational requirement to compete in the chaotic future scenario. In this environment in fact, this philosophy represents the right answer to dominate the "turbulent and unpredictable" 107 nature of warfighting, particularly for junior leaders, who are increasingly called to make decisions that impact the strategic level.
Abandoning misleading approaches that military organizations have used over the last seventy years, focusing on the importance of human relations, and instilling the value of trust is collectively the most important challenge for the concrete implementation of this philosophy.
Changing an organization's culture requires perseverance, time, and significant investments over an extended period of time.
Rapid changes to the structure of a military organization based on singular initiatives rather than a true desire to begin a new course are doomed to fail. After Napoleon's victory over the Prussian Empire during the Battle of Jena in 1806, Scharnhorst and Von Moltke inspired the Prussian Army to implement the idea of Auftragstaktik, but the first benefits of this philosophy were marked only in 1870 during Germany's reunification wars. 
108
Hence, he has to create proper harmony within military units, inspire trust around him and his staff, and coach junior officers about this value. Furthermore, key leaders must play a role (and potentially change) in considering new methodologies to counter the insane bureaucracy 109 and innovative criteria for soldier promotions and career advancements. 
110
Second, the educator, who is the vital actor able to shape the future generations of soldiers in the trust culture. This figure, which is crucial and fundamental in all fields, represents the reference model for the next generation and will always be a crucial asset to which the military organization entrusts its future. Academic instructors in the military institutes, military leaders posted in educational institutes such as military academies, or warrant officers in operation units will be the true multipliers who will instill a new culture of trust in military organizations.
Therefore, having a team of educators able to change a military organization's organizational culture requires an important talent management process. It will be important to identify the right attitude that enables a soldier to effectively fulfill his specific task, his training and educational background should be appropriately evaluated, and his awareness of his role are all fundamental considerations that must contribute to this figure's selection. Furthermore, the educational system requires significant financial resources to support the expansion of a trust culture and the maintenance of high educational standards. Sending educators abroad to learn alternative approaches, as well as adapting military institutes' information infrastructures to new educational needs such as critical thinking and agile methodology, are expensive and not always feasible for small armies such as the Italian Army. As a result, seizing any opportunity in this field and launching a significant investment campaign to improve the quality of the education system could be another critical aspect in spreading a new culture of trust in organizations.