# ID: c53cf01c9a0c44888c0d5c99719dfc30
# Title: China's Aviation Industry: Lumbering Forward-A CASI Monograph
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
publishes research findings and papers, journal articles, monographs, and edited volumes for both public and government-only distribution as appropriate.
• CASI establishes and maintains institutional relationships with organizations and institutions in the PLA, the PRC writ large, and with partners and allies involved in the region. • CASI maintains the ability to support senior leaders and policy decision makers across the full spectrum of topics and projects at all levels, related to Chinese aerospace.
CASI supports the U.S. Defense Department and the China research community writ large by providing high quality, unclassified research on Chinese
Broadly speaking, there are several important trends in organization, development, and utilization within the Chinese aviation industry.
For both the military and civilian sectors, continuous innovation will be key in building aircraft that are market-competitive or survivable in a conflict. China has made tremendous strides in improving its Research and Development (R&D) systems. While many improvements can be attributed to the aforementioned organizational reforms, additional improvements deserve independent attention. In particular, the acceleration of the use of Computer Integrated Manufacturing Systems (CIMS) [电脑综合制造], which include a full range of processes and tools such as Computer-Aided Design (CAD), Modelling, Quality Control, 3D Printing, and Computer Numerical Control (CNC) milling and lathing, have dramatically sped up the R&D process. As a result, since 2000, projects appear to be completing their conception-to-test-flight phases more rapidly than before. New materials, such as composites, carbon fiber, and titanium, which reduce radar cross-sections, save weight, and allow faster speeds, are frequently cited in the construction of new airframes. However, according to official assessments and statistics put out by Chinese government bodies, China is overwhelmingly reliant on imports of foreign technologies. For example, Xin Guobin [辛国斌], who is a Deputy Director of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) c , recently noted that 52 percent of core materials are imported. When certain types of processors and other technology necessary for "intelligentized" [智能化] manufacturing and other industries are taken into account, this number rises to between 70 and 95 percent. 
1
Despite these vulnerabilities, both civilian and defense aviation firms are benefiting from foreign technology. The government is also emphasizing "spinning on" civilian-developed technologies for military use [民转军], a reversal from the 1980s and 90s when military industrial capacity and know-how was used to build the civilian economy. Xi Jinping has made these types of synergies and increased cooperation between the civilian and military sectors (Military-Civil Fusion [军民融合]) a centerpiece of his administration.
Shifts in civilian market and military requirements and utilization are having a major impact on the Chinese aviation industry. The industry will play a major role in the PLA's modernization more broadly, but specifically with its strategic transformation [战略转型]. Both the PLA Navy's aviation branch and the PLA Air Force (PLAAF) are the recipients of major upgrades over the past decade. The PLAAF has a specific strategy for air operations "Integrated Air and Space Operations, Simultaneous Offensive and Defensive Operations" [空天一体, 攻防兼备], which it adopted in 2004. In 2014, Xi Jinping tasked the PLAAF with becoming a "Strategic Air Force." 
2
3
4
5
These volumes, written as study materials for PLA officers at the Academy of Military Science (AMS), provide the basis of many insights into the PLA's understanding of strategy and the basic outlines of how it intends to conduct warfare. In understanding China's military industry, a key component of our research is to understand how China itself understands its security environment and how it plans to fight wars. The R&D efforts it prioritizes and the equipment it buys, while subject to other factors, are focused on meeting these strategic requirements and tactical capabilities.
Published in 2009 by Blue Sky Press, this collection of essays by a number of retired PLAAF officers and professors represents an interesting moment in the PLAAF's development. After the adoption of the Air Force's first strategic guidelines "Integrated Air and Space Operations, Simultaneous Offensive and Defensive Operations," in 2004, strategists were working through the implications of the new strategy and what types of aircraft were needed. These essays represent an argument by those who said that China needed to acquire longer-distance capabilities and move beyond the close-range air defense thinking that had dominated since 1956. The chief editor of the book, Zhu Hui [朱晖], teaches at the Air Force's Command College in Beijing. Another of the major contributors, Dong Wenxian [董文先], is an experienced PLAAF reconnaissance unit commander and teacher who has published several books on the PLAAF's modernization. Taken together with the other contributors, these essays represent an attempt to raise awareness of the importance of a strategic air force. Individually the essays are rather shallow in terms of content. But if understood as posing an argument within the bureaucratic system of the PLAAF and the broader PLA, their essays take on greater significance. Of note, this book is a series of individual papers and is not considered an "authoritative" PLAAF publication, because it was not part of a funded plan nor did it have a forward by a senior PLAAF leader.
A common phrase in Chinese could be used to summarize our assessment of these essays' value: "You have to make an issue legitimate in order to address it authoritatively; if not, nothing can be accomplished [名不正, 则言 不顺; 言不顺, 则事不成]". While the author's advocacy has likely had some effect, the issues they raise are largely e Specifically, these books are labeled "装备指挥技术学院" 2110 工程"教材"
well understood. There is certainly some reason to believe that there have been major debates within the PLA regarding the direction of its strategy, but our conclusion is that the larger budgets, rather than a fundamental shift in thinking, have had the greatest effect in putting the PLAAF on the path to a strategic air force.
The Chronicle of the Chinese Aerospace Industry (1951-2011) [中国航空工业大事记 (1951-2011)] is a day-by-day account of the aviation industry, published in 2011 to commemorate the 60th anniversary of its founding in 1951. This book proved to be a vital resource in establishing timelines, finding the names of key designers and important data points like the growth of the industry. However, review of other books from this publisher reveals that most are actually textbooks on specific engineering subjects at a level of detail beyond the scope of this work, or else translations of similar works into Chinese.
Popular histories, such as Chronicle of the Chinese Air Force 
[中国空军纪事]
Biographies of senior officials provide useful insights into key processes and strategic thinking. The Biography of Peng Dehuai, 7 which follows the life of one of China's senior military leaders from the revolution through the late 1950s for example, provides a clear narrative of China's strategic thinking after the Korean War and the debates about the direction of domestic economic spending and military modernization. A review of similar biographies of later military leaders and aerospace engineers would doubtless provide insights about similar, more contemporary issues.
This study used a wide range of military, academic, and technical journals to examine the strategic direction of the aviation industry, persistent problems in organization, funding, and research, as well as specific technological hurdles.
The PLA's primary theoretical journal featured discussions of multiple aspects of these problems. Chinese Military Science [中国军事科学] is produced by the Chinese Academy of Military Science. Articles used in this study argue for the importance of near-space surveillance assets and similar adjustments to China's "Integrated Air and Space Operations" aerospace theory.
Other 
More general publications on financial issues and other topics periodically yielded useful information. Several financial publications had scholarly articles about issues within the defense industry. Finance Think Tank 
[金融智库]
Non-military topics enjoy a much broader range of academic and technical discussions. Journals such as Aviation Industry Economic Research 
[航空工业经济研究]
Television:
Chinese television news, talk shows, and documentaries offer a largely-untapped source of information for language-enabled researchers.
China's state television network, CCTV [中国战法], is a basic source of news information. Several daily news shows, such as Focus Today [今日关注] or Military Report [军事报道] are easily accessible and provide digestible coverage of aviation and military news. Television programs such as Technologies in The Military 
[军事科技]
[军工记忆]
[开讲啦]
Chinese language media based in Hong Kong also provides some useful coverage of military and aerospace developments. The Tactics 
[中國戰法]
In sum, television news programs, documentaries, and talk shows offer a very different format and level of detail than that of traditional news media. While requiring high-level Chinese-listening skills and being timeintensive to sift through, there are worthwhile bits of information included that are difficult to replicate elsewhere.
The PLA's official website, 81.cn, is, like PLA Daily, a major source of authoritative information regarding Chinese military developments. Though related to the PLA Daily, it is distinguished from the newspaper through its use of articles from other publications. Attention to the original source of information is important and articles frequently include caveats indicating whether something is an official source or not. The website includes multiple sub-domains for each of China's theater commands, services and important CMC organizations, each with a particular mix of news.
Aviation company websites have proven to be useful sources of recent news and history about the companies, though due to sensitivities many lacked significant detail about current or older weapons-even when they are well known or out of production.
The State Council Information Office (SCIO [国务院新闻办公室]) and National Development and Reform Commission (NRDC; [国家发展和改革委员会]) websites, (www.ndrc.gov.cn and www.scio.gov.cn) are important sources of official state plans [计划] and Defense White Papers [国防白皮书].
All aforementioned media have official social media accounts, as do each of China's military services. Some commentators and military enthusiasts occasionally post useful discussions or photos to Weibo.
Two major Chinese sources of statistics have been consulted for this report: The National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) and the Civil Aviation Administration of China. Statistics from the NBS provide insight into research budgets and industrial production. 
8
English-language Sources Books:
While there is a huge body of work on modern Chinese history, very little of it touches directly upon Chinese military industrial matters directly. Even fewer of these sources focus on the aviation industry specifically. However, piecing together information from various sources actually provides a more useful guide to the development of the Chinese aerospace industry, which has been directly impacted by broader trends in politics and economics. U.S. Air Force Historian Zhang Xiaoming's classic history Red Wings Over the Yalu: China, the Soviet Union, and the Air War in Korea is a foundational work for understanding the context in which China's aerospace industry was born. The vast amounts of material and training provided by the Soviet Union to aid in China's effort in the Korean war provides the basis for much of its later growth. Designs produced during this time remained in active service through even the early 2010s among the PLA Naval Aviation. The study also points to important political events that would shape the industry, such as Marshall Peng Dehuai's advocacy for a professional PLA, air power in general, and a bomber force due to his experiences as the commander of Chinese forces in Korea. Peng's subsequent marginalization after the Lushan Conference [庐山会议] can be understood as a watershed for the Chinese aviation industry just as it could be for PLA modernization in general. The limitations of Zhang's book are mostly related to its scope: it focuses on a particular time. Examination of more modern history must be found elsewhere.
Li Xiaobing's A History of the Modern Chinese Army includes some useful details about the early development of China's scientific and technological development and is a great overview of the PLA's history though it does not have a particular focus on the aviation industry.
Despite significant organizational changes since its publication in 2012, Dennis Blasko's book The Chinese Army Today: Tradition and Transformation for the 21st Century (Second Edition) remains a standard reference on the PLA's history, missions, and publications. A keen observer of the PLA, his work on Chinese military doctrine in the STI series of publications, and studies of China's helicopter force provide valuable insights into various aspects of the PLA and the Aerospace industry. James Mulvenon's 2001 study of the PLA and private industries in the 1990s is a useful snapshot of the tumult of that era. At the end of the national crisis of the Tiananmen Massacre and the PLA's nationwide crackdown on student and labor demonstrations nationwide, China underwent leadership changes, purged thousands of recalcitrant PLA officers and enlisted personnel. Partly in exchange for its continued loyalty, the PLA was allowed to maintain its business interests. g However, the accompanying corruption and distraction from training left the PLA hollow and ill equipped for war. The Third Taiwan Straits Crisis in the late 1990s helped spur a return to focus on operational matters. Xi Jinping's anti-corruption campaign and focus on "actual combat" [实战] can be seen as a continuation of the central leadership's attempts to change the culture in the PLA. In terms of understanding the aerospace industry, this is an important period because it helped set the tone for greater independence of the private sector and a push for a less commercially-focused PLA.
In the 1990s, landmark studies of China's strategic weapons programs by John Lewis and Xue Litai set the tone for an entire body of academic work on Chinese defense issues. Drawing on biographies and materials published during a relatively open period in Chinese history, as well as taking advantage of China's desire to trumpet domestic S&T breakthroughs, these books remain the golden standard of English-language scholarship on their respective topics. In particular, Tai Ming Cheung's works Fortifying China: In 2016, the Jamestown Foundation published an edited volume, China's Evolving Military Strategy, that analyzed the Chinese military textbook "Science of Military Strategy 2013" mentioned in a previous section. Wellregarded scholars examined sections of the book relevant to their expertise and provide useful context by drawing from other Chinese authoritative sources. Sections on the Air and Space domains were valuable to this study as references.
On specific topics such as innovation, other mainstream think tanks such as the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) had both useful short discussions and comprehensive reviews of certain topics. In particular, China Scholar Scott Kennedy's study of innovation in China was a useful overview of that topic. 
10
In the private sector, American companies such as Boeing, and consultancies such as Deloitte and the Teal Group, track the trajectory of aerospace trends in China. Boeing's reports, in particular, provided useful insights into the broad trajectory of the civil aviation industry and aggregate demand. While publicly available assessments by Deloitte and the Teal Group touch on defense issues, their primary focus is related to investment and generally do not address the strategic implications for the United States or internal Chinese considerations.
The China Maritime Studies Institute (CMSI) based at the U.S. Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island holds bi-annual conferences on Chinese military issues. A 2010 conference produced a study on China's aerospace capabilities with a focus on implications for the maritime domain. An annual conference held at the Carlisle Barracks and co-hosted by the National Bureau of Asian Research (NBR) has produced many relevant papers, among them " The PLA Air Force: 1949-2002 -Overview and Lessons Learned" published in 2003 have provided useful insight into Chinese military priorities and more general industrial capabilities.
Testimony given by experts for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission (USCC) provides a periodic snapshot into U.S. academic, private and government views of China's aerospace industry. This report primarily drew on hearings and research published since 2010. Additional hearings on China's manufacturing industry were also held. However, given the limited time allotted to hearings and space limitations on associated testimony means that while the provided information is succinct, it can lack in terms of depth. The need to repeatedly use the same scholars or scholars that have other China-specialties is also indicative of the narrow base of government, academics and private citizens working in the public sphere on this important issue.
This study makes limited use of English-language newspapers published outside of China. Some few exceptions include investigative reports and discussions of materials appearing in Chinese-language forums by CASI-partners Jeffrey Lin and P.W. Singer in their Popular Mechanics column, Eastern Arsenal. These articles frequently use photos and discussions that are hard to find elsewhere, but which also prove difficult to vet. Veteran National Security Reporter Bill Gertz frequently publishes analysis of Chinese weapons tests for the Washington Free Beacon. However, the lack of Chinese-language references and frequent use of unnamed U.S. intelligence community sources typically mean some care is needed when using these as indicative of broader trends. Aviation Week and Space Technology offered expert analysis of publicized Chinese developments but often rely on secondary sources such as the South China Morning Post or analysis of amateur photographs. Defense News, Air Force Times, and similar coverage of U.S. procurement priorities and next-generation aircraft offered a useful source of information on those topics in support of official statements from DOD, DARPA, and other government bodies. The Jamestown Foundation's China Brief publication, while not strictly a journal, provides regular coverage of Chinese military developments including relevant organizational changes, Air Force strategy, and aerospace industrial capabilities by top scholars.
The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) Website: https://www.sipri.org/ The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute maintains a comprehensive database of international arms sales, including equipment sold, associated dates and estimated costs. This database provides valuable insights into the extent of Chinese international cooperation, the volume of its imports and the direction of its aerospace industry.
Website: https://www.iiss.org/ IISS is a British think-tank based in London that publishes an annual snapshot of global military capabilities. The Military Balance is regarded as authoritative and contains a detailed breakdown of total manpower and numbers of individual equipment and weapon systems by variant. This database proved very useful when evaluating the proportion of aircraft and helicopters by military service and primary mission.
Russia-24 (Russian: Россия-24) formerly called Vesti, is a state-owned Russian-language news channel administered by the All-Russia State Television and Radio Broadcasting Company (VGTRK). It covers major national and international events as well as focuses on domestic issues.
Russian News Agency TASS (Russian: Информационное агентство России ТАСС) is a major news agency in Russia. Founded in 1902, TASS is the largest Russian news agency and one of the largest news agencies worldwide. TASS is registered as a Federal State Unitary Enterprise, owned by the Government of Russia. Headquartered in Moscow, TASS has 70 offices in Russia and in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), as well as 68 bureaus around the world.
The quality of publicly available information on China's aerospace industry is quite varied. Where it is most useful, it is most fragmented. While many aerospace firms now maintain active English-language websites, Chinese language skills remain a core competency needed to access most information in any meaningful way.
For Chinese language sources Chinese Aviation News, published by AVIC is probably the most valuable source of information. For defense-related aspects, however, it tends to have a more propagandistic slant. More meaningful data is found in academic journals but tends to be buried in technical discussions.
A decade ago a leading expert on China's defense industries joked that the number of people studying Chinese technology was so small they could easily fit into a minivan. Fortunately, that has changed. A larger number of scholars with Chinese language skills are highlighting important information, giving congressional testimony and generally raising the visibility of important trends.
Overall, we assess that a hybrid approach pulling together Chinese-language authoritative books, biographies and official media, supplemented by English-language scholarly works and, when possible, drawing on imagery analysis remains the most valuable method of study.
While the focus of this study is the development of China's aviation industry between 2004-2018, a brief overview of the history of the Chinese aviation industry is necessary to understand how it has arrived at its present position. China's drive for technological superiority, self-reliance, and sometimes byzantine organizational structures all derive from its experience in wars, political infighting, and economic development.
China's early history as a modern state was shaped in part by the need for effective airpower. Emerging threats and missions during the early 1950s helped drive the early stages of China's aviation industry. The PLA Air Force, founded in November 1949 with Chinese Nationalist (KMT) defectors and their planes, quickly found a new mission defending PRC airspace from KMT air attacks coming out of Taiwan. 11 KMT B-29 bombers, for example, attacked Shanghai 26 times between May 1949 and February 1950. 
12
13
14
The effect of UN airpower, primarily provided by the U.S., helped galvanize senior Chinese leaders, particularly Marshall Peng Dehuai [彭德怀], commander of Chinese forces during the Korean War, and Marshall He Long [贺 龙] to become advocates for extensive modernization of Chinese forces. At the end of the war, faced with shrinking budgets, the central leadership decided to significantly reduce the size of the PLA, which by that time had swelled to 5.5 million. Peng Dehuai emerged as a major advocate for reducing the proportion of regular infantry and focusing on air force, artillery, and armored forces. 
15
16
18
19
20
21
i
22
To staff these factories and their associated design institutes, two educational institutions that would train generations of designers were founded in 1952: Beijing Institute of Aeronautics (now Beihang [北航]) and Nanjing College of Aviation Industry (now Nanhang [南航]). An influx of returnees from abroad, particularly after negotiations with the U.S. to allow Chinese students to leave the U.S. in 1954, resulted in important scientists joining China's nascent aerospace industries. Foremost among them was Qian Xuesen [钱学森], the father of China's rocket and nuclear programs, and others such as Tu Shou'e [屠守锷], Ren Xinmin [任新民], and Wang Xiji [王希季] who would play vital roles in the rocket and space programs. 
23
24
25
26
27
In 1956, Qian wrote "Some Thoughts on Building China's National Defense Aerospace Industry" 
[建立中国 国防航空工业的意见]
29
The decision is called 《关于保卫祖国的战略方针和国防建设问题》 1960s Innovating in Spite of Chaos Much like the rest of the country, China's aerospace industry was hard hit by the ideological extremism and political chaos of the 1960s. The speed of the PLA's race to modernize and build a professional force was sapped by the purging of key leaders such as Peng Dehuai, the withdrawal of Soviet support in 1960, and through sustained political and economic chaos from the Great Leap Forward and political infighting. The Cultural Revolution "cost the PLAAF almost two decades of development and sharply diminished its political influence." 
30
31
Momentum from the 1950s also carried over in other areas. In 1964, China's leadership embarked on the Third Line [三线] strategy, which had the dual goals of improving the economies of China's interior while concurrently making its core industries, particularly defense-related ones, less vulnerable to Soviet or U.S. attack. 
32
33
The 1970s profoundly changed China and with it the direction of its aviation industry. While the cultural revolution still raged for much of the first half of the 1970s, China still saw important political and scientific milestones. On April 24, 1970, China launched its first satellite, the Dong Fang Hong 1 [东方红一号]. The following year, Henry Kissinger feigned illness during a visit to Pakistan to fly to China, laying the groundwork for the warming of relations and President Nixon's visit in 1972. However, political chaos did not recede until Mao's death in 1976, which opened the door to real political change. Throughout this time, China's strategic focus remained locked on the Soviet Union.
Fear of a Russian invasion from China's northeast kept the majority of Chinese forces focused on that threat. A National Intelligence Estimate, in 1978, for example, calculated that 44.8 percent of PLA troops (1,400,000 of  3,200,000) were concentrated in the four provinces of Northeastern China [东北], as well as 41 percent of its combat aircraft (1,400 of 3,900). 
34
During the latter half of the 1970s, having consolidated his power from Hua Guofeng, Mao's designated successor, Deng Xiaoping, began pushing modernization of China's institutions and especially the PLA. Perhaps the most important policy for the aerospace industry during this period was the decision to reprioritize conventional military capabilities, a reversal of decades where China focused on building a limited strategic arsenal of nuclear weapons and planned to rely on "People's War" [人民战争] to defend against invasion. 
35
36
37
38
40
k
41
Perhaps the most important development during this period was the March 1986 proposal to invest in strategically important technologies. Embraced by Deng Xiaoping, the "State High Technology Research and Development Plan" [国家高技术研究发展计划], commonly known as the 863 plan [863计划], targeted automation, energy, biotech, IT, lasers, space technology, and new materials. 
42
Accompanying these new programs was a major shift in the PLA's involvement in production. The PLA went into business, transitioning obsolete aircraft factories into producing cars, motorcycles, and light consumer goods. According to James Mulvenon's research, the PLA's profits grew by 700 percent between 1985-1990. This legacy remains in the form of numerous AVIC subsidiaries that still produce these goods today. 
43
The 1990s saw tremendous change to the aviation industry and the PLA. China was able to overcome major bottlenecks after the cutoff of defense cooperation with the West in the late 1980s, in part due to expanded cooperation with the Soviet Union. Rapprochement in the late 1980s opened the possibility of renewed purchases of military equipment. In 1990, Admiral Liu Huaqing [刘华清], a long-time weapons modernization advocate and CMC member, visited Moscow to negotiate the purchase of Su-27 long-range fighter jets. The jets were delivered in 1991 and were quickly copied to produce the J-11, thus beginning the ongoing and complicated stage of China-Russia arms sales characterized by mistrust despite continued sales.
Meanwhile, several international developments had a major impact on Chinese strategic thinking and aviation. French and U.S. agreements in 1992 to sell 60 Mirage 2000-5 fighters and 150 F-16 jets to Taiwan threatened to alter the cross-strait military balance. 
44
To modernize, China needed more effective and agile defense industries. A more market-oriented China began a new round of SOE restructuring. In 1993, the Ministry of Aerospace Industry was disbanded, and replaced with the Aviation Industries of China (AVIC), a super-SOE tasked with making the industry more competitive in a market economy. This move reflected Jiang Zemin's macroeconomic strategy which formally embraced a "hybrid" k China classifies these aircraft as 1st-and 2nd Generation fighter jets, using a different system than standard use in Western publications.
socialist economy. Accompanying this broader shift in attitudes came concern about the PLA's involvement in business. After watching the success of the United States' tech-enabled campaign against Iraq in 1991, in 1993 Jiang Zemin issued a new strategic guideline: "Local Wars Under Modern High-Tech Conditions." Modernization, however, is expensive and the PLA's commercial activity effectively doubled the PLA's defense budget at times. 
45
46
47
m
Charting a new path for the PLA In the early 2000s, the PLAAF's inventory of aircraft was still largely dominated by J-6 fighters, which were only marginally better than those used during the Korean War. Continuing sales of advanced fighter jets by the U.S. to Taiwan, meant that the PLA had only limited deterrent capability, which was supposed to be its core task. Rapid modernization to bring the PLA up to par with the United States was needed. In 2004, the PLA issued new strategic guidance [战略方针]
After just shy of a decade as separate companies, AVIC I and II were merged again into a single company in November 2008. AVIC announced a "Two Merges, Three News, Five Changes, and One Trillion" [两融 三新 五化 万亿] plan driving consolidation, integration of new technology, increasing competitiveness, market reforms, and the goal of raising revenue to a trillion RMB. 
49
In March 2008, COSTIND was renamed and downgraded to the State Administration for Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense (SASTIND), and was staffed solely by civilians. 
50
51
During the 2000s, China's growing national wealth began to have a marked impact on Chinese defense spending. Greater resources at the Chinese government's disposal, particularly after 2000 and the rapid expansion of its economy, allowed China to invest in weapons development programs.
The past eight years have seen some of the most important reforms in the PLA since the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976. Not only have the services been restructured, but the bureaucratic connections between the PLA and the defense industries have been changed in deeply important ways.
In the summer of 2015, China issued its latest Defense White Paper, titled "China's Military Strategy" [中国 的军事战略], clearly laying out a mission for the PLA with more prominent roles for the Navy and Air Force, and with special emphasis on cyber and space domains. 
52
Perhaps equally important is the elevation in status of the former Science and Technology Committee [科学技 术委员会] to the CMC Science and Technology Commission, independent of the EDD. This committee, detailed below, plays an important coordinating role between the CMC, scientific organizations, SASTIND, SOEs, and private industry.
The former Army Equipment Scientific Research and Procurement Department has also been transformed into the Scientific Research and Procurement Bureau under the EDD. This new organization dropped its Armyspecific role as the Army created a new PLA Army (PLAA) Headquarters with its own Staff, Political Work, Logistics, and Equipment Departments and gained, for the first time, its own Equipment department on par with the other services. The Army, Navy, and Air Force all appear to have Aviation Equipment Bureaus or equivalent offices under their Equipment Departments.
It is important to note that, despite these reforms, the organizations themselves remain dominated by the Army. As of this writing, only one senior member of the EDD is from another service. The EDD's Political Commissar, Lieutenant General An Zhaoqing [安兆庆], has spent most of his career with Air Force units. 
53
On January 22, 2013, at the second plenum of the Central Disciplinary Inspection Department Committee of the 18th Party Congress, newly-elected CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping announced a sweeping anti-corruption campaign targeting "tigers" (senior, powerful figures) and flies (lower-level officials) throughout the Chinese government and industry 
[老虎, 苍蝇一起打]
54
55
56
57
The aviation industry and defense companies more broadly appear to have largely escaped Xi Jinping's anticorruption campaign. In 2015, the Central Inspection Committee under Wang Qishan did carry out an inspection of AVIC, but their report largely gave the company a passing grade. AVIC leadership was reprimanded for laxity and wasteful spending on official receptions and for irregularities in procurement, but were not individually singled out. 
58
It is widely acknowledged that anti-corruption campaigns such as this, typically have political goals; in this case, consolidating the political position of Xi Jinping while improving his populist credentials. However, previous campaigns such as Jiang Zemin's in the late 1990s resulted in major changes to China's defense industries in an attempt to reduce corruption and improve their effectiveness. An article that appeared in the Party's Red Banner journal argued that State-Owned Enterprises' future competitiveness and success was in part predicated on their ability to fight corruption. 
59
Chinese aerospace firms access to private capital since the 1990s has had a significant impact on their ability to acquire or develop new technologies and improve manufacturing capabilities. AVIC senior leaders have repeatedly discussed how public offerings of their companies' subsidiaries has allowed them greater funds to invest in R&D and acquire new technology through cooperative agreements with foreign firms. 
60
61
Two recent forces deserve special attention: Centralization [集权化] and Marketization [市场化]. Many Chinese analysts comment on the problems arising from the aviation industry's, and defense industries in general, lack of centralization. In some ways, this dates back to the Third Line [三线] strategy of the 1960s which moved strategically important Chinese industries to central and southern hinterlands, away from the line of a likely Soviet advance. While this made China's military industries more survivable during a nuclear war or invasion, it had the effect of scattering resources and expertise. The trend since the 1970s has been slow and often painful consolidation, a pattern that has accelerated since 2008 with the reintegration of AVIC I and II, and the 2016 creation of Aero China's Aviation Industry: Lumbering Forward Engine Corporation of China (AECC). This consolidation pulled nearly all of China's engine-building expertise into a single company. Chinese analysts hope that initiative will streamline research and make better use of available resources. Centralization, particularly the shift from State Owned Enterprises [国有企业] to Wholly-State Owned Enterprises [国有独资公司], is aligned with Xi Jinping's political goals of consolidating political power and giving the central government greater direct authority over massive state-run companies. Centralization also allows the CCP to exercise more effective control over finances and resources and harmonize priorities.
The countering force, marketization, represents the forces pushing large aviation SOEs toward greater engagement with private industry. Chinese defense analysts argue that greater access to private capital would represent an important step and provide the defense industry with needed funds outside of government contracts. Lin Zuoming's replacement as AVIC CEO appears to have been motivated, in part, due to his highly public support for marketization and resistance toward greater government involvement in the defense industry.
Making the Leap to Innovation "..Our independent innovation ability, especially in the area of original creativity, is not strong. We still have to depend on others for core technology in key fields. Only by holding key technology in our own hands can we really take the initiative in competition and development, and ensure our economic security, national security and security in other areas. We cannot always decorate our tomorrows with others' yesterdays. We cannot always rely on others' scientific and technological achievements for our own progress. Moreover, we cannot always trail behind others. We have no choice but to innovate independently." -Xi Jinping 62 Xi Jinping has made becoming a technological and scientific superpower a priority. In particular, he has focused on making China an innovative country. This is not merely lofty rhetoric. China has identified technological innovation as a major priority and is making an all-out push for parity with western nations' R&D capabilities by 2050.
According to Li Keqiang's Work Report at the 13th National People's Congress, the contribution of technological advances to economic growth has risen from 52.2 to 57.5 percent. 
63
64
65
66
We should aim for the frontiers of science and technology, strengthen basic research, and make major breakthroughs in pioneering basic research and groundbreaking and original innovations. We will strengthen basic research in applied sciences, launch major national science and technology projects, and prioritize innovation in key generic technologies, cutting-edge frontier technologies, modern engineering technologies, and disruptive technologies. 
67
68
69
71
Since the 1950s, China's aviation industry has encountered bottlenecks that have limited growth or proven to be difficult scientific or manufacturing problems. In other areas, development of capabilities that the Chinese military needs for deterrence, mobility, or operations have proven harder than expected to overcome. Broadly speaking, these break down into two major areas: Institutional bottlenecks, where the underlying structure of the R&D organization or procurement system is at fault; and technological bottlenecks, where a manufacturing technique or platform has proven difficult to perfect, build, or purchase from abroad.
Importantly, China, and particularly the PLAAF, sees its personnel lacking in technological capability. Technicians are unfamiliar with proper operation of new equipment, and pilots, trained on older-generation aircraft struggle to adapt to the modern, data-driven cockpits. 
72
The Chinese aviation industry suffers from a lack of coordination and cooperation in research programs. Military-civilian fusion is frequently suggested as a partial solution involving co-development by both civilian and military companies to achieve faster development. The same argument can be made for development within the PLA itself.
There is currently no evidence that PLA Naval Aviation and PLAAF systems are acquired through a coordinated process. Although the PLAN Aviation and PLAAF, and to a lesser extent, PLA Army, operate numerous common aircraft types, their procurement systems are separate, resulting in redundancy and waste.
Given the PLA's broader aspirations for building a joint force, commonality of systems should make coordination of operations and logistics support much easier. While there will always be differences in requirements due to different operating environments, shared development would save significant time and effort. The reorganized Equipment Development Department and the subordinate changes it forced, namely, greater power for servicelevel equipment departments [军种装备部], may help resolve this problem.
Despite gaining a massive leg-up from Russian technicians during the early years of China's aviation industry, strong official support for basic research programs, and strategic partnerships with other countries, China continues to face a number of important technological bottlenecks.
Writing in New Economy Weekly in 2017, Jiang Jiang [姜疆], an experienced civil-aviation executive wrote that "Even until today, all of Chinese civil-aviation aircraft engines rely on imports. Military engines primarily follow the model of "imitation + imports," with the number of independently developed models relatively low." According to Jiang, despite significant progress, China's domestically-produced engines still lag 30 years behind U.S.-produced engines. In this he presents a significantly more negative view than international experts who typically estimate that China needs roughly 5-10 years to catch up. 
73
74
75
Chinese helicopters have seen a similar mix of importation, duplication, and incremental innovation. China's larger transport helicopter, the Z-8, for example, relies on three Canadian PT6B-67A turboshaft engines built by Pratt and Whitney. China has been successful in producing less powerful engines. The helicopter industry passed an important milestone in November 1992 when the WZ-8A [涡轴8A], a development of a licensed-produced French engine, successfully passed certification. 
76
China's reliance on foreign-built engines and designs continues to be a major issue. The inability to innovate around this issue and produce a high-performance engine has severely limited the capabilities of several types of aircraft, or ensured that for the time being, Russian and other countries' engines form a vulnerable supply line.
Maintenance contracts emerging from offset agreements are also important. China has become a hub for maintenance of various airlines including the entire United Airlines B-777 fleet. This leads to one of the most important areas of focus for the Chinese Aerospace Industry, the ability of China to independently design and manufacture its own engines and parts independently of technical support from western firms.
China's knowledge and capabilities in developing aircraft engines is largely based on western technology through partnerships or technology transfer agreements with western manufacturers, or through the direct acquisition of foreign assets. Analysis of China's WS-10 [涡扇-10] Turbofan engine (meant to reduce China's reliance on imports of Russian engines like the AL-31F) reveals that even its domestically-produced engines are in fact copies of foreign imports.
In 1974 GE and Safran created a joint venture called CFM International (CFMI). CFMI used GE's F101 engine, used to power the USAF B-1 Lancer, to design the CFM56, which would go on to power McDonnell Douglas, Boeing, Airbus, and the KC aerial refueling aircraft. 
77
78
79
80
81
The J-20 is China's first fifth-generation fighter (by its counting) and it exhibits some of the recent breakthroughs by China to develop its own engines. This advancement allowed China the independence to move away from reliance on foreign models and blueprints, although it is largely speculated that the designs for the J-31 are based on stolen blueprints for the U.S. F-35.
Direct acquisition of technologies and processes has also proven to be a successful model. The German aerospace industry has contributed to Chinese engine development through the Chinese acquisition of Thielert Aircraft Engines which enabled China to acquire a fully operational manufacturing facility. The German aerospace parts suppliers to Airbus, Cotesa, was also recently acquired by China's Advanced Technology & Materials (AT&M) following a review by Germany's Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy. 
82
83
A core goal of the defense aviation industry is to address the strategic and tactical needs of China's military. Examining a few areas where a need has driven investment, research, and production provide important insights regarding the industries' capabilities. Three areas stand out as aviation capabilities that China needs: Aerial refueling [空中加油], Airborne Early-warning [空中预瞀], and aerial Anti-Submarine Warfare.
A characteristic of Chinese aircraft acquisition has been a push for longer-range aircraft capable of patrolling China's long, complicated borders, and enforcing claims over vast distances, as in the South China Sea. In the early 1980s, in response to continuing tensions with Vietnam and the first island-building operations by Malaysia in the South China Sea, China sent bombers on flights to the southernmost parts of its claims. Due to their short range, Chinese fighter-jets, however, were only able to accompany the bombers part way. In 1986, China signed a MoU with a British company to acquire a hose-and-drogue refueling system. Later military clashes in 1988 further pushed Chinese leadership to begin developing a solution to the tyranny of distance. 
84
85
The continued emphasis on "far seas training" [远海训练], which requires aerial refueling for some aircraft, is placing increasing demands on China's small aerial-refueling fleet. 
86
87
Due to problems with Russian production, the Chinese military has few heavy IL-78 tankers. As such, both the PLAN and PLAAF are largely reliant on tankers based on the antiquated Tu-16-derived H-6, which has limited fuel capacity. The PLAAF has received modernized versions of this airframe, sometimes designated the HY-6 (轰油-6), while the PLAN currently uses a tanker based on the older "D" variant.
In addition to upgrading the H-6U, there are other indications that China is making greater progress in overcoming its aerial refueling bottleneck. Chinese carrier-borne J-15s have been observed "buddy tanking," using a Russian hose and drogue system to transfer fuel from one jet to another, an important part of modern carrier operations. Presumably a larger, carrier-capable tanker will need to be developed to make Chinese carrier aviation truly "blue-water" viable. 
88
89
As new aircraft are rolled out, aerial refueling probes have become a standard feature. The newer "B" variant of the JH-7 fighter-bomber for example, includes this capability. 
90
91
Y-8Q 91 deploying to bases in the Southern Theater Command as part of the 9th Naval Division. China's only other fixed-wing ASW aircraft, the SH-5 [水轰-5], is an obsolete sea-plane design. The Y-8Q now appears to be in low-rate initial production, though analysts note that the Y-8Q has limitations as a platform due to its slow speed and limited range. 
92
93
Despite continuing bottlenecks, there are a number of notable areas where the aerospace industry has made technological and organizational breakthroughs that are streamlining and improving the aviation industry's research, development, and procurement processes.
A recent area of major investment for Chinese defense industries is online platforms to help researchers communicate, and help companies to better streamline their research, design and procurement systems.
Particularly since the early 2000s, Chinese defense development and acquisition has emphasized dual-use [双用/ 两用] and both "spin-on" [民转军] and "spin-off " [军转民] technologies, i.e. finding ways to use existing civilian products and platforms for military purposes, and adapting technologies from the civilian R&D world for military use. 
n
94
95
96
97
n
The terms used here are "transforming the military into the civilian" [军转民] and "transforming the civilian into the military" [民转军].
There is recognition that lack of competitive bidding processes and stove-piped procurement is inefficient and hurts the military. 
98
99
100
101
Another recent area of emphasis is the creation of electronic procurement platforms [采购平台]. In late 2017, China North Industries Group Corporation (Norinco) [北方工业], a major producer of armaments for the PLA, launched an electronic bidding platform, introducing greater competitiveness and helping it bring in bids from the private sector. The platform logged more than 2.5 billion RMB in transactions for over 1,000 contracts in its first year. 
102
103
104
105
106
Chinese aerospace firms' widespread adoption of Computer-Assisted Design (CAD), Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), Computer Numerical Control (CNC), and Additive Manufacturing processes (including 3D Printing/Laser Sintering) represent an area of major breakthroughs for the aerospace industry.
Foreign firms have contributed to the Chinese aerospace industry through the transfer of specific processes, such as CAD or Computer-Assisted Design, and design-making capabilities. This has bolstered Chinese domestic production of aerospace components. For China greater use of CAD has been a major breakthrough. The J-10 multi-role fighter-jet, which was conceived in the mid-1980s and had its design finalized in 2004, was able to complete its design phase in the 1990s due to CAD, despite Chengdu Aircraft only having a limited number of computers with the software. 107 Certain foreign-manufactured technologies and industry secrets are not shared and this would include the design of turbines and fans for example, not to mention the production of jet engines. Other technologies or other types of products that are easier to design and develop are being produced in China with precision and success and this contributes to an improvement in quality and the ability of China to compete against global competitors. 108
Several large U.S. and European firms have transferred software for aircraft design to China. Chief among them is Honeywell Technology Solutions Lab-China (HTSL-China), which provides software and engineering support and "avionics development support" to Chinese customers. 
109
110
111
Another important way in which computer modeling is being used in aircraft design is Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), which allows the flow of air around an aircraft to be mathematically modeled before a prototype is even built. 
112
113
114
115
Advanced computer numerical control machine tools, or CNCs, have boosted China's key manufacturing sectors and added over 70.6 billion RMB ($10.3 billion) to industrial output over the past eight years according to the Chinese government. 
116
117
118
China uses Additive Manufacturing (AM) to produce parts for the J-15, J-16, J-20, and J-31 fighter aircraft. On the commercial side, AM is used in the production of the Y-20 transport and the C919 commercial airliner. 
119
Titanium laser additive manufacturing (LAM) in the Chinese aerospace industry began in 1995 and an important area of research focus. 
120
121
China claims to have manufactured the largest ever titanium component using LAM, which would be significant for U.S. companies, for example, especially the use of AM to produce parts for the F-35 program. However, the production of customized components for the aviation industry using AM is generally on a smaller scale, not as a means to mass produce components.
The most significant application of AM in the aerospace industry in China involves the design and production of the C919. Multiple component parts such as the windshield frame and certain parts of the wing structure, (e.g. the central wing rib), were produced for the C919 at a fraction of the cost and with significant time and materials savings compared with the normal process of forging metals. It is reported that other aircraft designs including the J-15, J-16, and the Y-20 are also using additive manufacturing processes. 
122
123
124
125
Accompanying the broader trends in the Chinese economy, private companies are increasingly entering the defense industry alongside state-owned enterprises. In 2010, the State Council released Several Opinions of the State Council on Encouraging and Guiding the Healthy Development of Private Investment [国务院关于鼓励 和引导民间投资健康发展的若干意见], explicitly encouraging greater private investment in the defense sector. 
126
Wang Ning [王宁], who was affiliated with the Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences [中国社会科学院研究生院], has noted that despite China's shift from a planned economy to market economy, there has been "essentially no change" in the way that funds are distributed to the defense industry. 
127
Major Programs
The research contributing to China's S&T progress, including aviation, can be broken out into three core areas. State plans and programs have been set up to promote research in each of these areas.
Almost immediately after the first official decision to build an aerospace industry, Chinese leaders laid the foundations for aerospacefocused universities. Beihang, Nanhang, and Northwest Polytechnical Universities (profiled below) became the source of most major design and engineering talent. Paired with an emphasis on education, these institutions have been a high-level recognition of the necessity of investment in basic research.
In 1986, a group of scientists approached Deng Xiaoping with a proposal for expanding basic scientific research in strategic areas. The 863 Program, named for the date when it was proposed, has formed a cornerstone of scientific and technological development in China ever since. 
128
129
130
131
The aviation industry has also benefited from government programs meant to draw on expertise abroad. In December 2008, the Chinese central government introduced the "Thousand Talents" [lit. thousand people plan; 千人计划]. 132 The program helps provide visas and stipends for people who are recognized experts in their fields and whose knowledge can help Chinese S&T research. The Large Passenger Aircraft Engine Project, for example, has already attracted 73 foreign experts to work at the AVIC Commercial Aviation Engine Research Center. 
133
Overview Despite continuing reliance on critical foreign components, Chinese aerospace companies have successfully produced a series of increasingly advanced and capable fighters, transports, missiles, and drones for domestic use and export.
As with the aerospace industry itself, fixed-wing aircraft development in China owes a major debt to the Soviet Union, both in directly transferred plans and in aircraft designs derived from ones given to China. For more than twenty years the MiG-15, transferred to China in massive numbers during and after the Korean War dominated the PLAAF's inventory. Later more advanced designs including the MiG-19, for example, were produced in China as the J-6 and remained in service as a manned aircraft through 2011. o In the second half of the 1960s, China acquired plans for the supersonic MiG-21 from the Soviet Union. Given only partial blueprints, Chinese aerospace engineers were forced to begin working on an indigenous version, the J-7. The new, and by some metrics, improved, fighter represented China's entrance to Second Generation Aircraft.
The late 1990s saw China make the leap from indigenous production of Second-Generation Aircraft to Third-Generation with its introduction of the J-10. p For China, Third Generation aircraft design and production represented a major advancement due to the significant differences in performance, testing, and even hydraulics needed compared to 2nd Generation aircraft. As a result, the J-10 directly benefited from digital design, modeling, and testing technologies that would help lay the foundations for future aircraft.
After the J-10, CAC's most prominent aircraft is the J-20 stealth fighter.
Born in Beijing in May 1963, Yang graduated from Northwestern Polytechnical University in Xi'an in 1982 with a degree in Aerodynamics. He later received a master's degree in Flight Dynamics, also from NPU. In 1985, he joined the Chengdu Aircraft Design and Research Institute. At a time when most of China's military aircraft were obsolescent 2nd-generation, (e.g. J-6.). Yang was part of a major effort to create a new generation of advanced digitally controlled, (fly-by-wire), aircraft. 
134
135
4th generation J-20 stealth fighter. Yang Wei was a key part of the J-10 and J-10S development teams, giving him the experience to work on the J-20. 
136
137
138
139
China is well suited for helicopters. Its mountainous terrain and complex urban environments mean that from Xinjiang to Shanghai, rotary wing aircraft's flexibility is an important strategic and tactical capability for China's military. In 2008, the search and rescue effort after the Wenchuan [汶川], earthquake in the southwestern province of Sichuan highlighted the importance of helicopters in navigating China's complex terrain. Altogether 69 military helicopters and 30 civilian helicopters played an enormous role in responding to the deadliest earthquake in modern Chinese history. 
140
Since the 1970s, and particularly since 1986, armed helicopters provided not only tactical movement and resupply, but also specialized attack roles against ground, sea, and underwater targets. Increasingly capable helicopters are now able to operate at high altitudes where China fights and perform SAR missions on remote islands in the south China Sea. Continuing innovations from China's aviation industry, though in many cases informed by stolen or purchased technology, have made this once backward sector of the industry into one of its most dynamic. 
141
142
143
145
China's helicopter force appears to have had three major drivers: tactical mobility for soldiers, direct-attack capability, and shipborne requirements.
The biggest customer for helicopters in the Chinese military is, by far the PLA Ground Forces (Army). In 2018, 85 percent of Chinese military helicopters in China's inventory were used by PLA Ground Force units. 
146
China's desire for airborne ground attack and specifically anti-tank capability has had two major drivers. First, during the Cold War, China faced the threat of invasion by the Soviet Union led by armored divisions it had no real ability to combat. Chinese anti-tank weapons at the time were incapable of penetrating the armor of most Soviet tanks. q Second, as with many other areas, Chinese observations of U.S. military performance during the first Gulf War had a major impact. The effectiveness of Apache and Cobra helicopters against Soviet-built Iraqi tanks further brought home the importance of an airborne anti-tank and close-air support helicopter. 
147
Army Aviation Attack helicopters under the Eastern Theater Command frequently practice flying low-altitude missions over water. Images of these missions show them carrying large fuel tanks and stopping and refueling on small islands off China's coast, suggesting that they will have a role in operations against Taiwan or the small islands it controls near the mainland coast. 148 As China's navy has expanded, so too have the roles and importance of its ship-borne aviation.
The Z-9C is the workhorse of Chinese naval aviation. But it wasn't until the 2010s that China began to fully explore the utility of these helicopters, their first pilot to land on a ship deck at night only did so in 2012. However, they have played an important role in logistical resupply, ASW, and emergency transport since then. With the expansion of the Chinese navy's mission to become a global force, these responsibilities have only further expanded.
The Army Aviation branch has also experimented with landing other helicopters, such as the Z-10 attack helicopter, on ships. 
149
150
151
Over the last decade, the domestic civilian market for helicopters has grown significantly. According to reporting by Chinese Aviation News journalists, the number of privately registered helicopters has now reached 1,017, a year-on-year increase of 23.3 percent. 
152
153
q
According to a declassified National Intelligence Estimate written at the time, "Beijing considers the fielding of newer antiarmor weapons an extremely high priority because it faces over 29,000 Soviet tanks and armored personnel carriers in the Far East." CREST "China Opening Doors," p. 10
China Aerospace Studies Institute
The career of one of China's most prominent helicopter designers sheds some useful light on the progress of China's development in this area. Born in Shaowu [邵武市] in Fujian province in 1964, Wu was obsessed with helicopters since childhood. Wu attended the Nanjing College of Aviation Industry, now Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics. After graduating, Wu began work as a designer at the AVIC Helicopter Institute Laboratory [中航工业直升机所总体 研究室] in Jingdezhen, Jiangxi province. 
155
In 2001, at the age of 37, Wu became China's youngest-ever chief helicopter designer. He has a reputation for commitment to his work, even riding along during early live-fire tests of the Z-10 attack helicopter to reassure the pilots that the helicopter is safe. 
156
157
China's Aviation Industry: Lumbering Forward Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
Chinese drones are quickly becoming one of its prominent parts of its aviation industry. 159 Despite a relatively slow beginning, with mostly university-led military projects copying Soviet drones or rigging traditional aircraft with remote controls, since the 1980s China has created an ecosystem of commercial, industrial, and military drones. China's domination of electronics and light manufacturing have helped make UAVs a top export item for China since consumer electronics made commercial drones cheap enough for widespread use. For the Chinese military, every combatant arm of the PLA employs drones for tactical reconnaissance, strike, and communications roles.
China's first drone, the CK-1 [长空一号] was a target drone copied from the Soviet-supplied La-17. China also experimented with unmanned An-2 biplanes and Il-28 bombers. 160 Perhaps in contrast to available evidence for traditional aviation, unmanned aviation has experienced massive growth in the civilian [民用] sector. Driven by a combination of hobbyist interest, commercial use, and military demand, the market for UAVs is expected to rise to 75 billion RMB ($10.6 billion USD) in 2025. 
164
165
166
167
In addition to traditional military roles such as reconnaissance, strike, and communications, several emerging trends in UAV research are worth highlighting. The PLA is betting heavily on intelligent, unmanned systems. A 2005 RAND report offered the following definition: "Swarming occurs when several units conduct a convergent attack on a target from multiple axes." 
170
171
172
175
176
177
178
CASC 11th Research Institute Director, Chief Designer of the CH-TI 
179
In this role he has significant oversight of the Caihong [彩虹] series of drones. According to Li, the program has faced some severe challenges in quality control, requiring added measures to address the problem. 
180
181
182
These organizations exist throughout the Party, State, and Military structure, and assist leaders in developing and implementing policy. In many cases they act as an important forum to allow leaders to interact with experts on specific topics and learn information to enhance their decision making. 
184
As mentioned earlier, Chinese national plans [计划] play an important role in setting research priorities for laboratories and corporations. These 
Within the PLA, the most important organization for China's defense aviation is the EDD, which is responsible for planning, research, development, testing and procurement for the entire military. The transformation of the General Armament Department (GAD) into the CMC Equipment Development Department will have wideranging consequences. As noted earlier, however, during the 19th Party Congress in October 2017, the EDD was downgraded from CMC member grade to Theater Command leader grade and the director was removed from the CMC. As a result, the EDD does not have as much clout as it did before the Party Congress.
The General Armament Department, had primary responsibility within the PLA for developing weapons, conducting testing, and developing relevant regulations. 187 However, it was primarily focused on developing equipment for the Army. The GAD was responsible for Ground Force RD&A and administered China's space program but did not have direct control over the Air Force, Navy, or Second Artillery's equipment development. 
188
While some responsibilities for space launch, testing and telemetry, and control appear to have been transferred to the Strategic Support Force, the Manned Space Engineering office [载人航天工程办公室] and the official leadership (the commander-in-chief [总指挥] position) remain with the EDD, meaning that ultimate control and direction of China's space program remains under the PLA in the CMC EDD. As of early 2019, Zhang Youxia [张又侠] is the commander-in-chief of the Manned Space Program Office [载人航天工程总指挥].
The CMC S&T Commission, formerly under the GAD, is an independent, Theater Command deputy-leader grade organization under the CMC, established on 11 January, 2016. 189 China's Ministry of Defense website describes the body as "aimed [at] strengthening the strategic management of national defense science and technology, promoting independent innovation in that area, and pushing for the integrated development of military and science technology." 190 Its leader is Liu Guozhi [刘国治], a Lieutenant General who is an expert in high-power microwaves [高功率微波] who previously served as deputy director of the GAD. 
191
192
193
194
196
As the leading State Council organization in charge of drafting S&T Plans, this organization oversees the implementation of the National Basic Research Program [国家基础研究专项规划] and National High-Tech R&D Program.
This latter role involves coordination among national laboratories, universities, and other parts of the national research system, and the supervision of R&D budgets. MOST also issues the National S&T Awards [国家科学技 术奖励]. Wang Zhigang [王志刚] serves as Party Secretary and Minister of MOST. Many of MOST's investments, such as funding for research into meta-materials, a key component of next-generation stealth technology, will be crucial for the aviation industry. 
197
Established in 2008, MIIT is in charge of administering and planning China's traditional and IT industries. It also plays an important part in information security. The Party Secretary and Minister of MIIT is Miao Wei [苗 圩], he is a former engineer with a background in the automotive industry. 
198
China's Aviation Industry: Lumbering Forward
China, more than most countries, has had a blurry distinction between civilian and military roles in its economy. An important part of the PLA's DNA has always been its mission as a "productive force" in society. 
216
In 1978, Deng Xiaoping first put forward what would later become the basis of Military-Civil Fusion (MCF): "Combine the Military and Civilian Sectors" [军民结合]. 
217
218
The emphasis remained on pushing military industries expertise into the civilian economy, with the reasoning that to be strong, militarily or otherwise, China must first be strong economically. As China's economic power grew, the military could increasingly learn more from or adapt from the civilian world, reversing the emphasis of the 1970s and 80s. The government ensured that as China's economy grew the military had access to and benefited from that growth.
In 2007, Hu Jintao's Party Work Report at the 17th Party Congress included language about MCF for the first time:
We will adjust and reform the systems of defense-related science, technology and industry and of weapons and equipment procurement, and enhance our capacity for independent innovation in R&D of weapons and equipment with better quality and cost-effectiveness. We will establish sound systems of weapons and equipment research and manufacturing, military personnel training and logistics that integrate military with civilian purposes and Fundamentally, the goals of Military-Civil Fusion can be described as improved capacity, capabilities, and cost.
Arthur Herman noted in his study of U.S. war materiel production during WWII that the key to U.S. success was not a ramping up of capacity during the war but putting the necessary levers in place to bring this capacity into play once the war started. A crucial period of deliberate industrial growth occurred between mid-1940 through the end of 1941, i.e. before Pearl Harbor and prior to U.S. entrance into the war. 
225
227
228
229
230
The ability to draw on civilian assets during an emergency or wartime can dramatically improve the PLA's warfighting capabilities. Although the PLA controls Chinese airspace, military-civil coordination offices are being set up at airports to streamline communication during peacetime. In the event of war, these offices will give the PLA access to a much wider range of runways, making the PLAAF much more flexible.
Civilian transport companies are also being tapped to assist the PLA with movement. In June 2018, a reserve Anti-Aircraft Artillery (AAA) Division in Shaan'xi held an exercise with West Dragon [西部飞龙通用 航空有限公司], a helicopter transport company. In 2012 the company signed a strategic cooperation agreement with the PLAAF. 231
Another goal is to use MCF to cut costs by sharing resources and reducing redundant research. AVIC, for example, signed agreements with Dongfeng Motor Company [风汽车公司] to make use of high-end equipment, technologies, or services for both the civilian and military markets, including lithium-ion batteries and smart equipment. 
232
233
234
235
While it is hard to generalize across the full range of Chinese aviation platforms, there appears to be a regular set of stages that almost all aircraft go through.
Section 5: The Research, Development, and Acquisition (RDA) Process
The initial stages of aircraft R&D in China appear to have two major origins. First, senior officials assess China's national, strategic, operational, and tactical requirements [需求] and task a research institute with carrying out initial R&D to determine whether a suitable platform can be developed. In the second case, R&D institutes, carrying out their own independent research, hit upon a design idea and present it to their superiors. Related to the latter process, some aircraft are designed purely for foreign markets, or with both domestic and foreign customers in mind. An example of these priorities can be seen in the Large Aircraft program [大型飞机项目].
The authors of Military Equipment Theory and Reform Implementation note that a persistent problem is that there are too many people in charge [多头], and that the industry is dispersed [分散] and segmented [分段]. 
236
The Party, through the Central Special Committee [中央专委/ 中央专门委员会], exerts control over the R&D process, consulting with top scientists and making final decisions on what to approve. 
237
After the general design parameters have been decided upon, designers and engineers develop aircraft design concepts [设计 理念]. A feasibility study [可行性报告] determines if further research is worthwhile. If so, the State Council and CMC will approve the project, research funds are allocated, and the project is officially registered u [立项]. This process is not always efficient. Chinese commentators have cited the lack of pre-research [预先 研究] to determine feasibility before proceeding to the modeling phase as a continuing problem that wastes resources. 
242
Digital modeling begins 
China Aerospace Studies Institute an issue and more resources are being allocated to this type of research. 
243
A vital stage is the flight testing carried out by both military pilots and aircraft companies' own flight test units. 
244
245
The Air Force maintains two Test and Training units: The Dingxin base is the regular venue for several important PLAAF events: China's Golden Helmet fighter pilot competition; Golden Dart, its strike aircraft and bomber competition; Blueshield/Golden Shield, focused on air defense and suppression of enemy air defense missions; and Red Sword, focused on dealing with realistic confrontation scenarios. 246
[中国空军试飞团] Location: Cangzhou, Hebei Province [沧州市, 
河北省]
247
The Test Center is China's primary scientific test unit for aircraft, aeroengines, helicopters, and other equipment. It also conducts testing of civil-aviation aircraft, for the CAAC. A key area where its research has made significant contributions is in engine testing and design. 248
Established in 1960, CAE is the Chinese government-authorized organization for international cooperation and engagement in international aerospace cooperation. 249 CAE acts like an umbrella organization for Chinese Aerospace research centers, institutes and facilities. It also serves an educational role, teaching graduate students in the field of aviation. In 2014 CAE held China's first Computational Fluid Dynamics/Wind Tunnel Testing International Research Forum in Beijing, bringing together scholars from Germany, the Netherlands, Russia and four other countries. 250
The AVIC Development and Research Center plays an important role in advising AVIC and SASTIND on trends in aviation, science, and technology. The research center uses advanced information technology, including simulation technologies, to test technologies and tactics. 251 As China's sole research institute devoted to comprehensive study of aviation technology and industrial development, it is a core part of China's Military-Civil Fusion plan under MIIT.
In 2014, Li Bo [厉博] and Zhang Yang [张洋], who both are affiliated with AVIC's Development and Research Center [中国航空工业发展研究中心] wrote that "currently China's aviation research and development capability are dispersed and technologies severed, making scientific and technological innovation difficult." 252 According to Li and Zhang, each "link" in Chinese S&T, such as scientific disciplines, programs, laboratories, and research area, all stand by themselves. They noted that despite there being more than ten Chinese carbon fiber companies with more than ten independent companies, none have mastered the core technology [核心技术] or made their own breakthroughs, and thus remain reliant on imports. 
253
254
Data from the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute's Military Expenditures Database estimates Chinese military spending in 2017 at $228 billion USD, more than double the level in 2008. 
255
A consistent complaint among analysts of China's military industrial complex [军工] is the inefficiencies involved in the funding mechanisms. Government Expenditures [国家财政支 出] remain the largest, and growing, source of funds. 
256
The Military Representative Offices (MRO) [军代表室] with members of relevant services, for example, AVIC enterprises producing fixed wing aircraft will have Air Force and Navy representatives, while those producing attack helicopters will have representatives from the Army. These offices are administered by municipality and province-level bureaus [局]. MROs are themselves subordinate to their services' respective equipment department 
[装备部]. v
257
258
259
Susan M. Puska, Joe McReynolds, and Debra Geary have noted that these representatives "often remain indefinitely within their narrow system, transferring from one job to another without ever being assigned to an operational unit." 
260
261
Available information appears to indicate that it will largely serve as a replacement for China's inventory of obsolete air superiority fighters, supplementing smaller numbers of longer-range aircraft being produced that would be used in strike roles.
Although the design was finalized more than a decade ago, the J-10 offers some useful insight into the RDA process, in part because the process has been explained in greater detail than other Chinese aircraft.
The J-10 is a good example of how requirements have changed in response to shifts in China's strategic environment. For example, in 1978 all work on the J-9, a prototype next-generation fighter jet, ceased work after 14 years of development due to a recognition that a clean-sheet design was needed to better respond to other nations' capabilities. 
264
In the mid-80s China's leadership realized that the capabilities of its inventory of fighters, of which the MiG-21 and J-8 were the most advanced, was falling behind other countries. The U.S. and China laid the groundwork to upgrade the J-8II through improved avionics and advanced air-to-air missiles. However, an indigenous design was also needed to reduce Chinese reliance on foreign imports and expertise.
Song Wencong [宋文骢], who had been involved in the J-9 effort, which also used a canard-layout, proposed a new, more capable multi-role 3rd-generation fighter to a group of senior Party and State Council Officials. In January 1986 the CMC, state council, and presumably, leading Party organizations, gave approval for the establishment of the project , and assigned it the code name "Project No. 10". 
265
266
267
268
269
270 In 1998, Chinese Deputy Chairman and CMC member Liu Huaqing [刘华清]
271
272
Since I first got into an aircraft to learn how to fly, no matter which kind of aircraft, at the very least I could understand 70 or 60 percent of what everything was, such as this is the altimeter, airspeed gauge, I could figure this is speed this is altitude, this is my speed, this is my aircraft attitude...when I got into the J-10's cockpit, I basically didn't recognize anything because there were no dials. 
273
274
275
276
Radars and the Diverterless Supersonic Inlets (DSI) developed for J-10 were then integrated into the J-20. 277 Similarly, a J-10C has served as a testbed for the WS-10 "E'mei" [峨眉] engines with Thrust Vector Control (TVC) [推力矢量控制] technology, something it hopes to integrate into the J-20 and future platforms. Follow-on variants such as the J-10D are planned using a more powerful domestically produced WS-10B engine and TVC. 
278
279
While this might seem slow for the development of a single-engine fighter, China faced a number of notable hurdles to move from 2nd Generation to 3rd Generation fighters. In doing so, it set the stage for the much more rapid RD&A of newer aircraft. Though many aircraft exhibit strong evidence of copying/imitation [仿 制], or integrate innovations appropriated from abroad, the learning process from the J-10 certainly marks the beginning of a new era in China's aviation development. Most importantly for China, the J-10 is a domestically produced fighter aircraft can reliably replace the roughly 20 percent of its fighter inventory that are less-capable 2nd Generation fighters.
Strategic airlift is key to countries that need to rapidly move a large amount of materiel long distances.
Mission: Strategic transport aircraft. Variants developed for aerial refueling.
Background: China has entered the large strategic airlift market which has been dominated by the U.S., Russia, and U.K., with the Xi'an Aircraft Industrial Corporation (XAC) Y-20 [运-20] or "Kunpeng" [鲲鹏]. The Y-20 is one of China's three "big plane projects," the other two being the C-919 airliner and the AG600 amphibious aircraft. 
281
282
283
284
285
286
287
288
• Help create a large publicly traded civilian plane company • Pursue Boeing as their standard • Build safe, reliable aircraft that conforms to standards throughout its lifetime. 
289 290
291
292
w
293
294
295
296
Mission: Medium transport/utility helicopter with potentially search and rescue, ASW and attack roles. Background: Until the late 1970s, China was reliant on outdated Soviet helicopter designs it purchased in the 1950s and 1970s. During the 1980s China made a concerted effort to acquire new helicopter technology to replace its Z-5 helicopter, a variant of the Soviet-designed Mi-4 Hound. In July 1980, China signed a deal with France to license the Dauphin helicopter, now produced as the Z-9 and the mainstay of China's light helicopter force. This partnership allowed the introduction of greatly improved designs but China still lacked important capabilities in medium-lift helicopters.
In 1984, China purchased 24 Sikorsky S-70Cs, a civilian version of the Blackhawk helicopter, from the United States for $165 million. 
298
299 300
301
302
Despite speculation in the PLA Daily the Z-20 would be publicly unveiled at the 2018 Zhuhai Air Show in November, the new helicopter has yet to be officially unveiled. 
303
A paper in the journal of the Academy of Military Transportation on Russia's investments in strategic power projection capability and the lessons for China noted that China's insufficient numbers of heavy lift transport helicopters severely restricted the military's response during the Wenchuan earthquake in 2008. 
304
Its association with CASC suggests that the CH-T1 may be armed with CASC's existing C-6/7/800 or YJ missile series. Based on its flight range limitations and China's strategic interests, the CH-T1 will most likely be deployed along China's coast and on the artificial islands in the South China Sea.
China has extensive research partnerships and joint ventures with almost a dozen countries. For the purposes of this report we chose to include Russia, due to the Soviet Union's pivotal role in creating China's aviation industry and Russia's robust export relationship with China.
France is also representative of current international agreements as a western nation that has shown willingness to partner extensively with China on civilian and military projects. In regard to U.S. companies' partnerships with civilian, or ostensibly civilian, Chinese firms there is a massive amount of literature that deserves research beyond the scope of this report.
Sino-Russian aerospace cooperation spans several decades. Since its inception, Sino-Russian relations has been one of practicality, undergoing alternating periods of friendship and cooperation, to mistrust and outright confrontation. Russian willingness to sell defense equipment to China is influenced by historic geopolitical tensions, distrust due to Chinese reverse engineering, and the status of the Russian economy.
Sino-Russian defense relations began in earnest in the 1950s, when Soviet Russia sent technicians and specialists to China to assist in developing China's industrial capacity. An agreement signed in 1953, for example, committed the Soviet Union to assist with 141 major industrial projects. 322 However, domestic politics and ideological differences drove the two nations apart until their rapprochement in the 1980s. Western arms embargoes on China after the 1989 Tiananmen Massacre and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, resulted in a period of practical defense relations between China and Russia, as China was seeking to modernize its military and Russia was trying to raise revenue by selling arms.
By the 1990s, Russian scientists, designers, and researchers were employed by Chinese aviation companies, and the Chinese secured Su-27s from the Russian government. Procurement of the Su-27 also demonstrates shortcomings within China's domestic aviation industry, as domestic industries were unable to produce an engine at the time for the J-10 fighter. 
323
By the 2010s, China's aviation industry had rapidly modernized and began to compete with American and Russian products. Due in part to Western sanctions on Russia, and the increased desire to build relations with China, Russia chose to sell its advanced arms-as evidenced by sales of the S-400 and Su-35 fighter. x Despite China's advancement in aerospace technology and R&D emphasis on engine designs, they are still inferior to Russian technology, resulting in one of the few sustained areas of military dependence/cooperation between the two countries. Nevertheless, unlike the 1990s, China's aviation industry is no longer as reliant on Russian military technology. Their development trajectory suggests that recent Chinese purchases of Russian jet engines may be seen as a stop-gap measure to meet their current needs as they develop domestic replacements in parallel.
x
Please note that negotiations regarding the sales of both of these weapons systems began well before Western sanctions were levied against Russia. Beginning in the late 1960s France began selling light utility helicopters to China, helping set a pattern for future arms sales. 
334
Pilots were trained in shipborne operations in Qingdao and used to support wreckage recovery operations during China's DF-5 missile test in May 1980 and its first submarine-launched ballistic missile test in 1982. 
335
A review of news from the last three years suggests that French companies are expanding their cooperation with Chinese firms. Airbus Group is a strategic partner of AviChina and holds 5 percent equity interests in AviChina. 
336
337
338
CASC is eager to use Dassault's 3DEXPERIENCE business collaboration software to help speed development. 
339
340
To assess the Chinese ability to challenge U.S. superiority in aerospace, we examined the current state of Chinese design programs, investment in innovation, China's potential to cooperate and absorb technology from foreign countries, and macroeconomic trends that could affect China's defense-industrial capacity over a series of time horizons. To begin, however, it is important to look at how the Chinese themselves assess the state of their industry.
Chinese engineers and scholars, while positive about recent developments, are realistic about the uphill climb still facing China's aviation industry. Yang Wei [杨伟], designer of the J-20 for example, believes that the Chinese defense industry has made major gains but is still in the second rank and that while civil aviation still needs development, research is making good progress and the industry has good momentum. 
342
343
New concepts that will likely be present across all sixth-generation manned and unmanned aircraft designs include stealth, omnidirectional broadband radar, greater flight altitude, and tactical performance. Operating at high speeds, including "super-cruise." sustained supersonic flight, will require an entire new generation of engines systems and advanced materials.
Crossing both fixed-wing and rotary-wing disciplines, UAVs will see widespread application, improving China's number of sensors and connectors on the battlefield and operating in a wide range of ISR and strike roles.
Yang Yujie [杨宇杰], Zhang Huijun [张慧军] and Liu Dan [刘丹], researchers at the Air Force Research Academy [空军研究院], wrote an assessment of future aviation, noting that competition in this field does not appear to be slowing down. They note that while the key characteristics of U.S. sixth-generation fighters are focused on hypersonic and directed-energy capabilities, Russia's military focuses on super stealth, high maneuverability, and y More recent Russian planning documents suggest that Russia will instead invest in modernization of its existing bomber fleet.
combined formations of manned and unmanned systems. 
345
In the early 1980s, China faced a similar moment, where the arms race between the Soviet Union and the United States was driving rapid innovations and the creation of an entirely new type of next-generation fighter jet exemplified by the Su-27 and the F-15. These aircraft were fast, maneuverable and could carry a wide range of advanced weapons. Similarly, in the mid-to-long term, Russia and the U.S. are investing in truly-next generation weapons after the refinement of advanced technologies such as stealth that began to be introduced at the end of the Cold War.
A review of available numbers of Chinese fixed wing and rotary-wing inventory reveals several important facts to use as a baseline. First, roughly 20 percent of its current fighter inventory are what China would classify as second-generation aircraft, including Q-5s, J-7s, and J-8s. While many of these have been modernized far beyond the capabilities of their original 1960s and '70s-era variants, as a group they lag significantly behind more modern aircraft in air-to-air capabilities and lethality. This is the first group that China must phase out and replace with more capable fighters. Some will likely be retained in a transitional-trainer capacity until more modern JL-9s and JL-10s are produced.
With over 800 3rd and 4th Generation fighters and a rapidly increasing number of capable cruise missile and anti-ship missile launch platforms, broader than just bombers, China does have an impressive force when viewed in comparison to its neighbors. However, examination of the broader economic picture and some key trends provide important context to understand the momentum and staying power of this growth.
China is just as subject to "Augustine's Laws" z as the U.S., and the push for "informatization," more stealthy radar cross sections, and advanced weaponry are rapidly increasing the cost-per-copy of its aircraft. Unlike previous eras, China cannot disperse aircraft factories across the country and reasonably expect that they can produce modern aircraft, the technology involved in modern aircraft is too complex and requires a much more substantial support system. aa
Relations between China and Russia have continued to deepen over Xi Jinping's tenure as general secretary, as both he and President Putin of Russia see important advantages to cooperating with each other in order to balance the United States and use their respective strengths to advance economically and strategically. The Chinese and Russian militaries have made large-scale army, air force, navy, and joint military exercises a regular occurrence, particularly since 2014. Sales of Su-35 advanced fighter jets and S-400 surface to air missiles, previously off the table due to fear of Chinese copying, have recently been completed. However, it is worth noting that despite deep cooperation, competition with Russia has been one of the shaping forces of China's aviation industry. Evidence from Russian sources suggests that Russia's defense industry is down-shifting or de-prioritizing investment in clean-sheet design of advanced fighters and bombers in favor of upgrades of existing platforms. Yury Borisov, Russian Deputy Prime Minister for the Defense and Space Industry, has said that Russia will continue to focus on production of the Su-35, rather than next-generation aircraft due to the Su-35's performance in Syria. 
346
347
U.S. allies are also confronting aging inventories of aircraft.
For the Japanese Air Self Defense Force ( JASDF), out of its total of 298 combat aircraft, 17 percent are F-4Ejs, which are nearing obsolescence. 
348
350
In response, Japan has begun acquiring advanced F-35 jets from the United States. An initial order of 42 aircraft has now been expanded by an additional 100 aircraft, including an unspecified number of the F-35B variant that is capable of short takeoff and vertical landing. 
351
352
Challenges to U.S. Superiority The U.S. is currently engaged in research for a new generation fighter. Medium-long term plans such as the Pentagon's "Air Superiority 2030" argue that the U.S. will need a "Penetrating Counter Air" superiority fighter. 354 
355
464
The U.S. is investing in small helicopters with more potent electronic attack capabilities, as well as smaller physical profiles to hide in radar clutter. 
357
China can be expected to deploy a number of entirely new aircraft in the near term that fill important holes in its existing capabilities. These include the ASW aircraft detailed above, as well as some form of carrier-borne early warning aircraft [舰载预警机], an important part of the carrier's ability to detect and respond to threats. 
358
359
For China, its ability to successfully break its reliance on imported foreign passenger jets, particularly narrowbody jets that are estimated to account for 70+ percent of its market over the next decade, could make or break the civilian aviation industry. ab If the C919 is successful, the effect of this import-substitution could give Chinese firms the funds to expand R&D and become truly globally competitive. Less lucrative, but still important, are Chinese military aviation exports. In 1996, China held its first aviation industry exhibition at Zhuhai in Guangdong Province. Since then, China has used the arms show to sign deals, highlight recent breakthroughs, and provide the first official showings of several types of aircraft. China has established itself as a major player in light transport, and cheap fighter jets. Particularly in Africa, countries are buying legacy Chinese jets to bolster their armed forces for regional and terrorist threats. 
360
361
362
ab A forthcoming CASI study of Chinese Aero engines will address this question in greater depth. ac Machining or sintering material does not necessarily impart characteristics like tensile strength, something that needs complicated forging processes.
As discussed earlier, despite 67 years of concerted effort, China remains significantly reliant on imports of foreign technologies. Andrea Gilli and Mauro Gilli have argued that modern technologies are difficult to replicate, and a technology typically fails because the techniques and even supply chains needed to build a finished aircraft or system are so complex. 
364
China's primary strategic advantage in the aerospace industry is its industrial capacity. Over the long term, however, there are several economic and demographic trends that may threaten this and the development of China's aviation industry as a whole.
China's economy will almost certainly face significant long-term challenges. Despite the recent change to the One Child policy and new government plans encouraging couples to have more babies, China will likely experience a serious population decline in the 2020s-2030s. This will mean a decline in the labor market. Without significant progress in shifting manufacturing to higher-end automated systems, China's economy as a whole will suffer and the defense industry will be particularly hard hit. Other macroeconomic trends, such as the effects of insufficient investment in rural education and health care could also come into play, sapping industrial capacity by leaving rural populations, China's traditional source for factory workers, without the skills necessary to compete in a modern economy. The greying of this population, which pays little taxes, will further diminish government coffers.
The aviation industry, especially the military aspects of the industry, can be an enormous drain on state finances. It does appear that China has reached the point where private demand for aircraft can help supplement government orders in keeping its vast network of factories and laboratories afloat on their own. However, as many within the aviation industry have noted, the Chinese government still needs to make significant investments in supporting basic research, much less the broader network of companies and institutes involved in aviation R&D. If those investments fail to materialize, or if the aviation industry does not successfully transform to being more reliant on the civilian sector, it could face a major crisis if government funds falter. This risk is important to note as the Chinese government is facing a myriad of economic issues, including declining state revenues and increasing government costs.
Thus far, the Chinese government has prioritized investments in quick turn-around and immediate policy research for political purposes over areas with long-term importance. This harms China's long-term strength in R&D by diverting funds away from the basic research [基础研究] widely acknowledged as fundamental to it becoming a truly independent power in aviation.
Website: http://www.avic.com Location: Chaoyang District, Beijing 
[朝阳区, 北京市]
365
367
368
369
370
ad For example, the State Council may now name and remove key leadership, including Chairman of the Board and CEO.
person in space, Yang Liwei [杨利伟]. Air Force Aviation University is a Deputy Corps Leader grade (Grade 6) organization. 
472
473
474
475
Key: *: UAV | †: In Development | In Chinese terminology, J=Fighter ( Jian; 歼), H=Bomber (Hong; 轰), Q=Attack (Qiang; 强) Y=Transport (Yun; 运), Z=Helicopter (Zhi; 直), GJ=Attack Drone (Gongji; 攻击), NPU=Northwestern Polytechnical University, NUAA=Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics. Su = Sukhoi, IL = Ilyushin, Mil = Mil Moscow Helicopter Plant
s Ehang [亿航智能] is a private manufacturer of hobbyist and professional drones based in Guangzhou. "关于我们," Ehang Website, [accessed January 2019], http://www.ehang.com/cn//about.html.
Li Feng 180
Li Feng 180
股票与债卷
股票与债卷
J-10C with TVC 276Y-20281   
ASN-206446   
The AVIC Test Flight Center's 13th Five Year Plan included the goal of doubling the number of pre-research projects. "试飞中2017年预研立项项目数和总 经费创历史新高," China Aviation Daily, 23 January, 2018. http://www.cannews.com.cn/2018/0123/170837.shtml; In additional example, a radar testing unit specifically conducts pre-research to help formulate worthwhile ideas for future research "做好预先研究谋划未来发展," China Aviation Daily, 24 December 2016 http://ep.cannews.com.cn/publish/zghkb7/html/146/node_008431.html.
, doctrine, personnel, organization, and limitations of China's aerospace forces, which include: the 
PLA Air Force (PLAAF)
PLA Naval Aviation (PLAN Aviation)
PLA Rocket Force (PLARF)
PLA Army Aviation (PLAA)
Strategic Support Force (PLASSF)
CASI supports the Secretary, 
Chief of Staff
U.S. Air Force
Department of Defense
U.S. Government
USAF
• CASI primarily conducts open-source native-language research supporting its five main topic areas.
• CASI conducts conferences, workshops, roundtables, subject matter expert panels, and senior leader discussions to further its mission. CASI personnel attend such events, government, academic, and public, in support of its research and outreach efforts. • CASI aerospace developments in the context of 
U.S. Breakthroughs Major Programs Overview by Sector Fixed Wing Rotary Wing Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
UAVs) Section 3: Defense-Related Aerospace Industrial Policy Policy-Making Organizations Key Leaders Section 4: China's Civil-Military Aerospace Industrial Capacity Section 5: The Research, Development, and Acquisition (RDA) Process Case Studies China's Aviation Industry: Lumbering Forward AESA Active Electronically Scanned Array (radar) A2/AD Anti-Access, Area Denial AEW&C Airborne Early Warning & Control AAM Air-to-Air Missile AM Additive Manufacturing AMS Academy of Military Sciences ASW Anti-Submarine Warfare AVIC Aviation Industry Corporation
China C4ISR Command, Control, Communications, COSTIND Commission for Science, Technology
Industry for National Defense DWP Defense White Paper ECM Electronic Countermeasures EDD Equipment Development Department EW Early Warning GAD General Armament Department GSD General Staff Department HALE High Altitude Long-Endurance ISR Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance JASDF Japanese Air Self Defense Force 5 Abbreviations China Aerospace Studies Institute 6 JSD Joint Staff Department LAM Laser Additive Manufacturing LRIP Low-rate Initial Production
MCF Military-Civilian Fusion MIIT Ministry of Industry and Information Technology MOST Ministry of Science and Technology NBS National Bureau of Statistics NDU National Defense University NRDC National Development and Reform Commission NUDT National University of Defense Technology PAP People
Armed Police PBSC Politburo Standing Committee PLA People's Liberation Army PLAAF People's Liberation Army Air Force PLAN People's Liberation Army Navy China
CMC Equipment Development Department (EDD)
CMC
China Aerospace Studies Institute [蓝天出版社]. Blue imprimatur of the PLA Air Force's Political Work Department
Central Party Press. National Defense University Scholars at China's NDU
/default/files/documents/CLM26AM.
China's Aviation Industry: Lumbering Forward
China's Aviation Industry: Lumbering Forward State Administration for Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense (SASTIND)  [国防科工局] SASTIND's predecessor, COSTIND, was created in 1958 to give the CMC and Politburo direct control over China's strategic weapons programs. 
200
In May of 2018, Zhang Kejian [张克俭] became the head of SASTIND, replacing Tang Dengjie [唐登杰]. 
201
202
SASTIND appears to have Deputy Directors [副局长] with portfolios focused on nuclear, materials [材料], ordnance (equipment), space, and aviation. For the aerospace industry, two deputies are the primary points of contact. Xu Zhanbin [徐占斌], who has experience working at Harbin Aviation Industry Group (HAIG) appears to oversee aviation-related work at SASTIND and makes regular visits to AECC and other Chinese aviation companies. 
203
204
205
General Zhang Youxia currently serves as one of the two vice-chairmen of the Central Military Commission (CMC) and is a member of the Political Bureau, 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. Zhang was born in July 1950 in Weinan, Shaanxi Province. Zhang joined the PLA in December 1968 and became a Party member in May 1969. Zhang spent much of his early career in Yunnan, under the 14th Corps near Kunming. During tensions with Vietnam after the 1979 border war, Zhang's unit was rotated to the border and his regiment saw significant combat. The 119th Regiment was involved in the Battle of Laoshan, in which over 3,000 Vietnamese soldiers were killed. After several leadership positions in the southwest, he became deputy commander and then commander of the Shenyang Military Region in China's Northeast. In 2012 he was appointed Director of the PLA's General Armament Department, which later became the CMC Equipment Development Department. In October 2017 he was named one of the two CMC Vice Chairman. As Director of the Equipment Development Department he was also the commander-in-chief of China's manned space program and frequently oversees space launches. 
207
208
209
China Aerospace Studies Institute LGEN Li Shangfu [李尚福]  In 2013, he replaced Major General Shang Hong [尚宏] as the General Armaments Department chief of staff and was promoted to Deputy Director the following year. 214 Shortly after the PLASSF was established in late 2015, Li was appointed as deputy commander for one year. 215 Given Li's career, his current position in the Equipment Development Department is one of the clearest indicators of the emphasis China is giving to space as a "new security domain" [新型安全领域].
Mission: Search and Rescue/Tactical Transport 307 308 309 310 Background: A co-production between AVIC's Avicopter and Rostec's Russian Helicopters, the AHL is expected to use Russian-built engines, most likely designed based on the PD-14 which will be used by Russia's new MC-21 twin-engine passenger jet. Use of the PD-14 underscores China's continued reliance on foreign-made turbofan engines. 311 International and Regional Policy Director Victor Kradov said that China's market would demand roughly 200 AHLs. 
312
313
Timeline: CEO of Russian Helicopters, Andrey Boginsky, indicated at the 2017 China Helicopter Exposition that the Russian side was willing to sign a contract by the year's end. China has also signaled that a contract could be signed by the end of the year; Gui Congyou [桂从友], the former Director-General of the Department of European-Central Affairs of the PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs [中国外交部欧亚司司长] stated in April 2017 that the agreement between China and Russia to develop the AHL was "99 percent ready." 314 In March of 2018, Wu Ximing noted Chinese helicopter designer, revealed that progress was proceeding smoothly, and that the two sides will cooperate at each stage of design and production." 
315
Timeline: In April 2018, the CH-T1 began field testing with the PLA Navy. 
316
Background: The CH-T1, also called an "Unmanned Ground Effect Test Vehicle [无人地面效应飞行器验证机]  utilizes ground effect techniques to carry out long-range reconnaissance and strike missions. The prototype was spotted in May 2017 on Chinese internet discussion forums. It was developed by CASC's 11th Academy, also known as China Academy of Aerospace Aerodynamics. 
317
318
319
320321
Concurrent with Chinese participation in Russian Vostok exercises in Russia's Far East in 2018, senior Chinese and Russian military officials committed to "strengthening strategic coordination" between the two militaries. 
324
325
On 6 September 2017, Russian aviation giant Russian Helicopter held a signing ceremony for its Asia Pacific Operations Maintenance and Assembly HQ in Shuangliu, Chengdu. The company will invest 2.4 billion RMB (approximately $350 million USD) and use about 400 square kilometers to establish a headquarters, repair facility, assembly center, and flight test base for the Ansat,  On 17 July 2017 at the MAKS Airshow, AVIC VP Chen Yuanxian [陈元先] led an AVIC delegation to Rostvertol and expressed interest in cooperating with Russian Helicopters in multiple areas. 
327
On 18 January 2017, a delegation from China Aero Engine Research Institute visited Russia's Central Institute of Aviation Motors to sign a memorandum of cooperation. The two sides agreed to advance technical research and aviation engine R&D, specifically, engine health management, distributed control systems, and engine thermal management. 
328
329
On 18 July 2017, at the MAKS Airshow, AVIC Vice President Zhang Xingguo expressed that as the One Belt, One Road initiative continues, there are great prospects for China-Central Asian cooperation for feeder aircraft, helicopters, and UAVs. 
330
Chinese-Russian cooperation in civilian aviation is also increasing. In addition to the C929 wide-body jet being co-developed by COMAC and Russia's United Aircraft Corporation, additional agreements are being drafted. On August 2, 2016, CAAC Chief Engineer Yin Shijun [殷时军] met with Russian Deputy Ministry of Transport Valery Okulov for the 20th China-Russian Transportation Subcommittee Meeting and the Civil Aviation Working Group Meeting. They agreed to revise draft bilateral agreements related to civil aviation security and in civil aircraft search and rescue. 
331
Medium-Term (Through 2028) China's priorities for Air Power over the medium-term can be understood from three major trends. First, comprehensive upgrading of the existing force to third-generation platforms and beyond. Over the next five to 10 years, China can be expected to replace its remaining first and second-generation aircraft, except in some sort of training roles, with third-generation aircraft, particularly advanced models of the J-10. Fourth generation jets, such as the Su-35, J-16, and J-20, are conducting cooperative training to test tactics and lay the foundations for the PLA's future force, which likely includes a mix of advanced interceptors, long-range fighters, strategic bombers, and increasingly, UAVs in various supporting roles.
Second, expansion of the "Integrated Air and Space Operations" strategy to place greater emphasis on space and the area between the two domains. Analysts affiliated with the Air Defense and Anti-missile College [空军 工程大学防空反导学院] and the Equipment Academy [装备学院研究生院], for example, argue that near-space [ 临近空间] is an emerging area that will be foundational to the PLAAF's strategy of "Integrated Air and Space Operations." 363 Continuing investments in High-Altitude Long-Endurance (HALE) drones capable of operating at 60,000 feet or more and remaining on station for more than 10 hours is a good indication that this will be a major focus for ISR platforms for the PLA.
Third, China will continue building a "strategic air force" that can meet the requirements of informationized operations and effectively carry out strategic defense, attack, and power projection. AECC is China's primary producer of aircraft engines. Composed of more than twenty subsidiaries and employing more than 10,000 people, the company is based in Beijing but has research laboratories and test facilities all over the country. Originally Xi'an Aero Engine Corporation, its current form was created in 2016 as part of a consolidation meant to help China overcome issues with domestic engine production.
The . 
383
384
385
387
Website: http://cac.avic.com Location: Qingyang District, Chengdu, Sichuan Province [青羊区, 
成都市, 四川省]
In conjunction with its civil-aviation affiliate Chengdu Civil Aviation Company [成飞民机公司], Chengdu has participated in the design and production of the C919, ARJ21 airliners and AG600 amphibious aircraft. 
390
Website: N/A Location: Wuhou District, Chengdu, Sichuan Province [武侯区, 
成都市, 四川省]
393
Chengdu Aircraft's design department is also involved in several of China's UAV programs, including the Soar Dragon (Xianglong; 翔龙) and Sky Wing (Tianyi; 天翼) High-Altitude Long Endurance (HALE) drones, Pterodactyl I (Yilong; 翼龙) 394 Medium-Altitude Long Endurance (MALE) and the stealth Dark Sword (Anjian; 暗剑) unmanned combat aerial vehicle (UCAV). Li Yidong [李屹东], Deputy Chief Designer CADI Chief Designer of the Yilong UAV series, has said Yilong-2's successful test flight showed that China had the ability to deliver a next-generation reconnaissance-combat UAV to overseas markets; he added that this was China's first domestically produced UAV with a turboprop engine. 395
Website: N/A Location: Anshun, Guizhou Province [安顺, 
贵州省]
397
398
399
400
401
Website: N/A Location: Shenyang, Liaoning Province [沈阳, 
辽宁省]
The Chairman of the Board and Party Secretary is Guo Dianman [郭殿满], an engineer who previously served as Party Secretary of Harbin Aircraft Industry Group (HAIG) and other roles at Avicopter. 
405
404
407
Website: N/A Location: Huanggu District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province [皇姑区, 
沈阳市, 辽宁省]
In 1991, China signed an agreement with Russian company Sukhoi to purchase Su-27 fighter jets. A subsequent agreement allowed SAC to build a licensed version of the jets. 
409
410
Website: http://www.xac.com.cn Location: Xi'an, Shaanxi Province [西安市, 
陕西省]
416
417
418
419
COMAC and Russia's United Aircraft Corporation are partnering to build a wide-body aircraft, the C929. ae The joint design and production deal, announced in May 2014, is intended to be completed around 2022-2023. 
420
421
China Aerospace Studies Institute
Website: http://avicopter.avic.com/index.shtml Location: Airport Economic Zone, Tianjin [空港经济区, 
天津市]
422
The company coordinates, oversees, and manages AVIC's helicopter branches, including: Hafei, Changfei, Huiyang, China Helicopter Research and Development Institute (CHRDI), and Tianjin's helicopter branches.
In comparing Avicopter's 12th and 13th Five Year Plan objectives, the company has shifted from internal management reforms, R&D innovation, and breaking through technological bottlenecks to promoting civilian helicopter development, expanding service industries, improving operation quality, and becoming one of the world's top four helicopter manufacturers af by 2020. 
423
• Russian Helicopters will contribute its technologies to the project, provide technical parameters, and develop individual AHL systems on a contractual base. • Avicopter will manage the program's organization, implementation and engineering design, and design prototypes, conduct tests, certifications, serial production, and market promotion. 
424
Website: http://www.changhe.com/ Location: Jingdezhen, Jiangxi Province [景德镇市, 
江西省]
428
429
430
431
Website: http://www.hafei.com/ Location: Harbin, Heilongjiang Province [哈尔滨市, 
黑龙江省]
With the acquisition of licensing rights to the French Dauphin helicopter in October 1980, China began building what was later designated as the Z-9 series helicopters, the current mainstay of its light helicopter force across the PLA, PAP, and civilian agencies. The Z-9 entered service in 1983. In 1992, Harbin again partnered with the French company Eurocopter to produce the EC120. 
432
433
434
435
436
Website: http://www.caaa-spacechina.com Location: Fengtai District, Beijing 
[丰台区, 北京市]
442
443
China's Aviation Industry: Lumbering Forward "special aircraft" including very-short to long-range drones, missiles, ground effect aircraft [地效飞行器], and hovercraft.
Most prominent of these is the Caihong (Rainbow) [彩虹] series of drones. Song Wen [宋文], is the chief designer of the CH series [彩虹] at (CAAA). The CH series includes a full range of hand-launched, rocketlaunched and full-sized drones that take off like traditional aircraft performing a wide range of roles including remote sensing, maritime inspection, artillery spotting, and data relay. 444
Website: http://aisheng.nwpu.edu.cn/ Location: Yanta District, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province [雁塔区, 
西安市, 陕西省]
446
447
448
449
Location: Chengdu, Jinniu District [金牛区, 
成都市, 四川省]
452
453
454
Three PLA-affiliated universities deserve special attention for their role in aerospace-related research. The first, NUDT, is subordinate to the CMC, while the remaining two are affiliated with the Air Force. While by no means an exhaustive list, these provide an example of the institutions that the PLA has working on the complicated engineering problems posed by aviation. These universities play an important role not only by training scientists, researchers and engineers for their respective fields, but also by popularizing new technologies and helping key organizations recognize trends and prioritize strategic areas of investment. NUDT is described as the apex of cultivating "high-quality, new-type talent" and "indigenous innovation in national defense technologies." 
463
464
467
468
478
Location: Beijing On 2 February 2004, PLAAF Headquarters held a ceremony to formally establish the new Air Force Equipment Research Academy [空军装备研究院], which is a corps leader-grade organization. 
480
483
Chinese-Language Sources Books 