# ID: c54a50786a6a4732a00248ac2cf1a678
# Title: Assessing the conventional force imbalance in Europe: Implications for countering Russian local superiority
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
This report describes broad trends in military capacity of North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) nations and Russia since the end of the Cold War and lays out in more detail the recent increase in the size and capabilities of Russia's armed forces.
This report outlines how NATO and Russian force levels and capabilities have evolved in the post-Cold War era and what recent trends imply for the balance of capabilities in the NATO member states that border Russia in the Baltic Sea region. It is intended to inform debate over appropriate posture and force structure for NATO forces to respond to the recent growth in Russian military capability and capacity and to increased Russian assertiveness in the use of force.
Russia enjoys a favorable correlation of forces in a short-warning regional conflict on its borders, and this advantage  By contrast, while Russia also saw a major decline through the 1990s and 2000s, more-recent efforts have led to effective changes in Russian warfighting capabilities and a gradual spread of more-modern systems to much of the Russian armed forces.
 Recent improvements to readiness and to the ability to move forces quickly within Russia, combined with the density of anti-access/area denial capabilities arrayed to defend the Russian heartland, provide Moscow with a much greater ability to project force against countries on its borders, including not only Ukraine and Georgia but also NATO members and allies in the Baltic region.
This report draws from a variety of publicly available sources, including previously published RAND research. 1   appears stable based on projected Russian plans for expanded forces in the West in the next few years. NATO enjoys considerable fundamental long-term advantages in terms of aggregate national power that would be relevant in a protracted conflict and should allow it to better deter Russia in the future, but NATO is not maximizing its inherent advantages. The Alliance's combined economic strength in 2016 (measured in U.S. dollars) was about 31 times that of Russia's. In 2015 (a historically strong year for Russian defense spending) NATO outspent Russia by approximately $895 billion to $52 billion on military forces (NATO, 2017b; U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, 2017). The aggregate military personnel balance strongly favors NATO as well, when all forces in their home countries are included in the count. These facts indicate that the Alliance clearly has the means to establish and sustain an effective conventional deterrent if it so chooses.
With the aim of reinforcing deterrence in mind, this report outlines some of the key considerations in addressing the following trends that produced the current imbalance of military power that is postured and ready to fight on short notice:
 In the years following the end of the Cold War, NATO's ground forces have substantially declined in size and shifted focus away from high-intensity conventional combat. NATO and Soviet/Russian Forces from the Cold War to the Present
It is instructive to begin with a look at the evolution of personnel levels across NATO and Russian military forces over time, starting in the last year of the Cold War. The common basis for comparison with today's balance of power considers those personnel, tanks, and aircraft that are postured to fight on short notice.
Figure 
1
In addition to personnel, it is also instructive to consider the numbers of some of the key weapon systems focused at that time on NATO's defense of West Germany (as shown in Figure 
2
Figure 
2
Still, the relevant question is how much relative combat power can be quickly deployed in a short-warning conflict. Figure 
3
Although there has been a steady decline in NATO personnel strength, Figure 
4
of the disparity in defense funding and ground military personnel? The answer to this question has four related parts:
 First, while NATO militaries have retooled to focus on stability operations and lighter forces that can be more easily deployed out of area to such places as Afghanistan, Russia has retained a combined-arms force that emphasizes mobility and firepower and trains to conduct larger-scale combined-arms operations. This gives Russian forces an important advantage in conflicts between mechanized forces close to their border.
 Second, there has been a notable increase in the quality of Russian forces over the last decade. This can be observed in the growing number of volunteer soldiers (as opposed to draftees), the fielding of modernized weapons, the improvements to readiness, and the experience gained from largescale exercises and combat operations in Ukraine and Syria. In particular, the Russians have advantages over current NATO forces in integrated air defense, long-range artillery, anti-armor munitions, and electronic warfare.
 Third, the highest density of Russia's most-capable ground and air forces is in its Western Military District (MD). The MD borders NATO allies Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, which have very small conventional forces.
 Finally, Russia's demonstrated ability to mass ready forces from elsewhere within its borders, leveraging its internal rail and road networks, means that it is likely to enjoy a significant time-distance advantage in generating combat forces during the opening weeks-or even months-of a crisis.
The next section considers each of these parts in further detail.  
(Vandiver, 2013)
 Germany's active tank fleet, which once numbered in the thousands, had been reduced to 244 by 2017. Of these, fewer than 100 were cited in recent reporting as being operationally ready for duty (Cranny-Evans, 2017, p. 145).
 The Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania operate some light armored vehicles but lack main battle tanks altogether.
Zapad 2017 -Russian-Belarusian joint military strategic exercise.
Figure 
6
In the years immediately following the 2008 war with Georgia, Russia embarked on a series of military reforms that eventually had a considerable impact on the quality of its forces. The transition to a brigade-centric army-which is now in the process of evolving further into a mix of brigades and divisions-brought with it notable improvements in readiness. The number of volunteer soldiers serving under contract in the Russian Armed Forces appears to have reached about 350,000-380,000; as the high-readiness elements of the Russian military are reliant on contract soldiers, this has substantially expanded the number of units ready for operations on short notice (Golts, 2017). Russian military units have also seen a relatively high pace of exercisesboth programmed and unannounced "snap" exercises-as well as active combat operations in Crimea and East Ukraine since 2014, and Syria since 2015. 2 Finally, Russian military modernization efforts have resulted in the fielding of some very capable air defenses, and long-range strike weapons, such as the SS-26 STONE (9K720 Iskander-M) tactical ballistic missile, as well as large numbers of more modestly improved weapon platforms, such as upgraded T-72B3 tanks.
The following figures show the comparison of key major weapon systems that would be available to Russia and NATO over the opening weeks and months of a conflict in the Baltic states. Figure 
5
Russia's general advantage in numbers is compounded by the fact that, compared with the Cold War balance described earlier in this report, NATO forces are not nearly sufficient to defend a contiguous line and delay a large-scale conventional advance by a mechanized adversary, such as Russia-particularly as Russian forces would have sufficient mobility to concentrate forces in time and space to substantially outnumber isolated defenders. An important counter to Russian strength on the ground would be the early employment of NATOmember air forces to disrupt and destroy Russian maneuver and artillery systems. However, Russia's national air defenses can cover sizable portions of NATO territory from Russian (or Russian-allied) territory. Russian aircraft and air defenses would greatly complicate efforts to focus NATO airpower on Russian maneuver forces in the initial phase of a conflict. Table 
2
Russian investment in its air defense network dramatically complicates the task of non-stealthy aircraft in gaining situational awareness and conducting air-to-air or air-to-ground combat. The relatively limited number of stealthy "fifth-generation" combat aircraft-of which most would be arriving from the continental United States during the first days of the conflict-would be spread very thinly
Table 
1
In active units or near Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania
Total Worldwide arrive. There are, indeed, some NATO forces that can respond:
 The NATO Very High Readiness Joint Task Force is intended to be able to move the majority of its subordinate units within seven days of notice 
(NATO, 2016)
 Recent RAND research has suggested that France, Germany, and the United Kingdom could each deploy approximately one single heavy brigade each within a month or two of the onset of hostilities 
(Shurkin, 2017)
However, Russia can also reinforce with additional units from its other military districts. Russia has nine more army headquarters across its military districts and more than 60 maneuver brigades or regiments in its order of battle. The Swedish Defense Research Agency (FOI) has estimated that right as the need for them to degrade Russian air defenses and defend ground forces against Russian combat aircraft was at its peak. Figure 
7
Looking out past the initial weeks, the comparison on the ground would actually get worse for NATO before getting better. It appears that Russia would start with not only a numerical advantage in key ground combat systems, but also with forces that can be generated and moved to the West more quickly than many NATO reinforcements can  2 Recent reporting on Russian large-scale exercises suggests an emphasis on scale and joint integration, frequently involving the conduct of two scenarios simultaneously (see 
Norberg, 2015;
and Brzezinski and Varangi, 2016)
2
(1989)
6
The report will be of interest to U.S. Department of Defense and NATO defense planners and policymakers-particularly those who are responsible for setting and implementing national security strategy objectives and for providing the resources required to meet them. It will also be of interest to leaders of the U.S. Army, NATO strategists, military officers, and research analysts.
www.rand.org
forces in allied countries as well as the Baltic, Belorussian, and Carpathian Military Districts) and all tanks from Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Poland. The data for combat aircraft include only air forces and exclude naval aviation and armed helicopters. The NATO figure includes all U.S. Air Force aircraft stationed in Europe (in dark blue), and all combat aircraft belonging to all European NATO allies plus Canadian aircraft stationed in West Germany. The Warsaw Pact figure includes all Soviet combat aircraft assigned to the Western Strategic Direction as well as all aircraft from the militaries of all Warsaw Pact states.
PHOTO CREDIT-PAGE 6
PHOTO CREDIT-PAGE 6