# ID: c618d7e315d845b99653c6c666d96a52
# Title: Boids Cycling Boyd's Loop: The Nexus of Artificial Intelligence and Joint Planning
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including
Russian First Echelon Movement and Maneuver -Time and Distance…………...…..      
War is a human endeavor-a clash of wills characterized by the threat or application of force and violence, often fought among populations. It is not a mechanical process that can be precisely controlled by machines, calculations, or processes.
-Department of the Army, ADP 6-0, Mission Command Decision making has been the centerpiece of warfare since its beginning. Decision making, and the philosophy of mission command, which enables initiative, has always depended on understanding, judgement, and action. The commander's ability to discern decisive leverage points in time and space, to achieve success is the essence of the art. Sir Rupert Smith distilled the idea, writing, "the practice of war, indeed its 'art' is to achieve an asymmetry over the opponent." 
1
2
3
While decision making has remained central, it has become more complex due to the evolution of the environment in which it occurs. The size of armies grew with industrialization, and the rate of change only increased as technology and other drivers fueled cycles of adaptation and evolution. An epoch of dispersion and decentralization occurred due to advances in the lethality of weapons of war. 
4
5
6
7
In the future, adversaries will be both more adaptive and dynamic, competing across all domains. 
9
10
11
12
While not completely alien to Colonel Chamberlain's intuition at Gettysburg, contemporary and future commanders face a more difficult decision-making environment. Faced with mortal danger, Chamberlain clearly accounted for both scientific calculations and psychological effects in a time constrained window of opportunity. In the future, however, commanders will await the same insight while searching for solutions to ill structured, high complexity problems extending through the six domains of air, land, maritime, information, cyber, and space. The future state of affairs poses a potential growth to complexity that will increase at an exponential rate as new technologies and applications are realized. Human learning and even the ability of the most seasoned commander to intuit will not keep pace with the advances. In contrast to the autonomy that mission command advocates to address the acceleration of the battlespace, battle winning coup d'oeil must be sustained into the future through improved human cognition, improvement to the decision-making process, or its augmentation.
While the mission command philosophy provides a near term mitigation to circumvent some of the difficulties of hierarchical decision making to gain or maintain the initiative, it does not address or eliminate the problem of complexity. The amount of existing information often exceeds the cognitive ability of leaders within the space and time the environment permits, and the brain is prone to errors. 
13
The cleaving of decision competence and available support has created a widening capability gap between the analytical decision-making process, commander's intuition, and effective decision making. While Colonel John R. Boyd's time-based theory of conflict entailed fighter pilots "generating a rapidly changing environment," the future environment itself will likely challenge the "ability to adapt," but with Boyd's ultimate message still holding true, that "whoever can handle the quickest rate of change is the one who survives." 
14
Simultaneously, the ability to understand and react first in a dynamic environment capable of rapidly invalidating previous plans will be essential to seizing and retaining the initiative. 
15
16
AlphaGo not only a nearly unbeatable opponent but illuminated new ways of looking at an ancient game. In move thirty-seven of the second game, AlphaGo made a move that was "unimaginable in the more than three-thousand-year history of the game." 17 Lee Sedol responded in game four with an equally inhuman move described by commentators as "God's Touch," which many attribute to insights developed when "AlphaGo pushed the boundaries of human amounts of data to provide commanders even more information. Proponents believe "it's going to inform our decision-makers, it's going to help them make decisions that, like playing chess, are thinking about two or three moves downstream." 
19
18
19 "The Key To All-Domain Warfare Is 'Predictive Analysis:' Gen. O'Shaughnessy," Breaking Defense, last modified on May 5, 2020, 3:23pm, https://breakingdefense.com/2020/05/the-key-to-all-domain-warfare-ispredictive-analysis-gen-oshaughnessy/. capitalized on in the absence of an improved military decision-making framework without exacerbating the challenge of understanding the operating environment.
Scientific advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning highlight revolutionary implications for military decision making. The technology, however, must be applied to a distinctly human endeavor comprised of imperfect information about often ill-structured problems. Human beings will remain responsible for decision making in these complex situations and will remain accountable for their decisions. No amount of new technology can displace that. To be effective, the technology must aid professional practitioners who synthesize decades of experience and study to apply their intuition to decisions. To avoid wasted time or money in the acquisition process, or worse yet, abdication of a radical technological advantage, a bridge between the technology and the unique context of military decision making is required. A bridge between artificial intelligence logic and algorithms, and their potential applications in existing decision support tools to enable decision making and disciplined initiative in the future operating environment is conspicuously absent from the existing literature on military decision making and AI development. Current and past efforts have focused on education and doctrinal process, without modification for the calculation capability now resident in computers, or lifting the veil surrounding artificial intelligence, and harnessing its game-changing power.
The Joint Planning Process, a decision-making apparatus, while analytically sound, is not structured in a way that it will keep pace with the future environment. Because the pace of conflict will outweigh a staff's ability to process an analytical contribution it will force commanders to solely rely on intuition in a world in which the past may be less relevant. The commander's intuition, which pulls from studied history and decades of personal experience, is open to bias and heuristics, and they often intuit based on solutions from previous conflicts. Such analogical reasoning is inaccurate for Joint, Interagency, Intergovernmental and Multinational (JIIM) operations within a complex adaptive system, which will increasingly continue to permeate conflicts of the 21 st Century.
An artificial intelligence enabled, semi-autonomous Joint Planning Process will create an understanding of the environment grounded in a framework of physical information. Course of action development will not originate from a desired endstate worked backwards applying ways and means in theoretical hindsight to create an imagined future. It will work forward from the current state. AI enabled JPP will explore forward through the possible branches of friendly and adversary decision trees, towards the environment and adversary described in step four of the Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operational Environment (JIPOE), brought to life as adaptive agent by means of minimax style decision tree. 
20
No man ever steps in the same river twice, for it's not the same river and he's not the same man.
-Heraclitus
In the joint military context, commanders, while supported by their staff, ultimately use their own faculties for decision making. When commanders are conducting problem solving to formulate guidance for their staff or subordinates, they are essentially conducting "means-ends analysis, a process of searching for the means or steps to reduce the differences between the current situation and the desired goal." 
1
3
The scientific explanation of intuition describes a much more algorithmic process to achieve coup d'oeil, fitting the very definition of "a process or set of rules to be followed in calculations or other problem-solving operations." and liabilities that will be further exacerbated by the future operating environment in terms of the requirements for speed, and the increased complexity and adaptive nature of the environment.
Within the current process, in order to prevail against thinking and adapting enemies operating in a complex adaptive system, military commanders are enabled by their own staff process of thinking and adapting. In the joint force the process is known as the Joint Command and Staff Process. The continuous cyclic process is described in the roughly four steps of "analyze the situation and need for action; determine the course of action (COA) best suited for mission accomplishment; and carry out that COA, with adjustments as necessary, while continuing to assess the unfolding situation," and occurs over successive iterations known as the Joint Planning Process (JPP). 
12
14
15
In psychology, a "concept refers to a mental representation that groups or categorizes shared features of related objects, events, or other stimuli. A concept is an abstract representation, description, or definition that serves to designate a class or category of things." 
16
18
19
If the situation or component parts are mischaracterized, then the resulting solution will likely be illogical. Scientific experimentation provides evidence that suggests "competency on reasoning tests depends more on whether the task makes sense to participants than on their problem-solving ability." 20 Within a complex adaptive system (CAS), the level of complexity makes it more likely that without significant analysis, incorrect concepts will be formed, especially when analogy to previous conflicts or situations are formed. This is anchoring bias, in which a guess at something they are uncertain of is obtained by shifting from a certainty. 
21
22
25
To their surprise, "the Russian military staged an all-out invasion, planning to totally decimate and destroy the Georgian military."
26
27
In the future, the vectors of change will exacerbate the gap between the reliability of human cognition and the complex operating environment. In fact, the more recent Russo-Ukrainian War showed how both the environment of 21 st Century war and a Russian aggressor evolved in just six years from the Georgian conflict. Human bias and cognitive limitations applied to a cursory understanding of a conflict often obscures underlying causes, but also highlights the inherent limitations of the current organizational and staff processes faced with the rate of change. Methods such as causal loop analysis, and cognitive maps, provide an avenue to capture and interrogate the complex interactions in a system using mathematical calculations. As the operating environment continues to become increasingly complex, AI programs using similar logic will enable deeper understanding of problems to enable reliable mission analysis even in a time constrained Joint Planning Process.
The third step in JPP is COA Development. A strong COA will accomplish the mission within the commander's intent, position for future operations, enable initiative, and be flexible with respect to an array of adversary and other actor actions. 
28
However, Kosko proposes that fuzzy associative memory operates by recalling multiple considerations, weighing each to a varying degree while regularly judging a relative value and comparing options. 
30
31
30 Bart Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy Logic. (New York, NY: Hyperion, 1993), 176. 
31
blindness, which has shown that people "systematically forget to compare an existing offer with the next-best alternative." 32 Similarly, déformation professionelle is the tendency to identify solutions within one's own discipline. 
33
Another vital aspect of COA development is the anticipation of the need to adjust the plan as it unfolds, and the development of branches or alternatives. A good COA provides flexibility, and branches and alternatives are planned contingent actions or adjustments to the plan. Doctrinally, "an alternative is an activity within a COA that may be executed to enable achieving an objective. Alternatives, and groups of alternatives comprising branches, allow the commander to act rapidly and transition as conditions change through the campaign or operation." 
34
35
36
37
33
35
36
37
functions and domains is critical to achieving synergy and a decisive effect. Integration and synchronization are a vital portion of JPP but are also critical to adjustment decisions.
While already important in 20 th Century conflict, the increasingly complex contested environment of the 21 st Century amplifies the importance of adjustment decisions as it changes dynamically as a CAS. The volatility creates several meaningful impacts to the decision-making process, which will only increase in importance in the future. As Chaos Theory describes, chaotic systems are heavily dependent on starting state conditions. Like the weather, science accurately forecasts the interactions and changes at the particle level, but due to compounding reactions in various directions, positive and negative feedback loops make forecasts increasingly inaccurate over increasing amounts of time.
A pendulum is a helpful visual analogy. Calculating the path of a pendulum after it is released is a relatively simple problem, and one in which the state of the pendulum could be forecasted with relative accuracy even after several cycles of swinging forwards and backwards.
Calculating the movement of a double pendulum, however, comprised of a second pendulum suspended from the first, creates exceptional dependance on the starting position, with changes to the future path magnified by very small differences in starting positions. Human forecasts of the path of the double pendulum will likely be significantly off by the time the pendulum swings back the first time. 
38
The peril of vehement adherence to the original supposition is best demonstrated by the case that John Boyd used to describe his Boyd's Loop. 
39
We have to disobey the old logic and break its laws to transcend it.
-Bart Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking Adaptive Systems do not lend themselves to analogical reasoning. In new situations, human cognition forms concepts from available knowledge and experience, which leads to association with past examples, driving intuition, or inductive leaps, based on analogy and experience. In this way, human cognition finds an exemplar from available sources. In contrast, computers calculate each instance and all relative, programmed variables to build a prototype of the actual situation. With the ability of a 2 GHz processor to run two billion cycles a secondcomputers build their prototype in real time. 
1
With some calculations based on the available information and data from past conflicts, it is possible to approximate the understanding of a situation that AI would have gleaned from In under fifteen lines of code, a program can be written that will ask for the required inputs and provide the calculation, most importantly highlighting the insight that it would take a division roughly ten times as long as a single vehicle to complete a 100 kilometer road march if limited to only one route. 2 In all areas where the science of warfare has generated calculations that turn data to information, AI could crystalize that knowledge and make it rapidly usable and available.
The JPP step that enables commanders to understand the operational environment and translate that understanding into a mission and guidance to enable the development of a course of action, is mission analysis. A key input to the mission analysis step is the Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operational Environment (JIPOE). The JIPOE is an algorithmic four step process consisting of "Define the operational environment (OE). Describe the impact of the OE.
Evaluate the adversary and other relevant actors. Determine the course of action (COA) for adversary and other relevant actors, particularly the most likely COA and the COA most dangerous to friendly forces and mission accomplishment." 
3
4
More importantly, conducting this analysis in a program or programming language that could carry into the steps of JPP by man-machine team. Without modifying the second step of JIPOE much, AI could evaluate how the operating environment dictates the integration of the seven joint functions. This analysis creates an overlapping patchwork of the potential employment of the joint functions of command and control (C2), intelligence, fires, movement and maneuver, protection, sustainment, and information, within a specific OE. 
5
6
Conducting a modified second step of JIPOE in a manner similar to how AI would process the information for the situation prior to the Russo-Georgian War reveals insight into the intentions and future actions of Russia. Despite the 104 th Airborne Assault Regiment redeploying to Pskov in northwest Russia at the completion of the Kavkaz 2008 Exercise, the 135 th and 693 rd Motorized Rifle Battalions (MRB) remained in the vicinity of the Mamison Pass. 
7
8
1
9
Analyzing the fires joint function provides its own insight, as well as begins to corroborate likely courses of action as the options and capabilities to achieve the effects from fires align with movement and maneuver options. The 135 th and 693 rd MRBs that remained in vicinity of the Mamison Pass following the completion of the Kavkaz 2008 exercise were equipped with 2S3 Akatsiya 152mm self-propelled artillery. The northern entrance of the Roki Tunnel is just outside of the maximum effective range of the 2S3's Rocket Assisted Projectile (RAP) round range from the top of the Mamison Pass. This, as well as the positioning of rocket artillery systems described subsequently, does not correlate to a prototype of a defense; reinforcing the intention of offensive operations. This comparison to a prototype will be discussed in step 3 of JIPOE.
In addition to the forces in vicinity of Mamison Pass, a rocket artillery unit equipped with BM-21s was moved to Kesatikau, only 5 Km by road, and 3 Km straight line distance to the north northeast from the north side of the Roki Tunnel. Dependent on the type of rocket, the 122mm rockets firing from a PAA in vicinity of Kesatikau could range to the northern edge of the town of Java, 35 Km by road from the southern opening of the Roki tunnel on the center route. Conversely, from that firing position they could only range up to the Mamison Pass in the west and could not range the eastern route at all without significantly repositioning to the north and east. The location of rocket and tube artillery systems concur with the results of the movement and maneuver analysis, identifying an ability to provide effects beyond the Roki Tunnel and support movement and maneuver along the center up to the town of Java. The analysis of the fires joint function clearly points towards the central route from the Roki Tunnel.
The step-by-step analysis replicating AI processing highlights the synthesis of the influence of terrain on the location and magnitude of effects that can be generated by the joint function. For the sake of length, only two of the seven joint functions were described. However, even with only two joint functions analyzed, the calculations show how AI can connect adversary actions to provide predictive analysis superior to drawing from analogy or means-ends reasoning, as the terrain and geometry are most certainly different from historical exemplars. Specific calculations are possible about the connections between units and equipment across multiple domains and the impact of the terrain on them. This specificity enables interpretation about their capability, and how changes to that disposition would affect it. This is insight. A more general staff processing of the information is not calibrated to the same level, nor are the linkages teased out, allowing the illusion of attention and feature positive effect to sustain the staff's confidence while not revealing any new information to be interpreted.
The third doctrinal step of JIPOE, evaluate the adversary, focuses on capturing the available forces of the adversary with respect to disposition, composition, and strength, and determining their doctrinal template for operations. In an AI enabled modification, the step of evaluate the adversary will be focused on the latter, as the former was analyzed in step two. The previous analysis of joint functions highlighted where the adversary was capable of achieving and even massing effects from the joint functions but does not identify the type of operation it is in support of. An understanding of the tasks and steps required to complete a variety of actions on the spectrum of conflict must be captured. Identifying the building blocks of a course of action is only a slightly different endeavor than conducting a Universal Joint Task List (UJTL) crosswalk, as there are tangible subordinate tasks that must be achieved, often roughly in order, to execute a Course of Action, and create its prototype.
Without changing the laws of physics, there are a series of physical observable actions to prepare for and conduct a military operation. Courses of action are comprised of capabilities delivered by the joint functions. Additionally, the capabilities have requirements, and many are observable. This is an ideal interface for current big data and data analytic initiatives. The identification of supporting tasks can aggregate to outline a COA that becomes increasingly clear as indicators overlap. As the program pieces together identified steps and tasks and compares them to prototypes of COAs, the likelihood of a specific COA emerges.
In 2008, Russia's actions prior to their invasion displayed several observable components of the impending offensive operations. A modified step three of JIPOE would compare Russia's posture to doctrinal template prototypes. The comparison includes the potential offensive roles of a motorized rifle battalion, notably as an advanced guard or part of the first or second echelon. 
10
11
11 Grau and Bartles, The Russian Way of War, 129.
troops on the forward edge."
12
13
15
16
2
Insight is generated by objectively aligning actions to elements of the competition continuum, then determining a collective center of mass for a number of inputs, creating a framework to interpret data and indicators. To incorporate and exploit the potential power of a machine learning approach, historical actions as expert data points could be inputted to fine tune analysis. An important distinction between machine learning using historical precedence is the use of individual actions, preparations, or condition setting as data points, and not analogy to past conflicts in totality. One way these expert data points feed into the AI algorithm and analysis is through the use of adaptive vector quantizers (AVQ), which build upon the fuzzy system described. AVQs can fine tune the patches that govern the rule the parameters return. If the patch in general is depicted as a two-dimensional shape on an x-y axis of two variables, then a data point is a specific x-y coordinate in that square. When expert data is inputted, AVQ dots move to the data at a specific coordinate. 
17
In terms of the 1979 invasion, the size of the force entering Afghanistan was much larger, although so is Afghanistan, which is just under ten times as large as Georgia, and 172 times larger than South Ossetia. In Afghanistan, "some 300 tanks and APCs of the 360 th Motorized Division, followed by a fleet of supply trucks, moved toward Kabul via the ancient Turkestan city of Mazar-i-Sharif along fast, Soviet constructed highways." 
19
20
3
22
22
If the international consensus in 2008 was that of a repeat of Russia's activities in the 1990s, namely employment of peacekeeping troops complimenting irregular force and political activities, then AI's analysis would have provided a lone voice of caution.
23
Of course, an expert staff executing JPP could have achieved a similar conclusion, but not without significant study of appropriate doctrinal templates, and a thorough study of the situation and variables-if given the time, and ability to remain objective. It is likely that an average staff would not have produced the same level of objective analysis and would have provided much more subjective conclusions, especially if few unambiguous warnings were present. The analysis of each joint function using current methods is time consuming and requires additional time to compile and merge the analysis of multiple individuals in order to identify the same insights. This staff process takes hours or days, and the Russians could cross the border and be in Tskhinvali by the time the staff figured it out for themselves. The AI enabled process would take far less time to figure out and would provide a doctrinally sound recommendation of what to do about it.
Having a computer partner meant never worrying about making a tactical blunder. The computer could project the consequences of each move we considered, pointing out possible outcomes and countermoves we might otherwise have missed. With that taken care of for us, we could concentrate on strategic planning instead of spending so much time on laborious calculations. Human creativity was even more paramount under these conditions, not less.
-Garry Kasparov, Deep Thinking
The time it takes to assemble key staff personnel to meet, conduct working groups, and iterate and merge work product for every JPP step is considerable. The ability to condense JPP further is limited by group mechanics and workflow. Other than planning a directing a course of action, the most significant available time reduction exists when planning in a crisis. Yet, doctrine does not present an elegant way of shortening the process, only a suggestion that "when possible, planners leverage previously prepared plans as a starting point in a crisis, modifying as required to meet the operational circumstances. If no previously developed plan is suitable, then the planning begins from scratch." 
1
JP 5-0 provides a seven-step approach to course of action development that follows a backwards planning construct.
2
but
Step one of the course of action development process directs the planner to "determine how much force will be needed in the theater at the end of the operation or campaign, what those forces will be doing, and how those forces will be postured geographically." 
3
4
9
10
The previously analyzed Russian forces from Table 
1
11
Given the locations of the Georgian second, third, fourth, and fifth Infantry Brigades, as well as a separate tank battalion in Gori, their distances to Russian forces, or key terrain can be calculated. Additionally, the corresponding combat power of Russian forces in vicinity of the Roki Tunnel and Tskhinvali can be recorded, and goal programming can be used to mathematically optimize the combat power routed from each Georgian brigade location to either the Roki Tunnel or Tskhinvali to meet favorable force ratios, while minimizing the overall distance travelled, which minimizes both time and fuel consumption. For the 4 th Infantry Brigade, which is recommended to split combat power between objectives, a second optimization can be run to determine the quantities of different combat systems by joint function to each objective and can be followed by travel time calculations based on formation sizes as discussed previously. What results is a rational choice solution grounded in doctrine and formed through the type of calculations reserved for adjudicating wargames in the later JPP step of COA Analysis.  This output is similar to analyzing data to create information. Merging these component pieces of information can create knowledge, which the commander or staff can apply wisdom to.
Instead of possessing an element of un-explainability, as intuition would inject, this approach is explainable, and can be modified with specific commander's planning guidance. 
12
The types of calculations that are ordinarily reserved for the later step of COA analysis are applied in the development of the COA in this modification. As Kasparov described the benefits of teaming with a computer, so too can humans apply operational art to a concept that has already incorporated the science. The level and complexity of the calculations that assist in generating the COA can be improved based on industry best practices.
The outputs of the man-machine developed COA can be compared to what the Georgian National Security Council articulated about their general course of action. This AI-enabled recommendation would have provided a more formidable force to the Roki Tunnel simultaneous to the commitment of Georgian forces towards Tskhinvali. It is likely that an earlier and more significant commitment of forces to a defense in vicinity of the Roki Tunnel would have significantly disrupted the invading Russian forces, which were already canalized, as well as prevented them from moving their rocket systems within range of Tskhinvali, and ballistic missile batteries through the tunnel to range further into Georgia, which proved to be the coup de grace for Georgian forces. 
13
These examples of ground forces must naturally extend to the application of combat power and effects from all domains. This technique enables simultaneous analysis of individual domains and provides a mechanism for the integration of cross-domain effects. Sorties of close air support may be integrated into the ground domain to provide a better combat power ratio at key locations and times in the ground fight. Additionally, air-to-air combat calculations can be carried out with ground-based air defense assets being factored into the air-to-air calculations.
This creates a multi-dimensional framework for combat operations conducted within and across domains and provides a method for synchronizing convergence. As conditions in one domain change, the impact on other domains and operations can be carried through. This creates multidomain breadth to the framework. With the core COA developed, the joint functions of protection, sustainment, command and control, and information can algorithmically identify the best integration of their function. With sufficient detail with respect to the breadth of the COA, the explanation can now turn to depth.
In order to create a COA at the operational level that has depth in both time and space, it must forecast several engagements ahead to achieve positions of relative advantage and seek to achieve a defeat mechanism that translates to success. Whereas the previous processes have largely been creations of algorithmically linking existing military doctrine or scholarship, they struggle to make the leap beyond immediate decisions and create operational art. For this, existing artificial intelligence provides applicable examples.
The minimax used in chess AI scores all board dispositions two moves ahead, action and reaction, and then compares the scores based on the program. 
14
15
Once courses of actions are developed and analyzed, they are compared during the step of COA Comparison. During the step, the COA's ability to accomplish the mission while maximizing elements of the commander's directed evaluation criteria are measured and compared, and ultimately inform the commander's selection of a course of action. 
16
17
Taking the implications of AI enabled JPP even further, AI could complete JPP semiautonomously following the first iteration, conducting the full JPP process near continuously, without fatigue, incorporating every new development. A continuous AI run JPP would provide feedback about the current positions and actions of forces. Near real time feedback would enable the tracking of subordinate units with respect to current operations, control measure compliance, and progress. Second, near continuous JPP is able to anticipate branches by evaluating what COA should be executed based on the current conditions, and even forecast the setup of future decisive engagements as conditions change. It will fight the enemy and not the plan. An AI enabled process would have the benefit of integrating resources for any emerging COA, synchronizing and optimizing effects from all domains, making the transition to a new branch plan more feasible. Such an ability would make incredible progress towards enabling forces to rapidly adapt in order to thrive at the edge of chaos in a volatile future environment.
To be of value, AI does not need to operate autonomously or replicate a sentient conscious being. AI only needs to bridge the widening gap between the suitability of the current planning and decision tools and the effectiveness of human cognition in complex adaptive systems. Complex calculations with more variables are not always more accurate. "One of the deepest truths of machine learning is that, in fact, it's not always better to use a more complex model, one that takes a greater number of factors into account . . . they might make our predictions dramatically worse."
1
Integrating AI into the Joint Planning Process will ensure that the process not only moves at near machine speed but, most importantly, at the speed of relevance.
With currently available open-source software and a standard laptop, tools to enable staffs to better model and understand the current environment and adversary can be developed to aid in JIPOE through Mission Analysis. Building algorithms to capture knowledge and create understanding of connections can be done now by self-taught staffs that feel incentivized or motivated to begin integrating AI. Burgeoning programming warfighters can seek technical assistance from data scientists hired across DoD organizations and echelons. Such initiative from within the force would enable Python or another programming language to become a lingua franca, such as Excel and PowerPoint have become. Staff's officers could code and run portions of a JPP program now, developing tools that increase staff speed and agility. Authoring programs will build trust and understanding, be explainable, and of course exceed the mental calculations of the commander it supports in several facets. It also has the added benefit of ensuring that the staff doesn't feed the commander data, but synthesizes it into information or knowledge for the commander's consumption. In a complex operational environment, understanding of connections must be synthesized into insight and must emerge within the staff process, because commanders will not register the signal amidst all the noise, but will recognize and understand it when it is teased out. In order to update military planning doctrine from industrial age process to information age process, JPP must merge the calculation and analysis capability of computers with the wargaming calculations of the Cold War era, which either lie semi-dormant in the modern staff, or veiled within the niche black boxes of third-party wargame simulations.
The Course of Action Development step through the COA Analysis and COA Comparison steps must be merged and modified to take advantage of the speed, power, and insights of current AI capabilities. COA Development must be more firmly rooted in the outputs of JIPOE. While JIPOE is doctrinally a key input to mission analysis, that thread can be lost in mission analysis where strategic direction and the dissection of higher documents can overshadow it. Increased JIPOE focus prevent anchoring on the desired endstate, and not on the present conditions. Backwards planning can make unjustified means-ends leaps, unwittingly aligning too many tenuous connections only ending in the vicinity of the present conditions. The Georgia case clear exhibits the dangers of those tendencies, where the science and operational art did not get sufficient consideration. The staff and leadership intuition was wrong, and their initial plan was flawed, likely because it considered a static problem and not how it would evolve. One does not need to look very far down the decision trees of the 2008 Russo-Georgian War to see the difference between likely results of sequential commitment to Tskhinvali and the Roki Tunnel, and how the size and timing of committed forces would change the outcome. Looking further ahead into the problem than the existing situation would have revealed very different outcomes precipitating from different starting state conditions. Missing the insight of how two very different conflicts would unfold based on control of the Roki Tunnel, with overall ground combat force ratios changing rapidly with time, the Georgians didn't place the decisive importance of the opportunity to defend the south opening of the Roki Tunnel. Emphasis on defending the south opening would have changed the early balance in favor of Georgia, gaining and preserving an asymmetric advantage for much longer. The short-term focus on Tskhinvali did not take into account the much less dynamic situation there, and the comparatively small difference in rapid commitment of Georgian forces there. The ability to forecast multiple alternative futures and choices enables the team developing the COA or the commander to not just think in three dimensions but in time. Understanding time, given its increasing rarity, and having the tools to work with and through it, may be the greatest advantage AI provides.
The COA development process can identify the most advantageous branches and prune the others, selecting both on suitability, feasibility, and acceptability. Joint functions can be simultaneously allocated and optimized to complete the COA. With a fuller understanding of the joint functions, human practitioners can take a doctrinally sound, feasible COA, and apply their knowledge and experience to turn science to art.
The incorporation of AI, to be successful and sustainable, will need long term cultural development. Introducing and championing computer programming at the junior staff levels would undoubtedly result in the development of novel programs and AI from the bottom up and a level of use, understanding, and trust that could not be thrust into the force. Throughout his experience with freestyle chess tournaments in which man-machine teams competed, what became clear is that "skill at manipulating and 'coaching' their computers to look very deeply into positions effectively counteracted the superior chess understanding of their Grandmaster opponents and the greater computational power of other participants."
2
In a twist of irony, these shepherds of AI will intuitively identify and substitute solutions to similar previously solved problems, the very problem with intuition in a complex environment. What is different is that they will see the structure of solved programming problems in the context of the military problem in front of them. They may recognize how the Minimax algorithm could apply to Course of Action Development, or how goal programming could help better understand and achieve asymmetry in movement and maneuver. They may find insight to decisions to exploit success or consolidate through the application of upper confidence bounds. The most advantageous concept of support may lie in solutions to the knapsack or traveling salesman problems. Intelligence fusion may best be accomplished with the logic that governs smart appliances. Such connections and leaps provide existing coding solutions to optimize performance in complex and adaptive systems, and will lead to solutions that exceed individual performance, as well as crystalize that knowledge for others. If military experts can
The realization that the MiG-15 pilot's decision cycle was slower than the F-86 pilot's decision cycle, and that the delay by the MiG-15 pilot resulted in the pilot reacting to an outdated version of the problem, albeit only by seconds or fractions of a second. The inherent reaction time to a problem that has since evolved, negated other advantages such as speed.
The realization that the MiG-15 pilot's decision cycle was slower than the F-86 pilot's decision cycle, and that the delay by the MiG-15 pilot resulted in the pilot reacting to an outdated version of the problem, albeit only by seconds or fractions of a second. The inherent reaction time to a problem that has since evolved, negated other advantages such as speed.
Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure: Recognizing and Avoiding Error in Complex Situations (New  York: Metropolitan Books, 1996), 7-10.   
Rune Djurhuus, "Chess Algorithms Theory and Practice" (Oslo: University of Oslo, 2013), 6-12. https://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF4130/h13/undervisningsmateriale/chess-algorithms---theory-and-practice_ver2013.pdf.
Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2013), 4.   
Roger Penrose, The Emperor's New Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989), 546.   
Schacter et al., Psychology, 374.   
Bart Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy Logic. (New York, NY: Hyperion, 1993), 176.   
William Duggan, Coup D'Oeil: Strategic  Intuition in Army Planning (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2005), 3, https://press.armywarcollege.edu/monographs/729/.
Duggan, Coup D'Oeil,
3.
Geoffrey Ingersoll, "Too Busy to Read," Military and Defense, Business Insider, accessed April 14,  2021, https://www.businessinsider.com/viral-james-mattis-email-reading-marines-2013-5.   
Rolf Dobelli, The Art of Thinking Clearly (London: Hodder & Stoughton Ltd., 2013), 35, https://justincayce.files.wordpress.com/2016/09/the-art-of-thinking-clearly-by-rolf-dobelli.pdf.
Svante Cornell and Frederick Star, The Guns of August 2008: Russia's War in Georgia, (New York: M.E. Sharpe, 2009), 162.
Cornell and Star, The Guns of August 2008, 162.   
Ibid., 50.   
"Double pendulum," My Physics Lab, accessed March 24, 2021. https://www.myphysicslab.com/pendulum/double-pendulum-en.html.
Operational Design is a notable adaptation that has introduced the development of a systemic understanding of the operational environment, however the dependency of variables remain relatively subjective, and the process time consuming.; U.S. Department of Defense, JP 5-0. Joint Planning, IV-1.
Division travel time was computed in a program written in Python
based on inputs of 5,000 vehicles, 32 Km/hr. travel speed, 2 minutes between march units, 5 minutes between serials, 100m between vehicles.
U.S. Department of Defense, The Joint Staff, JP 2-01.3. Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operational Environment, by Joint Force Development (Washington D.C., 2014), I-1.
In the 2008 Russo-Georgian War the operational environment (OE) could be defined as the country of Georgia including the de facto states of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, as well as the adjacent oblasts of Russia.
U.S. Department of Defense, JP 1. Doctrine for the Armed Forces, I-9.
Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking,[208][209][210][211] 
Alexandros Boufesis, The Russia-Georgian War of 2008: Russia's Geostrategic Ascension. (Ann Arbor, MI: Nimble Books, 2015), 44-45.
Boufesis, The Russia-Georgian War of 2008, 45.   
Boufesis, The Russia-Georgian War of 2008, 48-50.   
Grau and Bartles, The Russian Way of War, 129.   
Ibid., 138.   
Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking,  
 15  Ibid.
Ibid.,  
171-172.   
Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking,[215][216][217][218][219][220] 
Ibid., 221.   
Edward Girardet, Afghanistan: The Soviet War. (New York, NY: St. Martin's Press, 1985), 15.
Lester Grau and Michael Gress, The Soviet-Afghan War: How a Superpower Fought and Lost (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2002), 17.
Bruno Coppieters Ed., Contested Borders in the Caucasus. (Brussels: VUB University Press, 1996), 98-101.
U.S. Department of Defense, The Joint Staff, JP 5-0. Joint Planning, by Joint Force Development, (Washington D.C.,
2020), I-13.
U.S. Department of Defense, JP 5-0. Joint Planning, III-36.
Ibid.   
Cornell and Star, The Guns of August 2008, 169.   
Ibid.   
Cornell and Star, The Guns of August 2008, 73-74.   
The desired and acceptable range of COFMs is a great example of potential commander's planning guidance.
Cornell and Star, The Guns of August 2008, 174.   
Rune Djurhuus, "Chess Algorithms Theory and Practice", 6-12.
Bart Selman, "Foundations in Artificial Intelligence." (Ithaca, Cornell University), 21-50. http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs4700/2014fa/slides/CS4700-Games1_v5.pdf.
U.S. Department of Defense, JP 5-0. Joint Planning, V-42.
Ibid., V-45.
Brian Christian and Tom Griffiths, Algorithms to Live By: The Computer Science of Human Decisions. (New York, NY: Henry Holt and Company,
2016), 155.
Garry Kasparov, Deep Thinking: Where Machine Intelligence Ends and Human Creativity Begins. (New  York, NY: PublicAffairs, 2017), 246.   
Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking, 276.   
This thesis developed in harmony with its advocacy for man-machine teaming, largely due to the involvement of 
Mr. Jeff Turner
Dr. Frank Hoffman. Their
Hoffman's breadth and depth of knowledge of the defense academic landscape provided great insight into relevant research and existing work at near machine speed, not dissimilar to 
Garry Kasparov
Mr. Turner
Mr. Jeff Turner
2020), 
214-215
defeat this Russian force in various potential scenarios, as well as provides an estimate for casualties based on force ratios. It is not a crystal ball, but it does represent prudent planning. As the very first quote of this paper called forth, "war is a human endeavor-a clash of wills characterized by the threat or application of force and violence, often fought among populations.
It is not a mechanical process that can be precisely controlled by machines, calculations, or processes." 
6
2
When the combat potential has already been modified for terrain and mission type as in the TAM method, a calculation derived from computer modeling can be used to forecast casualties based on the corresponding COFMs. 7 Once all other variables are factored in, a remaining 1:1 ratio equates to an equal distribution of casualties, with a non-linear curve that approaches 0% at a roughly 4.4:1 combat power ratio. 8 This calculation does not provide a percentage chance of "mission success," but can provide iterations of expected battle damage and casualties, which shows how the combat power is affected over time. Assumptions must be made about the loss of combat power that will result in a defeat or withdraw, but this is a great example of where human insight can be forced to provide specificity, benefitting both the process and the individual's knowledge. Table 
3
6
Huber et al. Ed. Military Strategy and Tactics: Computer Modeling of Land War Problems, (New York: Plenum Press, 1975), 113. 8
When using a decision tree and the minimax algorithm for chess AI, the program appraises the board for most, or all, alternative futures and generates a comparable value. For each option, there is a specific disposition of white and black game pieces on the board. The disposition can be scored for each side, resulting in assignment of a number score. For example, the remaining white pieces are worth 30 points and black pieces are worth 40. This specific disposition is valued at -10 for the white player. In addition to the aggregated value of pieces, modifiers for positions are also often used. The method of valuating the remaining pieces for The inherent nature and trajectory of conflict results in an environment that will further challenge decision making with respect to both tempo and complexity. The Joint Planning Process (JPP) enables decision making through a linear process that forms a symbiotic relationship between commander and staff. Informed commanders must engage with the process and steer it as their understanding of conditions requires. In return, JPP provides an analytical guiderail to individual judgement and intuition, which can be used artfully and with agility. The relationship of persons and process is not a straitjacket; final judgement always belongs the commander.
Without the aid of JPP, commanders are subject to a myriad of heuristics and biases.
Their very experience, study, and intuition can prove misleading when dealing with problems existing in a complex adaptive system. The commander's problem is exacerbated as the future operating environment will rapidly outpace the process of a staff run JPP, leaving its analytical findings and recommendations outdated or irrelevant. Without a course correction, the unaided commander will forge ahead alone on their instincts as JPP lags. An analysis of cognition and commander's intuition within decision making reveals where the process draws its strength but also highlights where evolutionary biology has not kept pace with the explosion of technology, increasingly leaving room for error. The shortcomings will be exacerbated as the environment continues to evolve towards one of increasing speed, complexity, and volatility. Artificial intelligence tools in other sectors already demonstrate their aptitude for the task of providing quick, consistent, and accurate calculations. The iPhone map application already provides multiple routes and recommends an adjustment decision when traffic patterns change. express how they come to expert judgements, then a replication of expert judgement can be created for man-machine team, as computer programs do what they are programmed to do.
Throughout the research, it has become clear that the number of applicable connections couldn't be explored within the scope of this paper, nor the best models and calculations be determined with certainty. A compromise of effectiveness and simplicity was struck as a vehicle to convey the concept. If for example, it is believed that Bayesian inference would be more accurate than Laplace's Rule, then that better calculation can be easily substituted without changing the overall recommendation. With limitations in mind, it is not imperative that each algorithm produce an exact number. As in correlation of forces and means, what is important, is the relation between forces, regardless of whether it is measured in statute or metric. The pyramids were not built with modern engineering, but on good measure. Certainty will never be possible by machine, or human calculation, but good measure can be consistently reached. It is possible to ensure that it isn't a fair fight.
Understanding the inherent limitations of cognition and JPP in the current and future environment led to deeper insights about the underlying reasons that underpin military doctrine, heuristics, and aphorisms, which emerged from the calculations, the ability to animate them in space and time, and the emergence of connections. Kosko revealed a similar enlightenment that "science tracks math. Induction tracks deduction." 3 However, the present environment is one still skeptical of the possibilities, through an over estimation of human cognition competence and equal ignorance of artificial intelligence, written off as something too complex to wield, too far off, or too sci-fi.
We find ourselves in a similar situation as the focus of an Isaac Asimov short story, 