# ID: c6592798472b41549691a6f843de21fb
# Title: People First, Mission Always: A Historical Examination of the Need to Find the Balance Between Protecting the Force and Achieving the Mission
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
When should force protection take precedence over achieving the mission? Historically, a relationship has developed between these two concepts. From the development of fortifications to modern combat outposts, force protection has now become the overriding concept when a nation is deploying its military forces. The security of a nation's soldiers has become a priority, with unwarranted pressure on commanders to avoid casualties when deployed on a mission. This prioritization of force protection has become a modern day reality, except when a quick decisive victory is assured, or the conflict is deemed to be of vital national importance. The three historical case studies examined herein, examine the relationship between force protection and mission accomplishment. This relationship will moreover carry forward into future operational deployments, the lessons from history being a constant reminder of previous misadventures. Recent history has seen many examples where an overly defensive mindset has been adopted because of a publicly unacceptable tolerance for casualties. To be successful in military campaigns a balance needs to be attained between force protection and mission accomplishment.
When should force protection take precedence over achieving the mission? Historically, a relationship has developed between these two concepts. From the development of fortifications to modern combat outposts, force protection has now become the overriding concept when a nation is deploying its military forces. The security of a nation's soldiers has become a priority, with unwarranted pressure on commanders to avoid casualties when deployed on a mission. This prioritization of force protection has become a modern day reality, except when a quick decisive victory is assured, or the conflict is deemed to be of vital national importance.
The three historical case studies examined herein, examine the relationship between force protection and mission accomplishment. This relationship will moreover carry forward into future operational deployments, the lessons from history being a constant reminder of previous misadventures. Recent history has seen many examples where an overly defensive mindset has been adopted because of a publicly unacceptable tolerance for casualties. To be successful in military campaigns a balance needs to be attained between force protection and mission accomplishment. iv ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to take this opportunity to thank my wife Claire and our three children, Eva, James and Shane. The support from these four people has been incredible, and this thesis would not have been completed without their backing and support.
I would also like to thank my committee, Dr. Nicholas Murray, Dr. Richard   Berkebile, and Mr. Tim McKane for all their support. The constant feedback and recommendations for improvement have been extremely beneficial to me, and has allowed me the opportunity to complete this project in a very positive academic environment. For this I am extremely grateful.
The Truman Library, the Combined Arms Research Library in Fort Leavenworth, and the Irish Military Archives all deserve special mention for allowing me access to their files and documentation. This was done in a most professional and accommodating manner, and allowed me access to primary research material that helped strengthen my overall research findings.
Finally to Venita Krueger, I would like to say thank you ever so much. In times of personal frustration, your formatting ability and willingness to help was a major bonus, and because of this I am forever grateful. Thank you. -Anonymous For many years, Irish commanders departing on United Nations (UN) missions have uttered the above sentiments. They believe that in order to be a successful leader, the safety of their troops is of paramount importance. Most military leaders and their political masters, especially when troops are deployed on a UN or humanitarian mission, believe the same. Politicians envision that the domestic population is completely casualty averse. These politicians believe that their military's participation in international missions is dependent on the ability to avoid casualties, in order to placate the population, and electorate at home.
Commanders must not be reckless with the lives of their troops, but equally they must not disregard the overall mission that they have been deployed on to achieve. A balance needs to be struck, that will ensure the protection of the soldiers, along with mission success. The necessity for military leadership to ensure the protection of their troops during conflict has always been important, and sometimes decisive. Force protection as a concept entails "measures and means to minimize the vulnerability of personnel, facilities, materiel, operations and activities from threats and hazards in order to preserve freedom of action and operational effectiveness thereby contributing to 1 mission success."
1
Military forces, while winning every tactical battle, can still lose the war at the strategic level. As a campaign becomes protracted, or a military expedition is not considered to be of national importance, excessive casualties can diminish the domestic will of the people. This can be the deciding factor in the prosecution of a war. A casualty averse nation is one where military casualties could undermine the domestic support of the population, for a particular mission. This is due to an unrealistic perception of the ability to avoid casualties, a lack of faith in the prosecution of the campaign, and what type of operation is being conducted.
What is the correct balance, a commander should have between force protection and mission accomplishment? Which one should be the overriding concept? Force protection will always take precedence over achieving the mission, except when a quick decisive victory is assured or the mission is of vital national importance.
A force protection policy must balance the competing interests of the state in order to allow for mission success, while still maintaining the combat effectiveness of a
force. An overly cautious force that prioritizes protection and security over an offensive mindset, will ultimately extend the mission, and lose the initiative to the opposing side.
This inability to take the initiative because of an overly cautious approach could in due course jeopardize the mission.
This thesis will examine how the domestic population perceives casualties in comparison to the duration, and national importance of the mission. Force protection as a concept should not be the overriding factor but rather be equal to, and an enabler of mission accomplishment. The public or domestic population, prefers victory rather than defeat but at what cost?
2
3
The purpose and scope of this thesis is to find an acceptable balance for military operations, between the conflicting demands and motives of the domestic population and their political masters. In book one of On War; Clausewitz advocated "our task therefore is to develop a theory that maintains a balance between these three tendencies." 4 These tendencies are the three parts of his paradoxical trinity. The relationships between the people, the government and the army. 
5
6
7
The historical consequences of force protection, casualty aversion, and how these concepts have developed alongside fortifications theory will be defined, and then analyzed using three historical case studies. The Clausewitzian paradoxical trinity will also be used in order to help interpret the relationship that has been established between force protection, and achieving the mission, within these case studies.
As a young platoon commander, with the United Nations (UN), operating on the border between Lebanon and Israel, I had first-hand experience of force protection as a concept. Upon deployment I was met by my older brother who was rotating out after his tour of duty. While pointing at his blue beret, his parting words were "don't get yourself killed for this thing . . . it's not Ireland." This advice stuck with me for the remainder of my tour of duty. When examining this advice, two aspects are prevalent. The first, being the importance of preservation of oneself, and more importantly, of the platoon that I was responsible for. Secondly, the person giving the advice was my brother, and hence could talk to me directly, cutting through all the outside interference, to let me know where my priorities should be.
This advice struck home when my UN platoon outpost took a direct hit from a South Lebanese Army tank round. As the smoke evaporated and the radio chatter erupted, I grabbed the field phone and contacted the Non Commissioned Officer (NCO)
whose area of our compound, took the direct hit. After contact was established, I asked "are you all alright down there." At that moment, it struck us both, that my overriding concern was not mission accomplishment but rather, the safety of the platoon. It was a UN mission, and this was a defining moment in our tour of duty. Were we willing to sacrifice ourselves for the achievement of a mission that had not been achieved over the previous fifteen years? Miraculously everyone survived, but now they knew where their platoon commander's priorities lay. My main concern was with my men. I was not willing to needlessly sacrifice the lives of my soldiers for a complex mission that could only be solved at the diplomatic level. For me the overriding goal was to actually bring everyone home safely. These SOPs identify the necessity in achieving a balance between these two concepts in order for the Nordic Battlegroup to be effective on any future missions.
On a personal basis, as the force protection staff officer, what was essential for me was that excessive casualties and a poor force protection policy could possibly undermine the political and military resolve of the European Union. On reviewing the SOPs of the EU OHQ from this period, I have actually underlined the sentence about undermining political resolve, and notated 'the domestic will of the people'. This will of the people is commonly selected in campaign planning for a possible strategic center of gravity.
According to Clausewitz the strategic center of gravity is the "the hub of all power and movement, on which everything depends." 9 This "hub of all power" or the domestic will of the people, can be equated to the possible effects of force protection on the success of the mission. Political and military resolve encapsulates two parts of the Clausewitzian trinity, and the domestic will of the people completes the trinity. The necessity for an EU Battlegroup to avoid unnecessary casualties, reaffirmed my previous beliefs and led me down a path of discovery. This path will further analyze the relationship between mission accomplishment, and force protection, within this thesis.
Throughout history, the assembling and maintenance of an army has proven to be a costly matter. The actual preservation of this force can be as important as actually achieving the mission. The needless sacrificing of soldiers in achieving a mission can undermine the overall combat effectiveness of an army, and thus threaten the very existence of the state. Sovereigns and political rulers have needed to construct fortifications, and adopt force protection measures in order to preserve the force. This conservation of a standing army by the avoidance of casualties, and use of force protection, ensures the maintenance of power for these rulers.
This chapter introduced the aim and scope of my thesis. Force protection is a vital component in modern military operations; politically, domestically and militarily. The linkage between force protection, and mission accomplishment, will be further examined in the remainder of this thesis. Chapter 2 will examine the methodology used to analyze this thesis. Chapter 3 will examine the literature involved with force protection and how historical theorists have established the relationship between preserving a force, and the necessity to achieving the mission. The remaining chapters will consist of three historical case studies followed by a concluding chapter.
CHAPTER 2
In this chapter the rationale behind my research philosophy, epistemological stance and methodological framework is provided, so that the reader can understand the role they played in writing this thesis. A number of themes worthy of additional exploration were brought forward, and this thesis will find answers using a methodological framework which is based on the principle of research themes. These themes will be outlined at the end of chapter 3, the review of literature.
For the research process to be effective, I explored the realities perceived both historically and internationally. Since I am a serving military officer of 24 years' experience, and four deployments on United Nations and European Union missions, I am well placed to conduct this research. I am also very much aware that my military experience has impacted on my ontology.
In analyzing the events surrounding the siege of Jadotville An active researcher must be aware of their epistemology. To create a coherent investigation the researcher must understand their underlying assumptions about legitimate knowledge. 
13
14
A case study is a strategy that provides insight into how something works in life, over time. The use of a case study can also spot patterns and aid in understanding the differences between the ideal and the real. 
15
16
The theory and literature surrounding the historical development of force protection, and how it relates to mission accomplishment will now be examined in chapter 3. This theory and its outcomes or common themes, will then be tested using three historical case studies. These historical studies will be mainly based on primary This chapter will also identify a number of key themes that are evident through my review of the relevant literature. These will be carried forward into the remainder of the thesis, in order to form the basis for the case study research of subsequent chapters.
The Historical Development of Fortifications as a Method of Force Protection Throughout history, fortifications have been used to defend key terrain, and to protect the force defending from within. A defender in a fortress has a marked advantage over an attacker, because the defenses provide physical protection, allowing the defender to secure key terrain with considerably less troops, and more physical protection than the attacker.
Following the Italian Wars (1494-1498), the science of military architecture underwent a radical revolution. The French artillery using the first really effective siege cannon had battered down with ridiculous ease the high-walled medieval fortifications of the Italian towns. The Italians' reply was the invention of a new model enceinte-the main 
19
20
The appearance of the Trace Italienne in the 1520s brought about the end of the brief period of dominance for the wall-shattering cannons. This made fortifications, and force protection, the dominant aspect on the battlefield. They provided incredible protection to the defender. Capturing or reducing to rubble these 'Star Forts' was next to impossible and thus they also acted as deterrence to the empire building ambitions of the Bourbons and Habsburgs. 
21
22
23
21 Dennis E. Showalter and William J. Astore, Soldiers' Lives Through History: The Early Modern World (Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 2007). 
22
Paret,
Makers of Modern Strategy,
73. 23 Ibid.,
79.
24
A form of fortification advanced in medieval times, and still in use today is the stronghold. This is a place not merely for protection from attack but also of active defense. A stronghold is a center where the defenders are secure from surprise or superior numbers, and also a base from which they sally forth to hold predators at bay and to impose military control over the area in which their interests lie. 
25
There are two general classes of field fortifications, hasty and deliberate. Hasty fortifications are those initially constructed when in contact with the enemy or when contact is imminent. Deliberate fortifications are constructed out of contact with the enemy, or developed gradually from hasty fortifications. Field fortifications increase the combat efficiency of troops. They must be used skillfully to further the mission of a unit, and must not be allowed to lead to a passive or static defence. 
26
27
Running parallel to the construction of fortifications, is the theory associated with them and the reason for their construction. An overarching theme prevalent in the majority of these theorists' opinions is the need for the preservation of expensively assembled military forces. This need takes precedence over the achievement of the actual mission. Another prevailing area, is that in order to achieve the mission, active defense is the better option. Passive defense though initially beneficial will in the long run, have detrimental consequences to the mission. The theories of a number of key military philosophers have been selected to outline these various concepts associated with fortifications, and force protection.
Sun Tzu as a master theorist did recognize the futility of attacking fortifications.
"The worst Policy is to attack cities. Attack cities only when there is no alternative."
28
29
30
Jomini states that war will be confined primarily to a series of combats in which the possession of fortified areas will be imperative. 
31
32
In Book Six of On War, Clausewitz describes the strategic importance of fortresses and fortification. "Their significance was felt beyond their walls; it contributed 31 A.H. Jomini, Art of War (London: Greenhill Books, 1992). 
32
33
to the conquest or retention of the country . . . fortresses attained a strategic significance that for a time was considered so important that they formed the basis of strategic plans." 34 A defensive mindset can prevail especially when facing an asymmetric enemy.
The Israelis in South Lebanon and NATO in Afghanistan utilized the concept of combat outposts (COPs) so as to protect themselves from a not easily identifiable enemy. They projected power by active patrolling, and protected their force, using field fortifications or COPs. However, this power projection was directly related to how often the force left the relative protection of its fortification to go out and patrol the surrounding environs.
The intelligence gathered on these patrols, provides valuable situational awareness. But at what cost to the security and protection of the force. The primary reason for the withdrawal of the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) from Lebanon in 2000 was the lack of support from the Israeli population for their occupation of South Lebanon. The constant infliction of IDF casualties by Hezbollah reinforced this sentiment amongst the domestic population. 
35
"Strictly speaking, even the most passive function of a fortress, defence against assault, cannot, after all, be imagined without this active element." 36 If however a force does not have the capacity to project itself beyond the walls of a fortification, Clausewitz 34 Clausewitz, On War, 393.
35 Daniel Isaac Helmer, The Long War Series Occasional Paper 21, Flipside of the 
COIN: Israel's Lebanese Incursions Between 1982
-2000
(Fort Leavenworth KS: CSI Press, 2007), 72. 36 Clausewitz, On War, 394.
Clausewitz defines a defensive position as "any position in which one accepts battle and makes use of terrain to protect oneself . . . it makes no difference whether one's general attitude is mainly passive or mainly active." 
38
Staying inside the relative safety of the fortification may save lives in the short run, but through time this will lead to mission creep and mission extensions. This could jeopardize and elongate the overall mission, with the possible effect of endangering the safety of the force in the long run. 
37
38
The Clausewitzian trinity examines the relationship that exists between what Clausewitz espouses as the instrument of policy (the government), the play of chance (the military) and the primordial violence (the people). 
39
40
41
The people are paired mainly with irrational forces, the primordial violence of hatred and enmity. This would suggest a fickle nature that needs to be controlled or steadied by the other two aspects of the trinity. The people in a democracy are responsible for electing their government. The optimum government should be stable or rational so as to best represent the people in the most consistent manner. By acting in an irrational manner that jeopardizes the country, a government can lose its popular support or mandate, and loose power. This loss of power could be as a result of domestic unrest, and lack of confidence among the electorate.
Force protection, as a theory does seek to rationalize war, and fix an arbitrary relationship among the points or aspects of the Clausewitzian trinity. 
42
Which is more important?
The Clausewitzian trinity is an extremely useful tool in aiding the understanding of how force protection interacts with mission accomplishment. Forces can stay within the safety of their fortresses, not venturing outside the confines of the protective walls.
However the overall benefit of this is questionable because it undermines situational awareness, and control over the surrounding environs. The political masters and the domestic population will question the overall value of hunkering down behind the protection offered by a combat outpost. This will prevent casualties but is it the best use of resources, and tax payer's money. Is staying within the base and not patrolling, fulfilling the initial mission that the force was originally deployed or achieving the overall purpose of deploying the force in the first place? This purpose relates directly to the mission, and how successful it can be achieved. The success of this mission is of utmost importance in satisfying the needs of the political hierarchy and their masters, the electorate. The academics, Christopher Gelpi, Peter D. Feaver, and Jason Reifler, in their book, Paying the Human Costs of War, advocate that the support of the domestic population is directly related to whether a country has vital national interests at stake. 
43
As outlined in chapter 1, NATO defines force protection as using all measures and means available to minimize a force's vulnerabilities. Such vulnerabilities are exploitable weaknesses that must be protected so as to ensure "freedom of action and operational effectiveness thereby contributing to mission success."
44
45
46
47
48
49
As already stated, strongholds or COPs allow a force to project its will and intentions into the surrounding area. The success of this power projection is inversely 
46
47
48
49
proportional to the ability of a force to sally forth on a regular and effective basis from the conceived and relative security of their base or stronghold. A force that becomes overly dependent on the security provided by its fortified strongpoint or COP may be neglectful of actually achieving its overall mission in its area of responsibility. Such a force may become too casualty averse, or it may have the constraints of its political elite and national caveats in order to avoid casualties. Such a perception of protecting the force, to the detriment of the overall mission is facilitated by the relative security and safety received from a fortification or strongpoint. In the long run, a commander who accepts and mitigates the risks associated with patrolling, providing security, and interacting with the locals will have better odds, and a better chance of achieving his mission. However if he incorrectly perceives force protection to mean staying inside the COP, and not risking his troops by patrolling, then he will ultimately endanger his mission, hand the initiative to the enemy, risking not only his soldiers' lives but the lives of all subsequent soldiers serving in his area of responsibility.
In 1984, as a result of the Vietnam conflict, the U.S. administration published the Weinberger Doctrine. It set out conditions that should be met for the U.S. to become involved in future military conflicts. One of the main conditions was that "the vital interests of the U.S. or its allies must be at stake." 50 Point six of this doctrine states that "a combat role should only be undertaken as a last resort." 51 This enshrined the view that 50 Caspar W. Weinberger, "The Uses of Military Power," Defense 85 (January 1985): 2-11. 
51
52
53
53
54
55
Total force protection is unachievable, unless you never leave barracks and wrap your soldiers up in cotton wool. NATO doctrine advocates that "force protection must therefore, be based upon effective risk management . . . an unrealistic expectation to avoid risk may impact adversely on the accomplishment of the mission and, if casualties should ensue, undermine political and military resolve."
56
57
Prior to the United States involvement in Iraq and Afghanistan, the American attitude towards force protection can largely be explained by what was called the 'Desert Storm Syndrome.' That is an unjustified perception that the military can operate casualty free. 
58
60
61
63
60 Feaver and Gelpi,
162. 61
63
Storm, and the public backlash after Somalia, the public tolerance for casualties would be low. This was especially true in the case of Kosovo, which had connotations of being a UN sponsored humanitarian mission.
The Battle of Mogadishu, in 1994 reversed the illusion of the Powell Doctrine 64 and the success of Desert Storm. The deaths of eighteen U.S. soldiers seriously undermined the success and previous achievements of this multinational peace support operation. It was also a major deciding factor in the withdrawal of the U.S. contingent from Somalia. Six months after the incident the Clinton Administration released Presidential Directive 25. 
65
66
67
64
65
66 Adam Roberts, "The Crisis in UN Peacekeeping," in Managing Global Chaos, eds. Chester A. Crocker and Fen Osler Hampson (Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace Press 1996), 310. 
67 Feaver and Gelpi,
96.
68
69
The overall willingness of the public to accept casualties and support a military operation can be designated as casualty tolerance, casualty sensitivity or casualty shyness. This designation can be measured as absolute, high, moderate, limited or nonexistent. Thus the claim that the public is casualty tolerant is a claim that casualties do not undermine the domestic support of the population for a particular mission. 
70
68
69
70
72
A clear delineation between wars of national importance, and peace support humanitarian operations, also exists, especially in the realm of where a domestic population is willing to accrue casualties. Clausewitz in his paradoxical trinity examines this relationship and how it affects policymakers. 
71
72
73
74
75
Feaver and Gelpi argue that if policymakers can make the case that the operation is important, then the public would show a willingness to shoulder greater costs. 
76
76
77 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, for Acquisitions, Technology, and Logistics, Defense Science Task Force on Force Protection in Urban and Unconventional Environments (Washington DC: Governmetn Printing Office, 2006), 2. that minimal casualties are an essential element for the success of a mission. 
79
80
As previously demonstrated, there is a direct correlation between the avoidance of casualties and the ability to achieve mission success. It has also been established that mission success leads to domestic support from the people or the primordial violence as advocated by Clausewitz. It leads to the 'feel good factor' that was very evident in the United States after 'Operation Desert Storm'. The military or army were happy, the population or the people were also happy and because of this the Bush administration (1988-1992) or the instrument of policy were vindicated as victors awaiting their political spoils. The advantage of finding this balancing relationship is that an optimum relationship between the three facets of the trinity will be discovered. This will allow the military and the government to pursue their policies successfully. 
79
80
There is a significant analytical benefit to be gained by recognizing the relationship between the people, army and government. Ignoring any of these elements or distorting their relationship undermines a society's war effort. 
81
The security and protection of US military personnel is an overriding concern for the U.S. Government as this recent United States official document from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, states;
The safety of its men and women in uniform will remain a primary concern of a democratic state . . . moreover, casualties suffered in longer endeavors when the mission is more open-ended and the enemy more elusive can have a greater political impact than casualties suffered in those operations where the U.S. military is pursuing a defined mission and clear opponent. 
82
81
82
Oakley argue, was very evident in Somalia. Without a coherent mission and plan, commanders were reluctant to send troops to engage the warring factions, and increase the possibility of U.S. casualties. 
83
85
86
83
84
86
Properly managed force protection can give the army greater latitude to conduct all of its missions, even where decisive victory is not clearly apparent. Major Tim W.
Quillin, in his Monograph, for the School of Advanced Military Studies Leavenworth, "Force Protection in Support and Stability Operations (SASO)," reinforces this assertion that force protection should never restrict freedom of action but rather force protection should be used as an enabling facet in overall mission success. 
87
Force protection, mission success and the tolerance of the domestic population are all key aspects influencing the geometry of the Clausewitzian trinity. For military planners the most advantageous combination of mission success coupled with force protection is what should drive the planning and overall end-states envisioned. "Changes in the perceptions of the likelihood of success appear to have an important influence on the public's sensitivity to casualties." 
88
Throughout history, fortification theory has developed parallel to mission accomplishment. Fortifications enabled the sovereign to protect his territories while still preserving his expensively assembled army. The degree of mission accomplishment is inversely proportional to the force protection and projection measures adopted. History has proven that a leader who is overly concerned with the protection of his military forces, sacrifices the ability to successfully accomplish the overall mission, within an acceptable timeframe. This compares with research that suggests the public are more supportive of casualties if the mission is being actively pushed by the leadership of a nation. 
89
The Clausewitzian trinity is a complex but valuable analytical tool. It allows us to link the relationships required between government policy, the military and what the domestic support wants and expects. Mission success is a key facet in allowing for equilibrium to be established among the trinity. Protecting the force is not only about defensive measures. Instead, force protection in future missions will depend on the defensive measures in co-ordination with an offensive mind-set. This mind-set must take account of all aspects of the trinity. This chapter, through my review of literature, defined force protection and analyzed the progression of fortifications throughout history. The accompanying theory developed alongside these fortifications was also examined and related with force protection and its relationship with mission accomplishment. The various aspects associated with the relationship between force protection and mission accomplishment 
89 Feaver and Gelpi,
146.
These themes are listed as follows; does an overly protective force that concentrates solely on defense, lead to a protracted campaign, more casualties, and mission creep in the long run? What is the relationship between force protection and mission success? Which are more important, avoiding casualties and the destruction of an expensively assembled army or achieving the mission regardless of the consequences?
Ultimately what is the proportional relationship between force protection and a risk averse population and government? How is this relationship altered in times of threat to national security or when a mission is no longer or not perceived as a threat to national security?
Bassford and Villacres advocated that an approach to a theory which denies or minimizes the role of the forces inherent in the Clausewitzian trinity or the interaction between them is wrong. 
90
92
93
94
The news of the 'sickening fiasco', as Joseph Chamberlain called the defeat at Spion Kop, struck Britain like a thunderbolt. Accusations of muddle and incompetence multiplied . . . David Llyod George and countless other 'pro-Boers' redoubled their criticisms of the war. 
95
96
97
New tactics had to be formulated, so as to placate the unease, and dissention of the domestic British population. These new tactics would also be required in order to defeat the Boers.
By early 1900, after dramatic increases in their force levels in theatre, the British deployed what was at the time, the largest expeditionary army, in their history. 
98
In the latter half of 1900, after the loss of the conventional fight, the Boers began to use insurgent tactics, and the guerrilla phase of the war began. During the same time period in December 1900, Lord Horatio Herbert Kitchener, took charge of the British Army in the South Africa. He initially attempted to defeat the Boer guerrillas using mobile columns that scoured the countryside. However after a number of months of indecisive activities, and also because of the shortage in-theatre of British cavalry units, Kitchener realized that this tactic would not end the war quickly. He along with the British leadership understood the need to change doctrine, and tactics in order to bring the war to a favorable conclusion. The blockhouse system was developed as a means to defeat the Boer insurgency. 
99
101
The British constructed the first blockhouses in January 1901. Their original purpose was simply to protect the railways, bridges, and British lines of communications from the Boer guerillas. The elongated lines of communication in South Africa meant the 
99 Pakenham,
The Boer War,
[527]
[528]
[529]
103
104
102 Pakenham,
The Boer War,
569. 103
104
supports. 
105
These lines of blockhouses often stretched for long distances into the South African countryside, with the longest line reaching over 300 miles. 
106
107
108
Communications between each blockhouse was by field phone, and in addition they employed the services of native scouts as watchmen and for night patrols. 
109
The original purpose of blockhouses was to protect the railways and lines of communication. This was transformed into a new tactic by Lord Kitchener in order to defeat the Boer insurgency. With the railways secured by the blockhouse system, the British Army moved troops and logistics with relative security, thus enhancing their freedom of movement. Secure telegraph lines also enhanced the command and control capabilities available to Lord Kitchener and his military leadership. The first blockhouses had been constructed in relative isolation with a view to pacifying the surrounding countryside by protecting the railway lines and bridges.
However the original large stone ones were vulnerable to enemy attack. It was only after a series of connected blockhouses were established, affording mutual support that the benefits of this system became obvious. As the blockhouse system spread, it effectively allowed the control of key terrain across the Boer republics. 
110
111
112
113
(April 1902), 483. 111
112 Pakenham,
The Boer War,
[580]
[581]
114
He also observed that the even though small groups did get through the blockhouse lines; the Boers could not normally cross the blockhouse lines with their supply columns thus inhibiting Boer mobility and logistical resupply. 
115
Major General J. F. C. Fuller describes life on a blockhouse line as "monotonous in the extreme. . . . The worst feature of blockhouse life was its demoralizing influence on the soldier. Apart from sentry duty and minor fatigue work there was absolutely nothing to do except talk." 
116
117
118
A definite disadvantage of the blockhouse system was that the duty was "monotonous and sapped the morale of a unit. Leaders needed to constantly take care of their soldiers, ensuring that they maintained their fighting condition." 
120
118 Clausewitz,
On War,
394. 119
120
The blockhouses did have a major impact on the Boers and assisted in stifling the insurgency. The Boer commander Louis Botha in May 1902, cited by De Wet, delivered the following assessment of the British blockhouse system.
A year ago there were no blockhouses. We could cross and recross the country as we wished, and harass the enemy at every turn. But now things wear a different aspect. We can pass the blockhouses by night indeed, but never by day. They are likely to prove the ruin of our commandos. 
121
The blockhouses though initially developed to protect British lines of communications, transformed into a very effective tactic. A major factor in their success was the fact that they observed the fundamentals of defensive tactics. Whether this was intentional or not cannot take away from their overall utility. The overriding fundamentals that the blockhouses adhered to were that of mutual support, all-round defense, co-ordination and integration.
122
However the very fact that active patrolling was not pursued by the occupiers of the blockhouses, subdued the fundamental of offensive action. But within two years of their inception, the blockhouses successfully contained the Boer insurgency, whilst also protecting British lines of communications and freedom of movement.
The adoption of a defensive mindset was as a result of the initial failures by British forces at the start of the Boer War. British public opinion was horrified by the British casualties sustained during 'Black Week' and in Spion Kop. 
123
124
The British were lucky that this campaign was not a prolonged one. The lack of offensive patrolling from the blockhouses was offset by the effective use of mobile columns in an offensive capacity. The Boer War did lead to an overly protective force manning the blockhouses; however the overall campaign was not solely concentrated on defense. The use of mobile columns in conjunction with the blockhouses did offset the lack of patrolling from these blockhouses, and the possibility of a purely defensive mindset. The tactic of sweeping the South African countryside by the British mobile columns dislocated the Boer insurgents and this tactic combined with the blockhouses, curtailed the Boer freedom of movement. This combined tactic of offensive sweeps and defensive blockhouses prevented a protracted campaign, reducing casualties, and brought the war to a favorable conclusion for the British Army.
UN Battalion had fired over 300,000 rounds of small arms ammunition, nearly 1,000 mortar rounds, over 1,000 grenades and nearly 150 Anti-Tank rounds in this period. 
128
Given the lack of casualties why was the surrender of this Irish Company necessary? Was the unit commander prioritizing the protection and security of his troops over the achievement of his mission? This chapter will examine and investigate this theory, using official documentation and reports as primary research material Background Following nationalist riots against their Belgian rulers, on 1 July 1960, the people of the Congo declared an independent republic. Within a few days, the province of Katanga, a mineral rich area in the South of the country, attempted to secede from the nascent Republic of the Congo, thus threatening anarchy to prevail. The Prime Minister, Patrice Lumumba appealed to the United Nations for help and as a result the UN Security Council directed Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld to recruit a military force to restore order and to re-establish the integrity of the country. This force was to be known as the United Nations Operation in the Congo (ONUC), lasting from July 1960 to June 1964.
There was a prevailing fear among the international community that the Congo would become a battleground of the Cold War. Ireland was asked by the United Nations to contribute troops, and in reply the first Irish peacekeeping force began to assemble during July 1960, when 689 men were selected to form the 32nd Irish Infantry Battalion.
Belgian Union Minière du Haut Katanga
133
Using company money, Belgian officers recruited, trained and equipped a large private army for Union Minière, and the Katangan gendarmerie,
134
135
136
137
138
139
The Niemba Ambush was an unprovoked attack where Irishmen died in brutal circumstances. Prior to this incident, the Irish troops had fostered a good relationship with the Baluba tribe. The reaction of the domestic population of Ireland was one of astonishment and horror. There was a public outpouring of grief with thousands lining the routes of the funeral corteges. The Irish public felt justifiably proud of those who fell in Niemba. This was a significant moment in Irish military history, and it remains to this day the largest single loss of life in the Irish Army. However it brought home the realization among the population that Irish soldiers could become casualties, even when deployed on so called peace-keeping and peace-enforcing operations with the United Nations. The reaction from the Irish population did have consequences on the subsequent actions of Irish soldiers in the Congo. Whether deliberate or subconsciously, the mindset of the Irish military leadership was affected by the casualties received in Niemba. This mindset would become prevalent for all future deployments of Irish troops in the Congo.
Operations Rumpunch and Morthor (August-September 1961)   Initially Irish soldiers deployed with ONUC in a peace-keeping role, this changed to peace-enforcement after a short period of time. 
140
141
Information about Operation Morthor got leaked and on 11th September, groups of white mercenaries were observed organizing Africans in the Jadotville Area.
142
143
144
149
150
156
157
On day five of the siege (17th September), with no sign of relief and with water and other supplies running low, Comdt Quinlan called a meeting of his officers and Senior NCOs.
We estimated that there was little or no hope of ground assistance for at least some days and even without fighting we could not hold out another day without water. If we were attacked at this stage it would turn into a massacre. . . . There was no doubt that our surrender would be demanded any time. We were all agreed that if we could get acceptable guarantees of our safety we would have no choice but to accept, as there was absolutely no hope of help arriving in time. We also knew of the 'high level' cease-fire talks in progress and in view of that further fighting with the resultant heavy loss of life would be unjustified . . . if we could not get acceptable guarantees from the Burgomaster
159
160
156
157
158
the Katangans within a few days and ultimately led to the surrender of the Irish UN forces. Comdt Quinlan discusses in his subsequent report on the capitulation of his forces. "We decided at this stage that the only road open to us was to accept this surrender as further action would have resulted in the complete annihilation of our men."
161
The strength of the besieging Katangan forces is not clear. A review of literature lists anywhere between 2,000 to 5,000 gendarmerie, white mercenaries and locals involved in the siege of the UN force. Between 200 to 400 of these were killed by the United Nations forces, many more were injured. Jadotville was occupied by less than 200 United Nations soldiers, the vast majority of whom were Irish. The following quotation from Comdt Quinlan's report best sums up the incredible fact that no Irish or UN soldiers were killed.
The morale of the men was very high throughout. . . . I would like to record here that every man had a deep religious feeling because our emergence from the battle with only five wounded was considered by all to be a miracle. The enemy still does not believe that we had no dead. On several occasions, even up to the day before our final release, we were approached on this subject by doctors, priests and others. All insisted that we had 50 dead and they wanted to know where we had buried them. We have been told that they dug up likely burial places in our defensive localities. 
162
In analyzing the events surrounding the siege of Jadotville, I must be cognizant of my own epistemology. As stated earlier in chapter 2, I grew up in Mullingar, a garrison town in the center of Ireland. Many of the troops involved in Jadotville came from Mullingar and later served along-side my father in the town's military barracks. With this in mind I will attempt to critically analyze the events surrounding the siege of Jadotville and relate them to the theme of the relationship between force protection and mission success. Which are more important, avoiding casualties and the destruction of an expensively assembled army or achieving the mission regardless of the consequences?
The Irish battalions sent to the Congo to serve with the United Nations were the first time Irish Army troops were engaged in combat, serving outside of Ireland. At the time the preponderance of Irish infantry soldiers were either serving, just home or getting ready to serve in the Congo. Numerous infantry, cavalry and artillery soldiers served multiple tours, during the four years of Irish involvement. Heavy or mass casualties during the Irish involvement in Congo would have had a very detrimental effect on not only the Irish Army, but also the mindset of the Irish people. The Niemba Ambush which took place on 8 November 1960, had a substantial effect on the population of Ireland.
The state funeral of the nine soldiers who returned home in coffins, killed by tribesmen, in a country they were trying to pacify, did have ramifications on the psyche of the Irish population. Whether it was direct or indirect, the consequences of Niemba would affect subsequent deployments of Irish troops to the Congo. Comdt Quinlan's report along with the report of Comdt Kane, the commander of the failed relief operations, bare testament to this fact. Both mention or allude to the necessity to avoid unnecessary casualties, and annihilation. This would suggest that the safety of the Irish soldiers took precedence over the United Nations mission. As previously stated Gelpi, Feaver and Reifler, in their book; Paying the Human Costs of War, advocate that the support of the domestic population is directly related to whether a country has vital national interests at stake. The acceptance of casualties is thus directly related to how important the domestic population perceives the war to be. 
163
Prior to the attack by an overwhelming force of mercenaries and gendarmeries, the unit history of the 35th Irish Battalion notes deficiencies which the Irish leadership tried to rectify.
Our men were not adequately security conscious. They were not suspicious enough as sentries, on patrol or off duty. This fault prevailed right through. They were inclined to be 'cushy' and easygoing lot that accept all comers to the main gate, posts, etc. as honest to God humans. 
164
166
However as previously stated, the Irish Company in Jadotville could not follow the Clausewitzian dictum of active patrolling being the best form of defense and protection. Circumstances and the leadership dictated against patrolling, the consequences of which was felt during the siege. 'A' Company failed to get an accurate picture and situational awareness prior to the siege. This was particularly true at Lufira Bridge, where a substantial unknown force prevented both attempts to relieve the situation.
The unit history portrays that morale and resilience were of the highest standard throughout the tour of duty of the 35 th Irish Battalion. This was evident in every action according to the report of the Battalion Commander, Lt Col Aodh McNamee. 
165
In every Op in which this unit has participated I've experienced the highest standards of enthusiastic cooperation from all ranks. Certain people had to be restrained from action above the call of duty. 
167
168
169
This chapter will deal with the theme, what is the proportional relationship between force protection and a risk averse population and government? How is this relationship altered in times of threat to national security or when a mission is no longer perceived to be a threat to national security? Korea, had a population numbering 30 million people in 1950, it lies at the point where three great Asian powers meet-Japan, China, and the former Soviet Union. 
170
171
The origins of the Korean War began long before fighting broke out at Ongjin on 24 June 1950. The roots of conflict date back to 1905, when Korea was made a 170 William J. Webb, Korean War: The Outbreak, 27 June to 15 September 1950  (Government Printing Office, 2000), 3. protectorate by Japan. The Japanese proved to be oppressive rulers and in the 1930s, it is estimated that approximately 200,000 Koreans, suspected of being communist guerillas were killed. 
172
173
174
Beginning with the arrival of an understrength United States battalion, and ending with the employment of three divisions from Japan, a division from the United States, and other forces, the U.S. Army began a build-up of troops into South Korea. The initial objective was to delay, then stop, the North Korean forces in their efforts to reach the strategically vital southern port city of Pusan. 177 After Pusan was secured, a counteroffensive began on 15th September 1950, when UN forces made a daring landing at Incheon (Inchon) on the west coast of the Republic of Korea, South of Seoul, turning the North Korean forces and forcing them to fall back with the UN forces in pursuit. 
178
Source: Huntingdon College Website, www.huntingdon.edu (accessed 14 May 2013). yards forward of the main positions. 
185
186
187
The opposing sides of the Korean conflict had constructed defensive lines that were so powerful that their reduction could only be accomplished at a prohibitive cost.
Full scale offensive assaults would have resulted in large-scale casualties on both sides. The Sun Tzu dictum that "invincibility lies in the defence; the possibility of victory in the attack," 188 was only partially adhered too, the invincibility of both defensive lines leading to the stalemate. The U.S. Eight Army conducted a vigorous defense of its outpost positions so as to deny the enemy any marked advantage. 189 However all offensive actions by UN forces were suspended after the PLA entered the war.
During the spring of 1953, the snows melted, and the mindset of the Chinese and North Koreans changed. In order to put pressure on the ongoing peace talks, the 185 Ibid. 
186
187 Ibid., 274.
188 Sun Tzu, The Art Of War, 85. 
189 Miller, Carroll, and
Tackley, Korea 1951-1953, 274.
194
195
196
197
198
But rather, demands victory, especially in conflicts of national vital importance. 
199
200
The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) of the United States Military in a memorandum to the U.S. Secretary of Defense state that "any course of action in Korea had to be cognizant of the need to delay a general war with Russia until the United States had achieved the requisite degree of military and industrial mobilization." 
201
Further, pending the build-up of our national strength, we must set with great prudence in so far as extending the area of hostilities is concerned. Steps which might in themselves be fully justified and which might lend some assistance to the campaign in Korea would not be beneficial if they thereby involved Japan or western Europe in large-scale hostilities. . . . Further in the present world situation, your forces must be preserved as an effective instrument for the defence of Japan and elsewhere. . . . In reaching a final decision about Korea, I shall have to give constant thought to the main threat from the Soviet Union and to the need for a rapid expansion of our armed forces to meet this danger. 
202
Force protection of troops does take precedence over achieving the mission, when the conflict is not deemed to be of vital national importance. The needless sacrifice of military forces on foreign interventions is not acceptable to the political and military leadership of a country. More importantly it is not acceptable to the domestic population. When a conflict is not deemed to be of national importance, or a quick and decisive victory cannot be guaranteed, then the equilibrium or balance swings in favor of force protection, over achieving the mission. The Korean War provides a perfect case in point. Once the PLA crossed the border and become actively involved in the conflict, the once sought after quick and decisive victory, entered the realms of fantasy, and a cold hard reality set in amongst the American and western populations. Popular opinion changed dramatically and support for the war fell. This fall in support, coinciding with the realities of fighting the Chinese, focused the attentions of the politicians of the United States, the military leadership and its population. The priority now switched and became containing the war in Korea, preserving the combat effectiveness of the U.S. military in order to prepare for a possible war of national importance against the Soviet Union. longer possible, or when a mission is no longer or not perceived as a threat to national security. Once China entered the fray, the Truman Administration wisely decided to suspend all U.S. and subsequent UN offensive actions. They were content to accept the status quo and stalemate along the 38 th parallel. Once the chance of unifying Korea disappeared, and a quick and decisive victory was no longer feasible, U.S. intentions turned towards matters of vital national importance such as the defense of Japan and Europe, and a possible major war with the Soviet Union. The presidential documentation cited, along with U.S. Army histories of the war, all indicate a dramatic change in mindset from early 1951 up until the peace treaty was signed in 1953. The U.S. priorities now lay in the protection and preservation of the force. The balance shifted dramatically away from achieving the mission.
A Look to the Future Recent history has seen many examples where an overly defensive mindset has been adopted because of a publicly unacceptable tolerance for casualties. During my time in South Lebanon in 1993, 1995, 1998 and 1999, I witnessed the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF), adopting an ever increasing defensive attitude, because of the casualties inflicted on them by Hezbollah, the Lebanese resistance movement. The IDFs freedom of movement was severely curtailed because of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), resulting in the construction of defensive compounds in order to form a buffer or security zone to the North of the Israeli border. The Israelis adopted these defensive positions along the border between Israel and Lebanon, from their initial invasion in 1982, until their withdrawal from Lebanon in 2000. The primary reason for withdrawal was the lack of support from the Israeli population for their occupation of South Lebanon. The constant infliction of IDF casualties by Hezbollah reinforced this sentiment amongst the domestic Israeli population. 
204
NATO's and the United States' activities in Afghanistan are also subject to a planned withdrawal due to dwindling support on the home fronts. This lack of support, has forced many NATO countries to become overly protective and defensive in their mindset. The domestic population will tolerate casualties as an acceptable risk, once they recognize the mission to be of great importance to their nation. They will however have a lower tolerance for casualties if they do not fully understand or believe the mission to be of national importance, and the chances of success appear remote. Clausewitz in his paradoxical trinity fully understood the necessity of achieving a balance. His balance was between the three facets of his trinity. The instrument of policy (the government), the play of chance (the military), and the primordial violence (the people). These three tendencies are like three different codes of law, deep-rooted in their subject and yet variable in their relationship to one another. To be successful in military campaigning a balance needs to attained between these three facets. This balance directly correlates to the equilibrium needed to be reached between force protection and mission accomplishment. Without the support of the people, the balance will favor force protection over achieving the mission. mindset, one where venturing out on patrol or outside the combat outpost becomes a rarity. This defensive mindset, will hand the initiative over to opposition forces, thus endangering the overall mission. A balance needs to be established between these two concepts. How important the mission is to a country's national interests, or how quickly a decisive victory can be attained, will dictate which will get the priority, force protection or achieving the mission.
4. Finally, a major fundamental of defense is having an offensive mindset. 
206
The recommendations outlined in this thesis should be used as a guiding principle for future operational deployments. Military leaders and their political masters need to establish what type of war they are embarking on. These leaders also need to be adaptive in their mindset due to the uncertainty and friction involved in warfare. 
207
In January 2011, as my career progressed, I was appointed the Force Protection Staff Officer, for a European Union Battlegroup. I was operating at the Operational Headquarters Level (Procedures (SOPs) of the NBG, "any unrealistic expectation to avoid any risk may impact adversely on the accomplishment of the mission and might, if casualties should occur, undermine political and military resolve."
In January 2011, as my career progressed, I was appointed the Force Protection Staff Officer, for a European Union Battlegroup. I was operating at the Operational Headquarters Level (Procedures (SOPs) of the NBG, "any unrealistic expectation to avoid any risk may impact adversely on the accomplishment of the mission and might, if casualties should occur, undermine political and military resolve."
10 , I must be cognizant of my own epistemology. As a child I grew up in Mullingar, a garrison town in the center of Ireland. Elizabethville. He was my first Cadet Master when I entered the Irish Army as a young Cadet. His medal for bravery was a constant fascination for me, throughout my period of training in the Irish Cadet School. I entered the Defence Forces in 1988, at 19 years of age having completed my first year in third level education. To date my career has been successful and I have an expectation of further advancement. My civilian education and my military education at home and overseas, has given me frequent exposure to different cultures, and provided me with a wide range of experiences. These have in turn created philosophical assumptions within me regarding human behavior. 12
NATO, Generic Force Protection Handbook (New York: NATO Publications,   
2008), 5.
Benjamin C. Schwarz, Casualties, Public Opinion, and U.S. Military   Intervention: Implications for U.S. Regional Deterrence Strategies (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1994).
Cori Dauber, "The Practice of Argument: Reading the conditions of Civil-Military Relations," Armed Forces and Society 24, no. 3 (Spring 1998).
4 Carl VonClausweitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Parat  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989), 89.
Harry G. Summers, On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War (Carlisle, PA: US Army War College, 1981).
Michael Howard, Clausewitz: A Very Short Introduction (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 56.
Clausewitz, On War,  
Nordic Battle Group SOP 03740, 2010: 1
Clausewitz, On War, 242.  
Jadotville will be further described in chapter 4. It is located in the Congo and involved a siege of Irish United Nations troops by mercenaries and local militia in 1961.
Gunner Cunningham survived the Siege of Jadotville and lives in Mullingar my home town.
John Gill and Phil Johnson, Research Methods for Managers (London: Sage  Publications, 2010).
Ibid.   
Michael Quinn Patton, Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods (California: Sage Publications Inc, 2002), 69.
Eileen Kane and Mary O'Reilly-de Brún, Doing your Own Research (London: Marion Boyars Publishers, 2001), 117.
Robert K.Yin, Case Study Research, Design and Methods (London: Sage  Publications, 2009), 18.   
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, for Acquisitions, Technology, and Logistics, Defense Science Task Force on Force Protection in Urban and Unconventional Environments (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 2006), 5.
US Army, Field Manual (FM) 100-5, Operations (Washington, DC: Department of the Army,
1993), 2-10.
Paret, Makers of Modern Strategy, 94.   
John Keegan, A History of Warfare (New York: Alfred A.Knopf, 1993), 139.   
War Department, Field Manual (FM) 5-15, Field Fortifications; Training  Circular No. 96 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1943).
Paret, Makers of Modern Strategy, 94.   
Sun Tzu, The Art Of War (New York: Oxford University Press, 1963), 78.
Ibid., 85.    
Ibid.   
Harry G. Summers, On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War (Carlisle, PA: US Army War College, 1981), 2.
Christopher Bassford, "The Clausewitzian Trinity," 2007, http://www.clausewitz.com/readings/Bassford/Trinity/TrinityTeachingNote.htm (accessed 28 October 2012).
Christopher Bassford and Edward Villacres, "Reclaiming the Clausewitzian Trinity," Parameters (Autumn 1995).
Clausewitz, On War, 89.   
Christopher Gelpi, Peter D. Feaver, and Jason Reifler, Paying the Human Costs of War (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009), 35.
NATO, Generic Force Protection Handbook (New York: NATO Publications,  2008), 5.
Gelpi, Feaver, and Reifler, Paying the Human Costs of War, 24.   
NATO, Generic Force Protection Handbook (New York: NATO Publications,  2008), 3.
Michael W. Alvis, "Dying for Peace: Understanding the Role of Casualties in Peace Operations" (Strategic Research Project, Army War College, Carlisle Barracks, PA, June 1998).
Walter E. Kretchik, "Force Protection Disparities," Military Review (July-August 1997): 73-78.
Perry D.Rearick, "Force Protection and Mission Accomplishment in Bosnia,  2001" (Master's thesis, Command and General Staff College, 2001), http://dtic.mil/cgibin/GetTRDoc.pdf(accessed September 11, 2012).
Tim W. Quillin, "Force Protection in Support and Stability Operations (SASO)"(Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, 2000).
Gelpi, Feaver, and Reifler, 65.   
Bassford and Villacres, "Reclaiming the Clausewitzian Trinity."   
Thomas Pakenham, The Boer War (New York: Random House, 1979), 569.
T. R. H. Davenport, South Africa: A Modern History (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1991), 68-87.
Pakenham, The Boer War, 257.   
D. Judd and K. Surridge, The Boer War: A History (London: Tauris and Co., 2013), 134.
Ibid.
Pakenham, The Boer War, 258.    
Ibid.   
J. F. C. Fuller, The Last of the Gentlemen's Wars(London: Faber and Faber,  1937), 107.
R. M. Holden, "The Blockhouse System in South Africa," TheRUSI Journal  46, no. 290 (1902): 479-489.    
J. F. C. Fuller, The Last of the Gentlemen's Wars (London: Faber and Faber, 1937),
107-110. 107 Alan Krell The Devil's Rope: A Cultural History of Barbed Wire (London: Reaktion Books, 2002), 49.
Ibid.
Pakenham, The Boer War,[580][581] 
Ibid., 580.    
J. F. C. Fuller, The Last of the Gentlemen's Wars(London: Faber and Faber,  1937), 262.
Ibid., 111.    
Ibid.   
De Wet, Three Year's War,[321][322] 
The Land Component Handbook, The Command and Staff School, The Military College Ireland, 76.
D. Judd, and K. Surridge, The Boer War: A History (London: Tauris and Co., 2013), 134.
Lord Carver, "The Boer War," The RUSI Journal 144, no. 6 (1999): 78-82.
Irish Military Archives (IMA), Unit History 35th Infantry Battalion In The Congo, Section 10, Equipment, 50.
This was a Belgian mining company, once operating in Katanga, in what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This private army consisted of white mercenaries and a local African militia known as the gendarmerie.
Raymond Smith, The Fighting Irish in the Congo (Dublin, 1962), 71-83.
The Baluba is a indigenous tribe, native to the Congo.
Irish Military Archives (IMA), Unit History 32nd Infantry Battalion In The Congo, Chapter 5, Niemba, Section 178.
Ibid., Section 178.
Large numbers of Irish soldiers had fought and died for foreign armies. The main recruiters of Irish soldiers being Britain, France and the USA.
Peace-keeping operations attempt to keep an already established peace, whereas peace-enforcement operations enforce a peace between warring factions.
Con Cremim, "United Nations Peacekeeping Operations: An Irish Initiative  1961-1968," in Irish Studies in International Affairs, published by the R.I.A. 1, no. 4  (Dublin, 1984), 79-84.
Tom McGuire, ed., "The Siege at Jadotville 1961," RTE Radio 1, 20 January 2004.
Irish Military Archives (IMA), Unit History 35th Irish Infantry Battalion Congo 1961.
Irish Times, 21 September 1961.   
Chief magistrate, comparable to a mayor, of a city or town/Jadotville in this case.
Ibid., Appx 'B' report by OIC A Company, Comdt P Quinlan.
Ibid., Appx 'B' report by OIC A Company, Comdt P Quinlan.
Ibid.   
Christopher Gelpi, Peter D. Feaver, Jason and Reifler, Paying the Human Costs of War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009), 36.
Irish Military Archives (IMA), Unit History 35th Irish Infantry Battalion Congo 1961, Intelligence Officers Report.
Irish Military Archives (IMA), Unit History 35th Irish Infantry Battalion Congo 1961, Intelligence.
Richard J. Bernstein, "The Korean War: An Exchange," New York Review ofBooks, 22 November 2007.   
Howard S. Levie, "How it all started-and how it ended: A legal study of the Korean War," Akron L.Rev. 35 (2001): 205.    
Stanley Sandler, The Korean War: An Interpretative History (Routledge, 2002), 47.
John J. McGrath, The Korean War: Restoring the Balance, 5 January-8 July  1951 (Government Printing Office, 1998), 3-7; Gov Burton Ira Kaufman, The Korean  War (McGraw-Hill Companies, 1986).
Kaufman, The Korean War.   
Steven Casey, Selling the Korean War (New York: Oxford University Press,  2002), 35-36.    
George Gallup, "The Gallup Poll: Public Opinion 1935-1971," 961.   
Rosemary Foot, The Wrong War (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1985), 55.
William Stueck, Rethinking the Korean War: A new diplomatic and Strategic History (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002), 87.
New York Tribune Wire, "Many Chinese Closer to Seoul than Yanks," Washington Post, 2 December 1950, 1.
Feaver and Gelpi,[137][138] 
Ibid.
Ibid., 156.   
United States Action to Counter Chinese Communist Aggression, National Security Council Report 101/1, 15 January 1951, President's Secretary's Files, Truman Papers, 1.
Courses of Action Relative to Communist China and Korea, National Security Council Report 101, 12 January 1951. President's Secretary's Files, Truman Papers, 1.
Harry S. Truman to Douglas MacArthur, 13 January 1951, President's Secretary's Files, Truman Papers, 3.
Daniel Isaac Helmer, The Long War Series Occasional Paper 21, Flipside of the COIN: Israel's Lebanese Incursions Between 1982-2000 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: CSI Press, 2007), 72.
Clausewitz, On War, 89.   
Land component Handbook, 76.    
Clausewitz, On War, 119.   
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
CHAPTER 5 THEME TWO: THE CONGO EXPERIENCE THE BATTLE OF JADOTVILLE (13-17 September 1961)   Introduction This case study will deal with the theme relating to the relationship between force protection and mission success. Which are more important, avoiding casualties and the destruction of an expensively assembled army or achieving the mission regardless of the consequences?
On Sunday morning 13th September 1961, 'A' Company of the 35th Irish Battalion on United Nations (UN) duty in the Republic of the Congo was attacked by Katangese forces as the Irish attended mass. 'A' Company along with an attached armored car section withstood a five day siege by an estimated 2,000 gendarmerie and white mercenaries. 
125
126
127
126
127
129
130
Initially Katanga province was an area of relative calm compared to the rest of the Congo, during the early period of the United Nations involvement. The main concentration area of Katangese forces was around the Union Minière owning mines at Kolwezi, at the Kamina airbase, and along the road and rail routes that linked the mines with export points to Portuguese Angola, and to Northern Rhodesia. 
132
146
Prior to the attack, patrolling in the area was limited due to the imminent dangers associated with the previous operations conducted by Irish UN soldiers in August and September. This tactic, though initially preserving safety, actually failed to give the leadership significant operational awareness. This lack of information threatened the overall security of the 'A' Company base. Circumstances dictated that the Clausewitzian dictum that "even the most passive function of a fortress, defense against assault, cannot, after all, be imagined without this active element," 148 could not be adhered to. Local 145 Built in Ireland in 1941 on an armored Ford truck chassis, the turret was armed with a Vickers .303 machinegun.
146 Irish Military Archives (IMA), Unit History 35th Irish Infantry Battalion Congo 1961.
147 Ibid. 
148
Throughout the next week the attacks intensified on the Irish base with the enemy firing 81mm medium and 4.2" heavy mortars. The mercenaries and the Katagan Gendarmerie, even had close air support from a Fouga Magister jet aircraft, which attacked Irish positions on a daily basis. But every attack was broken up by "devastating fire from Irish armored cars, MMGs, LAs 153 and mortars." 
154
The excitement, fighting and lack of sleep consumed a lot of water. By Friday the water we had was stale. By Saturday it was almost putrid and on Sunday what was left made the men sick. There was a grave danger of disease due to burst sewers from bombed buildings and flies swarming everywhere. 
155
153
154
155
By the start of 1951, fighting between the United Nations forces and Communist forces to the North tapered off into a monotonous routine of patrol clashes, and bitter small-unit struggles for key outpost positions, in order to hold key terrain and provide protection to the main defensive positions. By the end of 1951, fighting became sporadic, with opposing sides, deployed along defensive lines, spanning the breadth of the peninsula. 
182
183
184
182 John Miller, Owen. J, Carroll, and
Margaret. E. Tackley, Korea 1951-1953
183
184 Miller, Carroll, and
Tackley, Korea 1951-1953, 205.
190
191
192
Korea. 193
190 Ibid.,
283. 191
CHAPTER 7 CONCLUSION This thesis argued that force protection will always take precedence over achieving the mission, except when a quick decisive victory is assured, or the conflict is deemed to be of vital national importance.
Historically, a relationship has developed between preserving a country's standing army, and actually conducting campaigns to achieve the mission. The maintenance and preservation of an expensively assembled army can become more important than actually fighting a battle. To lose or seriously degrade the combat effectiveness of a country's military force, could ultimately prove disastrous for a country and its political leadership.
Without a properly functioning standing army, the sovereignty of a country is called into question. History has proven that a country with a weak or ineffective military is vulnerable to the ambitious advances of other more powerful nations.
The three historical case studies examined herein, all had a common theme. In each of these examples, the tactics adopted were as a direct result of previous heavy casualties received. During the Boer War, 'Black Week' and the defeat at Spion Kop, had a dramatic effect on the British population, and provoked a search for new tactics that would help reduce casualties. The tactical use of blockhouses to protect the lines of communications, and also the British soldiers occupying them, was partially a consequence of the initial heavy casualties inflicted on the British by the Boers.
Likewise, the horror of the Niemba massacre in the Congo, and the subsequent outpouring of grief in Ireland, did have a substantial effect on the mindset of the Irish military leadership, and their UN operations in the Congo. This was especially true of the attempts by the relief column to save the besieged Irish company in Jadotville. The threat of receiving casualties at Lufira Bridge prohibited the Irish commander from conducting his relief mission. Also prevalent in the Irish mindset, was the fact that this was a UN mission, and not an operation of vital national importance to Ireland. This widespread outlook was a major factor in the decision making of Ireland's political and military leadership.
The initial support for the U.S. intervention in Korea quickly disappeared on the entry of the Chinese People's Liberation Army into the war. The American public realized a decisive victory was no longer possible and as such, support for the war began to diminish, as the realities of warfare hit home. Politicians decided that the conflict was not of vital national importance, and as such, offensive operations were suspended and the preservation of the force became the priority. Feaver, Gelpi and Reifler in chapter 3 stated that the more vital the mission is to national interests, the more willing the domestic population is to support the subsequent costs associated with it. 
203
203 Gelpi,
Feaver,
and Reifler,
37.
The use of mobile columns preserved the initiative for the British, dislocating the Boer insurgents. This dislocation combined with the containment measures provided by the blockhouses, and their connecting wiring, prevented the freedom of movement of the Boers, and ultimately helped bring the war to a conclusion. The Boer War was not protracted by the use of blockhouse tactics adopted by the British Army.
The historical case study on the Congo did prove that there is a relationship between force protection and mission success. It also supported Feaver and Gelpi in their assertions that on UN or humanitarian missions, avoiding casualties and the destruction of an expensively assembled army is more important than achieving the mission, regardless of the consequences. The Irish UN soldiers fought bravely in the Battle of Jadotville. They inflicted heavy casualties on the Katangan gendarmerie, and white mercenaries who were attacking them for five days, non-stop. The heavy loss of life suffered by the Irish UN troops in the Niemba Ambush prior to the Battle at Jadotville, did affect the mindset of the Irish military leadership. This combined, with the fact that the mission was in support of the United Nations, and not of vital importance to the Irish nation, meant that the relief convoy prioritized the protection of its own force over achieving the mission of relieving Jadotville. This is true also of Jadotville, where the company commander after running low on ammunition, water and supplies, chose a ceasefire and ultimately surrender, over the potential massacre of his troops.
The Korean War, after the decisive intervention of the Chinese PLA into the conflict, demonstrates that the relationship between force protection and achieving the mission can be altered. This is the case in times when a quick or decisive victory is no
The following recommendations arise from this thesis: 1. To paraphrase Clausewitz, politicians and military commanders need to establish, what type of war or conflict they are embarking on. This should be the first strategic question that they discuss and ask themselves prior to deploying troops. 
205
2. If a country is deploying its military on a peacekeeping or humanitarian mission, then the politicians need to clearly articulate the left and right boundaries. These boundaries should not be constrained by national caveats that restrict the interoperability and freedom to operate, of the deploying force. But rather it means what is acceptable, and what is not. The rules of engagement should be clearly articulated, and priority should be given to force protection. The military commander needs to be cognizant of this fact. He must also be aware that the domestic population will not tolerate excessive casualties for a mission, they do not deem to be of vital national importance.
3. The Clausewitzian trinity consists of three interdependent factors. All three act in unison, and achieving the balance between the three is key. The politicians need the support of the people; as such military ventures will be dependent on this domestic support, or will of the people. Force protection is the use of all available means and measures to protect the force. These means should not establish a complete defensive in Iraq, and the ongoing lessons being learnt in Afghanistan, indicate that force protection though important, cannot be the overriding concept. A force that surrenders the initiative is in danger of becoming ineffective. The initiative cannot be handed over to the opposition forces, in order to protect the force in the short run. The mission cannot be ignored. Should it be the priority is debatable, hence the necessity to find the balance between achieving the mission and protecting the force.