# ID: c8ac8039ebdb4998a61adba203806c4c
# Title: Fear, Honor, Interest: An Analysis of Russia's Operations in the Near Abroad (2007-2014)
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
In recent years, Russia has conducted several operations in former Soviet states, attempting to halt NATO expansion and protecting ethnic Russian minorities in those states. Western analyses have focused either on traditional military means in these operations or on novelties in the cyber domain, but rarely have they used these approaches with others. They focused especially on what lessons Russia learned from them to reform their armed services. This is a very narrow analysis, based on Western assumptions on the Russian way of war. Instead, Russia has created a new operational concept, which it refers to as "the fifth period of operational art," especially designed for its near-abroad policy. This new operational concept uses traditional domains with military means, non-traditional domains such as the human, information, and cyber domain, and non-military means such as (cyber) proxy forces linked to the social conditions of Russians living as minorities outside Russia. This monograph reviews the changes, their background, and practical application, together with their links to the social conditions of ethnic Russian minorities in former Soviet states. First, it describes the history of the collapse of the Soviet Union, the fate of the 25 million displaced ethnic Russians, their marginalization, regional tensions, and the strategy that Russia has developed to protect these ethnic Russians and its interests in the near abroad. Next, this monograph reviews the theory on the fifth period of operational art and creates an operational framework based on the theory and case studies of the 2007 Estonia crisis, 2008 Georgia war, and 2014 Ukraine conflict. Finally, it reveals how this framework uses non-military means linked to social conditions.
-V.K. Kopytko, Voyennaya Mysl [Military Thought]   In recent years, Russia has conducted operations in former Soviet states to prevent the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) from expanding its sphere of influence into areas formerly part of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). 
1
Russia would use cyber in future conflicts. 
2
In contrast, the RFAF has changed its way of war into an operational concept built on the human concepts of fear, honor, and interest that include engagement in the human and cyber domains with non-military means to achieve Russian objectives, protecting Russian minorities abroad. The RFAF has focused on social conditions and complex environments and applied different approaches in order to assist in the development of situationally unique planning 1 Foreign Broadcast Information Service Central Eurasia, "Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation 2010," accessed 10 July 2014, http://news.kremlin.ru/ref_notes/461.
2 Ariel Cohen and Robert E. Hamilton, "The Russian Military and the Georgian War: Lessons and Implications" (Monograph, Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army, Carlisle, PA, 2011); Roland Heickero, Emerging Cyber Threats and Russian Views on Information Warfare and Information Operations (Stockholm, Sweden: Swedish Defence Research Agency, 2010). models. 
3
Changes to means and domains are not new for Russian operational concepts as they evolved since 1920 in five distinct periods, although the principles, foundations, and tenets of the overarching operational art largely remained the same. 
4
5
6
This monograph contains three sections on theory, practice, and analysis and creates a Russian operational framework. The first section explores the social and strategic context, as well as the theoretical background of Russian operational art, through a literature review. The social context describes the living conditions of ethnic Russians outside of Russia after the collapse of the USSR, which Russia uses as a pretext of its operations. The strategic context describes the conditions under which national strategy has evolved and what national objectives it pursues. The literature review of current and previous Soviet and Russian operational concepts, referred to as periods of operational art, describe lasting principles, foundations, and tenets used to construct a preliminary operational framework based on the assumption that already ingrained principles in an organization are hard to escape. 
7
8
2003-2006 period. 9
The third section is a synthesis of the previous two sections and delivers a generic operational framework, with an emphasis on non-military means linked to social conditions. The concluding section answers the primary question, "How does the Russian Federation use nonmilitary means linked to social conditions in its current operational concept?" and provides recommendations for further research. 
8
9
13
13
The strategic purpose of war is to attain a better condition of peace.
-Carl Von Clausewitz, On War
Russian security strategy and operational concept did not evolve in a vacuum during the past decade, but are a reaction to events that unfolded after the collapse of the USSR. First, this evolution is a reaction of Russian leadership under President Vladimir Putin to counter the diminishing role of Russia in its traditional sphere of influence and the increasing role of the United States of America and NATO in that sphere. Second, this evolution is a reaction to the concerns of the Russian population and Russian Orthodox Church on the fate of 25 million ethnic Russians living outside Russia, their marginalization, and regional crises in the 1990s. 
14
Unrest in the USSR started in mid-1989 with demonstrations and clashes between ethnic minorities, after which the first Soviet states became independent. 15 Discontent over living conditions under communist' rule, topped by an economic crisis that most blamed on Moscow, 14 Nikolas K. Gvosdev and Christopher Marsh, Russian Foreign Policy Interests, Vectors,  and Sectors (Thousand Oaks, CA: CQ Press, 2014), 164. 
15
16
This almost immediately led to tensions, civil disturbance, and civil wars, most notably in Chechnya. 
18
19
20
21
22
23
Russian leadership started building a coalition with the separatists, while the 14th Army, still present in Transnistria to guard the Soviet-era military equipment, started to arm the separatists.
Cossack and Spetznaz units 25 from the USSR deployed rapidly to support the separatists and 14th
Army. 
26
27
28
23
24
25
26 Jackson,
[92]
[93]
[94]
[95]
28 Statie,
OSCE,
2.
29
As in Moldova, most former Soviet states contain an ethnic Russian minority that either lived as a minority intermingled with natives or as a regional majority. The new governments pursued pro-Western policies to counter Russian influence, provide security against a Russian threat, and pursue economic prosperity for their nation. 
30
31
32
These developments created a lower social class group, caused a feeling of marginalization and discrimination, and led ethnic Russians to cling to their Russian identity, language, culture, and religion. This helped their self-confidence and sense of self-worth, created involvement in social activity, developed community networks, and provided a forum to explore personal rights. 
33
34
30
31
32 Shnirelman,
Service,
482. 33
34
35
37
Beginning early 2000, Russia began to pursue a near-abroad policy establishing a sphere of influence in the former Soviet States, to protect Russian interests and ethnic Russian minorities abroad. 
38
36
37 Marlene Laruelle, "Negotiating History, Memory Wars in the Near Abroad and Pro-Kremlin Youth Movements," Demokratizatsiya [Democratization] 8, no. 4 (2000): 233-252. 
38
Gvosdev and Marsh,
157. EU and/or NATO. 39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
46
47 
Mattson and Eklund,
40;
De Haas,
"Russia's Military Doctrine Development,
" 14. 48
49
50
51
53
54
50
51
52 De Haas, "Russia's Military Doctrine Development (2000-2010)," 44. 
53 Kipp,
"Russian Military Doctrine: Past,
Present,
and Future,
[105]
[106]
[107]
[108]
[109]
[110]
[111]
[105]
[106]
[107]
[108]
[109]
[110]
[111]
Gvosdev and Marsh,
157.
55
56
Traditionally, operational art links to strategy as it develops campaigns and operations to organize and employ military forces by integrating ends, ways, and means to achieve the strategic end state. 
57
58
2
59
Isserson described operational art as the art of direction and organization in which operations are a chain of efforts throughout the entire depth of the operation's area, with principles of speed, efficiency, mobility, simultaneity, technological support, and a decisive moment at the final stage. 
60
61
These experts state that in the first phase, unconventional operations manipulate public opinion at home and abroad, while in the second phase disguised Russian forces aid the opposition. "New-generation war will be dominated by information and psychological warfare and asymmetric actions, to be used extensively to level off the enemy's superiority in armed struggle." 62 Diplomats, media, and interagency organizations conduct deception operations and leak false data, orders, and directives, in order to misinform and mislead the enemy's political and military leaders. At the same time, cyber-attacks must disable other media or communication systems in the enemy's country to prevent him from gaining information. In the two opening phases, this concept encompasses the use of communication and psychology, based on social 60 Georgii S. Isserson, "The Evolution of Operational Art," trans. Bruce W. Menning (Fort Leavenworth, KS: SAMS Theoretical Special Edition, 2005), 38-77. 
61
62 Sergey G. Chekinov, and Sergey A. Bogdanov, "The Nature and Content of a New-Generation War," Voyennaya Mysl 10, no. 4 (2013): 13-24. conditions. In these phases, Russia uses SOF, space, electronic, diplomatic, and industrial means to map key infrastructure in the targeted area and conduct subversive missions. 
63
64
65
Military systemology is an intellectual-informational confrontation that seeks to dominate and 
63
64 Ibid. 
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
1
75
The escalation phase started with violent riots in Estonia and demonstrations at the Estonian embassy in Moscow as ethnic Russians saw the movement of the Bronze Soldier as a further marginalization of their rights in Estonia. 
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
At this point, the conflict shifted very fast into the crisis and resolution phases. Russia tried to put the Estonian government under additional pressure by threatening to reduce gas delivery. Despite the short period of isolation and the fact that Russia was the sole supplier of natural gas to Estonia, it was unable to pressure Estonia into a settlement on the statue and language issues, although Estonia did move the statue to a more prominent location then previously planned. 
85
86
82
83
84
85 Bradley L. Boyd, "Cyber Warfare: Armageddon in a Teacup?" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2009), 35.
86 IHS Jane's, 9.
governments. 
87
88
Georgia became independent from the USSR in 1991and tensions started immediately over two breakaway regions: South Ossetia and Abkhazia. These regions wanted to remain within the USSR due to their troubling history with Georgia. After two short civil wars, both regions established internationally unrecognized pro-Russian local governments, while Georgia had to accept Russian peacekeeping forces in these areas. 
89
90
91
92
During the escalation phase, early 2008, Russia sent railway troops into Abkhazia to repair railroad infrastructure under the peacekeeping agreement. 
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
92
93
94 George T. Donovan, "Russian Operational Art in the Russo-Georgian War of 2008" (Strategy Research, US Army War College, Carlisle Barracks, PA, 2009), 9-10. 
95
96
97
98
99
Georgia to discredit its government and set stage for the abolition of the government. Final, information warfare targeted the Georgian government and military leadership, in the outbreak of conflict and crisis phases joined by cyber-attacks, to isolate them.
With cyber-attacks on NATO, Georgian government, media, and military networks, the conflict shifted to the outbreak of conflict phase. 
100
101
102
The Russian information warfare campaign is a clear example of reflexive control to shape perceptions prior to military operations in South-Ossetia and Abkhazia. Russia used proven media techniques: (1) one-sidedness of information; (2) information blockade; (3) disinformation;
(4) silence over events inconvenient for Russia; (5) "cherry picking" of eyewitnesses and Georgians that criticized their government; (6) denial of collateral damage and (7) Russian versions of place names in the regions to suggest the motherland relation. 
103
104
105
106
107
108
110
111
112
113
115
Ukraine became independent of the USSR in 1991 and tensions soon followed, largely because of an ethnic Russian minority in Crimea that wished to join Russia. In their support, and 
110
111
112 Donovan,
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
114
115
116
119
120
Zaborsky,
37. President Viktor Yanukovych and Russia. 121
The escalation phase of the most current crisis started after President Yanukovych of Ukraine fled the country in February 2014 and a pro-Western government assumed power. 
122
123
124
Next was the media campaign to gain support in Crimea, Russia, and isolate the government of Ukraine. Television and Internet were the dominant news media in Ukraine. 
125
Russia and Ukraine analyzed information on sentiments gathered from the Internet, finding a 76% score for pro-Russian sentiments in the region. In Russia itself, these figures were comparable. In Russia, 75% of the population thought state owned media were trustworthy. Independent news providers rated as 30% trustworthy while outside news providers rated 5% reliable. 
126
Developments in the information sphere aided this dominance. In 2010, Russia established social media-groups such as the Kremlin School of Bloggers to support their reflexive control mechanisms. 
127
128
129
130
127
128 Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), "Kremlin Allies' Expanding Control of Runet Provokes Only Limited Opposition," Media Aid (28 February 2010): 1-5. nineteenth century writer Fyodor Dostoevsky. He claimed, "Russia's special mission in the world was to create a pan-Slavic Christian empire with Russia at its helm."
131
To prevent NATO and the EU from helping Ukraine, Russia stepped up its information campaign. Russian media used past events to emphasize how aggressive NATO and the West were and how these powers violated agreements on NATO expansion restrictions into Eastern Europe.
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
141
142
143
144
145
146
Next in the Russian approach were the tasks that would lead to either provocation or exhaustion and paralysis of the Ukrainian government. Although the Ukrainian government decided not to be provoked strategically, the result on the operational level was devastating. All actions combined lead to the breakdown of morale of the Ukrainian forces in Crimea, as they surrendered their 190 bases, in many cases to join Russian forces. 
147
148
The government in Kiev admitted that local police and armed forces either were sympathizing with the uprising or had low morale, lack of professionalism, or were corrupt. 
150
146
147 Bērziņš, 4-5.
148 Ibid.
149 IHS Jane's, 8. 
150
151
152
From the previous sub-sections, it becomes clear that Russian operations used nonmilitary means linked to social conditions and reflexive control mechanisms for the preliminary operational framework as depicted in the first section. The ends, means, and ways together form the refined operational framework as depicted in the next section.
151 Bērziņš, 4-5. 
152
Observe calmly; secure our position; cope with affairs calmly; hide our capacities and bide our time; be good at maintaining a low profile; and never claim leadership.
-Deng Xiaoping, 24 Character Strategy
This third section provides a synthesis of the previous sections' results. It describes the modus operandi of the current Russian operational framework, the use of non-military means, and exploitation of social conditions. This framework contains a schematic systems approach that Russia will use in future conflicts, with elements and means that vary per conflict, based on the environment and enemy.
The case studies show that Russian operational art serves the strategic goals of maintaining a sphere of influence in the near abroad, either by preventing former Soviet states from joining NATO or EU or destabilizing those states that already joined these alliances. As Russia sees itself in a continuous struggle with the West over influence in the former Soviet states, it has developed a tailored operational concept to reach its strategic ends. This operational concept creates conditions of instability within non-NATO countries so the alliance will not accept their membership. It also creates instability within NATO countries to keep the alliance fragile. Conflicts with Russia generally end up frozen, destined to start again when the opportunity arises. How these conflicts will emerge again is a question of time and inspiration on the Russian part.
The current Russian operational concept is a whole of systems, methods, and tasks to influence the perception and behavior of the enemy, population, and international community on all levels. It uses a systems approach based on reflexive control to target enemy leadership and alter their orientation in such a way that they make decisions favorable to Russia and take actions that lead to a sense of despair within their leadership and establish a base for negotiation on Russian terms. Reflexive control "considers psychological characters of humans and involves intentional influence on their models of decision making."
153
1
154
Russia manages these military and non-military means through state controlled companies and organizations under a centralized political command structure. This structure, and the fact that the proxy forces consist of Russians and ethnic Russians abroad, make the operational concept a whole-of-society approach.
To create proxy forces, Russia exploits social conditions, culture, linguistics, and demography in former Soviet states and at home. It studies the behavior and demography of all actors to reveal cultural landmines or advantages it can exploit to achieve its objectives. Due to Russian policy in the Soviet-era, some 25 million Russians live in surrounding states where they had better paid jobs than in Russia, either as civil servants, teachers, or in the military. Their new home countries marginalize their position through language legislation, rewriting national history, or limiting their civil rights, causing concerns in Russia with the Russian public and therefore Russian government. The Georgia and Ukraine case studies show that areas with a high concentration of ethnic Russians are vulnerable to Russian influence. In most cases, Russia will infuse the situation by granting citizenship to ethnic Russians or other inhabitants with grievances, creating Russian citizens in surrounding states that it is willing to protect.
First Phase: Concealed Origin During planning in the first phase, Russia thoroughly analyzes his enemy, the characteristics and weaknesses of his command and control system, and his willingness to fight in order to arrange interdependent, sequential reflexive control mechanisms that can deteriorate parts of the command and control system and degrade the enemy's willingness to fight during the next phases. The case studies show Russia's narrative to intervene in neighboring countries is to protect Russian minorities. The region itself most likely contains a frozen conflict in which, after the decline of the USSR, groups of actors already showed their desire to join Russia. The reflexive control mechanism to justify this claim is distraction, the creation of an imaginary threat that Russia can use for justification and distract the targeted country and the international community from the real intent.
An ethnic Russian minority that wants support from Russia because it feels marginalized or mistreated by the current government is useful to create distraction. Russia influences actors in the region with the use of mass media to emphasize historical, cultural, and linguistic conditions, issues them Russian citizenship, and exploits these conditions to tempt them to take the Russian side. Russia establishes one-sidedness of information or information dominance in the enemy's country by buying local TV and radio stations, social media, and conducting influence operations on the Internet by blogger groups. Finally, the Russian minorities receive help from Russian youth groups and the Russian Orthodox Church. After establishing these pre-conditions, the operational approach shifts to the next phase.
Second Phase: Escalation
In the escalation phase, Russia exploits the social conditions and information dominance to create social unrest. In this phase, Russia uses historical sentiments that will increase the unrest, such as support by the targeted country for Nazi Germany and Russia's destiny to be the major regional power based on the history of the Russian empire. Honor, patriotism, and dreams of a better future are strong elements to help actors' self-confidence and sense of self-worth, create involvement in social activity, develop community networks, and provide a forum to explore personal rights. 
155
In addition, in the beginning of the escalation phase, Russia targets the international community through media and diplomats on international legal matters, aided by legal deniability (e.g. not involved in the uprising, as part of concealment), stressing that the targeted government is suppressing a minority, including self-determination. The case studies show that Russia uses the Kosovo case where Western countries intervened to help the Kosovar minority to attain self-governance. Russia now claims this a precedent for it to intervene to help Russian minorities. By not claiming leadership, aided by the concealment of operations, Russia maneuvers between international laws, makes sure the targeted government does not get any outside support, and divides it from its allies or international support. Russia's uses a broad interpretation of United Nations Article 1 on internal conflicts and the right to self-determination to aid its approach. 
156
With the reflexive control mechanism of pressure, it will try to convince the rest of the country that their government is not legal, is not in control, is not serving their interest, and will lead them in a useless war it cannot win legally nor militarily. To enhance this perception, cyber-attacks create financial market unrest by disrupting local banks. All this time, Russia operates under a blanket of concealment and legal deniability, preventing the international community from taking actions. The ethnic Russian minority then must create civil unrest and gradually seize key infrastructure in the targeted region, to start the next phase.
Third Phase: Outbreak of Conflict Activity
The third phase, outbreak of conflict activity, sees a difference between Russian interference in non-NATO and NATO countries. In both situations, Russia will increase its information warfare altogether with diplomatic and economic pressure and continue to create unrest. The Estonia case study shows that the Russian approach limits itself to these ways and means, while the Georgian and Ukrainian case studies reveal an additional approach.
In the latter, Russia uses a mixture of the organizations that are present, together with subversive elements such as SOF and Cossack fighters to seize key infrastructure. The enemy's security forces in the targeted region probably contain local actors that are willing to join Russian organizations or at least not hamper these organizations in achieving their goals. At the same time, RFAF conducts large exercises at the border with the targeted country. These forces act in the beginning as pacifier, leading the enemy to believe that pre-planned operational training is occurring rather than offensive preparations, thus reducing his vigilance. At the end of the phase, these forces become the deterrence, creating the perception of a superior force that is able to intervene successfully. If this military approach succeeds and the targeted country does not react, Russia achieves its first operational goal; a part of the country is under control of separatists.
Russia can exploit this fact politically to further establish its power in that region.
Fourth Phase: Crisis
In the crisis phase, Russia isolates the enemy government physically by rendering communication with their population, international community and media, and military leadership useless by directed electronic warfare and hard or soft cyber-attacks. In the case of soft cyber-attacks, overwhelming Internet attacks by Russian cyber-crime organizations and cyber proxy forces will reduce the government and military networks and phone systems in a manner that outmaneuvers applicable international laws. First, the cyber-attack means are not an "armed force" as Article 51 of the UN charter describes. 
157
158
In the case of hard cyber-attacks, proxy forces seize and disable or destroy physical Internet hubs, as was the case in the Ukrainian case study. This is part of the ongoing seizure of infrastructure throughout this phase. Proxy forces, with the help of Spetsnaz and Cossacks fighters, will tighten their grip on the occupied area by removing areas of resistance, forcing isolated enemy units to surrender and seizing remaining government buildings. The Ukrainian case study reveals that if there are not enough proxy forces, Spetsnaz and Cossack fighters will do the majority of the work, making this phase less vulnerable to the cooperation or capabilities of the proxy forces.
In addition, Russia overloads the targeted government and population with information, suggesting that they cannot win the battle, their government is not legal, and that they are isolated from their allies and international community. Russia targets the military with misinformation on the whereabouts of the RFAF, actions, outcomes, etc., as part of the concealment and deception.
The means are Russian media, RFAF Military Information Support Operations capacity, and the already mentioned cyber-attacks. These actions pressure, disorient, and overload the political and military leadership, which will lead them to taking the wrong actions, and even might provoke them to react militarily. If the latter happens, Russia will use its deterrence force to counterattack.
Although the Russian conventional force is superior and victory is almost certain, this is an undesired escalation as Russia seeks a psychological victory, not a physical one. Rather than military action, Russia wants to let the reflexive control system take its effects, as the culminating effect of its mechanisms of disorientation, overload, pressure, suggestion, pacification, deterrence, deception, and concealment must overcome the provocation and cause the political and military leadership to exhaustion, paralysis, and a perception of despair. This perception sets the leadership up for the resolution phase.
Fifth and Sixth Phase: Resolution and Restoration of Peace
In the resolution phase, Russian diplomats step in to negotiate favorable terms to settle the conflict or to freeze it for future options. All case studies have an indefinite ending: language and historical issues remain, while civil rights do not improve. Although Russian diplomats emphasize these issues during the peace settlement, they probably do not want to solve them. The case studies reveal that Russia achieved it strategic goals: preventing non-NATO countries from joining NATO and destabilizing a NATO country to pressure it into a settlement.
After the Georgian conflict, leading RFAF generals stated that they started planning the Georgia operation three months before the conflict, an indication that it was not a reaction on Georgia but a planned operation. 
159
To conclude, figure 
3
Blogger communities that propagate the Russian cause, and the ability to shutdown popular Internet sites that spread anti-Russian messages, aid the Russian cause.
The paramilitary consists of local, mostly ethnic Russian, organizations and volunteers from abroad. Laws in former Soviet states prohibit Russian as an official language and create discrimination towards Russian culture and heritage, leading to feelings of marginalization.
Russian media targets areas that contain a significant demographic ethnic Russian-minority, emphasizing their Russian heritage based on language, history, and unique Russian culture. These narratives enhance the minorities' feelings of marginalization by their government (fear), a sense of self-worth and belonging (honor), and a perception that Mother Russia has more to offer than the native country (interest). They create involvement in social activity, community networks, and provide a forum to explore personal rights. Russia builds strong relations with local ruling elites that are willing to cooperate and form (military) organizations. In the same way, Russia creates cyber proxy forces and appeals to other organizations such as youth groups, cybercrime, and Cossacks. The proxy forces receive help from private (military) companies, bankers, Russian peacekeeping forces, and SOF conducting unconventional warfare, to organize, train, equip, and finance an effective uprising.
Russian media also address the population of the targeted country to isolate their government cognitively from their people and raise support for intervention. The media campaign emphasizes that the government is not legal, is not in control, is not serving their interest, and will lead them in a useless war they cannot win legally nor militarily. Russia uses cyber denial of service attacks to physically restrict and isolate the targeted government, local and national political and military leaders, preventing them from sending, receiving, or gaining (other) information. Cyber proxy forces supported by cybercrime companies conduct these attacks. They also instigate attacks against financial institutions to create chaos. Finally, Russian media targets the international community on international legal matters.
Russia uses legal deniability and justification within international laws for their operations. Paramilitary forces, civil organizations, and SOF act as volunteers with no ties to Russia and cyber-crime companies and cyber proxy forces claim to work on their own. They provide Russia with legal deniability, deception, and concealment of their actions and intentions.
These means allow Russia to maneuver within international law and order and prevent international pressure and intervention. The ethnic Russian minority provides Russia with a justification for its actions, to protect Russians abroad, justified by UN Article 1 on the right to self-determination. Russia uses broad interpretations of international laws to justify their actions to the UN, the West, the Russian population, and to the government and population of the targeted country. It also outmaneuvers international laws that deal with cyber-attacks, as cyberattack means are not an "armed force" as Article 51 of the UN charter describes nor the outcome of an "armed conflict," as Russia makes sure that there are no organizational and technical links to the cyber-attacks.
With the help of the media, non-military means, social unrest, and a legal framework, the Russian operational approach generates psychological effects of reflexive control to influence the behavior of actors in such a way that they undertake actions favoring the Russian plan, ultimately leading to a sense of despair. Reflexive control uses cognitive or behavioral characteristics of an individual or group to create a cognitive model that delivers an approach how to persuade them.
Russia thoroughly analyzes the enemy, the characteristics and weaknesses of his command and control system, and his willingness to fight, in order to arrange interdependent sequential reflexive control mechanisms that degrade the enemy's willingness to fight, leading to operational shock and, ultimately, strategic paralysis. At this point, enemy leadership will be in despair and willing to sign a treaty with Russia, transforming the conflict into a frozen one.
Predict, Anticipate, and Counter Though Russian military leadership states that its operational art uses non-military means and ways flexibly and adapts to local conditions, the modus operandi of the non-military means within the operational framework and its links to social conditions, for now, seem to remain constant. 
160
161
Currently, NATO supports non-NATO members by offering membership and Security Forces Assistance. Next, it supports East-European NATO members by stationing forces in their countries and conducting exercises, though in a very limited way. Although NATO military actions are limited, these actions could backfire on NATO as Russia will use them for their media campaigns, while also encouraging Russia to expedite its operations to stop NATO expansion.
States that pursue NATO membership and contain ethnic Russian minorities still are possible targets. Furthermore, NATO countries with a large ethnic Russian minority provide Russia with opportunities to test the strength and resilience of NATO.
Instead, NATO should use its warnings and indicators system to anticipate Russian moves based on the operational framework and block reflexive control mechanisms from being achieved, effectively stopping one phase from evolving into another. Warning that Russia is covertly starting a crisis is feasible as NATO could monitor indicators such as media, cyber activity, social unrest, and movements of groups of men of military age to these countries.
Additionally, to counter this psychological warfare, NATO must prevent isolation of a nation's leadership. The current crisis in East Ukraine shows how NATO can counter this, by providing intelligence assets that reveal Russian involvement. Counter information warfare with media means broadcasting in Eastern Europe to mitigate the Russian information dominance is another option. However, these are all reactive measures.
Ideally, NATO should counter Russia before the conflict escalates. The Russian wholeof-society approach needs Russians at home and abroad that are willing to join the fight because they feel marginalized. A first step in easing tensions might well be that former Soviet states resolve the marginalization of ethnic Russians in their society, taking in account their needs and rights. Additionally, to shape a stable region and counter Russian influence tactics, it is beneficial for NATO to know how Russian minorities view reunification with Russia, including a way to influence their view. Further research on how to counter Russian operations as early as possible is necessary. While NATO focusses on military answers to the Russian threat, the most effective answer might well be in improving social conditions.
For the latter, NATO could refine its concept of engagement in such a way that regular units stationed in Eastern Europe understand and address the social grievances in the area as part of a whole-of-government approach. The purely military deterrence in Eastern Europe then also becomes a phase zero mission, preventing Russia from escalating. Finally, NATO could adopt and refine the recently developed USSOCOM counter-unconventional warfare method that addresses most of the non-military means it has to counter. The method does not specifically address the Russian operational framework and therefore does not describe the links between non-military means, social conditions, and cyber-attacks. Based on this monograph, NATO could refine it to a specific anti-Russian counter-unconventional warfare approach with a focus on interdependencies, to degrade the Russian reflexive control system and prevent the cumulative effect it has. A prerequisite is the ability to operate in the cyber domain as part of the human domain, and should therefore be part of the counter unconventional warfare method.
Source: Created by author, based on Timothy L. Thomas, Recasting the Red Star: Russia Forges Tradition and Technology Through Toughness (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2011), 129-130.
Source: Created by author, based on Timothy L. Thomas, Recasting the Red Star: Russia Forges Tradition and Technology Through Toughness (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2011), 129-130.
Michael R. Gordon, "Russia Displays a New Military Prowess in Ukraine's East," The New York Times, 21 April 2014, accessed 2 July 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/22/ world/europe/new-prowess-for-russians.html?_r=0.
Vasily K. Kopytko, "Evolution of Operational Art," Voyennaya Mysl 17, no 1 (2008): 202-214.
A. V. Smolovyi, "Problemniye voprosy sovremennogo operativnogo iskusstva i puti ikh rescheniya," Voyennaya Mysl no. 12 (2012): 21-24; Valery Gerasimov, "The value of science in anticipation," VPK news, 27 February 2014, accessed 2 July 2014, http://www.vpk-news.ru/ articles/14632.
Department of the Army, Counter-Unconventional Warfare (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 2014).
Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann, The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge (New York: Doubleday, 1966).
Nadia Diuk, "EuroEuromaidan: Ukraine's Self-Organizing Revolution," World Affairs, April 2014, accessed 27 January 2015, http://www.worldaffairsjournal.org/article/euroEuromaidan-ukraine%E2%80%99s-selforganizing-revolution.
122 Steven Woehrel, Ukraine: Current Issues and U.S. Policy (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2014), 1; Bērziņš, 2-3.
Gallup, Contemporary Media  Use in Ukraine (Washington DC: Broadcasting Board of Governors, 2014), 1-2.
Andrew Kaufman, "How Dostoevsky and Tolstoy Explain Putin's Politics," Andrew D. Kaufman, 7 April 2014, accessed 24/11/2014, http://andrewdkaufman.com/2014/04/ dostoevsky-tolstoy-explain-putins-politics/.
Dmitry Babich, "Media wars around Crimea: Russia not impressed by liars' empty threats," The Voice of Russia, 20 March 2014, accessed 4 October 2014, http://voiceofrussia.com/ 2014_03_20/Russia-not-impressed-by-liars-empty-threats-1813/.
Ginos, 11.    
Robert Coalson, "Pro-Russian Separatism Rises In Crimea As Ukraine's Crisis Unfolds," Radio Free Europe, 18 February 2014, accessed 24/11/2014, http://www.rferl.org/ content/ukraine-crimea-rising-separatism/25268303.html.
NOS, "Wie is de Baas op de Krim [Who is the Boss of the Crimea]," NOS, 11 March 2014, accessed 4 October 2014, http://nos.nl/artikel/622011-wie-is-de-baas-op-de-krim.html.
Steven Woehrel, Ukraine: Current Issues and U.S. Policy (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2014), 1.
NOS, "Militaire Spanning Krim Stijgt [Military Tension Crimea Rises]," NOS, 28 February 2014, accessed 4 October 2014, http://nos.nl/artikel/617230-militaire-spanning-krimstijgt.html.
139 NOS, "Kiev: Invasie door Russisch Leger [Kiev: Invasion by Russian Army]," NOS, 28 February 2014, accessed 4 October 2014, http://nos.nl/artikel/617425-kiev-invasie-doorrussische-leger.html.; IHS Jane'
s, 8.140 IHS Jane's, 8.
Adrian Croft and Peter Apps, "NATO websites hit in cyber attack linked to Crimea tension," Reuters, 16 March 2014, accessed 4 October 2014, http://www.reuters.com/article/ 2014/03/16/us-ukraine-nato-idUSBREA2E0T320140316; Russel Brandom, "Cyberattacks Spiked as Russia Annexed Crimea," The Verge, 29 May 2014, accessed 4 October 2014, http://www.theverge.com/2014/5/29/5759138/malware-activity-spiked-as-russia-annexed-crimea.
NOS, "Internationale Missie Oekraine [International Mission Ukraine]," NOS, 1 March 2014, accessed 4 October 2014, http://nos.nl/artikel/617484-internationale-missieoekraine.html.
143 NOS, "Referendum autonomie Krim eerder [Crimean Autonomy Referendum Earlier
]." 144 NOS, "Russen Vallen Basis Krim Aan [Russians Attack Crimea Basis]," NOS, 7 March 2014, accessed 4 October 2014, http://nos.nl/artikel/620412-russen-vallen-basis-krim-
aan.html. 145 NOS, "Pro-Rusland-Campagne op Dreef [Pro-Russia-Campaign on a Roll]," NOS, 13 March 2014, accessed 4 October 2014, http://nos.nl/artikel/622506-proruslandcampagne-opdreef.html.
Volodymyr N. Shemayev, "Cognitive Approach to Modeling Reflexive Control in Socio-Economic Systems," Information and Security 22 (2007): 35.
Thomas, 131.   
Yael, Ohana, Supporting Cultural Actors of Change in Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine: A Regional Review (Washington, DC: The German Marshall Fund of the United States, 2008), 9.
United Nations (UN), Charter of the United Nations (New York, NY: United Nations, 1945), charter 1, article 1.
Titiriga Remus, "Cyber-attacks and International law of armed conflicts; a jus ad bellum perspective," Journal of International Commercial Law and Technology 8, no.3 (2013): 189-189.
Remus; Cohen and Hamilton, 45.   
Van Herpen, 219.   
Gerasimov; Van Herpen, 247; Merle Maigre, Crimea -The Achilles' Heel of Ukraine (Talinn, Estonia: International Centre for Defence Studies, 2008), 1-21.
Woehrel, 1.   
The supreme art of war is to subdue the enemy without fighting.
-Sun Tzu, The Art of War Russia's near-abroad strategy is to maintain a sphere of influence in former Soviet states and at the same time disrupt EU and NATO's involvement in the area. capabilities and allow Russia to achieve its objectives preferably without engaging in conventional battle. It is a whole-of-society approach that uses state owned or controlled assets, ministerial departments, non-governmental institutions, and proxy forces as means for its operations to reach the desired end state. These non-military means engage simultaneously and speedily throughout the entire depth in all physical and information domains, through application of asymmetric and indirect actions, creating chaos, seizing vital terrain, and isolating enemy leadership.
The predominant non-military means Russia relies on are media and paramilitary organizations. Russia has integrated her civil and military media to shape perception at home, in the targeted country, and within the international community in a continuous information war. It