# ID: c9cd59c88f344b3280365a6b40b79a94
# Title: The German general staff system revisited
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1989.0
# Fulltext:
tiveness is lack of inculcation of the staff competencia characteristic in the German system. Given the continuous rejection of the German system, the study illustrates that acquisition of these staff competencies is not inconsistent with democratic constitutional government. Rejection to date has been an emotional response based on improper and complete understanding of the German civil-military experience. Planned acquisition of the competencies under the 1986 Act could further strengthen civilian control. Additionally, these staff competencies could eliminate some factors which, if left uncorrected, could ultimately lead to civil-military relations problems. Finally, military reform is the least complex and challenging of issues. The study will close with what generally is required in the way of political reform to make for a more complete solution to reform of national military security.
The conclusion of World War II left the United States with global military commitments and the requirement to maintain a large peacetime military, an historical precedent. World War II also demonstrated the need for more centralized control and direction of our military forces. The 1947 National Security Act was enacted to address this need, but proved ineffective to accomplish the results desired. The basic legislation was amended throughout the post-World War II, Korean and Vietnam eras into the early 1980's. Even today, legislative proposals to amend or abolish portions of the Act are not uncommon. Amendments normally grew out of an inability to handle crisis to a satisfactory conclusion. The premise of this paper is that lack of effective military performance is a consequence of the originally flawed, compromise legislation, a fundamental shortcoming that requires scraping major portions of the Act and starting anew.
The post war search for improved control over our military led to reconsideration of the German General Staff system, an approach which had been consistently rejected as anti-democratic.
Legislation specifically prohibits adoption of this system.
Since the German model, in many respects, proved to be a relatively effective system, it may be worthy of renewed consideration if such a system could be modified to remove any additional threat to civilian supremacy. Specifically, consideration should be given to acquisition of the staff competencies that were inherent in this staff system. Indications are that much of our continuous rejection is more an emotional response to the evils of Nazi Germany than to the facts of political history and the historical environment in existence in Germany during development of their general staff system.
Based on exact measures of implementation, the 1986 Defense Reorganization Act may be moving the United States in the direction of the German model. It is therefore worthwhile to review the basic ingredients of the German General Staff as compared to the performance of the U.S. system developed in 1947. Since indications suggest the German system is superior, the issue of maintaining civilian control is critical. Continued lack of effective performance and attendant crisis may combine to create future civil-military relations problems. This article argues that the inherent competencies of the German staff system are not inconsistent with civilian supremacy, but, on the other hand, would further civilian control by eliminating our tendency under the 1947 National Security Act to rely upon ad hoc military reaction for crisis resolution.
Napoleon had produced a superior general staff system and they studied it as extensively as all other aspects of Napoleonic war.
The often quoted belief that Napoleon contributed nothing to the study and furtherance of staff doctrine and practice is a myth perpetuated by the fact that Napoleon made little use of staffs himself. The reason Napoleon made little use of staffs for his personal prosecution of war was studied by the reformers.
Clausewitz concluded that Napoleon embodied the traits of 4 'military genius'.
He also concluded that dependence upon producing a 'military genius' at the right time and place in history was an unacceptable approach to national security. This realization generated the need for a general staff: A general staff system is needed to compensate for the normal absence of military genius in a commander. 5 The Prussian General Staff doctrine from this point forward "emphasized organizational perfection, methodical procedure, building an intellectual foundation to support 6 staff structure". Prussia, and later a federated Germany, had discovered an effective instrument in its conception of the general staff to institutionalize military excellence:
The Germans had no monopoly on an understanding of military theory, or an ability to analyze operational experience. Nor did they have a monopoly on military competence. But what they did have was a monopoly on consistently reliable and excellent performance throughout the Army and in accordance with doctrine and theory .... The only significant itary professional development in Prussia and Germany that was not matched in these other countries was The creation of the Prussian, later German, General Staff, and the special qualities of professionalism that differentiated that general staff from imitations in all other nations. 7
Other nations in Europe were soon to realize the beneficial effect of Prussia's staff innovations. The Wars of German Unification, 1864-1871, demonstrated the superiority of the German General Staff system. The new staff approach proved to be "as much a school for scientific study of war and training of top commanders as an administrative organization through which com-9 mand might be exercised". From these wars the German General
Staff gained its enormous world prestige; that the victories were gained largely through this effective instrument was obvious to 9 world military leaders.
Particularly after the Franco-Prussian War, the French also realized the error of their ways. The Germans had demonstrated no revolutionary, unknown aspects of war. In fact, France was a victim of a Prussian system that gained much of its thought and 10 doctrine from the original French model. The immediate French response was to renovate their decayed staff system. Although the French concluded the Napoleonic wars with a superior staff system, they had allowed it to fall into disuse in the intervening years and suffered the consequences.
The French experience was similar to most other countries, including Britain, Russia, and the United States. In times of war, countries would learn that armies with superior staffs consistently won campaigns. As the lessons of war and institutional memory faded, this lesson was forgotten and had to be relearned 11 at the next crisis. Germany appeared to be the only nation with a system that permanently institutionalized the staffing lessons of war.
The post-1871 period demonstrated a rush towards the German model. As has already been stated, France immediately instituted rejuvenating reforms. In 1890, Great Britain followed suit through the medium of an authoritative description of the German General Staff system by Spenser Wilkinson, The Brain of an Army.
This document was also read in the United States by Elihu Root who was searching for an answer to the disorganization and ineffectiveness of the American Army in the Spanish-American War.
The German General Staff was undoubtedly Root's model for reform, 12 although he did not make this claim.
In fact, the original American General Staff duty descriptions were exact reproductions 13 of the German model.
For our purposes, general staff duties are not as important as the philosophy and conceptual framework that produced them and the results achieved. The philosophy originated from the best of all teachers, disaster on the battlefield, and was not revolutionary but evolutionary. The Germans extracted their concepts 14 through an in-depth study of military history.
A review of that philosophical approach is worthwhile as, even in subsequent defeat, the German General Staff system has demonstrated a considerable superiority over that of its opponents. In the last year of World War II, when the German Army was in defeat on all fronts, that same Army is rated by military experts at a 20-30% higher combat efficiency than its adversaries because of the excellence produced by its approach to the operational art as 15 embodied in its staff system.
Trevor Depuy has identified ten competencies which embody the philosophical approach championed by reformers of the German 16 General Staff.
Selection: A rigorous, deliberate system of screening and selection designed to obtain the 'best and the brightest'.
Selection was based on a combination of competitive examination and regimental commander recommendation, with the latter being the most important. The selection sought only the most competent 17 line officers in order to form an "aristocracy of intellect".
Of equal or greater importance was the character of the officer.
Selection sought to systematically weed out officers with rampant 18 ambition at the expense of dedication.
Additionally, the goal 19 of selection was that it be nonpartisan.
As will be seen in "Civil-Military Relations: The German Experience", political objectivity was not always attained. The selection process continued well beyond the training period. Training was followed by probationary assignment to the general staff for 12-18 months.
Of those who started training, about 25% would complete all phas-20 es and be selected as permanent general staff officers.
Examination: Annual testing was conducted simultaneously throughout the army. Examinations were administered at local military district headquarters by general staff officers.
Simultaneous student testing plus the identification of students by student number was used to prevent the possibility of compromise, collusion, or unfair ratings. Examinations evaluated candidates in all aspects of military education and trainingtactics, terrain, history, etc. -as well as economics, social sciences, geography, and a foreign language of the student's 21 choice.
Additionally, officers were given physical fitness tests. Specifically selected general staff officers evaluated and graded examinations. Overall, "this system was so Historical Study: Historical study was considered among general staff officers to be a lifelong pursuit. Many of the greatest German military leaders were also accomplished historians. The emphasis on military history was reflected in the continuous presence of a historical division as one of the essential components of all German General Staff organizations. Indepth study of military history was considered essential. Objectivity in Analysis: Analytical emphasis must be on the truth without regard for who may like or dislike the product. If the analysis or estimate is accurate and valid, it will withstand any scrutiny.
Regeneration: There was continuous emphasis by all of the general staff, not just the leadership, to not become tradition bound or slaves of obsolete prescriptions. Regeneration was achieved by selecting the best from the army and also by a conscious effort to avoid the traps of 'we always did it this way', or 'it cannot be good because it was not invented here'. The German General Staff system and its associated philosophical approach provided Germany with military leadership that was more effective than any of its contemporary military institutions. However, one must avoid the extremes of praise or damnation that characterize much of the writing regarding the German General Staff. On the operational level, the system was not as all-seeing or as infallible as some might suggest. On balance, the general staff system created by Germany was a highly effective instrument which attempted to institutionalize excellence. Throughout its evolutionary development, the system achieved its goal of military excellence better than any other system. The excellence achieved was based on the competencies it emphasized and nurtured. It was not a system without fault; its strengths were, however, sufficient for it to become the masterpiece that all others emulated throughout its 150 year history.   As the war neared completion, the battle over postwar resource allocation was inhibiting, to the point of preventing, development of a policy and strategy for resource allocation.
The Navy offered a counterproposal to Marshall's proposals, the organization in which the services would remain independent, but their activities would be coordinated at national level by a national security council. Thus, the essential difference between the Army and Navy plans rested on the level at which coordination would occur.
Although President Truman favored some form of unification, Congress was more inclined toward the Navy plan. Congress believed the Navy plan would be cheaper to implement. Additionally, Congress was concerned about the amount of power that would exist in a unified military with a national level general staff.
The potential creation of a "Prussian" General Staff was viewed as a serious potential threat to civilian control.
A compromise solution was enacted. This precipitated the "revolt of the admirals".
The significance of the "revolt of the admirals" is manifold. Interservice rivalry reached crisis proportions. The primacy of institutional and organizational objectives over integrated military strategy was institutionalized.
[In] the strategic environment, for example, the projected behavior of potential foreign adversaries had only a modest impact on the services' behavior. Rather, the environmental stimuli toward which their strategic planning efforts were directed were overwhelmingly domestic in origin and were predominantly defined in organizational terms .... Thus, the priorities among roles and missions set by the services themselves, and the policies they were eager to advocate, were conditioned by threats and opportunities they perceived in their organizational environment. Specifically, the strategic preferences of elected politicians, and the allocation of budgetary resources in a manner consistent with these preferences were ... the origins of the changing distribution of influence within the services and the defense policies advocated by them.
15
Although the Joint Chiefs of Staff reached general agreement to 16 avoid inflammatory issues whenever possible, the primacy of acquisition of resources over strategy would reme-in a constant theme.
-Interservice debate was just as prevalent and intense as it had bten previously. The issues at stake in the controversy, however,
Strategic questions no longer dominated the discussion. i:eac, proprietary issues had become prevalent.
7, e -e f.un :ie-tal exi3-,en-e --h e r ; -.r n a e l 31-ernaTT7es :f rational strategy were at issue, put r-ather margiral gains 3nd losses of resources, forces, and weapons. The question of what should be done was less controversial than the questions of who should do it and how much resources should be allocated to it.17
The long term damage for national security came from the development and official sanction by all services of analysis that lacked objectivity. The situation in the Air Force was representative.
The end sought was not national security throuph a properly balanced military defensive and deterrent force but rather an autonomous, powerful ... Air Force which would be the first line of defense, the largest of the three military services, and the recipient of the largest share of the defense budget. Assumptions were drawn not -an initial step in the planning process, which would, in turn, provide the guidance for the structure, size, and deployment of the military forces. Instead, they were drawn in order to lead to the end desired. Those services which could establish major interests in higher priority functions had little incentive to bolster their contribution to lower priority functions in which other services had a primary interest. The Army regularly criticized the Air Force for its alleged neglect of tactical aviation and airlift. Both these services criticized the Navy for its alleged neglect of antisubmarine warfare and continental defense. Responsibility and initiative to resolve rather obvious national security problems would not occur in this uncontrolled organization.
Garnering of political support for resource allocation led to substantial military involvement in domestic politics. The "revolt of the admirals" represented military involvement in domestic politics to a degree that constituted a threat to civilian control.
. The war initially settled to a war of attrition along the Pusan Perimeter, followed by a war of rapid movement after the Inchon landing, and finally a return to attrition within a year after China's entrance into the war.
The significance of the war for this discussion derives from four facts. First, the war started with U.S. forces technically and tactically unprepared. This condition is partly explained by lack of initiative and responsibility as well as technical and tactical expertise; staff competencies which were not regenerated after the general demobilization of World War II.
Second, dependence on "force of personalities" continued. The nation had to depend too heavily upon carry over talent from World War II to attain results.
Thirdly, the war illustrated the first incidence of confusion on the relative merit of the use of force in achieving political objectives. The concept of 'total victory' was not politically attainable. Yet, the operational commander clung to this concept. General MacArthur became frustrated, then isolated, and ultimately alienated toward the political objective and political leadership. Alienation caused General MacArthur's extensive involvement in domestic politics in an attempt to force his will upon the civil leadership.
The General's reaction took the form of a protest against 'a new and heretofore unknown and dangerous concept that the members of our armed forces owe primary allegiance or loyalty to those who temporarily exercise the authority of the Executive Branch of the Government rather than to the country and its Constitution which they are sworn to defend. No proposition could be more dangerous'. The professional military men of the Pentagon, including the Joint Chiefs of Staff, accepted the plan despite the preposterous qualities which were to become so evident in retrospect, apparently because neither the CIA nor subordinate military officers carried full information to the Joint Chiefs, and the Joint Chiefs failed to ask the CIA and their own subordinates the appropriate hard questions.
3 7
The Joint Staff had by now increased to four times its size in 1947, but quantity was no substitute for competency. In fact, quantity generally hinders quality when they are mixed.
Close on the heals of the Bay of Pigs was the crisis in Laos. President Kennedy's response to military crisis was simi- wanted to do regarding "preparation for war" was correct, his strategic direction and use of military forces will probably cause his period as Secretary of Defense to be regarded as a failure because of Vietnam. In addition to not understanding the nature of war, he did not understand the military. Had he understood the nature of military predispositions toward national security, he might have been more effective.
The military view towards national policy reflects the professional responsibility for the military security of the state. This responsibility leads the military:
(1] to view the state as the basic unit of political organization; 
[2]
[5]
The major influx of 'new strategists', systems analysts, created undesirable side affects because of their limited background, training and predispositions. McNamara did not understand this either.
The usual training in economics has its own characteristic limitations, among which is the tendency to make its possessor insensitive to and often intolerant of political considerations that get in the way of his theory and calculations. He is normally extremely weak in ... history or ... politics, and is rarely aware of how important a deficiency this is for strategic insight .... They were trained to be highly scientific in one area of limited application, but that did not incline them to be comparably scientific or even worldly wise in the larger area where ends become more meaningful than means .... .... (It] has become customary to leave totally out of consideration the psychological and social effects ... simply because they could not be quantitatively handled .... implicitly denying their importance.
or systems analysts was confusion between what Clausewitz called "preparation for war" and "conduct of war", before and during Vietnam.
This confusion was a logical consequence of and conclusion to the inappropriate resource based strategy.
With Otherwise, he will make serious mistakes, shattering confidence, and being extremely dangerous. Some suggest only senior retired military should be Secretary of Defense and chiefs of services 78 should serve for much longer periods. This is essentially the method adopted under the German system and no doubt helped maintain continuity of required staff competency. However, both positions have critical influence on the nature of civil-military relations and civil control that will be considered later. For now, the consequences of not knowing what one is dealing with was also identified by Clausewitz.
Only if statesmen look to certain military moves and actions to produce effects that are foreign to their nature do political decisions influence operations for the worse .... so statesmen often issue orders that defeat the purpose they are meant to serve. Time and again that has happened, which demonstrates that a certain grasp of military affairs is vital for those in charge of general policy. ',ucn cf the oranizational complexity is a facade, createc in cart to 71re a false sense of rationality and legitimacy to Dffici-l action, and 2ccected in part because it tends to diffuse responsibility for 80 decisions gone wrong.
These attempted fixes create adverse second and third order effects. First, we tend to become hostages of these 'systems' rather than having the systems effectively serve our needs. Some As it became clear that the assistant secretaries ... were becoming more important, all the military services attempted to infiltrate those bureaucratic systems. ... each service nominated a military professional in the hope that his assignment to the position would materially increase that service's influence in the decision process.
... The individual military professional assigned to such duty ... found himself in a delicate position. His service expected ... evidence [of influencing] decisions, [but found he could only] prove his objectivity by pointing out ... flaws in arguments being advanced by his own service .... 
[Trick]
[of]
The military reform movement accelerated throughout the The two competencies characteristic of the German model not mentioned are historical study and technical-tactical perfection.
Historical study does not appear to be undergoing any major renaissance and certainly more work is required here.  42
The effort has produced a significant success.
Relationships between government-military-society were first explained by Carl Von Clausewitz more than 150 years ago.
War is more than a true chameleon that slightly adapts its characteristics to the given case. As a total phenomenon its dominant tendencies always make war a paradoxical trinity .... The first of these three aspects mainly concerns the people; the second the commander and his army; the third the government. The passions that are to be kindled in war must already be inherent in the people; the scope ... of courage and talent ... and chance depends on the ... commander and the army; but the political aims are the business of the government alone.
These three tendencies are like three different codes of law, deep-rooted in their subject and yet variable in their relationship to one another. A theory that ignores any one of them or seeks to fix an arbitrary relationship between them would conflict with reality to such an extent that for this reason alone would be totally useless. While a detailed description of those events is not within the scope of this study, identification of common symptoms is important.
French Army foreign and domestic political involvement was extensive throughout the period and motivated by many of the same factors existing in Germany.
France was beset by crisis combined with inept political leadership, creating a power vacuum and consequent political decision making dominance by the military.
Additionally, lacking both traditions of effective civilian supremacy and the will to establish supremacy, the French 47 Army was allowed to develop anti-democratic military doctrines.
When the social inconsistency of these doctrines became apparent, the French Army turned to expedient military solutions which deepened political involvement, leading to isolation, alienation, 48 and sedition.
In a manner similar to Germany, French political and military leadership created "arbitrary relationships" in Clausewitz's trinity of government-military-society.
The essential common ingredient of loss of civilian supremacy is loss of political decision making. This loss occurs because of shifts in relative power and relationships among national institutions. Where the military becomes the dominating institution, or is able to supplant inconsistent military values on government-society, problems in civil-military relations occur.
The establishment of arbitrary relationships described by Clausewitz in the "paradoxical trinity" can also cause or contribute to loss of civilian supremacy. As an outgrowth of these harmful institutional readjustments, the military will eventually possess unrestricted access to national resources thus becoming independent. Under any of these conditions, the military ceases to be the "branch of political activity" emphasized as essential 49 by Clausewitz.
The result is a military that "becomes mindless FDR was so vigorous in office that his leadership in defense became synonymous with civilian control, thus partially reversing the long trend of Congress as the ultimate authority in civil-military relations. The United States national level staff suffers from a lack of these competencies and has consequently proven less effective than expectations. Acquiring these st'ff competencies would certainly improve effectiveness. Military effectiveness must be balanced with risk to civilian control. Properly implemented, general staff system competencies are not only compatible with civilian control, they are a necessary part of civilian control.
However, military reform may be the least complex and least challenging issue. Ultimately, complete reform will require reform of certain political and bureaucratic practices and procedures.
The Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 appears to be heading national security in the direction of a national general staff, characterized by staff competencies which were inherent to the German staff system. The legislation mandates staffing this organization with highly competent joint staff officers. The key issue now is how this legislation will be implemented, i.e. where we will go, how we will get there, and how civilian control will be continuously maintained. The consequence of all these limitations is that our system of selection, examination, education and training does not provide a consistently reliable level of performance. To compensate for reliability of performance, we have increasingly added layers of review in the national security structure. These added layers of review are inefficient, provide a false sense of security and, as will be noted later, detract from proper civilian control.
Added layers are debilitating because there is simply not enough talent available to provide for so many layers. What we are left with is layers of bureaucracy without fulfilling the concept of "value added". What needs to be done is drastically reduce layers of review as we improve the quality of the reviews. The 1986 Defense Reorganization Act is starting this process.
The First, a global vs. regional policy mismatch. Our stated primary security interests were Europe and Japan. However, resource expenditures in Vietnam exceeded the combined expenditures for Europe and Japan. Second, U.S. involvement in Vietnam represented a domestic vs. foreign policy mismatch. President Johnson was unwilling to forego his 'Great Society' and, in light of favorable military progress "reports", made conflicting war decisions.
6
Finally, the war represented an operational doctrine mismatch.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff believed our ability to handle total 7 war inherently provided the ability to handle small war. Some suggest that Vietnam represented an exception in that mismatches are not the norm. The policy of unconditional surrender in World
War II shows that a policy-strategy mismatch occurred there too.
----? r--  Military isolation from society can be created through many vehicles. Included are recruiting policies, loss of self-esteem, and societal restrictions on peculiar military institutions.
Isolation can be an intentional policy of the military, based on the system of recruitment. If recruiting is not broadbased, but limited to certain social, economic, ethnic, etc.
groups of society, isolation will occur as it did in the pre-World War I German officer corps, and in the entire German Army after World War I. This particular trend has not been a marked one in the United States. However, there is currently an increasing proportion of military officers recruited from within military officer families, so the factor bears some watching.
Excessive recruitment of officers from within the military structure has been noted as a common ingredient of increasing isolation from society. The French experience illustrates isolation occurring through a string of defeats. The German experience with isolation occurring as a result of contrived recruiting practices initially, and political involvement ultimately.
Isolation can also occur because of the military's perception of value to society. The general tendency of questioning the efficacy of war and the military in western society has already been noted. The tendency may become more noticeable if anticipated resources are allocated away from defense, and as the trend continues towards disarmament. On the other hand, the potential for increased isolation can be minimized if changes occur with due 24 consideration for the effect on the military.
Military isolation can also occur when society rejects or attempts to change the unique needs of military institutions.
The military must be convergent with the larger society in order to execute its policies. However, policy execution by the military requires peculiarities in discipline and authoritarian rela- The significance of isolation depends on the degree to which it occurs. If isolation progresses beyond that perceived as necessary by the institution, frustration results. If isolation continues unabated, the situation can become one of alienation from society. This is truly dangerous for any democracy.
America appears to have no significant problems. However, to assume there can never be problems is the start of a serious problem; it takes for granted the role of our military in our free society.
Political leadership has the primary responsibility to keep relative military isolation in balance. The warning signs for unbalanced isolation have been discussed, but merit review. Militarily expedient approaches which are clearly at odds with social and political objectives, can be initial indicators of imbalance. The importance of political guidance on military doctrine and strategy is clear. Militarily expedient methods will be manifested by the increase of military power in domestic politics to the point that the military asserts a degree of control over domestic policy or becomes a director of foreign policy or national resource policies. Any one of these developments can be dangerous, because each implies a lack of faith in political institutions.
Cognizance of the need for a proper balance in military uniqueness leads directly to the fourth mandate for leaders, methods of controlling the military. Congress' historical use of available controls has been too often equated to "partisan and pork-barrel politics, fiscal budget ceilings, personnel ceil-28 ings". While sometimes effective, a partisan approach to military control is unnecessarily costly. Additionally, because
Congress has been slow to set disciplinary and ethical standards for its own members, their demands on the military may generate adverse side effects, such as military involvement in domestic politics, a debilitating growth of congressional oversight, inefficient resource allocation, an inappropriate power status for the media, and short term fluctuating control over the military.
The military must not become involved in partisan politics.
Actions by political leadership largely influence any tendency by the military toward subtle involvement. As noted, this is a source of concern, regardless of how apparently noble or worthwhile may be the objectives. The "Revolt of the Admirals" and continued domestic political involvement as an adjunct to resource allocation are civil-military issues which should concern us all.
Congressional oversight of the military is a tremendous growth industry. The effects are most apparent in the budgeting process. Congressional budgetary actions are often short-sighted and superficial, and encourage intraand inter-service rivalries, while failing to set relative levels of defense and opulence. This is unfortunate, as our congressional budgeting process is essential to and a cornerstone of our constitutional government.
The 1986 Defense Reorganization Act makes budgeting an even more powerful and meaningful means of controlling the military.
Recent requirements to tie strategy, roles and missions more closely to budget requests are significant and healthy for proper control. However, use of the budget as a control device can have an adverse effect on civil-military relations if Congress does not also reform itself. Furthermore, resource related problems will always exist to some degree unless there is a commonly agreed upon objective, consistently sought by all: national security at an affordable cost.
Finally, some additional DOD reform is required. Debilitating competition among the services for sources of funding, most recently occurring in the special operations area, and end of year spending binges must stop. Many would maintain that such political and military reform initiatives are impossible. Others maintain that they will not occur short of a major disaster.
Still others have more confidence in our political institutions.
The separation of powers does not preclude a stronger code of ethics in resource decision making.
A code of ethics would need to also address relations with the media. Hidden agendas and associated manipulation of other government agencies through unofficial messages -"the leak"have often placed the media in the "driver's seat", setting the agenda. Consequently, a major limitation on action can be media 
44
44
m!m I
2The adverse consequence of not understanding either the military
1Army resistance to Hitler was spasmodic and ineffective.
Craig; p 361.   20   Craig; p 238.
rarely raised. This was achieved by consistently maintaining very
ing military doctrine and the doctrine of war.American civil
The JCS: A U.S. Departure from the General Staff Model 
1
General;
Viking Press;
1963;
pp 46, 54, 63, 96-98, 100, 102-103, 120- 125, 140, 149-150, 164-166, 176-177, 189, 191, 204, 218, 238, 251-257, 323-325
Pogue, Forest C.;
Georae C. Marshall: Ordeal and Hope;
Viking Press;
1963;
pp 10, 16, 65, 89-95, 127, 140, 149, 164, 194, 262-284, 289-
, 1947
-1962;
MIT Press;
1965;
pp 16-17, 18-22, 208-218.
10-12, 18-19, 24-34, 64-74, 79, 87-89, 102-131.
Military and Society;
The Haworth Press;
1982;
pp 5-6, 12.
The staff competencies inherent to the German General Staff 