# ID: c9e7d06672b844988e0dd7899b8ae56c
# Title: Defense and Arms Control Studies Program, Annual Report 1992-1993
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1993.0
# Fulltext:
ruth be told, the United States took the Cold War more seriously than did any other of the war's major participants. With great expenditure, much trial and error, and more than occasional innovative analysis, the United States built a military that was by the war's end simply unsurpassable. The American military had the best equipment, the most professional leadership, the most sophisticated training, and most extensive logistical support of any in the world. It had these attributes because it was expected to be able to fight (and often did) far from its home bases in the difficult climates against the difficult opponents. The American military thought it had to be ready to meet the Communist challenge nearly anywhere on the globe it might conceivably appear.
In contrast our European allies came to view the Cold War as essentially a jobs program. Exhausted by the Second World War, they were quick to accept that threat posed by the Soviet Union could only be met by the United States and, with minor exception, organized their defense efforts to maximize local employment rather than, as America largely did, military utility. Their militaries often expressed preference for American equipment and practices, but were usually required to accept whatever systems national firms alone or in regional consortia could develop. The training of West European militaries suffered and their ability to project force at any distance from their borders was quite limited because European politicians were unwilling to impose significant burdens on their populations.
The Soviet Union, the other half of the Cold War, gradually slid into the same policies, allowing its once mighty military to become sclerotic while focusing its attention on expanding employment in a vast network of factories that produced great quantities of often obsolete weapons. Like the West European militaries, the Red Army saw little combat during the Cold War and had little influence in weapon procurement decisions. By the war's end the great ideological struggle between capitalism and communism was basically a jobs program for the Soviets as well. As a result, the economies of surviving republics are now burdened with industrial structures composed largely of arsenals and shipyards thoroughly accustomed to make-work orders.
Roles are now being reversed. Many of America's allies and former opponents seek to build capable militaries while America itself is beginning to consider defense as a jobs program. Chaos is growing along the borders and within the former Soviet Union. Ethnic and religious fissures, long paved over by Communist regimes, are reappearing, causing bloody conflicts and waves of refugees. Even when defense budgets are being reduced because of economic pressures, nations in Europe and Asia want the protection of militaries trained and equipped to fight. There is talk about shedding conscription to build professional forces, of acquiring airlift capabilities, and of the need to purchase or develop high technology weapons like those used by U.S. forces. Delegation after delegation stop by for discussions.
be said to be in fact post Cold War budgets. There are substantial changes ahead for the American military.
At the same time, America's military needs are becoming less urgently felt. Bounded by two virtually unarmed neighbors and two very large oceans, America is far from most of the post Cold War chaos. The U.S. armed services have an abundance of modern weapons, much more than their likely force structures will be able to absorb. Politicians worried about the future of local shipyards and aircraft plants now make the argument for their continuation on employment grounds and rarely mention any strategic requirements that could justify additional production.
Finding a strategic rationale for maintaining large U.S. forces and busy weapon production lines will be difficult. Without a popularly accepted, overarching principle like anti-communism, proposed interventions must be argued individually. The budget deficit and a growing unwillingness to suffer (or inflict) casualties gives ready excuse to delay or not to intervene at all. Bad experiences are certain to occur in even our most humanitarian-oriented ventures. After they do, major foreign interventions will likely require a direct attack against the United States, just as World War Two did, in order to achieve sufficient popular support.
The MIT Defense and Arms Control Studies Program (DACS) has sought to stimulate debate about the security requirements of a post Cold War world. Two impressions stand out from this experience. One is the determination on the part of many officials and officers to avoid discussion of options. Their understandable, but unsustainable view is that past policies with only minor modification are sufficient. Thus, the continuing assertion that high states of operational readiness are required for U.S. forces and that proportional reductions among the services are best when cuts cannot be avoided. The new world situation, however, demands, it would seem, a total rethinking of force levels and military missions. Moreover, defense budgets that hardly have receded to those of the Carter years cannot
The second observation to note is how easily wishful thinking can replace clear thinking in the analysis of options. The attractive vision often offered in academic discussions that has nations cooperating to provide security to threatened peoples ignores much unpleasant reality. Nations do not line up to have their soldiers killed in distant locations unless the threat that they are meeting is persuasive to the parents of the soldiers as well as to politicians. The troops assigned to these duties will not long tolerate exposure to mortal danger unless provided the right to retaliate to attacks with overwhelming force. Forging a coalition of nations that regularly will take on the burdens of intervention is likely to exceed the capacity of even the most accomplished of diplomats.
Among us Barry Posen has taken the lead in outlining the strategic alternatives. His paper on U.S. grand national strategies which was based on testimony presented to the House Armed Services Committee is already considered a classic. In it he describes the premises, arguments, and force requirements for the three alternative national security policies prominent in U.S. public discussions -cooperative security, selective engagement, and isolationism. He has supplemented this work with related analyses of nationalism, military formats, and specific scenarios such as an intervention in the Bosnian conflict. He is also conducting fundamental research on the relationship between nationalism and war.
The intervention theme has also been explored by Carl Kaysen and George Rathjens in separate projects based at the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Kaysen is leading a multi-stage study that brings together experts from around the world to examine the causes and consequences of past international interventions. Rathjens is involved in a parallel effort that is reviewing the United Nations' experience in peacekeeping and peacemaking activities.
My contribution to the debate has focused on the casualty issue. The use of force risks casualties, but is there the political will to take and inflict casualties in ventures where national survival is not threatened? Perhaps intervention would be more likely if non-lethal options were available. In June 1993 with the support of the Army War College and the Office of Net Assessment, DACS convened what possibly was the world's first conference on the use and consequences of non-lethal warfare technologies. Over 70 specialists participated in the sessions which were held in Lexington, Massachusetts and which produced a prescriptive list of uses for such technologies.
While some nations may be seeking nuclear status others are pondering their nuclear legacies. Jack Ruina has been considering the future nuclear arsenals of the United Kingdom and France, arsenals that have grown in relative prominence as those of the United States and the former Soviet Union have declined due to treaties and the attrition of peace. A related topic, interest in which several of us share, is the future of the laboratory complex that supported strategic systems in the United States. There is within these facilities extraordinary technical talent. What is of concern is how this talent can be effectively utilized while maintaining the reservoir of skills needed for nuclear deterrence. One conflict we often fear will not only be lethal but also nuclear is that between the Arabs and the Israelis. As part of his work on nuclear proliferation, Marvin Miller brought together several dozen U.S. and Israeli experts in discussion of nuclear weapons in the Middle East. The conference had the sponsorship of the Rockefeller Foundation.
Weapon technologies are certain to proliferate. Theodore Postol has been studying the defenses that can be raised against ballistic and cruise missiles carrying a variety of warheads. Aiding him in this effort are George Lewis and several visitors from Russia and Israel who are members of his Defense Technologies Working Group. A number of important papers have resulted including the definitive analysis of the Patriot/ Scud engagements that occurred during the Gulf War.
A frequently expressed concern is that Russia will feed world instability by exporting either weapons of mass destruction or the knowledge how to make them. Stephen Meyer examined this and related problems in a symposium he organized on the status of Russian Military R&D that was held at the program in November 1992. The general conclusion of the participants was that Russian military R&D capabilities are rapidly deteriorating and that Russia's export temptations are constrained by its own proximity to conflicts and the need to maintain cooperative ties with the United States.
The annual report provides public occasion to thank those who have been especially helpful in our work. Prominent among them must be several of our political science colleagues -Stephen Van Evera, whose theoretical suggestions continue to intrigue the many students we share with him; Richard Samuels, chair of the department and a leading expert on Japanese defense policies; and Ken Oye, Director of the Center for International Studies and a prominent specialist in international trade and security. Also we offer our congratulations and best wishes to several MIT affiliates who accepted senior positions in the new Administration. Les Aspin, former chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, a PhD graduate of the MIT Economics Department, and MIT's 1992 Commencement Speaker, is the new Secretary of Defense. John Deutch, Professor of Chemistry and former Provost of MIT, is the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology. Sheila Widnall, Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics and Associate Provost of MIT, is the Secretary of the Air Force, the first woman ever to head a military department. The Under Secretary is the Department of Defense official responsible for the Defense Production Act, the main mobilization authority for the nation, and, delegated though its Secretary, the Air Force manages implementation activity for the Act. With surely what was great foresight, just before either John Deutch or Sheila Widnall signed up for their jobs, DACS hosted a meeting on the 1992 Amendments to the Defense Production Act as part of a series organized by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Army War College.
In addition to those sponsors mentioned earlier, my colleagues and I would like to thank sincerely the Carnegie Corporation of New York, the Ford Foundation, the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, the W. Alton Jones Foundation, the Plowshares Fund, the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, the Department of Energy, the Army Environmental Policy Institute, the MITRE Corporation, and the John Merck Fund for their support of our work.
Finally, we would like to thank Commander Greg Hoffman, USN, our first Navy Federal Executive Fellow, for his many significant contributions to the work of the program and that of our students. Greg joined us in the fall of 1992 not quite certain what to expect. He leaves a year later having convinced us of the value in having military fellows affiliated with the program. He was ever patient as he helped us to understand how the military functions and only occasionally laughed openly as we demonstrated to him how university faculties muddle through their many roles.
Cdr. Hoffman on a prior assignment His current research interests are arms control, particularly nuclear proliferation, and the environmental impacts of energy use. He has studied proliferation issues since 1977, including both country-specific and generic problems. In the former, his main interests are in the Middle East and South Asia, while in the latter he has concentrated on international safeguards and export controls for sensitive nuclear technologies. From 1984 to 1986, Dr. Miller was a Foster Fellow with the Nuclear Weapons and Control Bureau of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA) and is currently a consultant on proliferation issues for ACDA, the International Technology Program of the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Technical Support Organization at the Brookhaven National Laboratory. 
June 19, 1992 -MIT Faculty Club DACS professors offered reflections on the causes and consequences of the Cold War's end and explained the DACS program's approach to security questions to two dozen Institute faculty representing wide-ranging disciplines, political perspectives, and ages.
October 13, 1992 -Cambridge Marriott Hotel Intended to explore the impact that the changing U.S. security and budgetary situation will have on the use and design of naval ships. (co-sponsored by the MIT Ocean Engineering Department)
Part of a series on security issues in the Russian Federation sponsored by the National Defense University. The 40 participants included representatives from the Central Intelligence Agency and Defense Intelligence Agency, as well as the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the armed services, the State Department, and private industry.
The second annual U.S.-Israeli Conference brought together American and Israeli officials, scholars, scientists, and policy analysts to wrestle with the problems of nuclear proliferation, chemical weapons, and arms control in a volatile region of the world. The first half of the conference was devoted to an overview of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, in global and regional terms. The issue of nuclear arms control in the Middle East and its relationship to the political process was addressed on the concluding day. Recurring themes that emerged and received repeated comment among the 30 participants included the potential threat posed by Iran, the "lessons of Iraq," and the heightened level of uncertainty in a post-Cold War world as to both the U.S. role in international politics and the nature of security threats.
The first in a series of workshops that FEMA (which shares mobilization responsibilities with DOD) is seeking to establish at universities. The day-long session explored the possible policy and organizational impacts of the 1992 Amendments to the basic mobilization law. National security, under the Amendments, is explicitly linked to the nation's general economic well-being, with the Department of Defense and its delegate, the Air Force, given broad powers to use defense acquisitions to promote U.S. industrial competitiveness.
The third annual symposium included four main topics: The Future of Defense Politics, Russia's Future, American Future Strategy, and Defense Technology's Future. After a report on the Program's future by Director Harvey Sapolsky, CDR Greg Hoffman, the Navy Federal Executive Fellow assigned to DACS, discussed the policy pressures that push toward an interest in non-lethal warfare options. Professor Stephen Meyer addressed Russia's future, noting that the media calls the crisis in Russia "...a contest between the forces for democracy and those for dictatorship" when the conflict is actually a much more prosaic struggle for personal political power. Professors Barry Posen and George Rathjens led a lively examination of alternative national strategies for the United States, championing Selective Engagement and Cooperative Security, respectively. The problems of theater ballistic missile defense was the focus of Professor Theodore Postol's report on the activities of the DACS Defense Technology Working Group. George Lewis, a DACS research fellow, closed the session with an analysis of why the Gulf War SCUD attack casualties were so low. The keys, we discovered, are warning, reinforced concrete, and luck.
June 2/3, 1993-The Sheraton Tara Inn, Lexington, Massachusetts The world's first conference on this subject examined the pressures leading to more use of non-lethal technologies, the technological opportunities, the historical experience, and the likely operational effectiveness of increased use of these technologies. Special attention was paid to environmental and arms control issues. Colonel John A. Warden III, USAF, Commandant of the Air Command and Staff College, gave the keynote address in which he speculated on high technology wars of the future. The other speakers included academic specialists in security studies as well as military and civilians directly involved in the planning and development of the technologies. Over 70 people attended including representatives from the United Kingdom, the U.S. armed services, industry, and the Departments of Defense and Justice. Political Science doctoral candidates may use Defense and Arms Control Studies as one of their fields of concentration. Within that context, defense and arms control studies has two principal objectives: first, it introduces the student to the study of American defense policy, including the policy process, arms control, force structure, and military budgets. Second, it introduces the student to the study of the role of force in international politics and how countries have historically pursued their security interests. Students are expected to develop competence in the methods of systems analysis, technology assessment, and strategic reasoning that shape the size and composition of U.S. strategic nuclear and general purpose forces. The international military competition, the prospects for arms control and their implications for U.S. force planning receive special consideration in several subjects. Others examine some of the same issues by contrasting U.S. experiences and approaches with those of rivals and allies.
Students who plan to offer Defense and Arms Control Studies for the general examination take two subjects from those listed below in the Forces and Force Analysis section, and one subject each from the listing in the Defense Politics and in the Comparative Defense Policy sections. Competence in technical analysis is required. A background in economics to intermediate level with particular emphasis on macroeconomics and public finance is advisable. The subjects in the Forces and Force Analysis section will provide sufficient review of the technical approaches to be examined.
The write-off requirement is three subjects with equal distribution among the three sections preferred although approval for alternative distributions may be granted in consultation with field faculty. A number of substantive fields in the Political Science Department deal with important determinants of U.S. defense programs and expenditures. Among the most closely related are: Science, Technology and Public Policy; American Politics; International Relations and Foreign Policy; and Soviet Studies. Students of defense policy are also encouraged to take subjects in economics.
Introduces the assessment of strategic nuclear forces. Emphasizes the development of force requirements and methods of analyzing alternative force postures in terms of missions, effectiveness, and cost. The history of U.S.-Soviet strategic competition provides the backdrop against which the evolution of nuclear strategy and forces is considered.
Examines in detail the technology of nuclear weapons systems. Topics include nuclear weapons design, effects, targeting, and delivery; ballistic and air breathing missile propul-TEACHING sion and guidance; communications and early warning techniques and systems; and anti-AT DACS missile, air, and submarine systems. Combines the discussion of technical materials with the national security policy issues raised by the capabilities of these technologies. Considers security issues from the distinct and often conflicting perspectives of technologists, military planners, and political leaders.
Based on the concept of Grand Strategy as a system of interconnected political and military means and ends. Topics covered include U.S. grand strategy, the organization of the U.S. military, the defense budget, ground forces, tactical air forces, naval forces, power projection forces, and the control of escalation. Particular episodes of military history that offer insights into current conventional forces issues examined. Graduate students are expected to pursue the subject at greater depth through reading and individual research.
Reviews weapons systems developments and efforts at arms control. Focuses on the interaction of technological factors with strategic concepts, intelligence assessments, and political judgment. Topics: nuclear weapons technology and effects, nuclear weapons proliferation, strategic defensive and offensive weapons, and analysis of current strategic arms programs. To the extent possible, experts who have played key roles in the topics covered are invited to give guest lectures.
Examines the politics affecting U.S. defense policies. Includes consideration of intraand inter-service rivalries, civil-military relations, contractor influences, congressional oversight, peace movements in historical and contemporary perspectives, and U.S. defense politics before, during, and after the Cold War.
Introduces the student to the problems and issues confronting American national security and the process by which American national security policy is formulated. The nature of the international system (post-World War II), the theoretical requirements for deterrence and defense, and alternative strategies for implementing American national security policy are discussed. The roles of the President, National Security Council, Department of Defense and armed services, the Congress, and public opinion in formulating national security policy are examined. Explores the origins, rate, and impact of innovations in military organizations, doctrine, and weapons. Emphasis on organization theory approaches. Comparisons with non-military and non-U.S. experience included.
A comparative study of the grand strategies and military doctrines of the great powers in Europe (Britain, France, Germany, and Russia) from the late 19th to the mid-20th century. Examines strategic developments in the years preceding and during World Wars I and II. What factors have exerted the greatest influence on national strategies? How may the quality of a grand strategy be judged? What consequences seem to follow from grand strategies of different types? Open to undergraduates with permission of instructor.
Based substantially on the 13-part public television series "War and Peace in the Nuclear Age." Includes the history and technology of nuclear weapons, including the discovery of fission; the development of fission and fusion weapons; nuclear testing and efforts to control the technology; problems in the proliferation of weapons; advanced nuclear weapons technologies; changing perceptions about the role of nuclear weapons in world affairs. 
George Lewis spent five years as a research associate in Cornell University's Department of Applied Physics after receiving his PhD in experimental solid state physics from there in 1983. Prior to coming to MIT in 1989 he was a fellow in the Peace Studies Program at Cornell and at the Center for International Security and Arms Control at Stanford. His research has included studies of arms control and verification for sealaunched cruise missiles and other non-strategic nuclear weapons, air surveillance and early warning systems, and the effectiveness of tactical missiles and of defenses against such missiles (with an emphasis on the performance of Patriot in the 1991 Gulf War). Dr. Lewis is now beginning studies on the proliferation of advanced military aircraft, and the technical prospects for boost-phase intercepts of tactical ballistic missiles.
A fighter-pilot in the Israeli Air Force reserves, Dr. Pedatzur has taught Israeli Defense Policy at the I.D.F. Military Academy and at Tel Aviv University, where he was a Research Fellow at the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies. For the last ten years he was a defense analyst for Haa'retz daily newspaper and more recently the Israeli correspondent for Jane's Defence Weekly. Dr. Pedatzur, who earned his PhD in political science from Tel Aviv University in 1993, has been writing on ballistic missile defense and has just completed a study on the Arrow --the Israeli defense system. He is currently examining Patriot's Gulf War performance. 
MARVIN M. MILLER
* Was on the campus of University of Northern Arizona to give a talk on "Future U.S. Military Force Structure" at the Arizona Honors Academy, June 9, 1992. * Presented an IAP seminar on "The Disposition of Weapons Grade Materials" during MIT's Independent Activities Period on January 15, 1993. * On February 10, 1993, visited the U.S. * Attended a workshop on Sources of Conflict in the Middle East, held April 15-18 in Istanbul, Turkey, sponsored by the American Association for the * Spoke on "Realist Theory and Ethnic Conflict" * Addressed a group of visiting cadets from the U.S. Military Academy's Domestic Affairs Forum on "Future U.S. Strategy and Force Structure," October 22, 1992. * * * Participated in the MIT Campus Visit Program of October 22-24, 1992 with a presentation on "Changing National Priorities." The 'Visit,' sponsored by the MIT Development Office, invites small groups of alumni and their spouses to the campus to explore new facets of the Institute. * Took part in the "Workshop on Technical * Spoke on "The Future of the Defense Aerospace Industry" at a meeting of the MIT Workshop on the Lean Aircraft Initiative sponsored by the MIT Center for Technology, Policy and Industrial Development, held March 29-30, 1993. * As the guest of the U.S. Military * Was a participant at the U.S.-Israeli Seminar on Arms Control in the Middle East, held February
R EC PIE NTS 9 992/1 993
R EC PIE NTS 9 992/1 993
May 5 -ALEXEI ARBATOV Research Fellow, Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard University Some Remarks on the Ongoing Russian Roulette *Co-sponsored by the MIT Japan Program. T U D I ES PROGRAM
Lisbeth Gronlund and 
David Wright
Depressed-Trajectory SLBMs: A Technical Assessment and Arms Control Possibilities
Science and Global Security, Vol
From Nuclear Deterrence to Reassurance: The Role of Confidence-Building Measures in Military Development," Arms Control (May 1993
Ivo H. Daalder
Terry Terriff
Carl Kaysen
Michael R. Beschloss
Carl Kaysen
Robert McNamara
George Rathjens
Nuclear Weapons After the Cold War
Joseph Rotblat
Jack Steinberger
Bhalchandra Udgaonkar
Westview Press
Do Weak States Bandwagon?" Security Studies (Spring 1992
George N. Lewis
Theodore A. Postol, "Long-range Nuclear Cruise Missiles and Stability," Science and Global Security, Vol
George N. Lewis
Future of U.S. Nonstrategic Nuclear Forces
Michele A. Flournoy
Guidelinesfor U.S. Policy
he 
Defense and Arms Control Studies (DACS) Program
MIT Center for International Studies
MIT Political Science Department
Commission on Government Procurement
Office of the Secretary of Defense
Naval War College
Office of Naval Research
RAND Corporation
Professor Ruina
MIT Defense and Arms Control Studies Program
Professor Sapolsky
Navy
Institute for Advanced Study
President Kennedy. He
Defense Department
CIA
Committee on Security Studies of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences
Dr. Kaysen
MIT-Japan Program's Global Political/ Economic
Center for International Studies
Political Science Department. * Medical School
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
U.S.-Japan Defense Technology Collaboration
MIT
Japan Program
MIT
Social Science Research Council
U.S.-Israeli Seminar on Arms Control in the Middle East
American Academy of Arts and Sciences in Cambridge
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
Princeton Plasma Physics Lab
Australian National University (Peace Research Centre) in Canberra and at the University of Western Australia (Indian Ocean Centre for Peace Studies
Carl Kaysen
s project on "Emerging Norms of Justified Internal Intervention
American Academy of Arts and Sciences in Cambridge
U.S.-Israeli Seminar on Arms Control in the Middle East, held February the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in Cambridge
Nuclear Weapons
European Security
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
GEORGE W. RATHJENS became Professor in the Department of Political Science after service with the Institute for Defense Analyses, the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defense, the Office of the President's Science Advisor, and the Weaoons Evaluation Groun of the Denartment of Defense. Dr. Rathjens received his B.S. from Yale University and completed his Ph.D. in chemistry at the University of California at Berkeley. He is active in a number of associations, including the Council for a Livable World of which he has been Chairman and the Federation of American Scientists of which he is Sponsor, Councilor, and Past Chairman. Dr. Rathjens' major policy interests are nuclear arms issues, post-Cold War international security questions, and environmental problems, with special emphasis on conflict and the environment.
JACK RUINA is Professor of Electrical Engineering. Dr. Ruina was an undergraduate at the City College of New York and did his graduate work at the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, earning his M.E.E. and D.E.E. there. He taught at Brown University and the University of Illinois; at the latter he also headed the Radar Division of the Control System Laboratory. While on leave from the University of Illinois, he served in several senior positions at the Department of Defense, the last being Director of the Advanced Research Projects Agency. He also held the post of President of the Institute for Defense Analyses. At MIT, he has held the position of Vice President for Special Laboratories and is currently Secretary of the MIT Faculty. He was instrumental in establishing the Defense and Arms Control Program and was its first Director. Dr. Ruina's special interest is in strategic weapons policy. 