# ID: ca7bde5e1ef04986aee7cceeccea1026
# Title: The New Balance: Limited Armed Stabilization and the Future of US Landpower
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
The U.S. Army's Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute and the Strategic Studies Institute are pleased to offer this groundbreaking monograph on the future of U.S. landpower. The Department of Defense (DoD) experienced revolutionary change in its strategic outlook over the past 8 years. As it transitions to new leadership in the White House and undertakes a historic Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR), it will be important for DoD to examine the "first principles" that guide its force planning.
Consistent with his past writing on the rapid onset of an unconventional operating environment, Mr. Nathan Freier takes a critical look at the missionassignment and orientation of U.S. landpower. He calls for an unconventional revolution in U.S. land forces that optimizes them for intervention in complex and violent crises of governance and security in states crippled by internal disorder. In the end, he argues that the armed stabilization of states and regions in crises will be not just equivalent in importance to traditional warfighting in future land force planning, as suggested by DoD 3000.05 (Stability Operations), but instead the primary land force mission for the foreseeable future. Freier twice deployed to Iraq as a strategist while assigned to the Army War College. From January to July 2005, he served in the Strategy, Plans, and Assessments Directorate of Headquarters, Multi-National Force-Iraq, and from May to August 2007, he served as a special assistant to the Commander, Multi-National Corps-Iraq, in the Commander's Initiatives Group. In his current capacity, he continues to provide expert advice to a number of key actors in the security and defense policymaking and analysis communities. Among his research interests and areas of expertise are U.S. grand strategy; national security, defense, and military strategy and policy development; irregular, catastrophic, and hybrid security challenges and conflicts; strategic net and risk assessment; terrorism; and the Iraq War. Mr. Freier holds master's degrees in international relations from Troy State University and politics from The Catholic University of America.
The Department of Defense (DoD) cannot long ignore the inadequacy of much of the current force for nontraditional challenges lurking on the strategic horizon. In the face of the next large-scale unconventional challenge when the President turns to the Secretary of Defense (SecDef) for options, the SecDef must have the right force available to respond effectively.
Senior landpower leaders in particular should reorient on a new unconventional balance point for force optimization. They should anticipate that there will be changes in the U.S. approach to defenserelevant and defense-specific challenges around the world. As a consequence, they should act proactively to help the SecDef identify and build capabilities for the new balance point during the upcoming Quadrennial Defense Review. Doing so will enable DoD to better account for contemporary strategic conditions with minimum future institutional disruption. This monograph arrives at the following conclusions.
• The contemporary strategic environment is marked by a new unconventional status quo. Four characteristics define this new normal. First, unconventional threats of "purpose" and "context" dominate the defense operating space. Second, internal and external threats to foreign interests will commingle in future land-centric contingencies. Third, hybrid combinations of purposeful and contextual threats will be commonplace. And, finally, fourth, traditional military power-employed in isolation-will be increasingly less useful. Combined, these indicate that "fighting and winning America's wars" will mean something quite different to senior land force leaders in the future.
U.S. landpower fulfils two roles in this new unconventional operating space. It delivers decisive lethal and nonlethal military effects and enables effective employment of important nonmilitary capabilities and resources like aid, development assistance, consequence management, and preliminary reconstruction.
• Armed stabilization may be the next most common and most important major combat operation (MCO) for DoD land forces. More broadly among the many targets available for land force optimization in the coming years, the most prudent course is one that pursues an unconventional revolution in mission and capabilities. Shifting land force policy in this direction acknowledges that armed stabilization of nations and/or regions in crisis and the defeat of violent threats to a foreign internal order are likely more important organizing principles for future force planning than is preparation for future traditional MCOs.
Here, U.S. land forces optimize for circumstances where: (1) vital interests are challenged by violent unconventional threats; (2) the degree of violence itself is quite high and the environment is nonpermissive; (3) physical threats demonstrate some organization and relative sophistication at various levels (but not that commonly associated with high-end MCO); and finally, (4) foreign partners suffer from substantial loss or complete failure of sovereign control over political and security outcomes.
• Four principles should govern future landpower employment in this new environment. These reflect the strategic experience and choices of the post-September 11, 2001 (9/11) era, and are sensitive to contemporary risk and cost tolerance. They are: (1) core interests first; (2) limited objectives; (3) risk management; and, finally, (4) early integration of joint, interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational contributions. All four blend at critical points.
• Shaped by these four principles, unconventional land force optimization calls for the adoption of eight new or revised missions. This new mission set is not a threat to the warfighting culture of either the U.S. Army or Marine Corps. Instead, it represents a recalibration of landpower's focus consistent with history, the likeliest strategic futures, and, finally, the desire by senior defense leaders to shift DoD's weight decisively in the direction of unconventional threats.
The new mission set includes: (1) active management of purposeful unconventional threats;
(2) armed stabilization; (3) preemptive/ punitive campaigns; (4) security sector reform and assistance; (5) conventional deterrence and limited traditional war; (6) facilitation of wholeof-government stabilization and reconstruction; (7) generation and sustainment of adequate land force capabilities; and finally, (8) homeland defense and security. All of these missions and
x their associated force pools are interdependent. When combined, they amount to a new 21st century land power force planning construct.
Pursuit of an unconventional land force revolution that accounts for these eight missions resets landpower for decisive intervention in future complex contingencies. General purpose land forces, in particular, must optimize for armed stabilization missions that demand rapid containment and defeat of nontraditional foreign hazards under conditions of general civil disorder in order to create secure operating space for the effective employment of essential nonmilitary agents (e.g., interagency, intergovernmental, international, and nongovernmental). This course recognizes that U.S. land forces are warfighting institutions first. However, it forces landpower leaders to build for a different kind of warfighting future.
Future Shock-The Next Two MCOs? 
1
The President: As you know, in spite of our best efforts, we have not yet turned the corner on the global economic downturn. Global markets have failed to rebound satisfactorily. Now, parallel crises in the Middle East and Mexico promise to undermine the physical security of the United States and global political and economic confidence. I asked the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) to open our discussion with an update on the most recent developments. Admiral Smith.
The DNI: Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen. Generalized inter-and intra-communal disorder across Saudi Arabia is likely to worsen. As you are all well aware, the global economic crisis hit primary resource exporters like Saudi Arabia hard. We assess that widespread political disaffection and economic dislocation provide fertile ground for continuing violent instability. It appears that the Saudi government is unraveling. The extended royal family, government ministers, and long-serving technocrats have all left their posts. Saudi security forces are dissolving.
We can now also confirm that the Shi'a insurrection in eastern Saudi Arabia left most of the Saudi petroleum extraction and export capacity unattended, destroyed, or under the control of anti-government forces. A similar uprising is reported in the Iraqi cities of Al Basrah and Um Qasr. Here it appears that locally-based Iraqi security forces are complicit in the seizure of Iraq's southern oil fields and Iraq's only deep water port.
As for Mexico, the pandemic spreading through Mexico's largest urban centers is a variant of Avian flu. The pandemic started in rural Mexico's poultry industry and has spread to many of Mexico's most consequential urban centersmost notably Mexico City. In Mexico City alone 100,000 to 200,000 citizens are ill. We have less visibility elsewhere. It is reasonable to assume that another 100,000 to 200,000 Mexicans are sick nationwide.
With a 12 percent mortality rate, upwards of 50,000 Mexicans are likely already dead. Continuing drought and famine in rural Mexico have witnessed 200,000 to 400,000 people migrating to major urban centers in the past 2 weeks. This is compounding the effects of the pandemic. The pandemic's mortality rate is expected to spike at 40 percent due to the concomitant outbreak of methicillinresistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) pneumonia among those already sick or acutely ill. Mexico lacks the fourth order antibiotics and ventilators needed to treat this severe pneumonia. The number of those sick will grow exponentially over the coming days. The Mexican health system will collapse in the next 7-10 days. We assess that Mexican security forces are likely next to fall victim.
The pandemic has triggered a number of quite dangerous developments in an already deteriorating security situation. First, criminal gangs are preying on internally displaced populations. Hundreds of the displaced have been killed or critically injured in the past 2 weeks. Second, workers at the port of Vera Cruz and Mexico City International Airport have abandoned their positions as a result of flu-related panic. A syndicate of organized crime groups and rogue national police occupy and run both. Legitimate commercial traffic, to include aid, has been dramatically curtailed. Third, we are witnessing dramatic increases in both illegal immigration and illicit cross-border criminal activity into the United States. Without remediation by us, this will result in the spread of the pandemic into this country. Finally, there are strong indications that much of Mexico's political leadership has agreed to an entente cordiale with Mexican organized crime. This has turned into significant elements inside the Mexican government for-profit criminal enterprises.
As you are well aware, like Saudi Arabia and Iraq, the global financial downturn has hit Mexico hard. The combined effects of increasing economic dislocation and criminality have fatally weakened the Mexican government and economy. Defection to organized crime of many Mexican political elites will put legitimate governance and national economic viability into a final death spiral.
Complicity of many government officials in criminal activity has encouraged increased criminality within the Mexican security forces and the lower levels of civil government. Conservatively, we estimate that upwards of 50 percent of Mexican territory is informally administered by criminal cartels. Of greatest immediate concern, we know of a number of large criminal sanctuaries abutting U.S. territory. Mexico's criminal cartels are better armed and better organized than what remains of legitimate Mexican security forces. Violence in Mexico is unchecked. This and the disproportionate impact of the economic crisis on Mexico have accelerated its devolution toward state failure. We have every reason to believe that it will fail completely within a month or two. We increasingly face the prospect of an ungoverned Mexico.
The President: The stable functioning of two friendly nations critical to the physical and economic security of the United States is in grave doubt. The fatally weakened governments of Mexico and Saudi Arabia have reluctantly asked for our help. Iraq has done the same. Clearly, helping them restore some functioning order under their authority is a global security interest. There are precious few states in the world that can help besides us. We have limited options and we need to be sensitive to Mexican, Saudi, and Iraqi sovereignty. Unfortunately, time is not on our side.
Today's discussion is about options. If we choose to assist Mexico, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq, we have no alternative but to turn to the Department of Defense first to facilitate and enable a whole-of-government U.S. response. Therefore, I asked the SecDef to outline some preliminary thoughts in this regard. Mr. Secretary, you have the floor. . . . ________________________________________________ Since September 11, 2001 (9/11), the United States has played the role of "revolutionary power." It employed military force to pursue transformational social and political objectives in places like Iraq and Afghanistan. Since January 2009, the strategic frame of reference and choices made by the last national security team have entered a period of substantial revision. The sheer number and scope of future challenges indicate that less ambitious pursuits are in order. 
2
3
It would be prudent for DoD and its constituent service components and combatant commands to address this point directly in the next QDR. First, they should anticipate significant change in the U.S. approach to defense-relevant and defense-specific national security challenges. 
4
Routine political transition at home inevitably leads to fresh perspectives on future actions abroad. There will be some continuity. For example, a war on terrorism (WoT) against jihadists will continue. Likewise, irregular wars in Iraq and Afghanistan will persist. However, these are only the first in what is likely to be an unbroken chain of unconventional defenserelevant contingencies on the strategic horizon.
Today, there is less uncertainty about future threats. It is, of course, impossible to predict with assured accuracy whether twin crises in Saudi Arabia and Mexico will occur as the fictional scenario above suggests. It is certain, however, that contingencies like these will challenge DoD in the future.
From both a strategic and resource perspective, prudent adjustments to the contemporary defense status quo are essential. On this point, Ashton Carter observes, "Strategic clarity-What kind of military do we need and why?-must make a return to the Pentagon after a period when ever-growing budgets and single-minded preoccupation with Iraq have caused it to fall out of practice." 
5
Incoming defense policymakers and constituent members of DoD-like the U.S. Army and U.S. Marine Corps-would benefit from wider and more thoroughgoing discussions about those foreign security challenges likeliest to require substantial defense involvement over the next 2 decades. This is a key step toward identifying the most suitable and acceptable landpower contributions in response. 
6
To date, naturally cautious and conservative U.S. defense and military establishments have pursued "full-spectrum" balance as a matter of policy. 
7
8
Despite U.S. advantages in traditional warfighting, and despite a necessary and successful detour in the direction of COIN, many within DoD and the defense strategy elite want to refocus defense strategy (including that associated with land forces) fully on emerging traditional military competition with resurgent great powers-e.g., "leap ahead" to defeat a rising China or a resurgent Russia in speculative future conflicts. They hold this view regardless of how remote and manageable the prospect of large-scale traditional warfighting is in reality. In a recent book, Thomas Donnelly and Frederick Kagan concluded similarly: "There are hints of a desire to return to the 1990's focus on wars against larger and more conventional enemies in the wake of the painful experiences of Iraq and Afghanistan." 
9
10
11
Declining defense resources are a certainty. 
12
13
The analysis here concentrates on future landpower missions in an increasingly unconventional strategic and operational environment. Even as it zeroes in on future foreign contingencies, it accepts that U.S. landpower will also play a substantial role in homeland defense and security (HLD/S). Indeed, I argue later that there is significant harmony between capabilities necessary for HLS/D and those essential to success in unconventional foreign contingencies.
"Unconventional" military activity as used in this monograph is not synonymous with "unconventional warfare." 14 Rather, unconventional here captures those new or newly appreciated nontraditional, defense-relevant conflict conditions endemic to the contemporary security environment. By and large, these conditions are distinct from the well-known demands of traditional warfighting. They are insurgency, terrorism, civil war, state failure and collapse, proliferation, strategically consequential criminal activity, and "hybrid war." 
15
16
17
18
These missions include: (1) active management of purposeful unconventional threats; (2)  We must concede that significant cultural and bureaucratic obstacles stand in the way of this alternative. This should not, however, undermine its urgency or legitimacy.
The SecDef owes the new President immediate advice on the future mission allocation and employment of U.S. land forces. Key force planning decisions lie on the near-term defense agenda. Seven-plus years of persistent unconventional conflict stunted wider debate on the role of U.S. landpower in future foreign contingencies. An emotion-laden U.S. election also inhibited meaningful consideration of future land force employment. There has been very little room for speculative consideration of land force futures given the demands of ongoing wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Strategic and operational circumstances are increasingly unconventional. They will remain so. The defense department and a broad collection of defense intellectuals now accept this proposition as inevitable. Consequently, the new defense team must turn to the business of deliberately assessing U.S. land forces in light of these circumstances.
One good starting point is a comparison of two competing environments. The first is external-the strategic environment within which DoD operates now and in the future. The second is internal-the bureaucratic policymaking environment within which DoD leaders frame strategic choices.
The strategic environment is hostile, complex, and quite distinct from the Cold War environment that preceded it. In serial unconventional engagements over the past 2 decades, it has provided the American defense establishment with a plethora of sometimes painful but nonetheless important lessons. Moreover, the policymaking environment is increasingly defined by the rapid onset of a number of resource-constrained strategic choices. Competing bureaucratic forces buffet the near-term policy decision space. We see longheld, traditional defense biases and declining defense resources. Yet, at the same time, we find increased recognition by military and defense professionals of the rising vulnerability and insecurity of core interests to unconventional threats. Thus competing forces contend for primacy as senior DoD policymakers debate critical future defense choices.
The fact that unconventional security challenges will dominate the defense operating space for the foreseeable future, calls for a revolutionary look at landpower force planning. This is the new post-9/11 status quo. 
19
Together, these characteristics argue strongly for U.S. land forces sacrificing some "excessive conventional overmatch" in favor of optimizing for more complex and disordered foreign security contingencies. 
21
With respect to the first characteristic-the prominence of unconventional threats of purpose and contextthere is near unanimity that the most compelling future defense-relevant challenges will be unconventional and often nonmilitary in origin and character. 
23
24
These threats of purpose and context will continue to conform to the irregular, catastrophic, and hybrid models outlined by DoD and others over the last 5 years. 
25
26
Most unconventional threats are land-and peoplecentric. This alone argues strongly for their central role in the institutional decisionmaking of land force leaders. One important implication associated with the new prominence of unconventional threats is the growing likelihood that U.S. landpower will deliver or enable delivery of lethal and nonlethal U.S. power and effects in response to them. When a future U.S. President opens discussion with "Mr. Secretary, you have the floor," the question is both "How will the military conduct operations?" as well as "How can military forces facilitate employment of other-often more appropriate-instruments of power?" It follows then that landpower leaders should focus on a new high-intensity challenge set. This challenge set springs from environments where order has failed or is failing and where restoration and maintenance of a new order is possible only through comprehensive, whole-of-government responses relying on the threat or use of force for success. Under these circumstances, landpower enables positive outcomes but likely will not be the decisive instrument for achieving them. 27
The second characteristic-the blurred boundary between internal and external threats to foreign interests-is evident in contemporary conflicts. One clear lesson of recent U.S. operational experience is that even external threats to friends, partners, or foreign interests often materialize first within states and regions of concern. They do not commonly result from overt interstate military aggression. External threats-even armed threats-to foreign interests will most often manifest themselves first as internal challenges to security and stability. These challenges will be both violent and nonviolent. They might be welcome or unwelcome to U.S. partners depending on their target, strategic intent, effect, and relative impact. The symbiosis and tension associated with Iranian influence in Iraq are important examples. In the fictional scenario, one might reasonably explore both the domestic and foreign origins of uprisings in Saudi Arabia's Eastern Province and the parallel instability in al Basrah and Um Qasr. Likewise, there might be a symbiotic relationship between criminal cartels in the fictional future Mexico and less visible external state and nonstate agitators.
In practice in both Iraq and Afghanistan, identifying the precise source of violence and instability proved a real challenge to operational commanders and policymakers alike. Internal and external engines of instability are operative in both. These emanate from hostile purpose and context. They can come via aggressive opponents acting according to some strategic design or unstable internal and external conditions militating against U.S. interests in the complete absence of design. Note, for example, the adverse catalytic effects of external conditions like the global economy and internal forces like political disaffection, criminality, and public health challenges in one or both of the fictional scenarios above.
The Iraq and Afghanistan experiences remain critical to a nuanced appreciation of contemporary operating conditions. The variegated threats to the stable functioning of both mimic the type of challenges that will be repeated in complex contingencies worldwide. In Iraq, for example, it continues to be quite difficult to identify hard boundaries between al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) and corporate al-Qaeda or indigenous Shi'a militias and irregular Iranian state-based actors like the Qods Force. Likewise, drawing bright lines between residual threats from foreign terrorists in Afghanistan, on one hand, and the interaction of hostile local or regional forces like the Afghan or Pakistani Taliban on the other, remains problematic. All operate in an environment that by itself is inherently volatile and insecure. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff underscored the blurring of purposeful internal and external threats recently when he observed, "Consider recent events in the border region between Pakistan and Afghanistan. . . . Ethnically disparate groups of extremists and militants are now cooperating with each other in an almost syndicate-like manner." 
28
29
Borders are arbitrary lines, relevant to cartographers but not necessarily to governments and populations. Further, what remains of classical state sovereignty in much of the world exists primarily in the aspirations of indigenous political leaders but rarely in real practice on the ground. Thus, in unconventional contingencies abroad, U.S. land force leaders will remain in the business of responding to both internal and external threats simultaneously. Often both are manifested as nontraditional, nonmilitary threats and operate inside vulnerable, indigenous populations. As a consequence, land forces will operate with severe limitations on the use of force.
Key land force implications associated with the commingling of internal and external threats are manifest. First, while perhaps not impossible, large-scale military encroachments on U.S. interests are increasingly unlikely. As a consequence, while external threats to core foreign interests persist, they will be less vulnerable to conventional U.S. military advantages. Standing ready on the frontier to repel existing military threats to a foreign partner is no longer the gold standard for measuring military capability. Unconventional challenges are likely to be more surreptitious and insidious.
In point of fact, external threats to the stability of a friendly foreign power or the security of a key foreign interest will commonly arrive via wire transfer, foreign influence peddling, terrorism, insurrection, and/or political infiltration and agitation. They are far less likely to materialize as overt cross-border military incursions. When an external actor can exploit propinquity and deep traditional cross-border social, political, and economic affiliations, and has the advantage of time, there is very little use in exposing itself militarily to traditional U.S. advantages. Again, though many of these unconventional challenges will be violent, their violence will be less overt or direct than that associated with conventional warfighting. Land forces will have to sift through this complexity and nimbly operate within and against it.
The U.S. military establishment is slow to acknowledge these implications. Largely the product of mirror-imaging, the tendency of the American defense and military establishments is to draw hard boundaries between internal and external challenges when developing and employing U.S. and foreign partner capabilities. This tendency results in an artificial division of security labor. For example, American military tradition holds that external threats are the business of armies, whereas internal challenges are the business of police. In this view, military and police functions are mutually exclusive-police forces patrol the streets looking inward, armies patrol international borders looking outward. Land armies influenced by this tradition continue to focus on conventional military violations of state sovereignty more out of habit than as a result of deliberate strategic net and risk assessment.
In much of the world, reality defies this convention. Where violent internal and external challenges are indistinguishable, the difference in function between police and/or constabulary forces and national armies should by necessity be less pronounced or important. This implies that both U.S. and partner land forces should assume those military and police characteristics that are most relevant to and useful in combating violent unconventional threats to a foreign partner's internal security regardless of origin.
A final implication is that, in almost all cases, the presence of hostile unconventional actors-state and nonstate, foreign or indigenous-will predate U.S. intervention and will remain long after a U.S. drawdown. In truth, it is impossible to sanitize a conflict environment of undesirable external influence. This is not intended to suggest that foreign intervention is irrelevant. It does suggest, however, that the opportunity for U.S. ground commanders to neatly separate foreign and indigenous sources of conflict for successive and final defeat remains the exception. Most unconventional threats and conflicts are management challenges first. U.S. and partner land forces will be in the business of driving down consequential internal and external resistance to levels that are tolerable but not in most cases extinguished. Winning, in this regard, assumes a whole new meaning.
The high likelihood of hybrid threats argues strongly that the most compelling unconventional, foreign security challenges confronting U.S. land forces will appear as complex fusions of purposeful and contextual challenges. 
30
31
Free Riding. Purposeful state and nonstate opponents often pursue ends directly anathema to core U.S. interests by free riding on adverse contextual conditions associated with a conflict or contingency already of substantial interest to the United States. As argued above, Iran leverages the chaos of the collapsed Iraqi state into a proxy battlefield. Likewise, nonstate groups like al-Qaeda do the same in Iraq, Afghanistan, and across the wider Middle East. Depending on the original sequence of events in the earlier scenarios, violent uprisings in the oil-producing regions of Saudi Arabia and Iraq might be examples of free riding. Further, the fictional internal struggle in Saudi Arabia's Sunni community in part might stem from Saudi Arabian alignment with the United States in the wider war on terror (WOT).
In free riding, the commingling of internal and external threats is often most acute. Though the United States remains focused on violent Islamists feeding off political disaffection and human insecurity in the Muslim world, similar circumstances will arise from or within other regions and sources as well. This piling-on to preexisting, unconventional conflicts and conditions complicates pursuit of U.S. objectives by diluting the ability to concentrate resources, capabilities, and strategic focus on a single source of violence or instability.
In foreign contingencies at the tactical and operational levels, hostile internal and external actors will seek refuge in adverse contextual conditions like failed governance, political instability, and human insecurity to secure strategic objectives that are either central or peripheral to the immediate conflict at hand. They hide among, exploit, and work through vulnerable and/or complicit local populations-often exploiting the advantages of common confessional, ethnic, or regional identity. Free riders operate autonomously, employing the cover of internal instability to enhance their freedom of action. They also operate in concert with other hostile actors, according to common interest or convenience. Worse, they can work through corrupt or duplicitous partner government and security force actors. All three instances of free riding are common.
On the latter point, when allies (or allied actors) themselves at times act against U.S. interests, the United States cannot rely on indirect approaches alone. For land forces, this means that effectively combating hybrid combinations of purposeful threat actors and contextual threat conditions requires both direct and indirect approaches. This involves a nimble combination of physical U.S. presence and direct U.S. action, merged with the careful cultivation, motivation, and employment of trusted local partner capacity. Working through others is always preferred but not always possible.
Strategic State Instability and Collapse. With regard to the collapse of functioning order in a major state, the United States is forced by circumstances to contend with a victim state's residual military capacity (possibly including weapons of mass destruction), while reestablishing functioning order in the face of irregular resistance and widespread human insecurity. 
32
33
34
35
36
There are other landpower implications related to strategic state collapse. First, regardless of cost, intervention that predominantly, or even exclusively, involves American forces may be unavoidable. This is particularly true in the earliest stages of intervention.
There may simply be no effective indirect approach or capable partner. Note the fictional President's lament in the prologue, "Clearly, helping restore some functioning order [under Saudi, Mexican, and Iraqi authority] is a global security interest. There are precious few states in the world that can help besides us." The absence of capable partners is not a prohibition against action. It is, however, a caution against overly ambitious strategic objectives.
A related implication is recognition that U.S. land forces should prepare to conduct rapid, multi-point foreign intervention and armed stabilization under conditions of general civil disorder. Given natural sensitivities about sovereignty, interventions of this kind will occur from a cold start after all other options are exhausted. In the fictional scenario, for example, the United States has been asked to help. The greater the immediate danger to the security of the United States, the more it is expected that U.S. Presidents will act sooner rather than later.
As part of a larger joint and interagency effort, U.S. land forces might find themselves responsible for (1) defeating residual traditional military threats inside the victim state; (2) confronting active irregular resistance from indigenous nationalists, extremists, and spoilers;
(3) isolating the victim state from the most malign and violent forms of external intervention; (4) preventing the migration of conflict and instability to surrounding states; (5) securing key national infrastructure and/ or dangerous military capabilities; and (6) addressing and managing widespread humanitarian concerns.
A third implication for land forces is that, in cases of strategic state failure, the breadth of the stabilization challenge will quickly exceed the capacity of the U.S. and its primary partners. Without a broader and more thoroughgoing international commitment, this precludes pursuit of the type of holistic reconstruction envisioned by contemporary stability operations literature and doctrine. 
37
Invasion by Proxy. Still another hybrid example envisions a capable state or nonstate competitor exploiting contextual conditions to conduct an invasion by proxy so as to secure irredentist objectives. Most often, this occurs through surrogates and sophisticated foreign fifth columinsts, employing other-than-military means. Here, an external challenger prosecutes war against another state from within-often without firing a shot. In practice, this takes the form of a nonmilitary end run around U.S. military advantages. Hostile, state-based opponents might shield themselves during invasion by proxy by holding substantial military capacity in reserve to discourage traditional U.S. intervention or retaliation.
While not direct instruments for prosecution of the conflict per se, a competitor's traditional military capabilities remain risk considerations for U.S. decisionmakers. This option is attractive to both highand low-end competitors. The fictional crises in the prologue leave the door open to the prospect that twin insurrections in Saudi Arabia and Iraq are part of an invasion by proxy. If the source of the invasion is Iran, for example, the stirring up of irregular/ unconventional conditions inside the affected states and Iran's traditional military capacity are naturally central to U.S. risk calculations. On the subject of the possible resurgence of proxy wars against the United States by competing great powers like China, Andrew Krepinevich recently observed:
It is not, however, far-fetched to believe that China, which seeks to develop strong ties to Third World countries hostile to the United States . . . might pursue proxy irregular warfare against U.S. interests, somewhat similar to what the Soviet Union did during the Cold War through its sponsorship of "wars of liberation." 
38
In the absence of a clear casus belli, traditional U.S. military advantages might be sidelined or useful only under limited conditions. In particular, land forces might reinforce a vulnerable partner's failing security capacity; they might be employed to secure threatened U.S. economic interests; and/or they might be used to provide for the physical security of U.S./ partner citizens. Barring overt and traceable external aggression, it will be difficult to justify a more expansive use of military force against the likeliest antagonists.
The final characteristic results from aggregation of the previous three. It is the decreasing utility of traditional military power when employed in isolation.
As articulated above, consequential challenges to U.S. security interests will commonly be unconventional threats of purpose and context. They will originate both within and outside of victim states and societies. And most will materialize as complex hybrids where a menu of hostile intentions, methods, and conditions combine to frustrate U.S. designs.
As argued above, the threats most commonly will not materialize in the form of overt military aggression. Today hostile actors and hostile conditions rarely dare to confront traditional U.S. strengths. By implication, effective U.S. responses to them require the nuanced blending of military and nonmilitary resources and methods.
Though traditional uses of force are less appropriate, DoD is-for the foreseeable future-in the business of leading USG responses to complex, unconventional contingencies abroad. Sheer military capacity alone places DoD in a position to either dominate or substantially contribute to U.S. success. There simply is no other USG actor with comparable, self-contained command and control, security, and support capacity. Therefore, DoD will at a minimum provide both the theater architecture and manpower for effective U.S. responses.
As the fictitious President observed earlier, "We have no alternative but to turn to the Department of Defense first." In almost all cases of violent unconventional threat, U.S. landpower will be at the center of DoD-led USG responses. As much as DoD and its land components prefer to limit their core competencies to a narrow definition of warfighting, strategic conditions will not cooperate.
Effective management and defeat of violent threats to U.S. interests remain core landpower business. Nevertheless, future landpower relevance hinges on its continuing to push against long-held defense conventions about what constitutes threats to U.S. interests and thus what constitutes the most appropriate land component contributions in response to them. It seems abundantly clear that fighting and winning America's wars will mean something quite different to senior land force leaders in the future. 
39
40
First, what precisely is consequential organized violence? Should, for example, DoD concern itself only with physical violence? Or military violence? Second, at what level of organization, aggregation, or political will does organized violence become important to the United States and the Defense Department-nationstate, transnational movement, warlord, clan leader, criminal organization, international institution? And third, under what circumstances and in what form should U.S. land forces be prepared to contend with organized violence? Concerning all three, Donnelly and Kagan usefully counsel against narrow conceptions of DoD's future mission: "In truth, the military's mission can and should be simply stated. The United States maintains and uses its armed forces for the purpose of defending, supporting, and advancing its interests around the world." 
41
42
43
44
In practice, it is reasonable to argue that defeat of violent threats to basic public order and restoration and maintenance of minimum essential political, security, and economic conditions within victim states might constitute the new MCO for U.S. land forces. If this is the new landpower MCO, then optimizing for it is the new standard for landpower force planning.
Lost in recent debates regarding defense policy on stability operations is the idea that some form of limited armed stabilization of crippled states may in fact become the most common and most important MCO for DoD in the future. The assertion in DoD Directive 3000. 05 that "(s)tability operations are a core U.S. military mission that . . . shall be given priority comparable to combat operations" divided future national security challenges into artificially distinct categories. 
45
46
Given the way the two concepts-that of combat operations on the one hand, and stability operations on the other-are presented in DoD 3000.05, it is equally reasonable to assume that the directive's drafters intended combat operations to be distinct from stability operations. The author argues for a much different perspective. Given a reasonable appreciation of contemporary strategic conditions, violent stability operations are among many unconventional contingencies that are not just comparable in priority to combat operations, but instead are actually the likeliest, most important, and most consequential combat operations on the strategic horizon.
Shifting policy in this direction acknowledges that which many already recognize-contingencies involving the armed stabilization of nations and/or regions in crisis, including defeat of violent threats to a foreign internal order, are more important missions for future landpower force planning than is preparation for future traditional MCOs. According to Steven Metz and Frank Hoffman, "[I]nvolvement in irregular warfare and stabilization operations in weak and failing states will be [landpower's] most common activity-perhaps its only major one." 
47
(2) underwrites landpower's role as both legitimate and indispensable to the prosecution and success of complex unconventional interventions abroad; and (3) rightly returns employment of military force to the fore as DoD's most important direct contribution to resolving foreign security contingencies.
The net effect of this new perspective on defense policy and decisionmaking is powerful. It focuses defense interest on unconventional challenges that are among the most violent, dangerous, and strategic in nature. It merges the concept of warfighting with that of military operations other than war (MOOTW). 
48
Conversely, it also argues strongly against shifts in defense capabilities that severely limit land force capacity for the use of precision violence. It extends beyond merely optimizing land forces for "nation building," and addresses the far more strenuous task of harnessing DoD landpower specifically as the principal U.S. arm for establishing and maintaining legitimate order under the most compelling, unconventional strategic circumstances abroad.
Powerful bureaucratic antibodies line up against this conclusion. Among landpower traditionalists this perspective appears to denude the Army and Marine Corps of long-cherished core warfighting competencies. For stabilization, COIN, and counterterror (CT) advocates, this perspective argues for greater selectivity in the employment of U.S. landpower abroad. Further, this new unconventional focus appears to step back from the notion that military forces are both instruments of hard and soft power.
Traditionalists should be mollified by the fact that this adjusted perspective reinforces DoD and subordinate institutions as warfighters. Nonetheless, it does force DoD land components to focus priority of effort and resourcing on a different kind of war. It also forces traditionalists to devote substantial resource, structure, and training priority on DoD's more comprehensive role in bringing this different kind of war to a satisfactory resolution.
To stabilization, COIN, and CT constituencies, the message holds that a great power like the United States cannot treat all unconventional or nontraditional conflicts equally. Some matter more than others in strategy and planning. Those that matter more should enjoy much higher priority. The United States can ill afford to parcel landpower out against diffuse unconventional threats that might be peripheral to core interests.
Naturally, terrorist, insurgent, or militia groups of concern are bad actors. Not all, however, are strategically consequential. In this regard, routine peacekeeping, peace enforcement, and stabilization activities cannot be nearly as important in defense strategy and force planning as more robust unconventional warfighting.
COIN, stabilization, and CT enthusiasts should recognize, however, that the hard and soft power remain central to future land force missions. In this regard, landpower is a deliverer of hard power and a key enabler for the protection and precise employment of U.S. soft power. Stabilization, COIN, and CT advocates should also recognize that this new perspective raises unconventional threats to the rank of primacy over (and not equivalence to) traditional warfighting in DoD strategy development.
Military traditionalists-particularly those in the land forces-should redefine defense convention in the direction of unconventional conflicts. Likewise, stabilization, COIN, and CT advocates will by necessity need to focus attention and interest against a clear set of strategic priorities that may or may not conform to their more expansive preferences for intervention in internal conflicts. This tension will be carried into the coming policy debates associated with the 2009 QDR (QDR 09).
The Theology of Full-Spectrum Dominance.
In spite of dramatic and necessary adjustments by U.S. land forces to the more unconventional demands of stabilization, CT, and COIN over the last 7 years, DoD's land components still remain largely optimized for ordered conflicts of fire and maneuver against rival states. 
49
50
Evaluating FSD as a universal organizing principle across DoD should be central to the upcoming defense review. As suggested above, QDR 09 will need to tackle the inherent tension that exists between warfighting traditionalists and advocates of stabilization, COIN, and CT. Neither has a lock on virtue. But FSD, as a universally applicable compromise position within the joint community, may be untenable on a number of counts. Unfortunately, future QDR debates are prone to devolve early into squabbles over scarce defense resources. They are less prone to proceed as serious discussions on strategy and prudent risk-taking. QDR 09 will be the second conducted with significant U.S. land forces committed to active unconventional military operations overseas. 
51
Indeed, to date, naturally conservative defense and military establishments have opted to pursue full-spectrum balance as a hedge against long-range uncertainty about the future character and relative importance of various conventional and unconventional hazards. 
52
What is required is a more fundamental shift in orientation, from a force that has been optimized to fight large, conventional wars to a future force that is truly "full-spectrum"-with greater capacity for irregular operations while retaining the ability to prevail in highend warfighting against conventional or WMD-armed foes. 
53
The latter two FMs-on COIN and stabilizationfall in the Army's family of keystone doctrines. 
54
55
56
57
58
As a rule, strategy and policy differences over the concept of balance arise in its precise definition, as well as subsequent identification of the most important balance point against which military forces in general and land forces specifically devote their finite resources and attention. The Army has chosen full-spectrum balance in the absence of hard defense choices on optimization. As a result, there is no balance point.
Strategic thinking inside DoD suffers from a diffusion of focus across contingencies that range from most likely and dangerous to the most unlikely. Future land force optimization-i.e., identifying the missing balance point-is one among a handful of key defense questions for QDR 09. According to Ashton Carter, "The principal strategic challenge for the Army is to decide how much to invest in [forces more appropriate to irregular or unconventional challenges] and how much to invest in more traditional force-on-force land combat capabilities; and then how to combine both types of forces into a single overall Army." 59
[I]nvestment strategists must avoid the pitfall of using uncertainty as a rationale to avoid major change.
Basing full-spectrum land force optimization on strategic uncertainty is consistent with DoD preferences. The Army's commitment to full-spectrum balance stems from the primacy of gross uncertainty in defense planning. The introduction of the Army's FM 3.0 is clear in this regard:
The Army's experience makes it clear that no one can accurately predict the nature, location, or duration of the next conflict. So [FM 3.0] . . . addresses the needs of an Army responsible for deploying forces promptly at any time, in any environment, against any adversary. . . . Once deployed, the Army operates for extended periods across the spectrum of conflict, from stable peace to general war. 
61
Invoking uncertainty in defense and military strategy development has been particularly important since the advent of "capabilities-based planning" (CBP) under SecDef Donald Rumsfeld. CBP is a "method to inform decisions regarding DoD planning, resourcing, and operations that addresses uncertainty and risk through agile analysis of a broad spectrum of challenges." 
62
63
64
An even greater danger in CBP sees DoD selecting menu items with a view toward preparing for every conceivable threat or contingency-an unfocused and undisciplined exercise to optimize for the widest range of challenges. In trying to do everything, DoD risks not being able to do anything well. Here CBP lacks discrimination in its strategic choices-i.e., selecting points that genuinely demand optimization, while consciously choosing to sub-optimize or hedge on the margins in the case of others. Krepinevich recently made a similar argument with respect to the Army specifically when he observed:
[B]ecause the range of missions is so broad, and the skill sets required sufficiently different, attempting to field forces that can move seamlessly from stability operations to high-intensity conflict appears destined to produce an Army that is barely a "jack-of-all-trades," and clearly a master of none. 
65
66
However, my appraisal of the environment and its demands indicates that land forces will be the force of choice for the United States against a wide range of unconventional threats of purpose and context for the foreseeable future. If landpower reverts back to more traditional optimization, it will force DoD into another painful period of adjustment when the next large-scale, unconventional contingency arises. Contingencies like this might include, but are not limited to, classical COIN. Thus, exclusive or excessive optimization for partnership with a state threatened by a traditional insurgency might also be ill-placed. Secretary Gates again was quite to the point when he observed:
In Iraq, an army that was basically a smaller version of the [U.S.] Cold War force over time became an effective instrument of counterinsurgency. But the transition came at a frightful human, financial, and political cost. For every heroic and resourceful innovation by troops and commanders on the battlefield, there was some institutional shortcoming at the Pentagon they had to overcome. There have to be institutional changes so that the next set of colonels, captains, and sergeants will not have to be quite so heroic or quite so resourceful. 
67
One can reasonably argue that traditional warfighting capacity has atrophied over the past 7 years. But one cannot reasonably argue that the United States is seriously disadvantaged in traditional warfighting against its most consequential potential competitors as a consequence. Secretary Gates made this point in a recent Foreign Affairs article: "[A]lthough U.S. predominance in conventional warfare is not unchallenged, it is sustainable for the medium term." 68 Thus, in spite of the relative decline in traditional land force readiness, the United States will continue to benefit from (1) an enormous head start in the development of traditional capabilities; (2) a robust military-industrial base that continues to push traditional innovation; (3) a decreasing array of traditional threat contingencies; and (4) substantial advantages in leadership, training, doctrine, and material capabilities. All will help mitigate marginal traditional risk for some time to come. Again, note the concepts of enemy miscalculation, accident, or preemptive American action as likely sources of traditional risk. Offsetting these residual risks requires prudent investment in traditional warfighting capacity, as well as deliberate whole-ofgovernment strategy focused on conventional war avoidance. It does not necessarily require the whole of the joint force to invest equally in both traditional and unconventional warfighting.
Breaking the tyranny of uncertainty requires recognition that some strategic conditions are more certain than many inside DoD prefer to acknowledge. As a consequence, the new defense team should temper lingering attachment to blind uncertainty as a cornerstone for strategic planning.
If one accepts the trinity of miscalculation, accident, or preemption as they relate to traditional conflicts, as well as the now obvious strategic risks and costs of the same, then it is increasingly certain that the United States (1) can avoid the most dangerous traditional conflicts, and (2) should pursue more modest and limited strategic and operational objectives should traditional conflict become unavoidable. General war may simply no longer be either realistic or affordable for either the United States or its main state competitors. More common, future traditional conflicts in particular are likely to take the form of coercive campaigns in pursuit of limited strategic and operational objectives. 
69
The recent past vividly demonstrates the consequences of failing to address adequately the dangers posed by insurgencies and failing states. Terrorist networks can find sanctuary within the borders of a weak nation and strength within the chaos of social breakdown. A nucleararmed state could collapse into chaos and criminality. The most catastrophic threats to the U.S. homeland . . . are more likely to emanate from failing states than from aggressor states. 
70
DoD will most commonly be asked to pursue a circumspect set strategic and operational objectives, in concert with its interagency partners, in environments where legitimate order ranges from dangerously vulnerable to failed. In spite of whole-of-government aspirations to the contrary, DoD will most often be the senior partner in these endeavors. From this perspective, landpower is less an instrument for imposing U.S. will on foreign military opponents and more the primary instrument for restoring minimum essential order in key regions faced with violent and contagious disorder.
Finally, it is also quite certain that recent strategic experience in Iraq and Afghanistan predisposes U.S. decisionmakers toward substantial caution about future military interventions. Decreasing defense resources, a clearer conception of core interests, and the likeliest and most dangerous hazards to those interests force discrimination on defense planners and strategists as to the key questions-Plan for what? and Do what?-in the future. 
71
Here, both anticipated strategic costs and interests are certain to trump preferences. True, senior policymakers can always overrule the most cogent strategic arguments for or against future interventions. However, they now know that they do so at their peril. In the end, there is a prevailing certainty that a reasoned, interest-based approach to defense planning-one informed by increasing confidence about the future character of the environment and its challenges-will position the new administration for prosecution of the forthcoming strategy and resource war inside the Pentagon over defense priorities.
Some uncertainty lingers. It remains unclear, for example, exactly how a new appreciation of the security environment, recent combat experience, national interests, and unconventional threats to these interests impact DoD thinking on land force planning. It is not unthinkable, for example, that defense strategy development might be inconsistent with strategic realities. Severe economic uncertainty at home increases this risk. In this regard, there is some allure to building the force DoD can afford versus building the force that it urgently needs.
There are also enduring DoD preferences for optimizing U.S. forces for the most comfortable, defense-specific challenges. Here, the extent to which future defense decisionmakers will push back against traditional military conventions like full-spectrum balance is equally uncertain. Regardless of this lingering doubt, near-term senior leader decisions will obviously affect future U.S. landpower force planning.
From now until QDR 09's delivery in a little over a year, intense debates over the orientation, structure, and use of landpower abroad will occur. 
72
• Continue pursuit of full-spectrum balance across DoD and within each service component. This option avoids hard choices on role differentiation. It continues measured adjustment of land forces to a more unconventional strategic and operational environment. Yet, it also sees DoD investing in a coequal landpower hedge against future traditional threats. • Pursue institutional regression. This option aims for a counter-revolutionary reaction against perceived land force over-optimization for nontraditional threats. It instead refocuses U.S. land forces against future conventional military challenges. These challenges are closer to traditional military missions and institutionally more comfortable to the defense establishment. • Pursue an unconventional revolution. This option accelerates and expands reorientation of U.S. land forces on nontraditional security challenges. It re-normalizes them for complex conflicts and contingency interventions. And it does so while hedging against the prospect of high-intensity conventional conflict with appropriate investment in naval, air, and nonmilitary instruments. 
73
Continued pursuit of broad full-spectrum balance is DoD's likeliest course of action, but it is suboptimal strategically. Recall Krepinevich's "barely jack-ofall-trades" characterization. Moreover, pursuit of broad full-spectrum balance will rapidly run up against uncooperative fiscal realities. It likely will be unaffordable in the current economic environment to optimize each military service for the entire spectrum of conflict.
Powerful advocates inside DoD favor full-spectrum balance. They seek to have it all, by optimizing all service components for the full-spectrum of conflict regardless of how likely or unlikely future contingencies are at any one point along that spectrum or how much any one service component is likely to contribute to those contingencies. Full-spectrum balance sees land forces pivoting between the demands of a known present (dispersed employment in unconventional environments) and an unknown future (maintenance of excessive overmatch to hedge against future highend traditional conflict). As a consequence, it pulls land forces (and the joint force overall) in competing, often irreconcilable directions.
The second option-institutional regression-is at once consistent with latent military preferences and potentially the least costly from a fiscal perspective. 
74
75
76
In institutional regression, landpower reverts to its traditional role as the decisive arm against miscalculating state-based opponents. Unconventional challenges would return to secondary status. Competencies for combating them would migrate back to special operations forces (SOF). 
77
Here, land forces team with partners to increase their defense and security self-sufficiency. On the subject of institutional regression, Brimley and Singh observe, "Such a reboot would involve both active removal of some innovations from the system and malign neglect of others. The result would be a military that [is] . . . prepared primarily for the wars it wants to fight." 
78
Responses to unconventional strategic realities, however, are manpower intensive. They are certain to rapidly overtake perceived cost-savings. One need only recall the author's earlier reference to the possibility of regime failure attending future coercive campaigns for some appreciation of this. Similarly, one should consider how effective U.S. responses to the Iraq insurgency would have been had the Bush defense team succeeded in substantially reducing U.S. ground forces, as was the early predisposition of Secretary Rumsfeld. 
79
Given the anticipated trajectory of serious threats to U.S. interests, unconventional revolution is the most strategic choice for DoD. Admittedly, this choice is presently an institutional orphan inside DoD. It is antithetical to prevailing defense convention and the theology of full-spectrum dominance, as it directs landpower resources heavily against the increasing certainty of an unconventional security future. And by doing so, it requires a significant re-rationalization of defense roles. The impact on U.S. landpower would be profound.
Traditional military conservatism inhibits meaningful consideration of an expansive, unconventional land force revolution. There is a strong legacy attachment to the concept of full-spectrum balance as the ultimate strategic hedge against losing the big one. Yet, a more wide-ranging reorientation on unconventional challenges asks, "Exactly what form is the big one likeliest to take in the future?"
A wider unconventional revolution confronts the concept of full-spectrum balance in land forces directly. It would allow Army and Marine Corps leaders to optimize their general purpose forces specifically for limited armed stabilization while retaining the flexibility to reorient missions and capabilities-with sufficient strategic warning-against higher-intensity traditional challenges and in support of future coercive campaigns.
Corporately, DoD should also elevate planning for limited armed stabilization to a position of primacy. Here, conventional coercive campaigns and conflicts become the new lesser included defense contingencies in strategic planning. This new perspective would materially impact future defense investments, as DoD reordered priorities more radically in favor of unconventional threats.
An unconventional landpower revolution reduces risk against the likeliest nontraditional threats while continuing to accept prudent risk in traditional warfighting. Though such a revolution is now only a marginal candidate inside DoD, the policy sea-change attending the presidential transition and the new administration's QDR might provide a window of opportunity for its meaningful consideration.
The current spectrum of conflict is the first obstacle to a more thoroughgoing revolution in landpower force planning. Designing a more appropriate conflict spectrum is an essential first step toward revolutionary change. It would help senior defense decisionmakers visualize the likeliest warfighting future. It also would help them see where, when, and under what circumstances the new president would be likely to order commitment of U.S. landpower. And, by implication, it would also illuminate how DoD should shape and employ land forces for future success.
Army doctrine employs a linear spectrum of conflict ranging from a stable peace all the way up to general war (see Figure 
1
80
81
Conceptually, the "spectrum of conflict" construct may be an over-simplification of the nature of conflict. Just as stability operations will take place simultaneously with offensive and defensive operations in a conflict, there may also be disparate elements of unstable peace, insurgency, and limited conventional war occurring simultaneously in a conflict. Future doctrinal development might require a departure from thinking of warfare in purely linear terms. 
82
2
The Y axis-running vertically-represents the degree of permissiveness and ongoing (or potential) violence in a conflict zone. 
83
84
85
2
In the past, land forces optimized for MCO against capable competitor states. Most prospective MCOs are captured in the upper right extreme of Block C. Today, in theory, landpower optimizes for the full-spectrum of conflict-Blocks A, B, C, and D. The author argues that land forces should optimize for challenges and conflict environments residing in some combination of Blocks A and B. This area is home to a range of unconventional military missions that might culminate in limited armed stabilization.
The shaded area in Figure 
2
2
U.S. landpower fulfils two general roles in the shaded space. First, it delivers decisive lethal and nonlethal military effects. Second, it enables effective employment of other equally important nonmilitary capabilities and resources-e.g., aid, development assistance, consequence management, reconstruction, etc. Active and reserve land forces here optimize for success under complex circumstances where (1) vital interests are challenged by violent unconventional threats; (2) the degree of violence itself is quite high and the environment is, in the main, nonpermissive;
(3) physical threats demonstrate some organization and relative sophistication at various levels (but not that commonly associated with high-end MCO); and (4) foreign partners suffer from substantial loss or complete failure of sovereign control over political and security outcomes. For a more comprehensive discussion of the top four blocks, see the following text box titled "The Alternative Spectrum of Conflict":
The Alternative Spectrum of Conflict Some further description of the top four blocks in Figure 2 might be helpful. Block A represents conditions where purposeful threats are less organized. Political and security outcomes in this space are under little or no formal sovereign control of foreign U.S. partners. Contemporary analogs might be Somalia, the FATA region of Pakistan, or a future collapsing Mexico, as in the fictitious example presented in the prologue. Much of the "ungoverned and exploitable areas" of the developing world might also be accounted for in this block.
Block B represents conditions where purposeful threats are more sophisticated, organized, militarylike, and/or military. In this block, control by foreign U.S. partners over outcomes ranges from highly contested to nonexistent. Admittedly, many of the challenges in this block are more speculative than they are in Block A. Nonetheless, should these more speculative contingencies come to pass, their strategic impact is also potentially much more grave-in large measure because the physical threats are more sophisticated.
Contemporary or future analogs in this space might be violent dissolution of strategic states, again as presented in the fictional scenario that opened this monograph. An example of operational conditions in Block B (but not necessarily an example of equivalent strategic impact) might be pre-Dayton Bosnia. At the more "military," upper right extreme of Block B are future cross-border invasions by strong regional competitors who rapidly overtake U.S. partners in conventional or hybrid military operations. These contingency events are much lower in probability. Thus, they are targets for prudent risk-taking. Block C represents conditions where threats are more sophisticated and organized. Yet, foreign U.S. partners also have greater control over outcomes. Most contemporary and legacy challenges lie in this block. Analogs range from Colombia's decades-long civil war against narco-traffickers and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC); the continued stand-off between U.S./Republic of Korea (RoK) forces and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK); the contemporary Iranian challenge; and the continuing military tension between the two Chinas. Naturally, both the strategic import and the intensity of these vary. Nonetheless, in each case the United States has one or more capable foreign partners who have an equal-if not greater-interest in outcomes and have some resident capacity to exercise control over outcomes. The degree to which they have unilateral control naturally varies.
Finally, Block D represents circumstances where threats are less organized and mostly criminal. In this block, foreign U.S. partners exercise a high degree of sovereign control over political and security outcomes. Analogs in this case might be persistent terrorist and criminal threats in North America, Western Europe, and the wider developed world. Admittedly, the permissiveness axis here is less germane. Indeed, U.S. military involvement here is unlikely.
Most western or developed states currently enjoy a monopoly over the instruments of violence within their territory. By implication, the environment is permissive-especially for partner security forces. Nonetheless, there are or can be less permissive pockets of effective sanctuary in any state-apartment block, neighborhood, region, etc.
Let's now rejoin the fictional NSC principal's meeting: SecDef: Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen. In conjunction with two integrated planning teams led by USCENTCOM and USNORTHCOM and involving representatives of the interagency, we have developed options for newly designated Joint Interagency Operating Areas (JIOA)-JIOA Northern Arabian Gulf and JIOA Mexico. These options have been developed in coordination with Saudi, Iraqi, and Mexican authorities.
In JIOA Northern Arabian Gulf, the President asked us to achieve five limited objectives in what amounts to an armed stabilization of eastern Saudi Arabia and southeastern Iraq. First, secure the free movement of commerce, most importantly petroleum exports, through the Arabian Gulf. Second, secure on behalf of the Saudi people critical petroleum extraction and export infrastructure and critical lines of communication in eastern Saudi Arabia. Third, assist the Iraqi government in reestablishing control over the same critical infrastructure in the vicinity of al Basrah and Um Qasr. Fourth, defeat organized threats to and meet the basic needs of both the Saudi and Iraqi people in a corridor running from just south of ad Dammam to the Kuwaiti border in Saudi Arabia and in Iraq, from the mouth of the Shatt al-Arab to just northwest of al Basrah. And fifth, assist both Saudi Arabia and Iraq reestablish legitimate civil authority and control throughout their territory. We have already established liaison with the Saudis and Iraqis to facilitate U.S. intervention.
To accomplish our objectives, we propose an initial multipoint, joint-interagency intervention in three critical air/sea ports at ad Dammam, al Jubayl, and al Basrah/Um Qasr with smaller supporting interventions throughout the JIOA as additional forces and interagency capabilities arrive. Physical threats to both the operation and the affected populations in the region are numerous. In Saudi Arabia, operating inside and sometimes with the support of a population that numbers 3 million plus are loose networks of competing Shi'a resistance groups, rogue elements of the Saudi Arabian military, a range of "popup" anti-government Sunni groups, al Qaeda-affiliated terrorists, and a number of Iranian fifth columnists. We can anticipate that our presence will attract more threats over time. In Iraq, principal threats include a similar collection of Shi'a militias, rogue Iraqi security forces-both army and police, and Iranian government agents. The population of al Basrah Province is approximately 1.7 million. We anticipate disorganized but nonetheless lethal resistance to the entry and continued presence of coalition forces and civilians in both regions. In both Saudi Arabia and Iraq we will enjoy some limited support from indigenous forces.
Throughout operations in both Saudi Arabia and Iraq, the United States must maintain control of both the sea lanes and air space in the JIOA. Given the apparent dissolution of the Saudi government and mounting damage to both the Saudi and Iraqi oil infrastructures, we are planning for a 2-year minimum commitment of U.S. forces. Land deployment can begin in 12 hours and will require 3 months to reach full capacity. A dispersed theater, the diffusion of threats, long land lines of communication, enormous operational dead space, and the vast physical security and point defense requirements call for an initial commitment of approximately eight brigade combat team equivalents and support infrastructure. Total Army and Marine Corps forces supporting the operation will number roughly 100,000-110,000. Our objective in JIOA Northern Arabian Gulf is to turn security responsibility over to a functional local or international authority as rapidly as possible.
JIOA Mexico is a different problem in scale. It is a country of approximately 109 million. In some respects, our proximity to this crisis is an advantage. In others, it pulls us toward a more comprehensive and resource-intensive response. I indicated to the President that we can neither ignore nor hope to fully contain the crisis in Mexico. No one needs to be reminded that the United States faces a shared a 2,000mile land border with Mexico; 1,600 miles of Gulf coastline offering sizable maritime access to the United States; and a quite significant legal and undocumented Mexican expatriate community inside the U.S.
Given ongoing political deterioration in Mexico, the President outlined six preliminary objectives for JIOA Mexico. Like the missions in Saudi Arabia and Iraq, I must emphasize that our mission in Mexico is seen foremost as a relief and stabilization mission. However, with respect to Mexico specifically, it is also a mission focused on protecting the sovereignty and immediate physical security of the United States.
In spite of the support of residual Mexican authorities, powerful indigenous forces are certain to oppose our involvement. We do anticipate significant violence. Our first objective is to secure and reopen the port of Vera Cruz, the Mexico City International Airport, and land and air lines of communication from both into Mexico City, principally for the provision of direct relief. Second, we will assist in containing and reversing the growing Avian Flu pandemic and providing direct humanitarian relief to the population of Mexico City and major population centers. Third, we will establish secure sanctuaries for displaced populations and protect those populations from further harm. Fourth, we will help legitimate authorities defeat criminal disorder inside Mexico City and assist in the reestablishment of legitimate civil order. Fifth, we will secure Mexico's critical petroleum extraction and export infrastructure to prevent irrevocable disruption. And sixth, alongside legitimate Mexican authorities, we will eliminate the criminal sanctuaries in northern Mexico. DoD will deploy 15 brigade equivalents inside Mexico initially. They will support the range of security missions outlined or implied by the objectives described. An additional 5 federalized Army National Guard brigades will be deployed on the U.S. side of the border as a stopgap measure to back up U.S. border authorities. In addition to a robust security presence inside Mexico, DoD will also need to deploy most of its excess medical capacity, as well as large numbers of logistical and support forces, to meet Mexico's mounting humanitarian challenges. I anticipate the total Army and Marine Corps commitment inside Mexico to climb to a minimum of 160,000. We will reach that number in a little under 60 days.
Prior to determining the shape, mission, and composition of future land forces, the President, on the advice of the SecDef, must determine the principles that will govern future landpower employment. The author offers the following four principles for future defense strategy and land force contingency planning. This monograph has attempted to build a case for each throughout prior discussion.
They reflect the experience and strategic choices of the post-9/11 era. They are strategically targeted and sensitive to the risk and cost-tolerance operative in contemporary American policymaking. The four principles are: (1) core interests first; (2) limited objectives; (3) risk management; and (4) early integration of joint, interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational contributions. All four blend at critical points and are thus not mutually exclusive. The fictional scenarios highlight the importance of each.
The first guiding principle implies that core national security interests-i.e., those that will have a material impact on the fundamental security, well-being, and prosperity of the United States, its population, and its allies-should govern the use of U.S. landpower. U.S. decisionmakers must recognize that the United States does have immutable interests. Strategic leaders can provide for the protection of these interests in the light of the most compelling unconventional threats and challenges. Threats to the most important national interests by necessity enjoy the greatest strategy, planning, and resource attention. The fictitious crises in the Middle East and Mexico, for example, pose significant physical hazards to the security of the United States, potential challenges to important foreign U.S. partners, and systemic hazards to an already wounded global economic system.
An upfront appreciation of interests, awareness of the likeliest and most dangerous strategic threats to those interests, and the required defense capabilities in response, collectively provide policymakers with a conceptual matrix for defining strategic and operational military requirements. This interest-based defense analysis should provide DoD decisionmakers with a conceptual foundation for the future U.S. landpower force planning.
Careful calculation of interests, on the one hand, and cost-benefit analysis, on the other, should govern decisions on intervention. As Michele Flournoy suggested in 2001, "[A]ny sound strategy must have as its foundation a clear conception of national interests." 
88
Candidates for core U.S. interests abound. In a previous monograph, the author offered five general categories of "strategic states" that merit close monitoring for increased irregular, catastrophic, and hybrid instability. 
89
The Princeton Project's Working Group on State Security and Transnational Threats also recently offered a more general, but nonetheless serviceable set of "fundamental [U.S.] interests." These include "economic prosperity; governance continuity; ideological sustainability; military capability; population well-being; and territorial integrity." 
90
Careful objective comparison of core interests and unconventional threats allows defense leaders to make prudent risk judgments about strategy and capabilities. Though sometimes difficult to acknowledge publicly in a liberal democracy, some circumstances (or strategic outcomes) simply matter more than others. For example, in reality, the Middle East; South, Central, and Northeast Asia; the Eurasian core; and the Americas are more likely to generate strategically consequential unconventional challenges than are Sub-Saharan Africa or the Southwest Pacific. Likewise, policy priority goes to purposeful or contextual challenges impacting proliferation of nuclear weapons, the surety of nuclear arsenals, confidence in and functioning of the global economic system, and U.S. physical and economic security. All of these take precedence over purely humanitarian concerns.
There is very little controversial about the foregoing rationale to warfighting traditionalists. Nonetheless, a new unconventional focus and the prospect for large-scale but still limited armed stabilization do force traditionalists to accept some additional risk in contingency scenarios involving latent conventional or traditional military threats. Likewise, they also constrain stabilization, COIN, and CT advocates to accept much more discrimination in the employment of U.S. landpower abroad.
Without question, grave unconventional threats to core interests can emerge from the strategic peripherye.g., al-Qaeda in Afghanistan. Threats like these will require the attention of land forces. However, their emergence does not necessarily stamp the label "core interest" on their geographic origins. As a consequence, addressing them does not automatically require a large landpower response. Steven Metz and Frank Hoffman make the point very well:
While some of the September 11 terrorists underwent training in Afghanistan, no one has made the case that such training was necessary for the attack on the United States. Sanctuary may be . . . a "nice to have" for terrorists rather than a "must have." If this is true, the massive strategic and economic costs of intervening and controlling ungoverned spaces outweigh the benefits. 
91
2
Both location and the nature of the threat matter. However, real strategic value is a function of interests. Strategic value grows out of answers to the questions, what has happened (or can happen and its likelihood), how it has happened (or how it is likely to happen), where it has happened (or might happen), why and when it has happened (or might happen), and what's likely to happen next as a consequence. The combined answers determine the strategic value of specific conditions. What the United States does to defend those vulnerable interests that exhibit higher strategic value is a matter of choice. In the author's fictitious scenario, for example, untoward circumstances erupting in less important regions of the world will by necessity be less compelling to U.S. decisionmakers.
The second guiding principle for land force employment is pursuit of limited objectives in both traditional and unconventional conflicts. Given the experience of the last 7 years and the diversity, character, and complexity of future challenges, the strategic aims of future military endeavors must by necessity become more realistic and limited. Absent pursuit of limited objectives, a new cycle of defense exhaustion will ensue.
Post-Cold War contingency planning occurred in the absence of relevant operational experience. Even worst-case scenario-based planning often resulted in best-case or ideal objective formulation. U.S. planners and senior decisionmakers assumed that comprehensive regime change-or, even better, comprehensive regime removal and replacementwere realistic, risk-informed outcomes in most traditional campaigns. By implication, comprehensive regime replacement in the event of state collapse was also seen as cost-adjusted and risk-informed. Recent strategic experience suggests that both assumptions were and likely remain unrealistic.
The United States is now in the 8th year of a regime removal and replacement in undergoverned Afghanistan. It is in its 6th year of regime removal and replacement in Iraq. The long-term, strategic outcome of both commitments is in doubt. And the strategic and opportunity cost associated with resetting depleted forces for similar undertakings in the future is enormous. Going forward, defense and military planners now have a great deal of real-world conflict experience. This experience has generated a host of lessons on the limitations of an over-committed allvolunteer force.
Recent experience and the predisposition of current policymakers indicate that deliberate regime change is a low-probability future demand. For example, one is hard-pressed to see regime change or forcible democratization as objectives in any future conflict with rising great powers like China or Russia. In the event of a future great power conflict, prospective land force contributions would support coercive/punitive operations centered on air and naval actions. They may also be employed in pursuit of limited objectives on the periphery of the offending state to reverse limited incursions or seize key terrain. Likewise, the now obvious costs of a deliberate regime change and forcible democratization make it hard to visualize the United States adopting either objective in a future conventional conflict with lesser regional powers. As Secretary Gates recently emphasized, "The United States is unlikely to repeat another Iraq or Afghanistan-that is, forced regime change followed by nation building under fire-anytime soon." 
92
Regime failure (e.g., collapse of target state) is one possible incidental consequence of future coercive campaigns like this. The trigger for collapse or failure of offending regime or victim state is immaterial. Limited armed stabilization will look similar whether a regime falls of its own weight or as a consequence of coercive external action. As noted in the previous discussion of strategic state collapse, some level of armed stabilization will ensue. Responding to regime failure or collapse would naturally entail substantial follow-on land force contributions. In this regard, according to Secretary Gates, "[E]ven the biggest wars will require 'small wars' capabilities." 
93
Iraq has reminded American policymakers that removing a regime is relatively easy, but rebuilding stability-much less a form of stability friendly to the United States-is a massive undertaking. In many, perhaps all, instances the strategic benefits are not worth the strategic costs. 
94
• Rapid restoration of minimally functioning indigenous authority and accountability. • Limitation of horizontal regional escalation of conflict and instability. • Isolation of the victim state (or region) from hostile intervention by outside instigators. • Protection of vulnerable populations and critical state institutions and infrastructure. • Defeat of violent organized threats to internal security and abuses by indigenous security forces. 
95
A "to do" list like this must be employed flexibly. Under certain conditions more will be possible. In those cases, most-or all-of this list may be realistic. In other cases-commonly most-the extent of the challenges will be so great and resources so limited that a conservative containment approach will be in order. For example, it may be that only pieces of a fallen state are viable targets for comprehensive stabilization and reconstruction.
Pursuit of limited objectives does not necessarily or even commonly suggest limitations on the physical size of future military commitments. Pursuit of the strictest and most precise definitions of the outcomes outlined above under very real operational conditions still calls for a robust range of land force capabilities. If one recognizes that, by population size (25 million) alone, Iraq is probably on the medium to low end of future problem sets, then a reasonable response range for future similar contingencies will include equal-if not greater-ground force commitments, even with more limited objectives. Pursuit of limited objectives is thus an acknowledgement that, even with large-scale commitment of U.S. forces and interagency capabilities, some downward rationalization of objectives is essential.
The third principle-risk management-is closely linked to the previous two. It assumes that commitment to risk elimination, though more palatable, often entails much more human, material, fiscal, and political cost than contemporary risk tolerance allows in practice. Thus, we have the aforementioned tension between full adherence to a universal to do list and more modest selection of a limited number of menu items intended to drive down strategic risk. Viewing future land force commitments first through the lens of risk management allows senior political decisionmakers to maximize impact on important but still limited objectives, recognizing that in some cases they are only treating the worst symptoms of a complex but nonetheless manageable disease. Attempting morefor example, curing the underlying disease itselfmight be excessively risk-laden, impossible, timeconsuming, and/or unaffordable.
The principle of risk management further acknowledges that early commitment to and pursuit of good enough leaves the United States with maximum freedom of action for management of its myriad global risks over time. In this regard, prudently minimizing risk is often more realistic in both absolute and cost terms than is eliminating it entirely. If risk is a rational assessment both of the likelihood of failure, and of the likelihood that success, if possible, might also be unaffordable in lives, money, material, political capital, and freedom of action, then policymakers should consider undertaking those minimum essential actions necessary to control hazards at acceptable levels of discomfort first.
Finally, the fourth guiding principle requires that employment of land forces occur within a broader strategic design exploiting decisive contributions from other national and multinational security actors. From this perspective, a decision to employ landpower should not be made unless and until there is strong evidence that military gains will be underwritten meaningfully by requisite contributions from other U.S. and partner agents. This is a tall order. According to Ashton Carter, "[O]ur edge in marshalling all elements of national power is not nearly as sharp as that of our military prowess." 
96
Ready for the violent and disordered environments captured in Blocks A and B in Figure 
2
These eight missions reflect a more realistic strategic frame of reference for land forces. They do not, as some will argue, constitute threats to the warfighting focus of the U.S. Army and Marine Corps. Nor, for that matter, are they fundamental deviations from either institution's core warfighting ethos. Instead, they represent a recalibration of landpower missions and forces accordant with the examples of history, the trajectory of the strategic environment, and the mandate by senior defense leaders to shift DoD's weight decisively in the direction unconventional threats and challenges.
The new mission set breaks out as follows: (1) active management of purposeful unconventional threats;
(2) armed stabilization; (3) preemptive/punitive campaigns; (4) security sector reform and assistance; (5) conventional deterrence and limited traditional war; and (6) facilitation of whole-of-government stabilization and reconstruction. These six are underwritten by two more foundational mission requirements- (7) generation and sustainment of adequate land force capabilities, and (8) homeland defense and security. The seventh mission captures the critical functions performed by the institutional Army and Marine Corps. The eighth mission recognizes both steady state and surge land force requirements associated with defending the United States from direct attack and supporting civil authorities in the event of domestic emergency.
All of these missions are interdependent. In some cases, the capability to perform one relies in whole or in part on borrowing capabilities inherent to other missions. This will become clearer in the description of the landpower force planning construct (FPC) outlined below.
The first mission-active management-recognizes that the United States will employ specialized land force capabilities as a matter of course against dispersed terrorist and criminal threats worldwide. In the near term, this mission will be most associated with the WOT. This was recognized in the 2006 QDR report: "[Defense] guidance must account for [persistent commitment to] distributed, long-duration [irregular] operations [worldwide]." 
97
The active management mission will endure and expand in focus over time. Recently Ashton Carter concluded, "Whatever the lifetime of Islamist extremism . . . it will long remain the business of national security authorities to counter terrorism arising from other movements and groups." 98 Indeed, U.S. decisionmakers recognize the value of keeping nonstate actors like terrorists under constant pressure. This will not change with the new administration. There is evidence that active management limits the intensity and frequency of direct catastrophic threats to the U.S. homeland and key U.S. interests. This, according to Steven Metz and Frank Hoffman, indicates that "[i]n the absence of a catastrophic attack on the American homeland, something like the existing strategy is likely to be sustained no matter who the next President is." 
99
The second mission-armed stabilization-has been a salient topic throughout this monograph. The armed stabilization mission represents a sea-change in the landpower mission focus. It recognizes that the principal large-scale, land-based contingency against which Army and Marine Corps forces optimize is no longer traditional MCO but rather the minimum essential armed stabilization of a strategic state, territory, or region-friendly or hostile-where functioning order has failed or has been seriously undermined by unconventional internal and external forces.
Armed stabilization is triggered by events ranging from insurgency, civil war, catastrophic terrorism, and insurrection to state collapse and natural or human disaster. It is close in concept to the 2006 QDR description of surge demands associated with the "conduct [of] irregular operations." 
100
Armed stabilization calls for "relatively large multipurpose ground forces capable of operating among civilian populations with strong self-protection and minimal harm to friendly civilians." 102 It typically requires rapid introduction of substantial U.S. land forces (< 8 brigade equivalents) and supported/ supporting international and interagency partner capabilities for the purpose of restoring a favorable, indigenously-led political and security order. These missions will occur in states, territories, or regions whose stable functioning is critical to the security and prosperity of the United States and its international partners.
Armed stabilization is undertaken in concert with other states in coalition. But it also remains a unilateral U.S. option. It includes substantial combat action, simultaneous provision of basic public goods to affected populations, and the initiation of early reconstruction. As described above, overall objectives are likely to be much more limited and/or modest than those pursued in Iraq and Afghanistan. Outcomes will focus first on the establishment of those minimum essential security conditions necessary for an indigenous or internationally-led recovery. Note, for example, the minimalist pursuits outlined in the discussion of limited objectives above.
The condition that most distinguishes armed stabilization from classical conceptions of stability operations or COIN is the potential level of organized violence. For example, doctrine and planning for stability operations do not commonly anticipate continuing combat action against legacy elements of the armed forces of fallen strategic states. Furthermore, armed stabilization will commonly occur in regions where political success or failure will profoundly affect the physical and economic security of the United States.
Operational conditions in an armed stabilization might range from a low-level, smoldering insurgency or insurrection to a nastier hybrid collapse of a relatively sophisticated state with high-end military capabilities. Consistent with the schema in Figure 
2
Forces in the armed stabilization pool include tailored combinations of combat, combat support, and combat service support capabilities most appropriate to sustained stability operations in dangerous, highlylethal conflict environments. The most complicated and dangerous circumstances might be those involving a crippled nuclear state. From an enemy C2 perspective, the combat action required in most cases of armed stabilization is quite intense but far less ordered than that anticipated in most traditional military operations.
Armed stabilization missions might occur on behalf or alongside of the government institutions and security forces of victim states, as in the fictional scenarios above. Or they might occur in the absence of capable and organized foreign partners altogether. Furthermore, they are as likely to occur in hostile states as they are in states that to date have enjoyed good relations with the U.S. Hostile strategic states suffering from internal disorder may threaten U.S. interests as fundamentally as friendly states beset by a similar fate.
Armed stabilization could occur as a standalone contingency. Or, as discussed earlier, armed stabilization might be incidental to regime failure attending coercive campaigns or a rarer U.S.-initiated regime change. Defense strategists and planners should anticipate armed stabilization beginning with opposed or semi-opposed entry into theater. Yet, it might also occur at the behest of a crippled foreign partner or in accordance with an international mandate. The bulk of general purpose operating forces reside in this pool.
The third mission-preemptive/punitive campaigns-involves the rapid introduction of a relatively modest land contingent (> 8 combat brigade equivalents) into a hostile, nonpermissive foreign environment. Punitive/preemptive campaigns focus on achieving a limited set of very specific political and military objectives over a short period of time. Missions might include violent destruction or dismantlement of terrorist sanctuaries and/or support networks, reversing illegitimate seizures of political power, contingency protection of American assets abroad; seizure and security of WMD or vulnerable national infrastructure; anticipatory defeat of rogue political actors threatening friendly foreign governments; and/or short-term protection of vulnerable foreign populations. 
103
The fourth mission-security sector reform and assistance-recognizes the growing imperative for more robust, deployable advisory capacity. The security sector reform and assistance mission is undertaken both under routine conditions, according to strategic priorities, as well as in extremis-e.g., in support of armed stabilization. It largely focuses on pre-conflict and post-conflict military and paramilitary capacitybuilding.
Security sector reform and assistance are DoD's principal contribution to whole-of-government conflict prevention. In theory, they reduce future demands for large-scale contingency intervention as U.S. partners become more confident with their own capabilities. It is also one key lever for facilitating meaningful reduction of U.S. land force commitments in the event large-scale intervention becomes unavoidable. Security sector reform and assistance capacity should reside in both SOF and general purpose forces. The force pool should involve a mixture of dual-role military capabilities, as well as stand-alone, specialist advisory capacity.
The fifth mission-conventional deterrence and limited traditional war-retains within U.S. land forces the capacity to aggregate appropriate capabilities from this and other force pools to conduct conventional military campaigns to achieve a circumspect set of military objectives against traditional military opponents. This mission requires the more conventional capacities for armored fire and maneuver; attack aviation; general purpose, indirect fire support; niche demands like theater and national missile defense; and the unique combat support and combat service support capabilities necessary to enable and sustain all of these in the field.
These capabilities should be sufficient to deter traditional challenges around the world. Nonetheless, recognition of the importance of this contingency mission here is not a license to maintain excessive conventional overmatch. In the event of higherintensity instances of armed stabilization, this force pool provides land force commanders with the ability to defeat hostile conventional capabilities and forces that remain under some coherent command and control, as they simultaneously perform other military and nonmilitary functions more common to stability operations. This capability largely resides within Army and Marine Corps general purpose forces.
The sixth mission-facilitation of whole-of-government stabilization and reconstruction-is now commonly recognized as a core function of land forces. It has not, however, been adequately defined or resourced. Robust, stand-alone, nondefense stabilization and reconstruction capabilities-appropriate for employment in semi-permissive and nonpermissive environments-remain distant prospects. Ashton Carter calls this "[t]he crippling inadequacy of the non-Defense instruments of crisis intervention." 
104
In reality, land forces will also need to demonstrate increased competency in a number of essential nonmilitary functions associated with complex unconventional contingencies. For example, the more violent the environment, the likelier it is that U.S. land forces will fill essential nonmilitary capacity gaps until conditions are more conducive or hospitable to large-scale civilian deployment. This mission and force pool largely belongs to general purpose forces and includes (but is not limited to) niche military capabilities associated with civil affairs, consequence management, limited civil reconstruction, and disaster relief. In part, it represents that level of inherently nonmilitary capacity that must nonetheless be built into and remain in landpower force structure for the foreseeable future.
Landpower capacity both for enabling employment of nonmilitary capabilities and for performing nonmilitary functions in extremis are essential to successful prosecution of the myriad missions described above. Landpower also underwrites broader U.S. capabilities for responses to humanitarian crises worldwide.
The seventh mission-generating and sustaining adequate forces-enables operational land forces to perform the missions outlined above. These are institutional U.S. Army and U.S. Marine Corps functions related to recruiting, training, organizing, supplying, equipping, manning, and mobilizing land forces for the conduct of operations. The U.S. Army calls this structure the "generating force." According to Army doctrine, "The generating force consists of . . . organizations whose primary mission is to generate and sustain operational Army capabilities." 
105
106
Finally, the HLD/S mission largely draws on the capabilities germane to and resident in the missions and force pools described above. Commonalities between some aspects of armed stabilization, facilitation of limited whole-of-government stabilization and reconstruction, and homeland defense and security are particularly noteworthy in this regard. 107 DoD remains a primary source of human and material capital for the USG. Use of military forces in support of civilian-led responses to domestic emergencies is less constrained by geography and "terms of employment" than is use of most of the remainder of the federal work force. There are historical precedents and legal strictures governing employment of U.S. forces in support of civil authorities at home. 
108
Nonetheless, DoD land forces provide civil authorities with significant capabilities under a coherent chain of command. As a consequence, they remain extraordinarily useful to USG responses to domestic human, natural, or other catastrophes. In the current economic environment, it may be neither prudent nor cost-effective for the USG to build parallel civilian capabilities that are as useful to the military in foreign contingencies (like armed stabilization or facilitation of whole-of-government stabilization and reconstruction) as they are to civilian leaders in episodic domestic emergencies that surpass local, state, and national capacity.
There are enduring traditional and unconventional military demands associated with HLD/S. In the traditional realm, for example, national missile defense requires continuing support from the force pools for conventional deterrence and limited conventional war. Less traditional-but perhaps more urgentcontingency homeland security demands include disaster relief, consequence management, and physical security. In accordance with U.S. law, civil authorities can rapidly introduce U.S. land force capabilities resident across mission areas-especially general purpose forces-to meet civilian capacity shortfalls in extremis. Here DoD land components act as a strategic reserve for civilian decisionmakers confronted with extraordinary, resource-intensive domestic emergencies.
The force planning construct (FPC) used by strategists and defense planners to address "activities that the Department conducts continuously (steady state) as well as those it conducts episodically (surge)" is one key outcome of the next QDR. 
109
3
In addition to both the steady-state and surge demands of active management, force generation and sustainment, conventional deterrence, and homeland defense and security, DoD should size its land force to meet the requirement for dealing with two simultaneous or nearly simultaneous large-scale, landcentric foreign contingencies. The most demanding surge contingencies in this regard are instances of armed stabilization. There are smaller surge demands as well. A two-contingency force remains valid for a variety of compelling strategic reasons. Three of these reasons are particularly important-deterring purposeful challengers, avoiding self-deterrence, and hedging against resource-intensive demands in the Americas and at home. With respect to the first-deterring others, the capacity "to wage multiple campaigns in overlapping time frames" provides the United States with "a strong deterrent against opportunistic aggression or attempted coercion." 111 This continues to be a compelling justification for a "two contingency" capability vis-àvis purposeful challengers. The mounting universe of unconventional threats of purpose and context and the demonstrated limits of U.S. capabilities over the previous 7 years increase the likelihood that the United States and/or its interests will be threatened simultaneously by two or more challengers in the future. As argued previously, these will not be conventional challenges. Having the capacity to address only one consequential threat at a time hollows out U.S. commitments to actively defend other important interests, leaving them vulnerable to the predations of "those who wait."
On the second point-avoiding self-deterrence, limiting U.S. freedom of action to a single largescale response can complicate future U.S. crisis decisionmaking to the point of paralysis. This is perhaps most important when looking at less purposeful and more contextual threats and challenges. Should the United States face a serious and imminent unconventional threat in one theater and a latent but nonetheless increasingly likely and more important threat in another, national security decisionmakers have the choice of: (1) intervening immediately against the known and more active challenge, potentially leaving an equally valued interest unguarded for an extended period of time, or (2) hedging against the second crisis by holding back from forcefully responding to the first. In either case, the United States is left with a one-contingency force and at least a two-contingency challenge set. In the case of (2), choosing not to choose is a choice. In either case, dangerous self-deterrence results-the first through inadequate capacity and the second through inaction. The fictional crisis scenarios demonstrate this dilemma in bold relief.
On the third point-hedging against resourceintensive demands in the Americas and at homethe United States can no longer treat the homeland; Caribbean; or North, Central, and South America as unlikely regions for significant military commitment. First, like a number of other regions around the world, the Americas to our south are increasingly vulnerable to catastrophe arriving via contextual threats like pandemic, economic collapse, natural or human disaster, collapsed political authority, civil violence, and criminality. There are purposeful threats to the internal security of states in the Western Hemisphere as well. Proximity, demographics, and the potential threat to U.S. sovereignty and physical security all argue that DoD address these latent challenges as it builds capabilities and resources military demands. This point is evinced in the fictional scenario as well.
Senior U.S. officials are also increasingly cognizant of real threats to the U.S. homeland. These range from extraordinary environmental and human catastrophe to lethal attacks by unconventional challengers like terrorists. Hurricane Katrina and 9/11 were grim reminders of the vulnerability of American society. Responding effectively to the worst human, natural, or purpose-driven catastrophes inside the United States could require land force capabilities beyond those currently assumed in strategic planning.
Figure 
3
The HLS/D mission intentionally overlays the two contingency stacks. It also spans the range of mission areas. Defense and security of the homeland are inviolable trusts of the armed forces. Though DoD is concerned principally with violent contingencies abroad, it must first consider and resource HLS/D to a minimum essential level. As senior landpower leaders build the future force, they should assemble those landpower capabilities necessary both to succeed in unconventional foreign contingencies and to support civilian authorities in the event of extraordinary crises at home.
An unconventional revolution in land forces redefines the balance point for force optimization. As a hedge against lingering traditional uncertainty, full-spectrum balance remains a legitimate goal for parts of DoD. Nonetheless, the author concludes that uncompromising pursuit of full-spectrum balance in land forces is fraught with unwarranted strategic risk. Indeed, pursuit of full-spectrum balance is likely to result in renewed imbalance in favor of the missions landpower leaders are culturally most comfortable with as against those they are likeliest to undertake. In this regard, excessive investment in full-spectrum balance in land forces is an expensive strategic detour that can result in sub-optimizing for an unconventional future.
Pursuit of a wider unconventional revolution resets the balance point for land forces in a way that best positions them for decisive intervention against compelling unconventional threats. Landpower remains the most versatile and broadly employable DoD capability. General purpose land forces, in particular, must optimize for armed stabilization. This envisions a land force capable of containing and defeating nontraditional hazards to U.S. core interests under conditions of general civil disorder in complex foreign contingencies. Their purpose in doing so is to create secure operating space for the essential work of important nonmilitary agents (i.e., interagency, intergovernmental, international, and nongovernmental). This course recognizes that American land forces are warfighting institutions first. However, it pushes landpower leaders to recognize that they must anticipate and build for a different kind of warfighting environment.
1. These scenarios are naturally fictional. The author opted to use actual states to make the descriptions more compelling. The fictional scenarios described are intended only to demonstrate the complexity and simultaneity of future unconventional challenges. They are not intended to be predictive of specific unconventional contingencies and in no way are they intended to impart value judgments on the authorities or populations of Saudi Arabia, Iraq, or Mexico.
19. The author first explored a "new unconventional status quo" in the forthcoming CSIS monograph cited earlier. 20. The author describes "threats of purpose and context" in more detail in both the CSIS and PKSOI/SSI publications cited earlier.
21. On the concept of "excessive overmatch," see HQDA, Army Strategic Planning Guidance 2005, available from https://army. mil/references/ASPG14Jan05.doc, accessed November 13, 2008, p. 7. The concept of excessive overmatch grew out of the development process for the 2005 National Defense Strategy. The Army itself acknowledged the concept of excessive overmatch when it observed, in its 2005 strategic planning guidance, "In some areas we have accrued excessive conventional overmatch and will continue to make well-informed decisions to convert excessive overmatch to more relevant capabilities across the active and reserve components." 22. Here the terms "environment" or "environmental factors" imply those adverse political, social, economic, and physical circumstances that emerge to threaten U.S. interests in the absence of a coherent hostile strategic design. 27. These conditions will be addressed below by the author in a description of a new spectrum of conflict.
Planning Framework, Version 2.0, August 1, 2008, p. 2. According to groundbreaking work on military responses to mass human rights violations, the MARO report observes, "The MARO Project aims to equip the United States, other states, and regional and international actors with military planning tools for an effective response to genocide and mass atrocity when directed by national leadership." 104. Carter 107. See HQDA, February 2008, pp. 3-12 to 3-20. Stability operations are described as military activities "conducted outside the United States in coordination with the other instruments of national power to maintain or reestablish a safe and secure environment, provide essential government services, emergency infrastructure reconstruction, and humanitarian relief" (p. 3-12). Primary civil support tasks are: provide support in response to disaster or terrorist attack; support civil law enforcement; and provide other support as required (p. 3-18). The "purposes of civil support tasks" are to: save lives; restore essential services; maintain or restore law and order; protect infrastructure and property; maintain and restore local government; shape the environment for interagency success (p. 3-18). Finally, the Army defines its role in homeland defense, as "protect[ing] the United States from direct attack or a threat by hostile armed forces" (p. 3-19). All of these are consistent with the author's description of the homeland defense and security mission set. Colonel Lorelei Coplen, Chief of the Policy Branch at the U.S. Army's Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute, was particularly helpful in the author's conclusions here. 108. See HQDA, February 2008, p. 3-17. Army doctrine states, "Army forces perform civil support tasks under U.S. law. However, U.S. law carefully limits actions that military forces,
Army, the 
Department of Defense
U.S. Government
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any