# ID: cb2c55bcc29b4342a3f6493ea6f07b90
# Title: Exploration of the Nature of Future Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1974.0
# Fulltext:
The five
The standard refrain that the military prepares for the next war based on how it fought the last one implies a general assumption that there is a lack of forward looking and planning in the defense establishment.
Blitzkrieg warfare, the Manhattan Project, and a multitude of other historical events refute any such truism. However, the above cited examples to emphasize the fact that an innovative approach is all too often a one-sided affair to the ultimate detri¬ ment of one of the belligerents.
Because today's world has become so complex in every field of human endeavor, it is exceedingly difficult, if not impossible, to foresee the direction of events and to imagine the impacts of alter¬ native choices. For these reasons and the great expansion of know¬ ledge, foundations in the new sciences of futurology and cybernetics have been established and efforts in these disciplines are attempting to provide devices to better control our destinies. The complexity cf life requires decisions long before the weight of these decisions are generally felt. The lead times for increasingly complex equip¬ ment grows. Industry of recent times has been forced into long range planning. The family's education requires the early allocation of funds for the advanced knowledge required to operate in today's world.
The fac: is that, today, intelligent forecasts are required tools.
Warfare is man's most traumatic experience.
The forces unleashed, the civilizations destroyed, and the human suffering endured alter the human condition.
Because of the threat of disastrous consequences to the vanquished, man has always prepared for war. Due to the in¬ creasing complexity of war, which parallels the developments in society in general, it has become necessary to attempt prediction much further into the future as to the nature of warfare than hither¬ to required.
The purpose of this study is to go beyond the normal planning horizons and to postulate on the plausible nature of future warfare and define it in general terms meaningful to today's reader. Though this effort is primarily educative for the participants, a product useful to interested activities of the US Army is also desired.
Because warfare is the outgrowth of the interrelationships of social behavior, the original scope of this study had to be extremely broad.
Any initial assumptions made about the various facets of this behavior could possibly infringe on the elements defining the predicted nature of a future war. Thus, initial efforts were made to establish the present status and trends of world politics, economies, military strength, etc., before projections into the future could be made and subsequently focused on conflictual situations. This first step involved massive research to include interviews with reknowned thinkers and institutions devoted to the world environment. As the data collected became synthesized it formed a framework of information applicable to conflict in the future. Using this as a basis, the study then was narrowed to examine the kinds of war considered plaus¬ ible in the early years of the 21st century and to note broad implica¬ tions to the United States. The specific rationale and definitions that serve to further delineate the study scope are presented in the paragraph on Terminology, below.
The narrowed objective of this paper is now stated as follows:
Determine the nature of warfare around the year 2000 and the implica¬ tions to the United States.
The only basic assumption made is that warfare will occur. Ob¬ viously, this assumption is used in order to answer the objective statement.
Additionally, it serves to narrow the focus an^1 d scard those trends that tend away from war and are therefore not remane to the study. It is worth noting that because of the futuristic na¬ ture of this paper, that wholesale conjecture is its essence when attempting to sketch the nature of future warfare.
It is quite evident that the terms of the objective statement require definition or explanation. Since military planning attempts to encompass a twenty-year cycle, it would be redundant to consider through 1995 as an element of a future time block. However, the extreme difficulty and questionable utility in forecasting innovations that are not based on existing theory and ideas must be recognized.
Therefore, the "future" of this research will be restricted to those horizons that can be perceived from today's knowns. Most of the existing investigatory futures and technological data work focuses on the year 2000.
Because of the availability of this background infor¬ mation, but probably equally important, because of the psychological impact of the dawning of the 21st century, the "future" for this re¬ search effort is centered on the early years of the 21st century.
A more difficult term of the problem statement to define is "nature." This is because of the multiple definitions given to the nature of warfare by authors through the ages.
They range from detailed descriptions of the tactical battlefield to philosophical extensions of man's nature. Since one of the goals of this research effort is to provide some useful product for interested activities of the US Army, the nature of warfare must emphasize its military aspects.
Those elements that tend to define the nature of war in this perspective are the political goals of war, the duration, the levels of violence employed, the strategic and tactical concepts, «.he technology and weapons employed, and the manner of conflict or war resolution. These parameters highlight the military descriptive nature of war being sought.
Warfare is defined as an organized violent act for a political goal that threatens the vital interests of a nation-state. The. part of the definition, "an organized violent act for a political goal," is pure Clausewitz1 and has been recognized by every authori¬ tative source since its original definition. The further refinement, "that threatens the vital interests of a nation-state," is included to offer some delineation between organized terrorism and insurgency.
If terrorism becomes so widespread as to affect national survival, national well-being, or some prized ideological tenet, then it must be redefined as an insurgent war. Terrorism as an instrument of poli¬ tical change, however, is considered within the framework of this p^per since it can have military implications by itself or in con¬ junction with other forms of warfare.
The particular methodology for the development of this paper is to outline the major determinants of the future, to define their specific influence on a broad spectrum of conflict, and from the re¬ sulting analyLes to draw universal conclusions and, lastly to measure the general implications of these conclusions on the United States.
Major determinants are those macro-trends that could be discerned to have significant impact on the world of tomorrow. No effort is made to conjure up new trends without basis today. Some of the micro¬ trends derived from the macro are identified in the detailed analysis as they shape the components of conflict.
The spectrum of conflict is a methodological effort to logically divide conflict into manageable parts for detailed analysis. Its logic stems from the primary political trend of the world power structure. Discusssion of this logic is contained in Chapter II.
The conclusions as to the nature of future warfare are gained from the analysis of and detailed conclusions derived from the in¬ dividual parts of the spectrum of conflict.
The implications of the conclusions to the Urited States are nec¬ essarily kept extremely broad, and general, and constitute aggressive supposition on the authors' part since each implication deserves in¬ tensive study in itself to determine its degree of validity. However if an implication contains significant apparent impact on the United States, it is worthy of identification.
There is something inherently presumptuous about any writings con¬ cerning future events. However, there is nothing wrong with presump¬ tion, providing the thought process behind it is completely rational and anchored in fact.
Likewise, when erecting a house of futurist thought that can withstand the winds of educated criticism, the founda¬ tion must be constructed upon the solid rock of historical prologue, the walls supported by strong members derived from analysis of con¬ temporary trends, and the roof shingled with logical projections.
Otherwise, the final product is not a house of substantial plausibility, but rather a dream castle of gosamer fragility.
It is perhaps trite to say the world of 2000 A.D. will be shaped by innumerable variables, many of which are at work now and others yet to be created. Moreover, it would not be possible to determine or understand all these variables and how they will influence the future.
It is pcssible, however, to look it history for a clue to the future and to discern contemporary trends of such magnitude that their ability to influence future world environment is unmistakable.
By using these tools we can at least conjure up a plausible glimpse of the world of tomorrow.
Since the purpose of this paper is to determine the nature of future warfare, we must specifically look at those determinants that have the greatest impact on the shaping of the essence of future armed conflict.
The capability and manner in which any nation wages war is dir¬ ectly related to its economic base, political health, and its state of technological development. Therefore, nature of warfare in the year 2000 will be directly and inextricably linked to economic, poli¬ tical, and technological conditions existing at that time.
To deter¬ mine the identity and strength of these conditions, it is necessary to extrapolate from the present and attach the most significance to trends that possess perceived performance.
What follows in this chapter, therefore, are analyses of three major variables relative to the nature of future war. Each variable is dissected to expose the strong and relevant trends that, in our judgment, will determine war's future.
The broad, somewhat oversimplified, outlook for the world economy in the early 21st century is that the poor will get a little richer and the rich will get even richer. There will be an acrossthe-board improvement for everybody, but the gap between the lessdeveloped countries (LDCs) and industrial states will widen.
The political and military power of nations is derived in a rough sense from their economic power. Conversely, the entire inter¬ national economic system reflects the international power system of nation-states.1 There will be a tendency toward the perpetuation of the advantages and disadvantages of the system. "Them that has, gets."
Additionally, the weak infrastructure of the LDCs, continuing world inflation,2 and uneven technological transfer will depress the growth of the LDCs and contribute to their continuing instability.
The neomalthusian predictions of gloom and doom will not take place in the early 21st century, if at all. Technology will solve subsistance levels.
Rising education and well-being will depress population growth. The application of these trends will not be uni¬ versal. There will still be areas affected by overpopulation and malnutrition. The one area of weakness in the energy picture is the foreseeable shortage of a mobile energy source. Depletion of oil reserves will accelerate. New reserves will be found, but probably not in suffi¬ cient quanities or timeliness to satisfy demand.4 Alternate sources are known (e.g., hydrogen) but there will not be sufficient time or interest to create the infrastructure of such an industry to influence the period under study. To a lesser extent, this lack of timeliness will influence the wider energy situation. Lead times are particularly long in this sector and the slow reaction and lack of anticipation by nation-states to cope with marginal shortages will tend to depress the overall picture.
The raw materials picture is scmewhat spotty for the turn of the century. Known reserves of iron ore are still plentifull. Some of the more exotic materials may be short. New discoveries, the substi-of expended products will assuage these shortages, but not com¬ pletely. Serious shortages will occur and because of the crudity of international economic mechanisms, the effects of economic dis¬ locations will be felt unevenly by all the nations of the world.
Two points can be deduced from the energy and raw materials situa¬ tion in the year 2000. First is the political leverage that can be expected by possessors of a relative monopoly of supply of a critical material.
Second is the significant increase in the expense of finished products arising from higher prices of raw materials and from the more complex production and reclamation situation. This further indicates the necessity for a sophisticate industrial base and tech¬ nologically astute population to maintain an industrial economy.
The influence of economic factors on the world environment will not cause any radical changes in the power structure as it is known today.
The Soviet Union together with its East European hegemony will continue to enjoy and foster virtual autarky. On a barter basis, Western nations will be allowed to contribute to its industrial base and develop raw materials. Geographic and climatic conditions will continue to restrict any long-term increases in USSR agricultural productivity. The Soviet economic central planning techniques will continue and be enhanced by use of better information processing tech¬ nology. These techniques, together with Communist political philosophy and the large portion of the GNP devoted to national defense, will continue to encumber an acceleration in the building of an extensive and highly sophisticated economic infrastructure. These economic facts point to an avoidance by the Soviet Union of a prolonged war of attrition. The economy can not sustain such a war and conversely their in-being military capability points to the quick war. Thus, Soviet policy, doctrine, and actions will continue to maintain large forces-in-being and mass destruction weapons for quick, incisive warfare.
The international economic instruments of today are extremely crude mechanisms. On a global scale, this system will continue because it will suit the self-interests of the United States and a second group of nations. These nations (Japan and West European powers but not India and China) plus possibly some new economically expanding states will be linked politically and economically. Because of the beneficial effects of the interlinkage, it will continue despite short-term abr sions caused by these countries'economic competitiveness.
These nations with substantial economic power will seek modification of international monetary, trade, and tariff agreements only to the degree it is helpful to the individual state. This continuing economic nationalism will be abated to some degree by developments in economic regionalism-the most developed of which is and will be the European community. Other areas, in the Pacific Basin and Latin America, will develop but will be dominated by a few states with the remainder in a client-dependent status. Ti.e far distant future may see some integra¬ tion of vari cus regional unions.
The political and military scence may see some influence by these regional blocs. Japan and Brazil with the attainment of a credible military power could become the spokesman for vast areas of the world.
This situation is not expected to fully materialize because of problems inhibiting both nations. However, some degree of patronal power can be expected to be achieved by each.
As previously indicated, the recipient of the whip saw effect of world economics will be the late developing countries (LDCs). An oversimplified, but useful general, picture of these countries is the following: Subsistance economies with some exporting extractive and agrie Aturai industries which in turn support some import substi¬ tution efforts. An extremely thin layer of entrepreneurship, techno¬ logical and management knowledge in the face of increasingly complex world environment make it almost impossible for these nations to achieve more than marginal net growth rates without substantial capital and technology transfer from more developed areas.
As a result of the apparently successful efforts of the Organiza¬ tion of Petroleum Exporting Countries in attaining better terms for their product, other nations enjoying a relative monopoly of supply will combine and attempt similar cartel-type actions. Unfortunately, the largest demand market is and will be che United States and the Common Market. This together with the East-West ideological competi¬ tion will cause the transfer of some technology and capital to the LDCs by the United States and Europe.
In world power relations, this will have marginal impact but will provide the LDCs some political leverage not hitherto available.
The economic scene of discontent in the 21st Century will be the less-developed world. When magnified by the political discontent latent in many ef these areas, potential trouble is a continuing reality.
In looking at political influences that may shape the nature of warfare (or lack thereof) between now and the early years of the 21st
Century, it is essential to examine briefly political history. Poli¬ tics is considered by many to be a science concerned with organization and administration of political units.
If it is a science, then poli¬ tics should exhibit some constant characteristics regardless of size or type of political system examined.
Our review of political history revealed two distinct character¬ istics, common to all political units through, the ages, which partic¬ ularly influence international relationships and thereby the prospects for war or peace. These characteristics are.
1. Political units, like living organisms, seek to survive.
Both the leaders and the led are eager to maintain their collectivity which has resulted from history, race, religion, or fortune.
Political units seek to impose their wills upon each other.
Political entities proud of their independence, jealous of their capacity to make major decisions on their own, are rivals by the very fact they are autonomous. Each can count only on itself.
Since these characteristics have been present in organized society for hundreds of years and since the nature of man has changed little, it is reasonable to assume they will continue to be pertinent in govern¬ ments of the early 21st Century. If these characteristics are constant and true, one realizes then that the primary objectives of any political unit are to:
1.
Retain what it now has,
Improve what it now has,
or some combination thereof.
In a competitive world, to do these things requires political power. The amount of political power a nation possesses can be said to be a function of economic power, technological capability, social cohesiveness and their respective contributions to usable military power. However, total political power is not just the sum of those ingredients, but is an illusive intangible also comprised of reputatbn, diplomatic skill, and contributing or detracting power of friends and enemies. Total political power is not constant, but rather is a dynamic force that rises and wanes with changing times and changing conditions.
Security, for example, is based upon either stength of self or relative weakness of others. Paradoxically, when one political unit acquires too much strength in search of security, it may actually lose security because other political units, due to fear or jealousy may ally against it.
There is another danger in seeking too much "security." Nations seek to be strong first for security and to enjoy peace, but also they seek to be strong so as to be feared, respected, or admired. Security can be a final goal but power too can be a final goal. While survival is paramount, often danger is not appre¬ ciated after the intoxification of power.
The reason for this background development is to emphasize that the basic nature of man and of national government has not changed for centuries and will not change in the next 30 years. That con¬ clusion in itself helps the futurist project current trends and anticipated developments into plausible political scenarios for the year 2000.
An analysis of research revealed several significant political conditions existing today that will be only slightly altered by the end of this century.   While some might deplore an apparent lack of centralized direction of US R&D as opposed to the single-mindedness exhibited by the Soviet Union, it would appear that the very free-wheeling nature of American technological growth is the more promising from the standpoint of new doors.It is the "new doors" aspect of technology which is the ultimate key to the future. When one considers the degree of destructiveness at hand today, maybe it is just as well we cannot foresee the almost certain quantum jumps in man's insane compulsion for self-destruction.
In addition to the obvious direct impacts of technology on weapons and hardware developments, there is an indirect impact on deterrence, the arms race and other components of the state of the political world referred to by the term "stability'.' Available literature contains a veritable plethora of views and opinions on this subject.
US Senator Edmond Muskie fears that more accurate ICBM's capable of being targeted against military targets rather than against cities is likely to increase their possibility of being used.Defense Secretary James R. Schlessinger, on the other hand, argues that the President needs flexible nuclear response options. How can a conscionable President respond to a limited Soviet attack on some US ICBM's when his only response option will trigger decimation of US cities?-' General Andre Beaufre contends that "a conventional arms race produces 28 instability whereas a nuclear arms race produces stability." Others view nuclear proliferation with a dread based on their certainty that once weapons have become commonplace, they have always been used.
Some experts state that development of defensive systems invites in¬ creases in offensive inventories and makes war more possible as leaders assess their assured survival potential and may act less rationally.
Many other experts believe that as defensive potentials increase, the possibility of war decreases.And on and on and on.
All proponents of all views present equally lengthy and reasonable arguments to support their theses. Who is right? Obviously with such divergent positions they cannot all be right, yet perhaps to some degree they are. Herbert F. York points out the modern absurdity that as nations' military power increases, their national security decreases
The fact remains that despite the continued presence of all the stan¬ dard historical causes of war, the 20th Century trend toward larger wars occurring more often has been apparently reversed since the advent of nuclear weapons. As nations become more interdependent and more affluent, perhaps their propensity for war will diminish.
That technology has definitely impacted on stability is undeniable.
Without enumerating any more of the "hows'* and"whys", there are a few generalities worth mentioning. The flow of technology is inexorable. As it continues to advance at an accelerated pace, some of the important results will unfortunately continue to be focused on militarily destructive devices.
However, many of the fruits of technology will be beneficial. They will improve the quality of life of even the world's most destitute. By the year 2000 A.D., Herman Kahn's world of plenty will still be far away, but perhaps enough people will be able to envision it to ensure that no one is foolish enough to destroy the chances of reaching it.
1. James R. Schlesinger, The Political Economy of National Security, p. 62.
Irving S. Friedman, Inflation. A Worldwide Disaster.
(The author points out that the present international economic system has a built-in bias for inflation. He further points out the rising expectations and subsequent political and social frustrations suffered in the poorer countries who are least equipped to handle inflation.)
Hudson 
Institute, 1973
The present relationships of nations can be categorized as follows
The US and the USSR clearly dominate the international scene politi¬ cally and militarily. A second group of nations (European states, China, India, and Japan) have sufficient power to exert sizable but limited influence on world affairs. The last group is the rest of the world's countries who are restricted in their options in the inter¬ national sphere.
Much of the power generated by the second grouping derives from their economic power and indirectly the military potential that eco¬ nomic power implies.
A short-cut to greater international muscle is, of course, the acquisition of nuclear arms.
In countries like India and China the combination of massive populations and nuclear capability allow them to bypass the sterile measure of Gross National Product, and to exert influence only indirectly related to economic power.
The bipolarity of the US and the USSR is expected to continue into the 21st century. The makeup of the second group of nations will be more dynamic. Egypt, Iran, Brazil, Indonesia, and South
Africa have economic and/or nuclear potential that could move them, to this second group.
In examining the possible type conflicts in the above described world, it is necessary first to examine the military potential of these nations. A determination of this potential may indicate a level of warfare in which they could logically engage. The measure of a nation's power is its national will to pursue its political goals and interests and convert economic power to military power, its mili¬ tary capability (forces-in-being), its mobilization capability (the convertability of economic resources to military capability), and its power projection capability (transportation and logistic infrastructure required to place forces in a theater of operations). Additionally, a nation's power is subjected to the positive or negative influences of other nations as well as the losses expected from an adversary's military actions.
In the third group of nations (less developed count!fes, LDC's) their military power is nearly totally circumscribed in the forcesin-being. These nations have a growing military capability and in¬ creasingly expend more of their domestic product on maintaining this capability.1 Except for the subsequent use of unemployed and under¬ employed manpower they have little mobilization capability and they have no power projection capability beyond states contiguous to their border. Not considering national will and third country influence, a war between LDC's would pit capability against capability. With limited quanity and quality of weapons, limited mobilization capability, the duration of the conflict would be limited and on the world scene the political impact would be limited. Even with a fanatical will, an LDC would be reduced over time to unsophisticated indecisive warfare.
Only third country influence could change this circumstance, ihis level of warfare is classified for this study as minor war.
In the second group of nations, those that have some modicum of economic or military power, there exists some significant mobili7itíon capability, an international power projection capability and nuclear arms potential or capability. The undeniable fact that cannot he assumed away about any conflict between these countries is that they are inextricably intertwined politically, economically, and militarily with the US-USSR bipolar power structure. Therefore, major political interests become involved in such a confrontation. Additionally, the forces involved are of major proportions and their projection capa¬ bility on at least a rejlonal basis is formidable.
For all these reasons it becomes extremely difficult to isolate or negated the in¬ fluence such a conflict would have on the entire world. Any such warfare would have to be classified as major.
Conceivably the US and the USSR could become involved in a war of major proportions using the magnum capabilities available to each.
Such a war would perforce be major and because of the enmeshing net¬ work of bipolarity would probably involve some nations of the second group. The greater this involvement and the more prone to initiation of mass destruction weapons the more total such warfare becomes for mankind. The thresholds for this level of war must be strategic involving multiple rations.
The above paragraphs define levels of warfare between nation¬ states. Not surveyed were sub-national levels of warfare. Terrorism attempts to exert influence on the political goals of power elites.
It does so by using minimum force to extract maximum political change or, taken conversely, to reduce the will to maintain the status quo « insurgency is one core step up the Udder. The insurgent has .»ore military power to use to reduce the will of an established govern¬ ment to pursue its political goals and at the same time erode the government's power base. The final phases of insurgency are seen as the transition to a direct confrontation of insurgent and government military power. This is a civil war. It then takes on the overtones of a classical contest of military forces. This phase is not discussed separately in this study since at that point the adversaries have established political roles not unlike nation-states engaged in some level of warfare.
Not introduced into this exposition were the various combinations that can take place in conflicts between nations with quantum differen¬ tials in power (e.g.,US vs IDC, 2d Croup vs 2d Croup, etc). As each of the defined levels of conflict are viewed in the light of possible 21st century settings, the impact of great power entry and other states entry into such conflicts will be surmised.
There With the above thoughts in mind, what role will terrorism play in shaping the world political scene between now and the year 2000?
How will military organizations and future warfare be affected?
What utility value does terrorism have for political units of all sized from dissident groups to superpowers? Before developing a scenario for terrorism in the year 2000, its important to highlight several trends that will influence the use of terrorism.
Trend #1.
International laws for curbing terrorism have not been enacted and it is unlikely that they will be.
it to be an increasing problem for the international community and will likely continue to be unless effective international sanctions are adopted and applied.
To date neither the United Nations nor any other organization has been effective in curbing international terror¬ ism. International law does not provide for any legal measures against the international terrorist.
In fact, no mutually accepted definition of terrorism has been accepted by the UN and none is likely to be accepted in the foreseeable future.
The proposals submitted by the United States to the United Nations concerning the control of international terrorism reflect the opinion of the non-Marxist and ron-Third World countries. The Western nations believe in suppressing international terrorism because it is contrary to our historical concept of law and order. This is not the same for a majority of other nations of the world and is con¬ trary to their history, ideology, and national interest in many cases.
Therefore, international terrorism receives implied approval by many governments.
Trend #2. Exorbitant cost of modern weaponry is making formal war too expensive. All things considered a likely scenario regarding terrorism in the year 2000 could be postulated as follows:
Situations and political conditions will exist in numerous nations which preclude free expession of political thought and rea¬ sonable possibilities for desired political, economic, or social change.
Resulting frustrations will result in formation of groups so desperate for recognition and expression that they will resort to violent acts for political ends. Terrorist movements will exist both national and international.
National governments recognizing the cost '•nd destructiveness of formal warfare will have explored alternative methods for exerting political or economic influence over advisory nations. They will recognize the practicality and small expense of sponsored terrorism plus the unique ability of the terrorist to operate in urban environ¬ ments against highly visible targets. Consequently, sponsor nations will support client terrorist groups.
Terror applied by groups and/or governments against governments and/or populations exists as an accepted fom*of warfare by a majority of nations of the world. The United States will express abhorance of this idea but realize it as a fact of life. Inconclusive debate will continue in international forums.
Proliferation of terrorist groups will reinforce the feeling of legitimacy of each terrorist. He will feel he is on the just side in a noble cause. Targets, victim types and numbers, and weaponry will range greatly between different terrorist philosophies.
Terrorist actions, both internal and international will continue and become more violent. This is particularly true in Third World nations.
Caution will be exercised by sponsor nations to avoid direct confrontation that might escalate to formal war.
Weapons used by terrorists will increase in lethality and des¬ tructiveness. Special terror weapons such as genetic disrupters, mind altering chemicals, and crop destroying biologicals or chenicals will be added to their arsenals.
Strategies for combatting internal and international terrorism will be developed by all governments. Options will vary from strin¬ gent repression to major concessions in accordance with the situation anticipated.
Military forces will be structured, equipped, and trained for counter-terror missions as well as commitment in formal warfare.
Partial successes as well as factional disagreements will frag¬ ment many terrorist movements into opposing groups thereby decreasing their effectiveness.
Some terrorist movements will attain their goals and others will fail. More will fail than succeed because of their inability to win sufficient support from the population. Enough will succeed to perpetuate the concept.
In conclusion it should be emphasized not to overexaggerate the importance oi terrorism in influencing the behavior of nations in world affairs. While it can be useful to a nation-state in influ¬ encing the behavior of another, it will never substitute for threat of formal war (or war itself) in the management of disputes between sovereign states. While terrorism is a nuisance and a threat to the internal stability of a state, it can be controlled or reduced to insignificance (never totally eliminated) if the state wishes to pay the necessary price (either by repression, concession, or reform) to do so. The questions for a nation-state to consider then are, how can it use the effects of terrorism to its advantage if need be and how can it minimize the disruption to its system if terrorism is used against it.
An insurgency is defined in JCS Pub 1 as a condition resulting from a revolt or insurrection against a constituted government which falls short of civil war.
The insurgent leadership has as its goal the gaining of political influence within the attacked nation. The primary objective of insurgent warfare is the destruction or erosion of the will of the established government to resist or to pursue its aims. The power of the government and its will to resist are inextricably interdependent. Therefore, the government's power is also susceptible to erosion through attrition by insurgent use of arms.
As defined by the JCS, this is a level of warfare below a civil war. Civil war indicates that the insurgents have sufficient military power to openly contest the power of the government. The focus of civil war shifts somewhat from the destruction of will to the destruction of power. Conversely, in an insurgency the insurgent power is initially insufficient to effect major change and the most available and sensitive target is national will.
The above over-simplified analysis of insurgent war is required to highlight its objectives so that proper focus on its means can be made.
It is obviots that because of the imbalance in will and power in the insurgent organization the arenas for action will differ noticeably from other type wars. There will be heavy emphasis on the political and psvchological/socioiogical elements and then secondarily on economic elements which have implications on morale and power.
Lastly, military capability, technologically enhanced, poses new dimensions in destructiveness for both adversaries.
There are two major long-term trends in the evolution of mankind that need indentification. Their progression will influence the nature of future insurgencies. On a short-term basis (since World War II) trends that are both significant and appear to be more than cyclical patterns must be briefly identified. Foremost among these is the decolonization of West European empires. This has left some governments of the Third World with ill-defined international power relationships and narrow bases of political support. Decolonization has nearly run its full course and is not a trend as such. But the resultant ill-defined internal and external power system is a status that portends conflict well into the 21st century. A second critical development is the legitimacy of violence within countries. This is an aberation of long-term "egalitarianism." As Samuel Huntington has pointed out, "the democratization of government in a Society in which violence is a key part of government also means the democratization of violence."9 Going further, as He masses perceive the legitimacy of their goals, the more legitimate becomes the exercise of violence.
The third short-term trend is the enormous increase ir. weapons pro¬ duction worldwide. The availability of these weapons to all elements of society and the growth in military establishments worldwide (mili¬ tary growth exceeds economic ;rowth in developing countries) makes readily available the means to commit violence.10 These are the macro¬ trends emanating from the 17th century or earlier, from those which are outgrowths of industrialization and from the restructuring result¬ ing from cataclysmic world war. These trends appear to possess the in¬ tensity to carry into the 21st century.
For the analysis of the nature of future insurgency these trends will provide an initial basis.
Possible micro-trends useable in insurgent warfare will be identified in the development of a description of an insurgency around the year 2000.
The boscage of insurgent war will not change.
The figlit by insurgent and constitute.d governments for population control is central to the political, economic, and military basis of power.
It is the uncommitted element of this population for which the con¬ tending parties vie. Overt commitment is not necessary; simply denial of this base value is sufficient.
The relative success of the Maoist type rural insurgency will cause its emulation in the future.
The greater the percentage of the population found in the countryside the greater will be the propensity and chance ot success for this type of insurgent war.
The closer a nation is to a subsistance economy, the less counterguerrilla capability the established government can generate and conversely, the more dependent it is on the agricultural sector.
It is unfortunate but one of the core characteristics of these least developed countries is that they are ruled by elitist factions only nominally concerned with needs of the general populace and/or they are extremely crude, unsophisticated political regimes enjoying no significant power base.
Projecting an improbable but extremely high economic growth rate for these least developed countries over the next thirty years would still place many of them at the marginal subsistance level. It is quite obvious that both economically and politically some countries of Latin America and Black Africa will be fertile ground for rural insur¬ gency. What has been lacking is a disciplined cadre of dissidents with an appealing revolutionary creed. The marriage of a viable creed with the tested and refined rural guerrilla warfare techniques will pose difficult problems to these regimes.
The other arena for insurgency is in the urban areas. The phenomenal worldwide growth of the megopolis has tended to lessen the influence of the rural community in many areas since urban growth is associated with some degree of industrialization and serves as an outlet for rural dissatisfaction. rigid and an economic crisis of major proportions takes place, then a viable urban insurgency may take place. The western world experienced some narrow escapes in the great depression of the thirties.
Several economic clouds loom in the horizon of the 21st century that could foster urban insurgency. Energy, food, resources, popula¬ tion, and international inflation are highly interdependent problems 12 that with even marginal acceleration could have profound impact. a threatened government will be able to develop population control systems that will strike directly at the insurgent movement.
Very relevant to the power developing country is the fact that these command and control/information systems are and will be available on commercial markets and when considering the stakes, will be rela¬ tively cheap.
The insurgent and the established government will not be so fortunate in the field of weaponry. Without a largesse from a highly industrialized state, neither side will be able to afford the newest weapons systems.
The arms market will, however, be glutted with weapons of the 1970's and early 1980's. It is not foreseen that these poorer states will have the technological capacity to indulge in any 14 significant internal arms production.
Therefore, an insurgency isolated from external influences will be nearly totally dependent on the commercial arms market.
It is necessary to interject at this point some speculation as to the plausibility of help from industrialized states to either con¬ tending party since this help will alter spectacularly the level of violence, duration, tactics, strategy, and termination of the war.
The Chinese dismal failure at promoting revolution in Africa in the 1960's and the failure of Cuba to do the same in Latin America indi¬ cate that an insurgency must have its impetus from within its bound¬ aries. Once started, however, it must take on some ideological over¬ tones, be they a political "ism," religious, racial, or anticolonial themes, there must be an appealing ideological thrust before outside aid can be effective.  The ability and desire or other industrialized powers to support insurgency antagonists is limited.
As ties with former colonial domains become more remote and tenuous, the less interest will be evinced. Soviet satellites will continue to exert no international influence that is not condoned/dictated and supported by the USSR.
As previously stated, the great power relationships will continue, thus restricting the volition of the second tier of powers. As raw materials become more scarce and as their desire for economic well¬ being continues, there can be a predilection by these powers to secure supply sources indirectly by force. These middle powers will be compelled to be circumspect in this type of support and only in dire circumstances would high visibility major weapons systems be provided.
In summary, there is high plausibility of the United States to support existing governments and there is high plausibility of the USSR to support insurgents. Support rendered by other industrialized nations, while possible, will decreasingly be undertaken.
In light of the above, the insurgent war becomes more onerous.
The weapons systems then obtained by the contestants are current or perhaps only one generation behind. Because of their accuracy, destructive of human life and materials. This would imply that the war would be shortened because of exhaustion of the forces involved.
The antagonists, however, have a pipeline for material support; therefore, it is primarily exhaustion of the populace that will decide the issue. And this, of course, returns to the basic ingredient of insurgent war that determines the degree of will and the power base, the population. The pro-government and uncommitted populace will fix the responsibility fur concluding the war on the established govern¬ ment since it is formally vested with power. Whether the existing government can fulfill its responsibility in a timely manner so that dissaffection and desertion do not occur is the question.
The tactics of the insurgent wa'" will be altered by the charac¬ teristics of the weapons systems of the year 2000. The lethality of these systems will severely restrict battlefield mobility. Mechanical conveyances used to improve mobility and firepower will leave a detec¬ table trace, regardless of its structural composition. Heat, elec¬ tronic emission, and reflective surfaces are known now. Other charac¬ teristics will also become detectable in the future. The present ability of a single man to passively detect and then launch destruc¬ tive power against these vehicles is a'so known. Further, the cost differential between the expensive vehicle and its cheap destroying weapon will increase. Therefore, the capability for battlefield mobility will decrease drastically. This will have unfavorable effects on the quantity of troops needed to surpress insurgents.
However, in the opposite sense the local protection of population Indeed, the danger of involving other nations is perhaps greater for a minor war than for any other for the peculiar reason that the small power nations likely to clash do not have the economic and industrial wherewithal to field and equip large forces in sustained combat. They must have major power sponsors to provide them with a significant capability to fight for any length of time.
It is an unfortunate conclusion that the current ideological con¬ flict between the world's two most powerful nations will prevail well into the 21st century.15 This fact alone fosters the sponsor concept of supporting and assisting those nations friendly to one or the other of the two major ideologies and wooing those nations professing ideo¬ lógica neutrality. Added now to the ideological impetus to support friendly countries is and will be the increasing importance of the smaller councries as they become important as sources of raw materials and trade partners.
The net result will be a greater effort by the major power to sponsor the smaller developing countries.
trade and industrialization benefits as well as arms and weapons technology--will tend to encourage, adventurism among the small nations.
The seeds of adventurism already exist. Many national boundaries are disputed. Territorial claims in international or contiguous waters are likewise contested. Again, the growing awareness of the significance of raw materials will exacerbate the existing disputes over territorial rights. Witness Greek and Turkish arguments over possible oil deposits in the Aegean Sea. Herman Kahn foresees many small "classic" wars developing over such disputes.
Granting therefore the distinct possibility, if not probability, that regionally limited minor wars between two or more small power nations will occur near or after the turn of the century, what will their nature be? Obviously, it will be a direct function of great power sponsorship--who, how much, and how long.
It is this relationship which dictates the wide diversity in the nature of possible minor wars. Two contiguous nations with little or no sponsorship, limited to small, ill-trained armies equipped with obsolete circa 1980 or earlier weapons and weapons systems, will fight a very "uninteresting" war indeed. The margin for victory will depend primarily on standard factors such as relative size of the nations' armies, economies, and leadership. Superiority of individual weapons systems, logistics, and support activities, etc., will be relegated to secondary importance, because relative differences should be slight unless the primary factors are disproportionate to begin with.
It will be war on a small scale much like war as we know it today.
tense but short duration sea, infantry, and tank battles receiving limited, somewhat ineffectual tactical air support. Such wars will be of short duration. Once initial stocks of arms and supplies are exhausted, the war will necessarily grind to a halt. Without sponsor¬ ship (i.e., resupply of arms) to negate mediation incentives, negotiated settlements will practically be forced on the quickly exhausted parti¬ cipants.
Incentives to continue the struggle will be minimal. The danger here is major power disputes erupting over the settlement conditions and attempts to take political or economic advantage of the situation.
The opposite extreme to the above "two-small-weak-nations-andalmost-nobody-cares" minor war is the one where the participants verge on, major power status and are sponsored by the two major superpowers and/or their allies. Efforts to limit the conflict now become inextricably entwined with efforts to resupply and sustain the proxy nations' relative strengths thus assuring military super¬ iority and strong negotiating positions. The putative root cause of the war may become submerged in major power interests.
The nature of this level of minor war is far more devastating, especially when projected to the year 2000. Superpower sponsorship will almost surely dictate the employment of modern weapons and all the sophistication and horror implied thereby. The probability of escalation to tactical type, short-range precision nuclear weapons cannot be totally dismissed.
as saying that if it looked like they were being pushed into the sea, "they'd take a hell of a lot of Arabs with them."^ Even if most futurologists and strategic experts are correct in their belief that nuclear weapons will never be used, an all out superpower--supported minor war in the year 2000 portends to be mindboggling in its ferocity and destructiveness. The weapons available will run the gamut from those in current inventories to their successors exhibiting orders of magnitude improvements in efficiency, lethality, and sophistication.^-® This trend has already surfaced in the Yom Kippur War of October 1973. The unprecedented intensity of that rela¬ tively small war of only 18 days' duration was instrumental in the 19 total destruction of more tanks for one side (the Arabs) than the entire tank inventory of all the Allies in the spearheads of the World War II Western Front in late 1944.
This level of destruction, using the embryonic so-called smart weapons of today, when extrajolated 26 years hence along the technological growth curve will drastically revise the nature of the battlefield as we know it. Offensive and defensive developments will tend to make one-on-one duels mutual suicide. Each side will still attempt to deploy conventional-type weapons (tanks and airplanes) because if one side doesn't, the other side will have an advantage--and because the leaders of tomorrow will still be psychologically oriented toward application of new develop¬ ments in the "good old fashioned" standard way. But by then, the widespread application of lasers in offensive, defensive, communication, and command and control systems, coupled with remotely controlled computer-operated self-protecting reconnaissance, electronic warfare and interdiction vehicles made of exotic new, vastly improved materials, etc., will drastically alter battlefield tactics. Increased emphasis will be placed on behind-the-lines interdiction of logistics and communication choke points. Battles will be short, vicious contests of attrition very costly to both sides and to the sponsors. Initial inventories will be used up in a matter of days and resupply will tax the superpower sponsors both logistically and economically. The end result will be initial high intensity engagements dwindling rapidly to attrition forays amid mounting pressures to negotiate as net costs force alternative solutions.
Escalation of such a minor war to include direct involvement of the major powers is a distinct danger. Submarine transports, giant jets, and surface logistics vessels run the risk of interdiction, and contin¬ gency alert forces in the area run the risk of attack. What happens, for example, if a supporting nation's integral defense posture is seriously degraded by sudden destruction of key intelligence, communications, command and control, and/or survilance systems being made available to assist one of the combatants? And how tolerant will a major or super¬ power supporting nation be of a minor nation's attempts to hold industries, citizens and/or captured advisors hostage for withdrawal and non-invol¬ vement demands? Also the political, demographic or geographic situation might foster direct intervention miscalculations on the part of one or more sponsor nations.
In short, there are any number of scenarios which could happen to escalate a minor conflict into a more serious major confrontation. For this reason, a premium will necessarily be placed on diplomacy, effective communications, mutual respect, and genuine desire for conflict termination on the part of the sponsors to avoid escalation consequences.
Under anticipated future conditions of engagement it would appear that neither side will have much to gain by war. Only by a fait 21 accompli surprise attack are initial objectives likely to be attained.
Thus it would seem to appeal to reason on both sides to negotiate first from positions of intact strength rather than later from positions of attrited strength augmented by increased enmity.
The type of world that the following scenario portends can be called the "Conflictual World". It is characterized by"the willingness of individual powers to sui^prdinate their interests to long range schemes for cooperation. The atmosphere of international relations is one of distrust of intentions of other countries and competition for narrow national advantage.
There is a greater willingness to put diplo¬ matic, economic, and military pressure on other countries when interests clash, and the force of international opinion as a deterrent to pressure politics has weakened."22 The opposite type of world is one of coopera¬ tion, however, in spite of a seemingly growing detente between the superpowers, the contemporary world and its growing problems do not presage cooperation in the future. and Soviet Union were involved in the conflict, it is assured that they would limit their use of NBC weapons to the tactical variety. Therefore, a major war would become total as soon as strategic exchanges occur between the superpowers.
It is not likely that a major war would break out between a Tier II nation and one of the superpowers, The nuclear balance, even in the year 2000, militates strongly against this eventuality. Even border skirmishes between China and the Soviet Union will probably be kept closely circumscribed and will not exceed the "incident" level.
It is assumed that the two major military alliances will not have It is doubtful that any industrialized nation will sit idly by using candlelight while her neighbor boasts of energy surpluses.
What follows is not intended to be an all-inclusive description of a major war and the tools used to wage it. The portrayal attempts to emphasize those capabilities that will have the greatest impact on the nature of war in the future.
Those readers who believe that certain descriptions are not The central cause of the war, however, will quickly become enmeshed in the peripheral issues. Nations will be extremely reluctant to enter the conflict, but "entangling alliances" and uncontrollable events will undoubtedly deny them the flexibility of remaining neutral. This will be especially true in Europe where a high density of Tier II nations exist. Both sides will attempt to keep the conflict circum¬ scribed. Moreover, the belligerents will be aided in their efforts to limit the conflict by the superpowers.
A major war occurring in Europe in the year 2000 seems to be the most plausible among the possible candidates. Another likely pair of nations for a major war is China and Russia. Still another possibility is a conflict between China and Japan.
From an industrial capability standpoint, China will not reach Tier II status until well after the year 2000.
For this reason, it appears that China will vigorously avoid the creation of incidents that could lead to war and an arresting of her steady march to modernity.
For a major war that occurs in Europe, the weapons of the combatants will only be limited by the constraints imposed by the superpowers.
Most nations will possess tactical nuclear weapons. All Tier II nations of Europe will have the capability to produce nuclear weapons.
Admittedly, nuclear weapons will not be used haphazardly. Each combatant will be aware of the great potential for escalation. There may be incidents, however, where tactical nuclear weapons are used out of actual or a perceived fear of annihilation. For example, a task force commander at sea could resort to nuclear depth charges if he becomes convinced that his force will be destroyed unless he does so.
A similar situation could occur in a land battle. Once nuclear weapons are used by either side, regardless of the reason, escalation could be almost immediate and, once this threshold is crossed, it is unlikely that any of che combatants will be willing to voluntarily deescalate the conflict.
the year 2000, all Tier II nations will probably possess a variety of lethal chemical weapons to include nerve and blood gases. On the other hand, defenses will tend to keep pace too. Protective devices, antidotes, and recuperative techniques will lessen the lethality of the weapons. One chemical munition, a mind altering drug similar in effect to LSD, can be used co neutralize entire cities without killing the population.
Perhaps one of the most potent weapons in the year 2000 will be bacteriological. By then most, if not all, of the diseases of the 1970's will be extinct. Synthetic diseases, however, will be created that are deadlier than anything man has known.
It is not likely that the more lethal chemical and bacteriological weapons would be used early in a major war for the same reason that combatants will hedge on the use of nuclear weapons--fear of escalation.
Nevertheless, there is always a chance of the "cornered rat" situation where one of the sides may resort to his "Sunday punch" out of desperation.
The economic costs to the participants of a major war in the year 2000 will be astronomical. Cost will certainly be a factor determining the length of the war. Unless one side or the other is sponsored by a superpower, it is not likely that the combatants can support the requirements of a long war even if they wanted to.
Another major consideration in the duration of the war is the role the superpowers choose °r are forced to play. We think that Russia and the United States will exhaust every effort to end the war quickly. To them, each day raises the chance of further escalation and further superpower involvement.
navigation. Surface Efi'et Ships cruising at 125 knots will be able to span over 3000 miles in one day. Ice and offshore obstacles will no longer restrict naval maneuver. Deepwater ports and channels will also lose their significance. The polar icecap will be traversed almost as easily as Walden's pond.26
The speed and maneuverability of SES will enhance their capability for raiding ports and cities near the sea coasts. This tactic will be employed by both sides and points up the special vulnerability of built-up areas close to a littoral during this time frame. Most SES will be armed with missiles, rapid-fire guns, and rocket-launched torpedoes. Guidance systems will employ both radar and laser. Infra¬ red and nuclear-particle detection systems will make it especially difficult for enemy submarines to maneuver with impunity.
SES will make amphibious assaults more plausible in the year 2000 than they appear to be in the high intensity environment of the 1970's.
One hundred ton air-cushion landing craft will be available that can be launched from dispersed high speed transports within a one hundred mile radius of the objective area. Widely separated and maneuvering at 75 knots, the craft will not have to mass until just prior to reaching the objective.
All of the nations in Tier II will be able to afford and most will possess the most sophisticated aircraft available in the year 2000. The tactical war, however, will end almost as quickly as it begins. Tactical air defenses in the year 2000, that will include hand-held anti-air weapons, will be essentially impenetrable. Aircraft will, however, have the capability of "standing off" at distances of up to 75 miles and acquiring their targets with radar and laser.27 VTOL aircraft. some with a troop-carrying capacity of up to 1000 men, will be available to all of the combatants of a major war to ferry personnel and supplies over short distances to the scene of the battle. These aircraft will be extremely vulnerable, however, and can only be used in a permissive environment.
Perhaps one of the greatest advancements in warfare will be in the area of Command and Control. All commanders in the major war of the year 2000 will be capable of communicating directly, and immediately, with seniors and subordinates, not only orally, but visually through the medium of television. Moreover, national leaders on both sides will be able to talk directly to their counterparts in other nations.
I .rhaps the greatest advantage that will obtain from better command and control is the opportunity to talk to the adversary and keep the conflict limited where possible.
A significant difference between the armies of 1970 and the year 2000 can be found in their size and content. The army of the year 2000 will be small in contrast. Moreover, personnel in the year Many scholars are of the opinion that as a result of the US and USSR possessing the capability for mutual annihilation through the use of nuclear weapons that a situation of stability will e,ist in the foreseeable future.
It is further suggested that the Soviet and American systems are drawing together and that one day, through a series of modifications of their respective institutions, the gap between them would be so slight that cooperation would be assured.
But there must be taken into account the possibility of a widening gap with consummate noncooperation and ultimate violence.
What then of the frightening arsenal of nuclear weapons? Nuclear proliferation certainly provides questions as to the use of these weapons by other than superpowers.
In a follow on to the scenario provided in regard to major war, it would be necessary to extend this type of war to its possible extension-total war. J.C.S. Pub. 1 does not discuss total war as such, but refers to general war wherein there is armed conflict between major powers in which the total resources of the belligerents are employed, and the national survival of a major belligerent is in jeopardy.
Within the scope of this study, the terminology total war is defined as an extension of the J.C.S. definition of general war in whiv.h the armed conflict between major powers includes the involvement, directly or indirectly, of all nations of the world. Directly, the involvement may take the form of active engagement with all available resources on the side of or against one of the major belligerents or its allies.
Indirect involvement entails receiving, to some degree, the results of the active engagement of the belligerent nations or those which have become directly involved. The results may be the death of many citizens due to nuclear fallout or the contamination of water and foodstuffs through chemical/biological effects. Whatever the causes, it is considered that the general war will be of such a magnitude that virtually every person will feel the detrimental effects of such an action.
Basic trends shaping the nature of future warfare have been previously discussed within the scope of this paper (see Chapter II).
The underlying trend which would lead to a total war is the result of the failure to successfully resolve the multitude of technological, economic, and political problems which surface between 1974 and 2000.
In the essential area of arms control, for example, efforts have been The scenario for such an escalation is easily seen.
Continuing failure in the political area would result in a situa¬ tion in which a nation will find itself requiring maximu effort against another to protect its very survival. The ultimate outcome of such effort would be total war.
Total war will consist of the maximum use of all available weapons by the nations actively engaged in the conflict. On the sea, nuclear depth charges will be employed in an effort to destroy submarines firing undersea-launched missiles. Surface Effect Ships with speeds of more than 100 knots will range throughout the world's waters firing guided missiles capable of destroying other ships as well as inland cities. Remote controlled sea anchored missiles will be employed to seek destruction of enemy cities. The unique survivability of devices such as this insure that devastation will continue despite the surface environment. Aircraft carriers with speeds in excess of 100 knots will be used to launch sophisticated aircraft with a vast arsenal of weapons. With nuclear or solar propulsion, these ships will be able to remain at sea indefinitely, providing great survivability as well as being able to proceed to the most effective launch sites.
The most formidable weapon system will remain the submarine.
Advanced technology in antisubmarine warfare will not keep pac^ vtl the developments found in quieter, faster undersea crafts.
An increase in the number of weapons carried by each submarine combined with independently taipetable manueverable reentry vehicles will give each vessel the capability to destroy entire nations. During total war, maximum utilization will be made of this most powerful weapons system.
In land action, large formations of ground troops will become immobilized and rendered ineffective due to the massive use of land missiles and sea and air launched devices. To overcome this^land forces must be organized into small, highly mobile formations equipped with enormous capabilities for destruction. Because of impenetrable hardened sites, land-based weapons will be able to withstand the most powerful blast and be launched against a multitude of targets. At present, missiles are dispersed in concrete silos embedded in the ground.
In the future, advanced ICBM will be put on railroad flatcars, trucks, and barges capable of being moved around and increasing their survivability.
In space, total war will include the use of manned and unmanned orbiting satellites with missiles which will be guided to their targets.
Lunar missile sites will also be employed as a launch platform. With radio warning, a nation could launch its moon missiles long before the site could be attacked.
Total war will also involve the use of chemical and biological weapons.
Faced with conceivable destruction, rational decisions may be disregarded, and nations will unleash potent elements of disease and ultimate death through blood and nerve gases as well as lethal pollutant bacteria.
The duration of such total war will be numbered in days during the active exchange of weapons.
Command and control over the launching of weapons will only be viable for hours at which time communications will be lost between launch sites and headquarter's control. The remaining uncontrolled period will consist of sea5 land, and space stations firing their weapons as a result of prearranged initiatives.
Life on earth will be restricted to small areas where chance has left them unaffected by the NBC weapons. The remaining population will make an attempt at beginning civilization again. Their success or failure is a matter of will to continue after such a holocaust. and now confuses regional limitations with weapons usage limitations.
With the expected proliferation of nuclear weapons, cheir increased precision and reduced size greatly changes the limitation aspects of future wars. Thus, some wars constrained to rather well-defined regional limits could conceivably escalate to include nuclear weapons.
Yet, a worldwide war could be fought using only conventional weapons.
And what meaning will "conventional" have in the year 2000? Cold War, too, has become an anachronism. General, central, and total have been 
The kind of war that technology will make possible in the year 2000 will have profound effects on military establishments as we know them today.
Armies will be smaller because of the increased firepower and lethality of weapons and the prohibitive costs of large forces. Personnel will be highly specialized in order to handle advanced weapons systems and increased training will be necessary to develop proficiency.
Because of the destructive power of weaponry, major wars will tend to exhaust themselves more quickly. The short duration of the conflict may negate the need for excessively large reserve establishments and mobili¬ zation bases but require an increase in the readiness of the in-being
Reserve components. The sudden onset of total war, however, could mean that only those nations with a well-equipped and highly dispersed Reserve establishment would retain any capacity for recovery and ultimate victory. Weapons development which once focused on mass area destruction now is turning towards one-on-one precision both defensively and offensively.
While cities will remain hostages in political statements of deterrence, the ability to spare many cities or parts thereof will become a military option. This is possible because of accuracy and size trends which will permit precision ICBM's and penetration techniques (electronic and MIRV) which assure target destruction. There exists also the option of using chemical and biological weapons (CB) ranging from lethal nerve agents to incapacitating disease organisms and mind-altering substances. CB weapons might also be directed against crops, animals, or water supplies.
Little hope can be held out for less expensive weapons in the future.
However, there are some exceptions. Mini-computers and small electronic devices will be both plentiful and less expensive. Weapons systems such as ships and planes will remain expensive. Labor costs will continue to rise worldwide as will the cost of component materials. Substitute materials may reduce costs marginally but not substantially.
The technological growth curve appears to be on a downward trend from the exponential shape experienced over the past 300 years. This attentuation has been forced by resource (both humans and natural) and financial limitations.
In the United States, this generates a need for more integrated efforts in scientific exploration and research and development, especially in the defense sector. It implies at least more correlation in the military among the departments and more centralized direction based on national objectives, policies, and military strategy projections in support thereof.
As much as practicable, man will increasingly seek to achieve his needs and desires in a peaceable manner. If, however, his efforts are frustrated, he may still resort to force. The nature of man has so dictated throughout history and it is realistic to conclude that war will continue to be an accepted means of satisfying political and economic disputes through the year 2000.
Recent trends do indicate however that war may become less and less acceptable as a means of settling differences, at least among the more advanced nations of the world. Ironically, the destructiveness of weapons has profoundly influenced these trends. In the future national leaders will consider long and hard before subjecting their cities and populace to possible destruction over less than the most critical interests. Likewise, it can be expected that adversary nations ¿ill also be less apt to press for unreasonable demands.
It is important to emphasize, however, that what one nation considers unimportant may he vital to another.
Although much has been written that suggests the demise of nationalism and the rise of regional and world organizations, nationalism, with its attendant dangers, will still be a major decisive force in the year 2000.
Among the less developed nations of the world, war will still be an accepted means for achieving national interests. These wars, however, will likely be kept partially circumscribed by the deliberate efforts of the developed nations which fear great power involvement.
It is likely that Russia and the United States will continue their adversary relationship into the 21st century. A rough balance of power will exist between the two nations making the likelihood of major or total war low. In spite of this power balance, however, both giants will compete vigorously in the political and economic spheres for the favor of other nations and for their own aggrandizement.
because of the destructiveness of nuclear war, it is doubtful that any rational leader will consider it a viable option. Nevertheless, the nuclear club will probably increase its membership markedly by the year 2000.
Current nuclear powers have no lasting secret and it is but a matter of time before many nations of the world acquire a nuclear capa¬ bility. Only time will tell if man's rationality will prevail in the non-use of nuclear weapons. Historical precedence implies the inevitability of their use.
War in the year 2000 is likely to occur for many of the same reason found throughout history. Because of greater interaction between nations and the ever increasing arms buildup, the chance for sudden outbursts of military conflict are likely to increase. Although technological advances will likely alleviate much of the shortfall in strategic resources and food, competition for these scarce commodities could be a major factor in a nation's decision to go to war. The potential for conflict will be much greater for the less developed countries than the developed, for the latter will have used technology to overcome shortages.
Because of a trend towaid shorter wars in the future, the results of the conflict will greatly depend on a nation's readiness for war at the commencement of the hostilities, rather than its potential for sustaining a drawn-out war. Therefore, the United States must be con¬ tinually capable of deterring war across the spectrum of conflict or, if deterrence fails, be capable of marshalling sufficient force to defeat aggression.
To be credible, the United States must have versatile forces in-being that possess the requisite qualifications to achieve national objectives in any type of war.
Table I. Some unexpected achievements or discoveries on the left and on the right are some expected concepts which have materialized. Source: Arthur C. Clarke, "Hazards of Prophecy", The Futurists, p. 149. Other unexpected developments might include antibiotics, jet propulsion and radar. New and possibly very simple methods for lethal CB warfare The interrelation of research areas vividly portrays the syner¬ gistic nature of an open society pursuing knowledge in ever broadening horizons.
23. Arthur C. Clarke, "Hazards of Prophecy," The Futurists» ed. Alvin Toffler, p. 149.
have been, in resume, five levels of conflict isolated which can beneficially serve for the investigation of the nature of warfare in the year 2000 A.D.
have been, in resume, five levels of conflict isolated which can beneficially serve for the investigation of the nature of warfare in the year 2000 A.D.
Qinto EO RMV's so that man's place in the loop becomes ever smaller.10 Surface effect ships, navigation satellites, laser communications and data recording, and space warfare are but a few of the hundreds of areas evidencing advancement through applied combinations of technologies.Another broad technological area which promises to provide unli¬ mited adaptation to others is that of improved materials, fabrics, and composites.This becomes an extremely attractive development area because of the desirable characteristics of these exotic materials-high melting point, light weight, strength, invisibility to portions
This Group Research Project was produced under t aegis of the 
Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War College
The scope and general methodology were outlined by the Institute.
The battlefield in Europe will be within a primarily urban environment.
By the year 2000, tne area from the English Channel to the Oder River will be a vast megapolis. This situation will present significant problems for the ground maneuver of forces and the isolation of the civilian populace from the battle. Shelter programs will probably be abandoned because of their prohibitive costs. Refugees will clutter lines of communication and strain military facilities. Because cf the built-up nature of the ground environment, there will be few, if any, set-piece battles in the year 2000. There may, however, be a spate of combat-in-cities similar to what the allies experienced in the European theater during World Wav II.
The chore of the defender will be made easier, however, by the type of weapons that will be available to him in the year 2000. Flame¬ throwers, anti-tank missiles and anti-aircraft missiles will be minia¬ turized, and rather than requiring a crew to operate them, one man will possess these capabilities in a hand-held weapons %rstem.
The war at sea in the year 2000 will truely be Buck Rogerian.
Surface Effect Ships--SES will have all but replaced the slow surface fleets of the 1970's. Most seafaring Tier II nations will have a Navy to support their level of competition for commodities. The SES will be either nuclear or solar powered. Speeds of 100-150 knots for the heaviest ships will make international straits and canals militarily and commercially insignificant. Weather will also lose its importance for naval activity. Even typhoon winds won't affect ships that glide gracefully over the highest waves and employ laser gyroscopes for 32.
Heilbroner, Robert L. 