# ID: cc4b2c88c726488395c20e55a888bb7e
# Title: The Russo-Ukranian Conflict through the Lens of Sun Tzu
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including
Many scholars classify Russia's actions within Ukraine in 2014 as hybrid warfare since Russia combined both conventional and unconventional warfare to achieve its political objectives. Frank Hoffman defines hybrid warfare as "any adversary that simultaneously and adaptively employs a fused mixture of conventional weapons, irregular tactics, catastrophic terrorism, and criminal behavior in the battlespace to obtain desired political objectives." 
1
its operations reveal about the present character of Russian warfare. In addition, the research will use the philosophies of Sun Tzu and Chinese strategic thought as an analytical tool to determine how the Russia engineered chaos at the tactical and operational levels of war utilizing nonmilitary methods such as cyber and information operations.
Sun Tzu's philosophy of warfare and strategic thought provide an excellent lens with which to view and analyze the strategic advantage gained by Russia through its use of hybrid and nonlinear warfare in Ukraine. To appreciate this analysis, one must first understand certain key concepts foreign to Western ways of thinking. In his book, Deciphering Sun Tzu: How to Read the Art of War, Derek Yuen provides an in-depth analysis of Sun Tzu's theory of warfare and Chinese strategic thought. Yuen's analysis of Sun Tzu exposes the Western reader to a unique perspective reflecting the cultural and historical nuances of Chinese culture and strategic thought. Likewise, in his introduction to his translation of Sun Tzu: The Art of Warfare, Roger Ames provides a philosophical overview of the key concepts behind Sun Tzu's work. Most appropriate to the Russo-Ukrainian War is Sun Tzu's writings about gaining the strategic advantage over an adversary through nonmilitary means without fighting. Ames' analysis of Sun Tzu's writings identifies Sun Tzu's concept of shih, or strategic advantage, as the fundamental basis of Sun Tzu's theory woven throughout the text. 
2
For Sun Tzu, the best path to victory in warfare is conquest over one's adversary without expending blood or treasure on the battlefield. Sun Tzu states that "to win a hundred victories in a hundred battles is not the highest excellence; the highest excellence is to subdue the enemy's army without fighting at all." 3 Fundamental to Sun Tzu's concept of winning without fighting is the use of nonmilitary means to gain a strategic advantage or victory. Yuen finds that "it is the process of 'militarization of war' and 'tacticization of strategy' that have blinded us from identifying and rediscovering the countless opportunities in the non-military spheres of war." 
4
5
Sun Tzu provides another relevant strategic concept for analyzing Russian operations within Ukraine: the Tao or "way" of deception. Deception is a strategic tool used to instill confusion within the mind of the enemy in order to gain a strategic advantage. Yuen finds that deception is a "form of strategic manipulation" with the purpose of "not just to deceive or mislead; the Tao of deception instead aims for a higher goal whereby an enemy can be manipulated and controlled." 
6
7
9
1
Some scholars find Russia's success in Ukraine as an evolution of Russian strategic thought that successfully weaves together military and nonmilitary methods to achieve its geopolitical goals. Kristin Ven Bruusgaard attributes Russia's operations in Ukraine to a shift in Russian strategic thought versus an evolution in Russian military doctrine. Ven Bruusgaard believes that the Russian military borrowed tactics from the West "for nurturing regime change by using political, economic, or military support to selected groups, covert action and information operations." 
18
Similar to Ven Bruusgaard's in his reluctance to define Russia's recent use of hybrid warfare as a cutting-edge form of Russian war, Michael Kofman finds that Russia is simply employing all instruments of national power to achieve its political objectives. Kofman does not believe that the Gerasimov Doctrine is a harbinger revealing the evolution of Russian warfare, but instead finds recent Russian military publications to be "a blend of intellectual currents among Russian military leaders and responses to how they view NATO operations." 
19
In sum, scholars disagree concerning Russia's use of hybrid or nonlinear warfare. Some 
Russia's use of hybrid warfare exhibited during its 2014 invasion of Ukraine is an evolution of Russian warfare that can be traced back to the establishment of the Soviet Union. In particular, Russia's use of information operations to gain a strategic advantage over its adversaries has become the cornerstone of its hybrid military operations. James Sherr finds that "today's Russian state has inherited a culture of influence deriving from the Soviet and Tsarist past . . . it bears the imprint of doctrines, disciplines and habits acquired over a considerable period of time in relations with subjects, clients and independent states." 
20
To understand Russia's manipulation of the information environment as a means to achieve its political objectives, it is helpful to reflect upon Gerasimov's findings that "the information space opens wide asymmetrical possibilities for reducing the fighting potential of the enemy." 
21
When examining Russia's employment of hybrid warfare, in particular its activities associated with the cyber and information domains, it is necessary to reflect on Russia's historic practice of using political propaganda to influence the strategic environment. Since the 1920s, Russia has used active measures "to influence political attitudes and public opinion in noncommunist countries through deceptive and covert means." 
22
23
The Cold War offers a multitude of examples of Russian active measures designed to influence political institutions and public opinion through deception and disinformation. Soviet political influence operations often functioned under the guise of governmental institutions with a goal of promoting a Soviet foreign policy agenda. For example, The World Peace Council (WPC), established in 1949, operated in mostly communist countries to promote the Soviet Union's anti-Western agenda. 
24
Dennis Kux finds Soviet disinformation campaigns sought "to gain public acceptance for the distortion through repetition and periodic resurfacing" such as a 1983 news story that claimed the United States and Israel were deploying cruise missiles on the African continent. 
25
Prior to the inauguration of Donald Trump, then-Director of National Security James Clapper released an unclassified report finding that Vladimir Putin had ordered an information campaign designed to "undermine public faith in the US democratic process." 
26
It is apparent that Russia's use of active measures against the West never subsided even after the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991. Russia has a rich history and culture of influence that continues to this day. From Lenin to Putin, Russian leaders have sought psychological influence and control of the Russian population and the populations of countries within the Russian sphere of influence.
Another historical component of Russian nonlinear warfare as it relates to their practice of disinformation to influence the strategic environment is reflexive control theory (RC).
Timothy Thomas defines reflexive control as "a means of conveying to a partner or opponent specifically prepared information to incline him to voluntarily make the predetermined decision desired by the initiator of action." 
27
Russia's incursion into Ukraine in 2014 was motivated by historical and geopolitical elements. Furthermore, the currents of political and social chaos within Ukraine accelerated that speed at which Russia was able to take control of the Crimean Peninsula and portions of Eastern Ukraine. The political and social unrest associated with Euromaidan Revolution eventually culminated with the removal of Ukrainian President Yanukovitch from power. Yanukovitch's removal from power provided the trigger that led to the Russian annexation of Crimea as Russia sought to punish Ukraine and the West for the removal the pro-Russian Ukrainian leader.
Russia's historic connection to "Little Russia," or Ukraine, dates back to the eighteenth century when Russia took certain lands from the Ottoman Empire. Moreover, important to recent history, the Ukrainian territory has provided a strategic buffer between Russia and the West.
Seeing the Ukrainian Revolution and Ukraine's drift toward the West as an existential threat to Russia and its regional influence, Vladimir Putin seized the opportunity to regain control of Crimea while stoking chaos in Eastern Ukraine.
While active measures and reflexive control serve as homegrown theory for Russian and Soviet actions, classical Chinese military thought provides a useful theoretical lens through which to analyze and understand recent events and their implications for future Russian conflict.
In particular, Sun Tzu's strategic concepts of Cheng and Ch'i, Tao of deception, and nonmilitary means to achieve victory provide an excellent framework to analyze the 2014 Russo-Ukrainian
War for clues about the character of Russian warfare.
Attacking the enemy's mind prior to the initiation of conflict and during military operations is the preferred indirect technique of warfare used by Russia in Ukraine. Yuen finds that "Sun Tzu's emphasis on the mental phase prior to actual battle may appear to suggest that he has a strong, philosophical preference for psychology and mind games, rather than real, violent conflict in order to achieve victory." 
33
34
Russia's proclivity for employing cyber and information operations during modern conflictespecially during the initial phase of a conflictwas apparent during the first days of the Russo-Ukrainian War.
During the Russo-Ukrainian War, Russia's accelerated actions during the initial phase of the conflict proved to be overwhelming to the Ukrainian government and its Western supporters.
Following Russia turned to propaganda and information operations in order to quell resistance from domestic and international populations.
Much like Sun Tzu, Russia values and employs the psychological component of warfare to avoid a costly conventional war. Once the threat from the Ukrainian military was exhausted, Russian information operations "proactively targeted pro-Russian rebels, the domestic population, and the international community to alienate Ukraine from its allies and sympathizers." 36 By attacking the minds of the Ukrainian government, populace, and the international community through targeted information operations, Russia secured a strategic victory on the Crimean Peninsula without further opposition from within Crimea or from the government in Kiev. Russian international news outletssuch as RT and Sputnikbroadcast programming that discussed the "Western puppet government" in Kiev while enflaming longstanding grievances within the ethnic Russian populations in Eastern Ukraine.
In addition, Russian cyber-hackers targeted the Ukrainian elections attempting to cast doubt and delegitimize the rising pro-Western government in Kiev. Shortly after Russia's annexation of Crimea, Ukraine prepared for presidential elections in May 2014 to replace the ousted former President Yanukovych who had fled to Russia. The presidential election arose at a critical time as the government in Kiev sought to move past the political and social unrest that had dominated the country during the months leading up to the Euromaidan Revolution. In addition, Ukrainian officials hoped the election would serve as a referendum for a pro-Western government and denouncement of Russia's actions in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.
Just days before the presidential election, the Ukrainian election commission suffered a debilitating cyberattack that nearly derailed the election. In addition to cyberattacks on the Ukrainian election commission, Ukraine's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and military were afflicted by an array of cyberattacks (Figure 
2
37
Russia's use of orthodox and unorthodox methods of warfare during the initial period of the Russo-Ukrainian War were highly successful. As forecast in their 2013 writings, Russian military leaders consider the opening period of conflict to be decisive. It involves the use of information operations, electronic warfare, and sometimes involves kinetic operations such as high-precision weapons and long-range artillery. 
38
39
Ukraine officials blame Moscow fort.I series of cyberattacks both before and after the coun~ry,~014 presidential elect ions. allegations that Russia denies. ere are some of the alleged actions taken by hackers:
Areas affected strategic and operational use of Maskirovka and reflexive control provided ample maneuver space that allowed Russia to gain a strategic advantage over Kiev and the West.
From the start of the Ukraine conflict, the Russian government offered a narrative to the international community that sought to confuse and hinder a Western response. Shortly after the incursion into Crimea, Russia disseminated propaganda on Russian state-controlled television and social media platforms that supported the rights of ethnic Russians living within Crimea to break away from the government in Kiev. Furthermore, the Russian government initially denied involvement during the Crimean uprising as the "little green men," wearing Russian military uniforms without unit designation, secured key terrain and infrastructure on the peninsula.
Maskirovkaby which disinformation is applied against all levels of NATO's command chain troops, the separatists were able to thwart Ukraine's ATO efforts. Russia's influence and manipulation of the Russian ethnic populations living within the Donbas demonstrates that "the business of war does not occur as some independent and isolated event, but unfolds within a broad field of unique natural, social, and political conditions. 
41
For Sun Tzu, the greatest victory is gained through the use of nonmilitary methods, which is described by Sun Tzu as "winning easily and unexceptionally." Achieving an easy and unexceptional victory during the initial phase of a conflict requires one to conceal one's form (hsing), or become formless. Yuen finds that "one of the most important tasks for those engaged in the battlefield involves evaluating the enemy's hsing, while concealing one's own or making it unfathomable." 
42
An analysis of Russian nonlinear warfare in Ukraine reveals their subversive targeting of the Ukrainian population through cyber and information operations to gain a geopolitical victory against the West. However, before taking a deeper look at examples of nonlinear warfare within the Russo-Ukrainian War, a working definition of nonlinear warfare is required. Tad Schnaufer defines nonlinear warfare as "the application of collective subversive measures on a state(s) by another actor, targeting its government, population, and vital social functions, in order to fulfill a grand strategy" without a declaration of war. 
43
In a speech to the Russian legislature in 2005, Vladimir Putin characterized the fall of the Soviet Union as a "major geopolitical disaster" and has since sought to reclaim Russia's geopolitical influence. 
44
Ukraine crisis provided Russia with a golden opportunity to insert itself into the fray. The annexation of Crimea, along with provoking ethnic grievances in Eastern Ukraine, served to promote Russia's grand strategic goals: to return to prominence on the geopolitical stage and to diminish the West's political and ideological influence within Russia's traditional spheres of influence. However, to achieve its strategic goals, Russia believes it must turn to nonlinear warfare to avoid the conventional military strength of the United States and NATO. To accomplish this, Russia chooses to remain "formless" and hide its true intentions from the West, using subversive measures to realize its geopolitical objectives.
At the heart of Russia's subversive measures displayed through nonlinear warfare is their practiced use of Maskirovka, active measure, and reflexive control to spread disinformation and disrupt the decision-making of its adversaries. In Ukraine, Russia employed its full collection of subversive measures primarily through the information and cyber domains. Timothy Thomas finds that the rise of information technology has "flattened" the levels of war as new technologies have "reduced the distance" between adversaries. 
45
Since the 2014 Russo-Ukrainian War, volumes of scholarly journals have been published
as defense and national security experts examine the conflict searching for indicators on the future of Russian warfare. Seeing the conflict through the lens of Sun Tzu provides a distinctive tool for analysis and making inferences on some characteristics of Russian warfare. To avoid the military strength of the West, it is evident Russia favors the application of nonlinear warfare over conventional warfare. In addition, using lessons learned from observing a multitude of color revolutions on its periphery, Russia seizes opportunities to prey upon conditions of social and political chaos to sow additional disharmony.
From his studies of Sun Tzu, Mao Zedong applied many concepts from The Art of War when developing his strategies directing the Chinese Revolution. In On Protracted Warfare, Mao Zedong advised "In order to attain victory we must as far as possible make the enemy blind and deaf by sealing his eyes and ears and drive his commanders to distraction by creating confusion in their minds." 46 Similar to the ancient teachings of Sun Tzu or Mao's strategy of revolutionary warfare, Russian warfare in the 21st century has a penchant for attacking the mind of its enemy to sow disharmony as a means to further its strategic goals and intentions. Three larger implications emerge from the record of recent Russian behavior.
1. Russian Nonlinear Warfare: Political Warfare Redux?
In 1948, George Kennan called upon the US national security establishment to institute measures to counter Russian overt and covert political warfare. Now declassified, Kennan's political warfare memo defined political warfare as the "employment of all of the means at a nation's command, short of war, to achieve its national objectives." 
47
48
The complexity of warfare during the 21 st century has intensified as the line between war and peace erodes with the proliferation of information and cyber technologies. Michael Kofman writes, "Russia has turned information into an instrument of national power and is using it to create space for itself and its interests in the international environment and global public opinion." 
49
50
In recent years, Russian military leaders and analysts have spent much time and energy examining the color revolutions. From Gerasimov to Kartapolov, Russian strategic thinkers have consistently acknowledged these events within their academic writings. One lesson drawn from these examinations resulted in Gerasimov's proclamation of a four to one ratio of nonmilitary to military measures observed in modern conflicts. Instruments of national poweralso associated with political warfareare used more often than traditional military ways and means to achieve strategic goals. In his examination of the Gerasimov Doctrine, Russia analyst Charles Bartles finds that "while the West considers these nonmilitary measures as ways of avoiding war, Russia considers these measures as war." 
51
Engaging in conflicts through the employment of nonmilitary methods provides Russia with the opportunity of winning the easy and unexceptional strategic victory. Moreover, engaging in nonlinear warfare allows Russia to promote its strategic goals with minimal resources by avoiding the expenditure of blood and treasure associated with conventional warfare. In addition, Russia's ways and means to an unexceptional victory are enhanced through the cyber and information domains. These domains provide Russia with an uninterrupted pathway to stream disinformation and propaganda into targeted states. When provided an opportunityas seen in Ukraine in 2014 -Russia will exploit social and political chaos to destabilize its adversaries.   Century, Ajit Mann finds that the United States "must meet the weaponized narratives of our adversaries, not just with a better weaponized narrative, but with a comprehensive narrative strategy." 
58
The conflict in Eastern Ukraine continues to rage with no evidence of cessation since the Minsk II peace agreement signed in 2015. Ukraine finds its goal of joining the European Union thwarted as Russia enjoys a geopolitical victory of driving a wedge between Kiev and Brussels.
Moreover, Russian disinformation campaigns continue to attack Western democraciesfrom the United States to Germanyseeking fractures within targeted populations to plant the seeds of discord and chaos. Russia's manipulation of social mediausing internet trolls to spread disinformation and fuel hyper-partisan political environmentsseeks to disrupt democratic institutions and political systems.
Russian tools of the trade -Maskirovka, active measures, and reflexive controlcontinue to factor into Russia's manipulation of the cyber and information environments to promote its strategic interests. To avoid the military strength of the West, it is evident Russia favors the application of nonlinear warfare over conventional warfare. Sun Tzu and classical
Chinese military thought provides a useful theoretical lens through which to analyze and understand recent events and their implications for future Russian conflict. Western policymakers are wise to use this tool to assist in establishing a sound policy to deter and defeat Russian nonlinear warfare and its growing threat to democratic values and institutions.
The 2018 National Defense Authorization Act acknowledges the Russian threat posed to the United States and Western democracies. As it states, "Russia's ongoing malign influence activities-misinformation, disinformation, propaganda, cyber-attacks, election interference, active measures, and hybrid warfare operations-pose not only a threat to the security interests of the United States and those of our allies and partners in Europe but also to the integrity of Western democracies and the institutions and alliances they support." 60 Increasing the resilience of the United States against Russia's nonlinear warfare and its attacks on democratic institutions requires a whole-of-government approach that mobilizes all resources across the spectrum of US national power.
31
The Russian military developed reflexive control theory as a means to propagate Maskirovka (deception) dating back to the establishment of the Russian Army's Furthermore, Russia's highly effective manipulation of the cyber and information domains created a haze of disinformation that stunted the West's response time, allowing for the creation of a fait accompli. Nonlinear warfare within the information age offers the Russian government amplified opportunities to shape strategic outcomes through the use of both active measures and reflexive control. Russia's manipulation of the cyber and information domains to promote its political interests was initially demonstrated in the former Soviet republic of Estonia.
The Russian military developed reflexive control theory as a means to propagate Maskirovka (deception) dating back to the establishment of the Russian Army's Furthermore, Russia's highly effective manipulation of the cyber and information domains created a haze of disinformation that stunted the West's response time, allowing for the creation of a fait accompli. Nonlinear warfare within the information age offers the Russian government amplified opportunities to shape strategic outcomes through the use of both active measures and reflexive control. Russia's manipulation of the cyber and information domains to promote its political interests was initially demonstrated in the former Soviet republic of Estonia.
.i~u dat rg Ce nter; :f Resistance "' 1 tt ,he -elJ :i' , 1..rtiller, ard Ar St• ke;, Oel il'erng :i-e:isio•, l'.'eap:n; S~rike;, and "and ng ,:i' i-.s~ Jlt Force;. Cl earing :::, JI tr e Terri:cr1 us•ng ::ir:>ur::t =o•ce; Es:aJli;hng : L' CJntrol •Jl'~r tre State-',i:tirr. 2. Color Revolutions: The West's Contribution to Russian Nonlinear Warfare?
•New" Approach for Achieving Political-Military Coals
The social and political upheaval demonstrated during the 2014 Maiden Revolution provided Russia with a window of opportunity to insert itself into the Ukraine crisis. Exploiting the growing chaos within Ukraine, Russia manipulated social and political fissures. In addition, Russian actions aggravated the disorder within the Ukrainian political and social systems.
Russia's geographic, historic, and cultural connections to Ukraine clearly assisted their operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine. A historic culture of strategic influence, combined with operational and strategic success in Georgia, Estonia, and Ukraine serve as an indicator that Russia will continue to use nonlinear warfare to achieve its political and strategic goals. But for Russia to accomplish this, certain conditions on the ground must be met.
Russia to replicate its success in Ukraine. Most pundits point to the Baltic States as a potential target for Russian intervention since the Baltics share similar characteristic with Ukraine. The challenge for Russia in replicating a similar operation in the Baltics is the ability to mask its intentions. From the perspective of Sun Tzu, Russia gained early success during the Ukrainian conflict as its strategic disposition remained formless to the international community. Since the conflict, the international community has analyzed the conflict and has discovered Russia's true "form" and inclinations for conducting nonlinear warfare.
The 2017 National Security Strategy (NSS) identifies Russia as a rising threat to the values and interests of the United States. In addition, the policy document calls into focus Russia's increasing investments in its conventional weapon systems along with its hostile posturing along the borders of former Soviet bloc countries. Interestingly, the NSS provides little attention to Russia's subversive political activities other than a brief discussion about "Promoting American Resilience," finding only that "actors such as Russia are using information tools in an attempt to undermine the legitimacy of democracies." 
52
53
In his 2014 writing that examined Russia's evolving character of war that was witnessed during the Georgia and Ukraine conflicts, Frank Hoffman recognizes the term "hybrid warfare" as many scholars soon began using the term to label Russia's actions in Ukraine. In addition, Hoffman describes the Russo-Ukrainian War as an "unconventional conflict" that might also resemble certain characteristics associated with the description of political warfare and defined by George Kennan in 1948. 
54
55