# ID: cd12fd8c456d45079608ae0d312a9160
# Title: Engaged in Debate: Major Albert C. Wedemeyer and the 1941 Victory Plan in Historical Memory
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
In the final months leading up to World War II, America's strategic leaders recognized a troubling gap between the nation's industrial capacity and the projected requirements of a fullscale mobilization. Their recognition created momentum for a strategic estimate encompassing not only theaters and military operations, but manpower and industrial production as well. The result was the Victory Program, which officially began in the summer of 1941 with a joint Army and Navy response to President Roosevelt's request for industrial production requirements necessary to defeat America's potential enemies known as the Victory Plan. According to the official history, the strategic genius behind the Victory Plan was not a senior Army officer, but the uniquely qualified Major Albert Wedemeyer. For more than six decades, accounts ranging from Wedemeyer's autobiography, Army official history, and various secondary sources maintained a consensus regarding Wedemeyer's unique and invaluable contribution to American war planning. In recent years, however, intensifying interest in the Victory Program, including the role played by economists, spawned an opposing narrative that diminishes Wedemeyer's role in the creation of the Victory Plan, as well as the enduring Victory Program and Anglo-American grand strategy. The two schools of thought offer little middle ground; they portray Wedemeyer as either a gifted strategic genius or an inconsequential staff officer. The truth lies somewhere in the middle, with Wedemeyer serving in a key position at a critical point in the nation's history, but not quite the savior some have made him out to be.
In the final months leading up to World War II, America's strategic leaders recognized a troubling gap between the nation's industrial capacity and the projected requirements of a full-scale mobilization. Their recognition created momentum for a strategic estimate encompassing not only theaters and military operations, but manpower and industrial production as well. The result was the Victory Program, which officially began in the summer of 1941 with a joint Army and Navy response to President Roosevelt's request for industrial production requirements necessary to defeat America's potential enemies known as the Victory Plan. According to the official history, the strategic genius behind the Victory Plan was not a senior Army officer, but the uniquely qualified Major Albert Wedemeyer. For more than six decades, accounts ranging from Wedemeyer's autobiography, Army official history, and various secondary sources maintained a consensus regarding Wedemeyer's unique and invaluable contribution to American war planning. In recent years, however, intensifying interest in the Victory Program, including the role played by economists, spawned an opposing narrative that diminishes Wedemeyer's role in the creation of the Victory Plan, as well as the enduring Victory Program and Anglo-American grand strategy. The two schools of thought offer little middle ground; they portray Wedemeyer as either a gifted strategic genius or an inconsequential staff officer. The truth lies somewhere in the middle, with Wedemeyer serving in a key position at a critical point in the nation's history, but not quite the savior some have made him out to be. 
In the period leading up to America's involvement in World War II, the nation's strategic leaders identified a troubling gap between the nation's industrial capacity and the projected requirements of a full-scale mobilization. This created institutional momentum for a new strategic estimate encompassing theaters, operations, military units, manpower, and industrial production. 
1
Roosevelt's query regarding industrial production requirements necessary to defeat America's potential enemies in the event of war. In keeping with the American tradition of broad strategic guidance, the President only vaguely referenced potential enemies when he described the nation as an arsenal of democracy. 2 Paired with the seeming inevitability of direct participation in the war, despite the lack of public support for such a policy, this vagueness frustrated the efforts of military planners caught between national sentiment and US foreign policy on one hand, and the terrifying reality of Axis aggression on the other. Due to the timing and scope of the 1941 Victory Plan, it superficially appears that this seminal document underpinned US strategy in World War II. However, the Victory Plan is more aptly characterized as an initial step in the gradual 1 Mark Skinner Watson, The War Department -Chief of Staff: Prewar Plans and Preparations, United States Army in World War II (1950; repr., Washington, DC: Center of Military History, 2003) 338; Ray S. Cline, The War Department -Washington Command Post: The Operations Division, United States Army in World War II (1951; repr., Washington, DC: Center of Military History, 1990), 61, 355.
2 David M. Kennedy, Freedom From Fear: The American People in Depression and War, 1929-1945, Oxford History of the United States (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 468-469, 631; John Keegan, Six Armies in Normandy: From D-Day to the Liberation of Paris (New York: Penguin Books,  1994), 28. On December 29, 1940, in one of his iconic fireside chats, Roosevelt announced his arsenal of democracy policy, which committed the US to a policy of all aid short of war, and allocated American industrial might to the defense of the Western European democracy against fascist aggression. Roosevelt's arsenal policy also served as the harbinger of his concept for leveraging the strength of US industrial capacity to fight of a war of machines as evidenced in his January 6, 1942 announcement of his 'musts'  program.  theater. This estimate foreshadowed ground offensive operations by a massive mechanized army, and the ultimate elimination of totalitarianism from Europe. It was the first official US military correspondence to contemplate the challenges of defeating the vaunted German army in landbased battle on the European continent. 5 Although Wedemeyer's strategic estimate eventually proved to have substantial flaws, his work on the Victory Plan represented the opening salvo in an essential civil-military dialogue. 
6
Economists Won World War II that the Victory Program emerged and matured without Wedemeyer, that his role was inconsequential, and that the strategic impact of the program was 
5 Kirkpatrick,
63,
[86]
[87]
[88]
McLaughlin,
38;
insignificant. This study arbitrates between the two predominant narratives to present an objective record of Wedemeyer's role. 
7
The Victory Program emerged from the American strategic context during the period between the German invasion of Poland in 1939, and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, an event that forced American leadership to enter a war the nation had hoped to avoid. 
8
Significantly, Wedemeyer expounded on the Joint Board's strategic concept and succinctly stated the military establishment's preferred strategy for World War II, and therein lies its value.
Wedemeyer's manpower estimate, on the other hand, was truly original work. As the nearest point of consilience among the authors, this section will analyze Wedemeyer's manpower estimate, including the method he used to arrive at his final recommendation. This section will consider the estimate's accuracy, relevance to overall strategy, and impact on subsequent war planning. As the various authors agree, the manpower estimate was Wedemeyer's responsibility; therefore, his estimate can provide the clearest indicator of his significance with respect to Allied strategy and war planning. Furthermore, the impact of his manpower estimate on US war planning indicates how assimilation of Wedemeyer's conclusions shaped the views of US Army planners, thereby indicating the significance of his strategic influence. 
9
Kirkpatrick,
2,
[63]
[64]
Watson,
337,
Lacey,
Keep From All Thoughtful Men,
14. 10 Carew,
210,
236;
Kirkpatrick,
1;
Lacey,
9.
15
16
20
19
Wedemeyer,
13,
[17]
[18]
[19]
Kirkpatrick,
[6]
[7]
14;
Wedemeyer,
46. 20
21
22 Wedemeyer,
[48]
[49]
Kirkpatrick,
8;
McLaughlin,
General Albert C. Wedemeyer,
[19]
[20]
[21]
Eiler,
Wedemeyer on
In 1936, Wedemeyer graduated first in his class from the US Army Command and General Staff School (CGSS) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. The two-year program of instruction focused on mastery of tactics and logistics at the division level and below, while providing an overview of corps and army level operations. However, CGSS only provided a theoretical foundation in mechanized warfare. In his own assessment, Wedemeyer described the CGSS curriculum as overly theoretical and lacking in practical application of learned concepts and procedures, and the instructors as only marginally qualified for the task. 
23
23 Eiler, Wedemeyer on War and Peace, 1;
McLaughlin, General Albert C. Wedemeyer, 21;
Wedemeyer, 48, 50;
Nenninger, "Leavenworth and its Critics," 209, 221;
Timothy K. Nenninger, "Creating Officers," Military Review 69, no. 11 (November 1989): 59, 63;
Schifferle, 71-71, 117-18;
Calhoun, 179-80.
24
Wedemeyer's purpose at the Kriegsakademie was not, however, entirely benevolent. The War Department's curiosity to know more about their potential German enemies and the Nazi Party inferred upon Wedemeyer a responsibility to collect intelligence about his hosts. His Kriegsakademie instruction introduced him to German concepts of mechanized warfare, air power, combined arms operations, and logistics. He participated in field exercises, including the 1938 annual maneuvers in which he commanded a German antitank company, which afforded him witness first-hand German maneuver doctrine and the mobility of the German army.  
Wedemeyer, 49;
Kirkpatrick, 10-11;
McLaughlin, 2;
German General Staff School, 1938, 1. 27
Nearly eighty percent of Americans opposed US intervention in international conflict until after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. Emboldened by America's secure geographic position and encouraged by an historical aversion to large, standing armies and pernicious alliances, many American politicians trumpeted non-interventionism and opposed defense spending throughout the Interwar Period despite growing threats in both the Pacific and Europe. 
28
29
29 Miller, 10;
Grotelueschen, 10-11;
Forrest C. Pogue, George C. Marshall: Ordeal and Hope, 1939
-1942
(New York: Penguin Books, 1993)
30 Ross, American War Plans: 1890
-1939, 183;
Miller, 9-10.
From 1919 to 1938, the JPC assumed the mantel of US war planning and initially assumed the responsibility of revising existing Color Plans, which drew their name from the color designator assigned to the enemy nation that the plan focused on; for example, Japan was Orange and Great Britain was Red. Without adequate policy guidance, these plans remained largely theoretical, and, therefore, had limited value during actual contingencies. Regardless of their practical usefulness, the Color Plans of the 1920s and 30s provided critical staff exercise for the fledgling JPC, and served as an intellectual training ground for the officers who attended the AWC during the Interwar Period and combined the various colors into oftentimes outrageous, but occasionally realistic contingency scenarios in the mid to late-1930s. 
31
32 Morton,
14;
Grotelueschen,
12
The fact that US military planners opted for economic warfare when considering their most likely contingency speaks to their recognition of the social and political constraints under which they operated. From these, institutional constraints emerged in the form of declining military strength relative to global threats. As late as 1938, the US Army boasted only 184,000 total troops, and US Navy tonnage had decreased over the previous two decades from the already inadequate World War I capacity. To mitigate this significant vulnerability, the joint planners periodically recommended updates to the Personnel Mobilization Plan (PMP) and the Industrial Mobilization Plan (IMP) to inform mobilization and gain strategic flexibility in the event of a major war.
33
The Munich crisis of 1938 caused the JPC to consider the possibility of a two-ocean war.
From this came the decision to replace the Color Plans with the Rainbow Plans, so named for the combination of legacy colors in international coalitions. The Rainbow Plans emphasized the  of 1935, 1936, and 1937, to produce institutional constraints within the American military.
and Admiral Harold K. Stark, the two top-ranking US military officers, who also recommended reframing national policy to place the country on a war footing. 
35
A defense of the Western Hemisphere, from anywhere in the north to just south of the eastern bulge of Brazil (10 degrees south latitude). No forces would be projected outside of the Western Hemisphere.
Carry out Rainbow One. The United States, Great Britain, and France are allied. The United States does not provide the maximum participation in Europe but takes as its major responsibility the defense of all three nations' interests in the Pacific
Carry out Rainbow One and protect US interests in the Western Pacific.
Protect the Western Hemisphere, including all of South America.
Carry out Rainbow One. 
With Plan Dog and Germany-first as a guiding strategic framework, US planners secretly hosted their British counterparts in the first American -British Staff Conversation (ABC-1) in Washington, DC from January 29 to March 27, 1941. In a consolidated report issued at the conclusion of the conference, the joint US-British planning team stated the broad strategic principles of the Allied effort: the defeat of Germany was the major objective, the Atlantic, including Europe, was the decisive theater, and a strategic defense characterized by economy of force operations would mitigate potential war in the Pacific. Critically, the ABC-1 report called for the inevitable Allied invasion of the European continent, and from this point forward 
36 Morton,
30;
Calhoun,
197;
Kennedy,
458,
460,
38
39
40
Rainbow Five represented the culmination of nearly two decades of American war planning. Focus on the Atlantic and the threat posed by Nazi Germany-despite impending Japanese aggression-demonstrated American assumptions about the inevitability of a two-ocean war. During the mid-to late-1930s, while WPD and JPC planners were occupied with ABC-1 and Rainbow Five, the AWC student exercised creative hypothetical conflicts that resembled the two-39 Ross, U. S. War Plans: 1938-1945, 67; Grotelueschen, 16-18; Morton, 43-44; Weigley, 314. Experience with the hypothetical Red-Orange (UK-Japan) scenario convinced American planners of the wisdom of addressing a trans-Atlantic threat, such as Germany, before turning attention to the Pacific, thus Germany-first. After the conclusion of the ABC-1 conference in March 1941, all war planning conducted by the United States and the United Kingdom was coordinated among the various Allies. 
40
Interestingly, nine officers from the 1936 AWC class went on to serve in WPD between 1936 and 1944. Surely, these officers brought their experience from AWC exercises into concrete war planning. In 1940, AWC's hypothetical exercises gained an element of realism, as students worked on what became known as Rainbow X. This hypothetical plan assumed German domination of the European continent, emphasized the importance of air superiority, and required the opening of additional theaters to siphon German military might away from the main effort, all of which became characteristics of Rainbow Five in execution. 
41
42
The American experience in World War I proffered several important lessons about the nature of modern war, not least of which involved the essential importance of planning for a transition from the normal pattern of life to "the full effectiveness of the military machine." 43 41 Gole, 48-55, 61, 65-66, 107, 115 Bernard Baruch was the head of the War Industries Board and the architect of the American economic mobilization for World War I. In March 1921, he recommended to President Harding several institutional changes to expedite economic mobilization and achieve maximum productive output in the event of a future war. While the President rejected Baruch's proposals, the 1920 National Defense Act did include a Congressional mandate for peacetime mobilization planning. This responsibility divested to the Planning Branch of the War Department, where it remained until the Reorganization Act of April 1939. 
44
As the Army sought to avoid the mistakes of World War I, it settled on a three-pronged approach that centered on the IMP. The Army Industrial College (AIC), established in 1924 at the urging of Baruch, would train military officers in "the art of setting the whole nation in battle array." 
45
46
44
47
48
49
As the American strategy coalesced into Rainbow Five, cognizance of the imbalance between ends and means spurred an estimate of industrial production and manpower requirements. As early as February 18, 1941, William S. Knudsen, the advisor for industrial production on the National Defense Advisory Commission (NDAC), recognized the need for a unified program to place American industrial production on a path towards meeting domestic and international military materiel demands. The Office of Production Management (OPM) echoed Knudsen's urgings with frequent calls for consolidated production objectives under the umbrella of a general strategic plan. In early April, OPM issued an anonymous memorandum emphasizing the unprecedented industrial demands being placed on the US economy, citing operational needs for a two million-man army, a two-ocean navy, and the Lend Lease Act. On April 18, Under  for the expansion of industrial production. In effect, Marshall's guidance represented an early effort to match industrial capacity with the approved military strategy. 
52
52 Watson,
333,
Smith,
135;
Pogue,
140.
Therefore, Nelson and May recognized the prudence of collaboration with their potential allies.
Beginning in June 1941, May met with his colleagues in London to compile the total industrial and raw material potentials of both the United States and Great Britain. The two countries, along with Canada, produced a statement of combined industrial potential based on available material resources, later known as the Anglo-American Consolidated Statement. May's report exposed American policymakers and industrialists to the challenge of simultaneously expanding the production of both raw materials and manufactured goods, an endeavor that would forever revolutionize the American economy. However, May's seminal report was not delivered until December 4, 1941, almost three months after the military presented the Victory Plan. 
53
With respect to the initial service-specific estimates from the Army Ground Forces (AGF), the Army Air Forces (AAF), the Maritime Commission, and the Navy, the Victory Program was 
53
54
55
56
57
61
Watson and Kirkpatrick. 62
63
61 Ross, U.S. War Plans: 1938
-1945, 67, 70;
Wedemeyer, 63;
Kirkpatrick, 61, 63, 86-
65
66
64
65
66
67
68
67 Wedemeyer,
63;
Kirkpatrick,
61;
Leighton and Coakley,
129;
Gole,
131
68
69
70
71
70
71
72
73
73
in homage to his Kriegsakademie experience, he opted for a heavy reliance on smaller armored divisions with increased firepower. He envisioned a mechanized force organized around interchangeable standard units, replete with critical enablers including antitank, antiaircraft, and mobile logistics capabilities. Never forgetting his foes, Wedemeyer's task forces mimicked the Germans' best qualities, while retaining the distinctly American tradition of concentrating power early for a decisive blow against the heart of the enemy. Despite Wedemeyer's unique German insight, the trend toward mechanization and combined arms teams of air and armor was already well established in the US Army by 1941. 
74
74 Kirkpatrick,
81,
86,
[88]
[89]
Watson,
345;
Eiler,
Wedemeyer on War and Peace,
6,
8. Wedemeyer'
75
76
75 Heinrichs,
105;
Watson,
342;
Weigley,
316;
Wedemeyer,
[9]
[10]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
66,
107;
Calhoun,
76 Watson, 343;
Kirkpatrick, 78;
Edelstein, 51;
Dana G. Mead, "United States Peacetime Strategic Planning, 1920
-1941:
77
78
79
80
77 Kirkpatrick,
[78]
[79]
Mead,
307;
Edelstein,
55
78
79
80
81
82
81 Fairchild and Grossman,
46;
Kirkpatrick,
78;
Leighton and Coakley,
[131]
[132]
World War II, the Army had notably fielded only sixteen armored divisions and no mechanized divisions, far fewer than Wedemeyer's prediction. 
83
However, the short list of similarities between Wedemeyer's estimate and the actual fielded forces ends there. The US Army never fielded the number and type of divisions Wedemeyer foresaw; ultimately topping out at only ninety-eight-mostly infantry-divisions. The qualitative weight of the differences between Wedemeyer's estimate and the actual fielded forces implies that Wedemeyer's prescient estimation was more coincidence than foresight. 
84
83 Kirkpatrick,
[95]
[96]
98;
Mead,
318;
Keegan,
32;
Schifferle,
[54]
[55]
Calhoun,
234;
Gropman,
42.
85
86
85 Calhoun,
261,
319;
Watson,
344;
Kennedy,
631;
Edelstein,
83. 86 Kirkpatrick,
101;
Smith,
137;
Watson,
Leighton and Coakley,
132.
Production Board (WPB) subsumed the Victory Program. 
92
93
94
95 Cline, 194;
McLaughlin, General Albert C. Wedemeyer, 10, 126-27, 201-3;
Wedemeyer, 249, 290;
Eiler, "An Uncommon Soldier;
" Resume of Service Career of Albert Coady Wedemeyer, General, February 11, 1972
, National Personnel Records Center (NPRC), St. Louis, MO, RG 319, Folder 2, Service Documents (July 1944
-February 1972)
The 1941 Victory Plan served two purposes: first, as a strategic concept of operations it was a statement of the US military's broad concept for winning World War II, and second, as a manpower estimate it initiated iterative discourse about the feasibility of simultaneously growing the US Army and mobilizing American industry. Wedemeyer's strategic estimate paved the way for successive iterations of strategy including Operations Bolero and Overlord. However, the singular impact of Wedemeyer's contribution to the American strategy for winning World War II is overstated. His strategic estimate was neither revolutionary, nor qualitatively peerless.
Although a first of its kind study, and widely accepted throughout the military, Wedemeyer's operational approach was arguably nothing more than an extension of the existing strategic context, the foundational principles of which originated in Plan Dog and were codified in Rainbow Five. Significantly, American strategic leaders from the President, to the Chief of Staff of the Army, to the Chief of WPD, explicitly directed that Rainbow Five be used as the foundational strategy for the Victory Program. 
97
Wedemeyer certainly benefited from the institutional knowledge cultivated by the Army during the Interwar Period. The IMPs of the 1930s, the AIC, and especially AWC with its creative, and, sometimes, realistic, planning scenarios served the Army well in laying a foundation for an incumbent military strategy and industrial mobilization planning before the outbreak of war. Furthermore, Wedemeyer's bold approach to framing the problem and developing a strategic approach was more likely an artifact of American interwar military institutional knowledge, well known to Brigadier General Gerow and many of the WPD planners.
It seems clear that the primary purpose of the Victory Program, as President Roosevelt, intended, was to bring military, industrial, and economic experts together to critically analyze the feasibility of executing Rainbow Five in the context of his arsenal of democracy policy. The pressure of achieving the President's audacious goals generated palpable institutional momentum throughout military and industrial circles during the winter and spring of 1941. The various memorandums circulating the halls of the Office of the Secretary of War, the War Department, and OPM codified the experts' apprehension about all-out industrial mobilization, and embodied an institutional sense of urgency. In this respect, the Victory Plan was simply a "base of departure" or "benchmark" for continuing military-industrial dialogue, and, in this light, Wedemeyer's manpower estimate was a necessary first step. 
98
98
Through their historical narrative of the Victory Program, Watson and Kirkpatrick canonized Wedemeyer. Veritable cult followings emerged among students of military history, which elevated Wedemeyer and his manpower estimate as icons of professional staff work.
Perhaps a more thorough study of the man and his plan is in order, before bestowing such adulation upon him.  
99
99
3. It is therefore important that we create the productive capacity to provide equipment for the following: a. Appropriate forces distributed for the defense of the United States, outlying possessions, and bases selected to facilitate the defense of the country and the Western Hemisphere.
b. Task Forces which can effectively conduct military operations, primarily in the European Theater, as well as in the Western Hemisphere and in other strategically important areas.
c. The military forces of associates and friendly powers committed to the policy of opposing Nazi aggression. Quantities to be limited only by or own strategic requirements and the ability of the friendly powers to use the equipment effectively.
4. A sound approach to the problem of determining appropriate military means requires careful consideration of WHERE, HOW, and WHEN, they will be employed to defeat our potential enemies and to assist our associates. a. WHERE. Accepting the premise, that we must come to grips with the enemy ground forces, our principal theater of war is Central Europe. Possible subsidiary theaters include Africa, the Near East, the Iberian Peninsula, the Scandinavian Peninsula, and the Far East; however, the operations in those theaters must be so conducted as to facilitate the decisive employment of Allied forces in Central Europe. b. HOW. The combined and carefully coordinated operations of our military forces, in collaboration with associated powers, must accomplish the following:
(1) The surface and subsurface vessels of the Axis and associated powers must be swept from the seas, particularly in the Atlantic and war areas contiguous to Europe. vast resources of Russia? It is believed that Germy will occupy Russian territory west of the general line; White Sea, Moscow, Volga River, (all inclusive) by July 1, 1942, and that militarily, Russia will be substantially impotent subsequent to that date. Thereafter, Germany will "Coventry" all industrial areas, lines of communications, and sources of raw materials east of the line indicated, unless a drastic Nazi treaty is accepted by Russia. Germany will probably require a full year to bring order out of chaos in the conquered areas, so that it will be July 1, 1943, before she will largely profit economically by her "drive to the east." The maintenance of huge armies of occupation has become unnecessary. By totally disarming the conquered people, maintain splendidly organized intelligence, and communications nets, and employing strategically located, highly mobile forces (parachute, air-borne, mechanized, and motorized), Germany may control the occupied areas with relatively small forces, thus releasing the bulk of the military for other tasks. Obviously, our war effort time-table, covering the production of munitions, the creation of trained military forces, and the increase of transportation facilities (air, ground, and sea), is strongly influenced by events transpiring in the Russian theater.
(3) We are confronted by two possibilities; first, a rapidly accelerated allout effort with a view to conducting decisive, offensive operations against the enemy before he can liquidate or recoup from his struggle with Russia; second, a long drawn-out war of attrition.
Under our present production schedule, we will soon have adequate military means to defend our outlying possessions and bases and to provide for the security of the Western Hemisphere, but we will not be able to provide sufficient appropriate forces for timely offensive action in the principal theater of operations. The urgency for positive action exists, particularly while the enemy is contained militarily in Russia. It would strongly contribute to the early and decisive defeat of the Axis Powers, if the Allied forces could seize and firmly establish military bases from which immediate air and subsequent ground and air operations might be undertaken.
(4) The United States is approaching its task in a logical manner, but the production of materiel must be greatly accelerated to permit its accomplishment. At present, the bulk of our production has to be devoted to the support of Great Britain and associates, rendering it impracticable for us to undertake offensive commitments. But time is of the essence and the longer we delay effective offensive operations against the Axis, the more difficult will become the attainment of victory. It is mandatory that we reach an early appreciation of our stupendous task, and gain the whole-hearted support of the entire country in the production of trained men, ships, munitions, and ample reserves. Otherwise, we will be confronted in the not distant future by a Germany strongly entrenched economically, supported by newly acquired sources of vital supplies and industries, with her military forces operating on interior lines, and in a position of hegemony in Europe which will be comparatively east to defend and maintain.
(5) The time by which production can reach the levels defined by our national objectives is highly speculative. July 1, 1943, has been establish as the earliest date on which the equipment necessary to initiate and sustain our projected operations can be provided.
The ability of industry to meet the requirement is contingent upon many intangibles; however, the program can be definitely accomplished, in fact, greatly exceeded, if the industrial potential of the country is fully exploited. The urgency of speed and the desirability of employing our present great economic and industrial advantage over our potential enemies cannot be overemphasized.
a. The future alignment of powers and their respective combat capacities cannot be accurately predicted. In order to arrive at a plausible basis from which to determine our future requirements, the following assumptions pertaining to the world situation as of July 1, 1943, are made:
(1) Russia is substantially impotent militarily in Europe. Resistance in Siberia, to include the maritime provinces, probably continuing.
(2) The Axis military strength is materially weakened through economic blockade; by losses in the Russian campaign; by British air and sea operations; by the inability to exploit quickly the extensively sabotaged Russian industries and raw materials; by lowered morale of the people.
(3) The military forces of Japan are fully involved with or contained by campaigns against a somewhat strengthened China, by the Russian forces in the Fare East maritime provinces, or by the threat of United States -British military and economic reprisals.
(4) Great Britain and associates have increased their fighting forces by creating and equipping additional combat units.
(5) The French will probably continue their passive collaboration with Germany.
(6) Control of the Mediterranean Theater, including North Africa and the Near East, remains disputed.
(7) The United States is an active belligerent and is collaborating in an all-out effort to defeat Germany. b. If these assumptions are correct, or even reasonably sound, on July 1, 1943, there will be no military bases remaining in Allied hands, other than the United Kingdom, possibly the northern coast of Africa and the Near East. The establishment of additional bases, for example, in the Iberian Peninsula, the Scandinavian Peninsula, and Northwest Africa will be bitterly contested by the Axis. However, to bring about the ultimate defeat of German, those bases and others even more difficult to establish, must be available to the Allies, Obviously, carefully planned action, involving appropriate sea, air, and ground units must be undertaken.
Allied success is directly contingent upon the coordinated employment of overwhelming forces, surprise, and mobility, supported by sufficient reserves in materiel and man-power to insure a succession of effective impulses throughout the operations. c. Latest information pertaining to the potential industrial capacities and military strengths of the opposing powers (excluding the US), as of July 1, 1943, indicates that the Axis Powers will have about 400 divisions available in the European-Near East Theater and the Allied Powers approximately 100 divisions. To accomplish the numerical superiority, about two to one, usually considered necessary before undertaking offensive operations, the Allies would have to raise about 700 divisions. A force of 700 divisions with appropriate supporting and service troops would approximate 22 million men. If Great Britain and the United States should induct so many men for military service, added to the tremendous numbers already under arms, the economic and industrial effort, necessary to conduct the war, should be definitely imperiled. d. It is believed that the enemy can be defeated without creating the numerical superiority indicated. Effective employment of modern air and ground fighting machines and a tight economic blockade may create conditions that will make the realization of the Allied war aims perfectly feasible with numerically less fighting men. Another million men in Flanders would not have turned the tide of battle for France. If the French army had had sufficient tanks and planes, and quantities of antitank and antiaircraft materiel, France might have remained a dominant power in Europe. In June, 1941, when the Germans launched their invasion of Russia, they knew that their adversary was numerically superior and could maintain that superiority in spite of tremendous losses. The probably also knew that Stalin was creating a military force of great power, consisting primarily of effective modern fighting machines, and that if they delayed their "drive to the east" another year, Russia would possess armadas of air and ground machines which would not only render an offensive campaign impossible, but would make large demands upon the German military to secure her eastern frontier. The Crete campaign also presents illuminating evidence in favor of modern fighting means when opposed by superior numbers that re equipped with inappropriate means and are operating under World War I static tactical concepts. Approximately 17,000 Germans attacked and conquered the island which was defended by about 30,000 British. e. Our broad concept, of encircling and advancing step-by-step, with a view to closing-in on Germany, will remain sound regardless of future developments in the European situation, for it envisages the only practical way in which military and economic pressure may be brought to bear effectively against Germany. The loss of potential bases of operation, presently available, would render the accomplishment of our strategic plans extremely difficult and costly.
It is important, therefore, that the Allies take effective measure to hold the United Kingdom, the Middle East, and North African areas. Also the islands off the northwestern coast of Africa should be denied to the enemy. Before undertaking operations in connection with the establishment of additional military bases, for example, in the Scandinavian Peninsula, the Iberian Peninsula, Africa, and the Low Countries, a careful survey of the areas of projected operations and a thorough examination of the enemy capabilities are mandatory. The unfortunate Norway campaign of 1940 is a glaring example of a total lack of appreciation of such realities on the part of those responsible for the British expedition. The Germans employed approximately 175,000 men, strongly supported by the Air Force, to conquer and secure their lodgment in Norway. Special Task Forces, including two mountain division and numerous parachute units made effective contributions to the success of the operation. Having gained a foothold, the Germans quickly established themselves in order to hold their bases and to facilitate exploitation.
The British Forces dispatched against Norway totaled about 24,000 men, with no mountain troops and with inadequate air supporting units. The failure of the British Expedition is directly attributed to insufficient and inappropriate means. If and when the situation indicates the feasibility of an Allied expedition against Norway for example, powerful and appropriate means, especially trained and equipped for the task, must be provided. Large and effective reserves must be readily available to preclude dislodgment of the initial forces and to facilitate subsequent exploitation. A careful study of Norway, including the terrain and communications net, and a survey of possible enemy capabilities, indicates the necessity for mountain, infantry foot, and motorized divisions, numerous parachute, tank, antitank, antiaircraft, and airborne units. The force required for the entire operation may total several hundred thousand men. The execution of the plan would be predicated on sea and local air superiority. The size of this force may appear large. However, even though our enemy may not be strong initially in the area of projected operations, the mobility of modern fighting means will enable him to concentrate destructive forces against us with unprecedented speed and surprise effect. The foregoing considerations apply with equal emphasis to pro-posed forces for other theaters of operations. Careful studies, concerning the Scandinavian Peninsula, the Iberian Peninsula, the Near East and Africa, have been made by the War Plans Division of the General Staff, and these studies made important contributions in the determination of the estimated Ground Forces (See Tab A). The enemy capabilities in those theaters in 1943 would obviously be conjecture. Task Forces consisting principally of armored and motorized divisions, must be created for possible operations in North Africa, the Middle East, France and the Low Countries. The exact strength and composition of the Task Forces, necessary to seize and maintain military bases, will be determined immediately prior to the operation. We can avoid the unfortunate disasters experienced by our potential allies in Norway, France, the Balkans and in Crete by planning now and creating quickly the production capacity necessary to equip the ground forces recommended (Tab A). We must not suffer ignominious defeat and be expelled from the bases that we elect to establish. If the premises and assumptions made earlier in this study are appropriate and sound, additional strategically located bases are vital to the splendidly conceived plans of the Air Force and finally may serve as areas of departure for the combined operations of air and ground forces. The seizure, retention, and effective utilization of these bases is predicated on the successful operations of adequate sea, air and ground forces.
5. Shipping was a bottleneck in the last war and again increased demands will be placed on all transportation facilities, particularly water, by constant troop movements and the expanded war industrial and economic effort. In order to transport and maintain effective forces in European areas, several million tons of shipping and adequate port facilities must be made available essentially for military service. To transport five million men with their modern air and mechanized equipment to European ports over a period of approximately one year would require about seven million tons of shipping or 1,000 ships. To maintain such a force in the theater of operations would require about ten million tons of shipping or 1,500 ships. But it is highly improbable that the situation in Europe will develop in such a manner as to permit or to require operations involving the movement of so large a force across the Atlantic within the limited time of one year, even if the ship tonnage were available. The progressive building-up of large military forces in the theater will probably extend over a period of at least two years. This progressive movement would greatly reduce the demands upon maritime shipping for essentially military purposes and further would extend the period of time for the augmentation of maritime shipping now available. The realization of our present national policies may require operations in distant theaters by military forces of unprecedented strength. It would be folly to create strong fighting forces without providing the transportation to move and maintain them in the contemplated theaters of operations. The maximum possible shipbuilding capacity of our country, coordinated of course with other essential demands upon industry and raw materials, must be exploited and continued in operation for the next several years. 6. The foregoing considerations clearly indicate the importance of creating a productive capacity in this country, that will provide the most modern equipment designed to give mobility and destructive power to our striking forces. The forces that we now estimate as necessary to realize our national objectives and for which production capacity must be provided, may not be adequate or appropriate. No one can predict the situation that will confront the United States in July, 1943. We may require much larger forces than those indicated below, and correspondingly greater increased quantities of equipment. Emphasis has been placed on destructive power and mobility, with a view to offensive maneuvers in our principal theater of operations (Europe). The forces deemed necessary to accomplish the role of ground units in the supreme effort to defeat our potential enemies, total 5 Field Armies consisting of approximately 215 divisions (infantry, armored, motorized, airborne, mountain and cavalry) with appropriate supporting and service elements. The strategic concept outlined in this paper contemplates distribution of U.S. ground forces approximately as follows: (More specific data will be found in Tab A). 
; Russel F. Weigley. The American Way of War: A History of United States Military
; Russel F. Weigley. The American Way of War: A History of United States Military
The United States, Great Britain, and France are allied. The United States will project forces to the Eastern Atlantic, Africa, and/or Europe to effect the decisive defeat of Germany, or Italy, or both. Figure 2. The Rainbow Plans (as of July 1939). Mark E. Grotelueschen, "Joint Planning for Global Warfare: The Development of the Rainbow Plans in the United States, 1938-1941," Army History PB 20-15-4, no. 97 (Fall 2015): 13.
The United States, Great Britain, and France are allied. The United States will project forces to the Eastern Atlantic, Africa, and/or Europe to effect the decisive defeat of Germany, or Italy, or both. Figure 2. The Rainbow Plans (as of July 1939). Mark E. Grotelueschen, "Joint Planning for Global Warfare: The Development of the Rainbow Plans in the United States, 1938-1941," Army History PB 20-15-4, no. 97 (Fall 2015): 13.
42  
42  
63
Michael G. Carew, Becoming the Arsenal: The American Industrial Mobilization for WorldWar  II, 1938-1942 (Lanham, MD:  University Press of America, 2010), 236;Kirkpatrick, 3.   
Kirkpatrick,[1][2] Watson, 340; Lacey, Keep From All Thoughtful Men, 13, 16, 19,  
While both Kirkpatrick and Watson seem to follow Wedemeyer's own description of his accomplishments, Lacey comes across as both strident in tone and short of evidence given the severity of his claims.8 Grotelueschen,[15][16][17][18] 
Watson, 331, 354; Kirkpatrick, 103.   
Wedemeyer, 49; Kirkpatrick, 10; McLaughlin, General Albert C. Wedemeyer,  
26; Eiler, "The Man Who Planned Victory."
Kirkpatrick, 37, 45; Grotelueschen 11; Ross, American War Plans: 1890-1939, 161-63; Gole,  27; Calhoun, 46-47.  Social constraints, including non-interventionism and isolationism, combined with political constraints such as the 1922 Washington arms limitations treaties, the 1929 Kellogg-Briand anti-
Morton, 21, 23; Keegan, 26-27; Watson, 103; Grotelueschen, 13-14; Ross, U.S. War Plans:  1938-1945, 17, 33.   
Kirkpatrick,[78][79] Eiler, "The Man Who Planned Victory;" Pogue, 
Watson, 337,; Brigadier General L.T. Gerow, "Memorandum for the Assistant Chief of Staff G-2, Subject: Ultimate Production Requirements," July 14, 1941, NARA II, College Park, MD, RG 165, NM-84, Entry 422,WPD General Correspondence, 
War Plans Division, "Ultimate Requirements Study: Estimate of Army Ground Forces," September 1941, NARA II, College Park, MD, RG 165, NM-84, Entry 422, WPD General Correspondence, Folder 4494-21.
First and foremost, I owe much to my family, Kelly, Reagan, and 
Whitney
Major Chris Hanna
Mr. Robert Brown
Dr. Marlyn Pierce
Dr. Mark Calhoun
Arts Studies Fellowship, 
Advanced Military Studies Program. 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release
War Production Board
Plan Dog
Rainbow Plans
Victory Plan
Major Albert Wedemeyer
War Plans Division (WPD). One of four American graduates of the German Victory Plan
WPD planners, implicit in the President's request was an estimate of the type and scale of operations inherent in the military strategy, as well as the size and composition of ground forces needed to execute those operations. In need of an action officer to orchestrate the strategic review, estimate the forces required, and carry the Victory Program through to completion, Gerow selected Major Albert 
Wedemeyer. 58
59
60
58 Watson, 342;
Maurice Matloff and Edwin Snell, The War Department -Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1941
-1942
(1953;
repr., Washington, DC: Center of Military History, 1999)
59
Kirkpatrick, 35, 55-57;
McLaughlin, 26;
German General Staff School, 1938, 80-138. 60
established. The degree of success attained by sea and ground forces will be determined by the effective and timely employment of air supporting units and the successful conduct of strategical missions. No major military operation in any theater will succeed without air superiority, or at least air superiority disputed. The necessity for a strong sea force, consisting principally of fast cruisers, destroyers, aircraft carriers, torpedo boats, and submarines, continues in spite of the increased fighting potential of the air arm. Employment of enemy air units has not yet deprived naval vessels of their vital role on the high seas, but has greatly accelerated methods and changed the technique in their employment. It appears that the success of naval operations, assuming air support, will still be determined by sound strategic concepts and adroit leadership. A sea blockade will not accomplish an economic strangulation or military defeat of Germany. Nor will air operations alone bring victory. Air and sea forces will make important contributions but effective (2) Overwhelming air superiority must be accomplished.
(3) The economic and industrial life of Germany must be rendered ineffective through the continuous disruption and destruction of lines of communication, ports, and industrial facilities, and by the interception of raw materials.
(4) The combat effectiveness of the German military forces must be greatly reduced by over-extension, dispersion, shortage of materiel, including fuel, and a deterioration of the home front. Popular support of the war effort, by the peoples of the Axis Powers must be weakened and their confidence shattered by subversive activities, propaganda, deprivation, and the destruction wrought and chaos created.
(5) Existing military bases (the British Isles and the Near East) must be maintained. Additional bases, which encircle and close in on the Nazi citadel, must be established in order to facilitate air operations designed to shatter the German industrial and economic life.
Such bases may also provide feasible points of departure for the combined operations of ground and air forces. In disposing of our forces, we must guard against dispersions of means in operations that do not make timely and effective contributions to the accomplishment of our main task, the defeat of Germany.
(6) The commitment of our forces must conform to our accepted broad strategic concept of active (offensive) operations in one theater (European), and concurrently, passive (defensive) operations in the other (Pacific). c. WHEN. The following factors with regard to the time element are important in determining the production capacity necessary to realize our national objectives:
(1) The lag between plan and execution is considerable. Past experience indicates that from eighteen months to two years are required.
(2) How many months will Germany require to defeat Russia, to reconstitute her forces subsequent to Russia's defeat, and to exploit to any perceptible degree the