# ID: cd318dc1905749d2bc159ec05deabce9
# Title: Neurowar is Here!
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Mysterious attacks on the human brain have begun plaguing U.S. diplomats and officials with increasing frequency, ranging from overseas diplomatic outposts to right here in the United States. Known in the media as Havana Syndrome, these attacks appear to be signaling a new form of warfare-one that is focused on enhancing, targeting, and weaponizing the human brain-neurowarfare. Indeed, the human brain is at the center of a biotechnological revolution currently underway. At the same time, great power competition has returned to the forefront of international relations, as China and Russia seek to contest America's global leadership. In an increasingly globalized and interconnected world, this contest is ultimately a battle of ideas and influence, with more value placed on information and non-lethal means to manipulate and control both adversaries and domestic populations alike. The battle for influence begins and ends in the human mind, where reality is perceived. The implications of these developments point to both a new form and domain of warfare centering on the human brain. By highlighting recent attacks targeting the brain and revealing research from the United States and its two main competitors-China and Russia-this thesis seeks to argue that neurowar is not just coming, but rather is already here and is likely to fundamentally alter conflict and warfare.
Mysterious attacks on the human brain have begun plaguing U.S. diplomats and officials with increasing frequency, not only overseas at diplomatic outposts but also in the United States. Known in the media as Havana Syndrome, these attacks appear to be signaling a new form of warfare-one that is focused on enhancing, targeting, and weaponizing the human brain: neurowarfare. This thesis explores the human brain as the next battlefield, leading to a new domain, and likely the last domain of warfare as the brain serves as the foundation of all other domains. The implications are likely to alter the nature of conflict and many of the assumptions that warfare is built upon. This paper uses unclassified, publicly available information to both analyze the events surrounding the Havana Syndrome, and to understand this apparent new form of warfare called neurowarfare within a greater strategic and neuroscientific context. The authors argue that neurowar is not just coming; it is already here, and it plays a crucial part in the context of Great Power Competition (GPC). Indeed, GPC is ultimately a contest for access and influence among states throughout the globe, and neurowarfare is another tool akin to a gray zone activity that can be used to increase a state's influence in a highly competitive security environment.
Not only is the U.S. government, and specifically the national security community, investing heavily in neuroscience and neurotechnology-neuro S&T-but so is its largest competitors: China and Russia. Both states either have or are actively developing neuroweapons, as well as the requisite concepts of operations on how best to employ them.
It is also likely that one or both states has already employed neuroweapons. China and Russia clearly believe in the importance of this new technology and see the military and strategic potential it offers. Furthermore, from a strategic standpoint, the instruments, tools, and impacts necessary for neurowar are increasingly similar to the same tools needed for political power, thus increasing the likelihood of their continued development, employment, and implementation. As the cost of both preparing for and waging conventional war increases xx in an era of globalization defined by economic, social, and cultural interdependencies, the primary method of aggression and destabilization has shifted from pursuing physical destruction and violence to influencing and controlling large populations.
In light of these developments, the authors recommend the U.S. national security community should increase awareness of neurowarfare and its impending dangers and impacts on its personnel. The United States also needs to decide whether it should pursue neuro S&T that could be used to degrade an adversary-technologies Russia and China are developing in earnest. The Intelligence Community, specifically, has a key role in monitoring the development of neurotechnologies and the potential development and employment of neuroweapons. Finally, the United States must determine how to respond to neuroweapon attacks, especially as they increase in frequency.
We still don't know for sure, but I am absolutely determined -and I've spent a great deal of time and energy on this in the four months I've been CIA director -to get to the bottom of the question of what and who caused this.
-William Burns, Central Intelligence Agency Director, 22 July 2021 
1
2
Only in the past few years has this information begun to surface in the public domain, and there have been no shortage of theories surrounding the origin of this mystery, 1 Mary Louise Kelly, "Transcript: NPR's Full Conversation With CIA Director William Burns," NPR, July 22, 2021, sec. National Security, https://www.npr.org/2021/07/22/1017900583/transcript-nprs-fullconversation-with-cia-director-william-burns.
2 Adam Entous and Jon Lee Anderson, "The Mystery of the Havana Syndrome," The New Yorker, November 9, 2018, https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/11/19/the-mystery-of-the-havanasyndrome.
including sonic weapons, microwaves, insecticides, crickets, mass hysteria, and everyday aches and pains, to name a few.
3
4
5
6
7
9
10
The attacks in Cuba are one of the first-known uses of a neuroweapon.
Neuroweapons are a broad category encompassing several different methods defined as "weapons that specifically target the brain or the central nervous system in order to affect the targeted person's mental state, mental capacity and ultimately the person's behavior in a specific and predictable way." 
11
There is both a finite number of experts willing and able to replace those impacted.
Furthermore, some families have been impacted, which can serve as a deterrent for anyone not wanting to replace a targeted individual in their job by putting either themselves or their families at risk. Second, this is also impacting diplomatic relations. When the attacks in Cuba occurred, it was at a critical juncture in the bilateral relationship between Cuba and the United States. By late 2017, the DOS recalled a majority of their personnel stationed in-country in order to protect their people, thus significantly cooling the previously warming ties between the two states. 
12
The incidents in Cuba, dubbed the "Havana Syndrome," are not isolated events. A similar incident occurred in Guangzhou, China, in 2017, 
13
14
15
government and across the globe," current CIA Director William Burns recently stated. 
16
This paper uses unclassified, publicly available information to both explore the events surrounding the Havana Syndrome, and to understand this apparent new form of warfare called neurowarfare within a greater strategic and neuroscientific context. The authors argue that not only is neurowar coming, it is already here now, and it will be a crucial part of this era of GPC. Our research indicates that not only is the U.S. government, and specifically the national security community, investing heavily in neuroscience and neurotechnology-neuro S&T-but also its largest competitors, China and Russia, also believe it to be the future of warfare.
This paper is purposely written at the unclassified level in order to inform and bring awareness to military and government officials who may not have access to classified information on the matter but are nonetheless operating in this environment, both as potential targets, but more importantly as stakeholders. The authors of this work, although associated with the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), do not hold nor cannot access any secret knowledge to inform conclusions or opinions. All information contained in this thesis is sourced from the public domain.
To date, neuroweapon attacks against American officials, although incredibly damaging for individuals, have been conducted in a non-lethal capacity. Due to the uncertainty surrounding causes and issues of attribution, these attacks have not elevated to a level of aggression that has impelled an international response. However, the fire has been lit. The development and employment of neuroweapons is leading to an era of neurowarfare, which the authors contend is not just a new form of warfare, but is a new domain of warfare. 
18
warfare. Neurowarfare has the capacity to fundamentally alter conflict for the rest of human history. The technology, organizational capacity, potential, implications, and resultant stakes are significant. The evidence we present in this thesis suggests that the first country to develop, refine, and implement this form of warfare will likely have the capacity to dominate the world stage. Similar to other domains, the country that not only develops the technology, but also integrates the strategy, organizational structure, doctrine, and information systems associated with neurowarfare in a comprehensive design may become the most powerful country in the history of the planet due to the centrality of the human brain. 19
This thesis is certainly not the first scholarly effort to examine neuroweapons, neurowarfare, and its implications. However, it is a relatively niche and new area of interest that requires in-depth study to differentiate truth from fiction. While there are many opensource references to government efforts to militarize neuro S&T research and development (R&D) for explicit national security purposes, they lack a larger context to understand what neurowarfare is, how it can be classified, how it is currently unfolding, and how U.S.
adversaries view neurowarfare. Major efforts to document and publicize the impending neurowarfare environment in the national security space has only recently started, with efforts likely hampered due to classification issues. Admittedly, all efforts will be incomplete due to the same classification issues. However, the most recent scholarly work occurred in 2017, before the rise of Havana Syndrome and employment of neuroweapons, leaving a clear gap and need to update the literature. This section will briefly cover three of the leading figures and books in this arena.
In neuroscience. 
20
Dr. James Giordano, a Georgetown University neuroscientist and neuroethicist, is considered by many to be the leading scholar and public speaker on neuro applications for national security. He's spoken on neuroscience in many forums including universities, think tanks, military schools, national laboratories, policymakers, and even to USSOCOM.
A simple search of his name on YouTube unveils dozens of speeches he's given on this topic and reveals the depth of his thinking in this discipline. Along with numerous scholarly articles, he edited a 2-part book series titled Advances in Neurotechnology, bringing in leading scientists to discuss the potential and implications, which included a 2012 book titled Neurotechnology: Premises, Potential, and Problems that discusses the larger technical, ethical, legal, and cultural issues from neuro S&T, 
21
22
Finally, the most recent book to dive into neuro S&T from a military perspective came in 2017 from Dr. Armin Krishnan, a Security Studies professor from East Carolina University, titled Military Neuroscience and the Coming Age of Neurowarfare. This book 20 Jonathan D. Moreno, Mind Wars: Brain Research and National Defense (New York: Dana Press,  2006).
21 James J. Giordano, ed., Neurotechnology: Premises, Potential, and Problems, Advances in  Neurotechnology (Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2012).
22 James Giordano, Neurotechnology in National Security and Defense: Practical Considerations,  Neuroethical Concerns (CRC Press, 2014).
updates the literature on current and future neurotechnologies. It is the most comprehensive review of the potential and limitations of neuro S&T research from a national security perspective, and also begins to scratch at the larger strategic implications of the impending neurowarfare, arguing that nonlethal strategies will grow in importance during the 21st century as mind manipulation becomes increasingly powerful and prevalent, a position the authors of this paper agree with. 
23
While introducing the concept of neurowarfare can seem fanciful and dubious, it is only a continuing trend of warfare rapidly expanding to new areas of scientific progress.
While the land and sea have been domains of warfare for millennium, only in the past century has the air domain, and only within the past few decades have space and cyberspace been weaponized. These new domains became part of the battlespace because science and technology (S&T) evolved to explore and unlock many of their secrets.
This paper argues that S&T, specifically in the area of neuro S&T, is unlocking the mind as the next frontier in scientific and technological progress which is already leading to an era of neurowarfare. The potential has been understood for quite some time, but only recently has science begun to turn potential into reality. In 1967, Dr. Richard Heilbroner, famous American economist, historian, and author, opined that the expansion of knowledge is gradual in society and leads to a pattern of technological evolution.
Technological progress drives "loosening constraints" that lead to future discoveries and areas of progress:
Particularly from the mid-nineteenth century to the present do we sense the loosening constraints on technology stemming from successively yielding barriers of scientific knowledge-loosening constraints that result in the successive arrival of the electrical, chemical, aeronautical, electronic, nuclear, and space stages of technology. 
24
25
Unquestionably, military technology has never stood still."
26
Twenty-five years after Cohen wrote his article, information systems have multiplied in form and function, playing a crucial role as a driver in many industries. Both the United States as a society and the U.S. military is wholly dependent on information, which leads to increasing vulnerability, first to cyber-attacks, but then to information attacks through manipulation. The center of gravity for manipulation is ultimately the human brain, as different people perceive reality through their own lens of perception.
Cohen also aptly summarizes how military change diffuses into the political space:
"Revolutionary change in the art of war stems not simply from the ineluctable march of technology but from an adaptation of the military instrument to political purposes." 27 From a strategic standpoint, this thesis makes the case that the instruments, tools, and impacts necessary for neurowar are increasingly similar to the same tools needed for political power, thus increasing the likelihood of their continued development, employment, and implementation. Information manipulation has become increasingly valuable, but as awareness is raised, the value will decrease, thus necessitating a response to go further towards direct brain manipulation, and eventually control. This point makes neurowarfare likely to proliferate in the near future.
Neuro S&T is one of the latest and potentially most important frontier of science due to the ways science is beginning to unlock the brain's secrets. To be clear, this will be a long endeavor, and the scientific community is still many decades from completely realizing, if ever. But the journey has indeed started. As early as 2002, Cohen presciently recognized the fundamental importance of the revolution in biology, and its impending implications on warfare:
The biological sciences increasingly make it possible to change the nature of human beings themselves…One can scarcely doubt that an Adolf Hitler, or for that matter a Saddam Hussein, would have availed himself of the resources of biotechnology to breed new kinds of human beings-supersoldiers, for one thing, insensitive to fear and truly loyal to the death-who could serve his purposes. 28
This paper aims to better inform mid-career military practitioners and policymakers about developments in the militarization of neuro S&T leading to an era of neurowarfare.
There are many issues to discuss for awareness and preparation of the operational environment, including the categorization and means of neurowarfare, the current usage, the larger strategic context, and how U.S. adversaries view neurowarfare. One area that is outside the scope of this paper is the ethical considerations of neuro S&T and its applications to warfare, but the authors acknowledge the issues are many and heated. Some have voiced concern that if the United States does not engage, others will, leading to impending weakness. In 2002, Cohen himself highlighted the nature of technological progress in military affairs: "To the extent that the revolution proceeds from forces in the civilian world, the potential will exist for new military powers to emerge extremely rapidly.
A country like Japan or, in a few years, China will quickly translate civilian technological power into its military equivalent." 
29
Chapter IV is an exploration of the current strategic context the United States finds itself in in order to understand the nature of the current struggle in foreign affairs and the motivations behind strategic competitors, including their focus on influence. Chapter V looks at the mindset and current public activities of neurowarfare conducted by the United States' two, current, biggest competitors-China and Russia. Chapter VI summarizes with conclusions, recommendations, and suggested future research. If the reader is still not convinced that neurowar is here, the appendix includes many of the organizations in the national security space, and specifically the DOD, that are developing neuro S&T into specific applications, demonstrating their wide-ranging utility.
The human brain has 100 billion neurons, each neuron connected to 10,000 other neurons. Sitting on your shoulders is the most complicated object in the known universe.
-Dr. Michio Kaku, theoretical physicist and bestselling author, 2014 
30
-Dr. Richard 
Thompson, neuroscientist, 2007 31
Neuroscience, or the study of the human brain and nervous system, is still in its relative infancy. As reflected in the quote above, the human brain is frequently described as the most complex and fascinating object in the universe. Diseases originating in or disrupting brain function are some of the most destructive, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Huntington's, autism, epilepsy, schizophrenia, depression, and traumatic brain injury (TBI), among others. 
33
The father of modern neuroscience, Santiago Ramon y Cajal, revolutionized the study of the nervous system only a little more than a century ago with his scientific drawings illustrating how individual neurons form the building blocks of the brain. 
34
35
Recently, science has discovered the brain has nearly 100 billion neurons and 100 Future of the Mind: The Scientific Quest to Understand, Enhance, and Empower the Mind, has described the current era as the golden age of neuroscience due to advances in technology that allow examination in unlocking some of the complexities: 37 "We've learned more [about the human brain] in the last 10 to 15 years than in all of human history combined." 
38
39
40
While science has illuminated a great deal with respect to the human brain, two things have remained constant and clear: (1) the brain is an incredibly complex organ with vast potential that is still barely comprehended, and ( 
2
56
57
In the 21st century, increased research, development, and innovation in the field of neuro S&T, combined with biotechnology, nanotechnology, and artificial intelligence (AI), has created a huge market to capitalize on the vast potential of the human brain. This has 52 Tim Requarth, "This Is Your Brain. This Is Your Brain as a Weapon.," Foreign Policy, September 14, 2015, https://foreignpolicy.com/2015/09/14/this-is-your-brain-this-is-your-brain-as-a-weapon-darpadual-use-neuroscience/.
53 led to entirely new industries and commercial development. The benefits are obvious: grow the economy, provide better healthcare and quality-of-life, and further human development. Much of the origin can be traced to new brain-imaging technology that is providing a clearer and more detailed understanding of how the brain works, leading to successive breakthroughs. From 2000 to 2009, only around 400 neurotechnology patents were filed annually. 
58
59
60
This neuro S&T R&D funding has seeped into the national security arena for national security purposes, with DARPA leading efforts as the pathfinder organization for the DOD.
The largest investor and supporter of the BRAIN initiative inside the DOD is DARPA. 
61
Performance enhancement tools seek to amplify the capabilities of the brain in such ways as improving cognitive performance, sensor perception, memory, concentration, motivation, and situational awareness, while at the same time negating the ills associated with decreased sleep, stress, pain, fear, harmful memories, and other negative emotions.
Performance enhancement techniques are generally considered positive, as discoveries will diffuse to a range of applications in the civilian sector, thus increasing quality of life for future populations. However, advancing neuro S&T is not without risks, as some have voiced concerns over tampering with the mind and creating "super soldiers" due to potential negative consequences depending on how enlightened, moral, and autonomous they would operate. 
76
There are three broad categories of performance enhancements: (1)   Neuropharmacology uses drugs designed to target specific areas of the brain. 
77
78
79
Militaries for centuries have used drugs to increase the performance of their troops, using alcohol, caffeine, nicotine, even cocaine, opioids, and amphetamines, including "Japanese meth" and "Nazi meth" during World War II. 
80
81
83
Right now, brain stimulation technologies have been shown to increase and solidify learning by helping the brain process large amounts of information. Two recent promising advances in brain stimulation technologies include transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), which uses a constant, low direct current delivered via electrodes on the head, and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which uses magnetic fields to stimulate nerve cells in the brain, thus expanding brain capacity and capability. 
84
85
Brain stimulation devices mounted on a military member's head provide opportunities for increased cognitive performance. There are ample opportunities during combat where brain stimulation devices could be adapted to existing helmets, whether a soldier on patrol or a pilot in the cockpit. Even more so, they could be tailored to command and control-type positions, where greater understanding of the battlespace and situational awareness provide new ways to think through unfolding engagements with increased clarity for optimal outcomes. Brain stimulation techniques could also be applied in training environments, thus decreasing the need for expensive and complex exercises while tailoring the training to an individual's weaknesses and needs. Such an approach would maximize both effectiveness and efficiency. 
BCIs are rapidly advancing in both the civilian and military sector and provide the greatest potential for augmentation. BCIs are already being commercialized as robotic prosthetic limbs and to provide mobility and independence for spinal-cord injuries. They are also being explored as exoskeletons to provide increased strength and protection. 
86
89
Recent reports estimate one third of all research and development is directed towards military, law enforcement, and other national security purposes. 
90
Beyond just the battlefield, there are numerous neuro S&T applications for recruiting, selection, learning, training, and rehabilitation in military settings. 
91
92
93
In the hands of an adversary, all enhancement technologies could be used for degradation purposes, which increases the risk of furthering neuro S&T. The stakes are so high and the incentives so great that it is only a matter of time before these ideas gradually become realities.
On the other hand, performance degradation tools seek to impair or degrade the capabilities of the brain by decreasing cognitive performance, impairing sensor perception, incapacitating, or potentially killing. Little is being publicly discussed when it comes to degradation, often due to classification issues. 
94
Defining the term neuroweapon has become more complicated and controversial between nations because there is so much gray area, or gray matter-pun intended. There is not a universal, agreed upon definition due to distinguishing between the methods, intended target, and effects of an attack on the brain. Most attempts usually devolve into lawyerly semantics due to numerous overlap between biological weapons, chemical weapons, radiation-based weapons, and cyber weapons. Lines are blurred; there is no clear delineation. Additionally, once it is defined, it can then be regulated and restricted, similar to biological and chemical weapons now.
With those limitations in mind, this thesis considers three definitions. Ultimately, this is about influencing, and could involve potentially controlling the most important aspect of a human being-their mind.
The general target of these weapons is the human brain and all its cognitive functions, including thought, perception, memory, learning, and emotions. There are four general categories of neuroweapons: 1) drugs, or neuropharmacology, 2) bugs, specifically neurological bioweapons, 3) waves, short for electromagnetic and sound waves, and 4)
bytes, or direct information attacks on the brain. 
98
99
Bugs, or biological weapons in the form of viruses, bacteria, and fungi that are genetically engineered to directly attack the brain and nervous system, could incapacitate, injure, disable, or kill personnel in precise manners or may be able to produce tailored behavioral effects. 100
Waves, or energy carried through different media, including light, radio, and sound waves, can be utilized as weapons if the energy is sufficiently concentrated in space and time. Whether sound waves in the form of sonic and ultrasonic weapons, or electromagnetic waves in the form of radio frequency (RF)-DEW, wave-based weapons are a broad class that uses intense energy to incapacitate, damage, or destroy. 
101
102
Interestingly, DEWs were originally explored and considered in the 1960s as a creative way to attack electronic systems: "At that time, three distinct concepts were Finally, bytes, or information-and software-based weapons can be a way to "hack the brain." 
105
Waves appear to be the most likely method that is currently available, and they can be debilitating with long-lasting effects similar to concussions. However, currently there is little evidence to show behavioral impacts outside of pure impairment or deterioration, in the form of mind control or forcing behavioral actions. Finally, bytes may become a more likely target once brains are connected to computers, necessitating similar precautions and defenses that cyber systems use now. Many bodily devices that have implantable chips could already be at risk of tampering and manipulation, especially with DEW, thus creating huge vulnerabilities.
Neurowar also has great strategic potential with surgical precision as a form of counter-leadership strategy. If a key member of the operational or strategic chain of command, from military leaders to the SecDef to the President of the United States (POTUS), is targeted in a non-lethal manner during a crisis and is suddenly impaired, there are not fast and easy processes to hand over nuclear launch codes or authorization to strike.
In these crisis scenarios, minutes count, and the time to convene cabinet members and certify decisions might be the difference between life and death. This is just a small sample of possible scenarios, but it highlights how serious neurowar could become as the tactics, technology, and strategy evolves.
Of course, there are big differences in the impacts of neuroweapons, creating a spectrum of effects. This has led Finnish professor Dr. Torsti Sirén to classify the impacts on an individual in three categories: 1) mild-inducing sleep or lowering inhibitions, 2) inbetween-causing aggressiveness or passivity, and 3) extreme-mental coercion or incapacitation. 
107
Chapter III further explores how neuroweapons are being used against the United States with great effect. From a strategic standpoint, there are also soft and hard power dimensions to neuro S&T.
There are both "soft" and "hard" power implications for exercising neuro S&T against competitors. In a soft power capacity, "neuro S&T research and development can be utilized to exercise socio-economic power in global markets." 
108
Strikingly, few national laws or international agreements restrict the weaponization of or attacks on the human brain. While current U.N. treaties against biological and chemical weapons, specifically some neuro-microbiologicals, chemicals, and toxins are prohibited, currently most neuroweapons fall into a legal and regulatory gap, as it does not fit either of these two categories. 
110
113
115
This chapter has served as a broad primer on military neuro S&T. particular country is responsible, all available information strongly suggests that Russia is behind these events.
The purpose of this chapter is to conduct a holistic review of all of the known U.S.
cases of Havana Syndrome to highlight the frequent use of this emerging capability and enable a better understanding of the growing threat. Although data for this section and the thesis overall are limited to what is unclassified and publicly available, there is enough information in the public domain to glean important lessons. This review will proceed chronologically from when the cases reportedly occurred, provide some background on the technological feasibility of the suspected weapons, and then offer implications and consequences to U.S. national security due to these attacks.
The following are all the countries and publicly available information surrounding Havana Syndrome cases against U.S. personnel. To our knowledge, this information has not been compiled in the following manner before now.
Havana Syndrome was first reported at the end of 2016 to the U.S. Embassy in Cuba's by a CIA officer operating under diplomatic cover. 
121
123
124
125
127
The consequences of these attacks were not just the immediate pain and disorientation experienced by the victims. In many cases, victims are still suffering longterm injuries. Some of these injuries include mild traumatic brain injury, hearing loss, balancing issues, and severe headaches, among other symptoms. 
128
129
130
131
Not long after the last reported attack happened in Cuba in August 2017, another possible case of the Havana Syndrome occurred in Uzbekistan. In September 2017, a USAID worker and his wife stationed at the U.S. Embassy in Tashkent reported symptoms consistent with those experienced in Cuba and were flown out of the country to be medically examined. 
132
133
One of the more significant cases of Havana Syndrome occurred at the end of 2017 in Moscow, another indication that the Russians likely have a hand in this. Marc Polymeropoulos-a CIA officer for almost three decades and at the time responsible for clandestine operations across Eurasia-visited Russia in December 2017 with the hope of expanding counterterrorism cooperation, despite Russia's reluctance to grant a visa for suspicion he wanted to run cover operations in Russia. 
134
135
136
137
138
While  
143
144
145
In May 2019, a White House staffer working in a London hotel room preparing for then-President Donald Trump's state visit to the United Kingdom experienced a ringing sound that eventually became painful and caused her ears to ring even after she left her room. 
147
148
150
One year after the suspected attack in Northern Virginia on the within seven minutes he went from feeling fine to believing he might die. 
153
154
There were also reports of Havana Syndrome in the Central Asian country of Kyrgyzstan, though it is unclear exactly when in 2020 these instances took place. 156 A U.S. military officer stationed in Kyrgyzstan pulled his car into a busy intersection and began feeling an intense pressure in his head and his two-year old son, who was in the backseat, began screaming. 
157
158
159
In 166 Josh Lederman and Andrea Mitchell, "2 U.S. Diplomats to Be Evacuated from Vietnam After 'Havana Syndrome' Incidents," NBC News, August 24, 2021, https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/politicsnews/two-u-s-diplomats-be-evacuated-vietnam-after-havana-syndrome-n1277539.
167 Lederman and Mitchell.  to Hanoi by several hours, as her delegation waited in Singapore to ensure it was safe for her to continue to Vietnam. 168
A few weeks after the high-profile Vietnam case, reports surfaced that a Havana Syndrome case occurred during CIA Director Bill Burns' early September visit to India, requiring a member of his staff to seek medical attention. 169 CNN reported Mr. Burns was "fuming" with anger over the incident, and some within the CIA view the attack as a clear message to the Director that no one is safe from being targeted. 
170
Though not reported publicly until mid-October, more than a dozen officials who work at the U.S. Embassy in Bogota, Colombia and their family members reported Havana Syndrome symptoms in mid-September. 
172
177
178
Not only is the use of DE waves to induce a neurological response possible, but soon after Alan Frey's work became public the Soviet Union took notice and its Soviet Academy of Science invited him to visit and lecture. 
179
180
181
182
183
Embassy in Moscow for decades, one of the earliest cases of possible Havana Syndrome took place in 1996. Two National Security Agency operatives, Mike Beck and Charles Gubete, traveled to a "hostile country" where both men reported feeling groggy and disoriented in their hotel room. 
184
185
One potential reason cases are showing up now is that the technology to conduct microwave attacks has appeared to advance in the last decade. According to Tom Rogan of the Washington Examiner, an April 2012 Russian government article claims Russian intelligence services "were mainly engaged in generators that influence the psychophysical state of an individual with their fields and rays" and a 2019 Russian army article mentions the fact that these weapons historically were larger in size but now have become much smaller. 
186
They can cause symptoms of various diseases, make a person fall asleep instantly, or, conversely, stay awake for a long time." 187 Moreover, in 2012 Russian President Vladimir Putin reportedly gave the approval for Russian scientists to develop electromagnetic weapons that can attack the central nervous system. 
188
The difficulty in detecting and countering these miniaturized microwave weapons are exacerbated by likely Russian tradecraft that seeks to mask the true nature of a particular RF signal. According to Eric Haseltine, former head of Research and Development at the National Security Agency, the Russians are likely using a variety of 185 Tom Rogan, "US Intelligence Grapples with Nervous System Attacks Amid Heavy Russia Suspicions," Washington Examiner, May 6, 2021, sec. Opinion, https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/ opinion/us-intelligence-grapples-nervous-system-attacks-russia.
186 Rogan.
187 Rogan.
188 Christopher Leake and Will Stewart, "Putin Targets Foes with 'Zombie' Gun Which Attack Victims' Central Nervous System," Daily Mail, March 31, 2012, https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2123415/Putin-targets-foes-zombie-gun-attack-victims-central-nervous-system.html.
techniques that would explain the type of energy and method used. 
189
191
193
194
Havana Syndrome cases have expanded greatly since the initial incidents in Cuba at the end of 2016 and early 2017, and the consequences of these cases, as well as future consequences, are starting to become clear. These consequences range from minor to severe health concerns for officials. Evidence suggests they can effectively neutralize senior officers within the U.S. government, play a role in impacting geopolitical initiatives, and possibly damage intelligence collection efforts. Most alarmingly, since these attacks have proved effective and have not been met with deterrence or a response, they are only likely to increase in the future.
At minimum there are individual consequences for the targeted officials. Being stationed in an overseas environment is already a challenging situation. The impacts are magnified if physical and psychological effects are felt on the individual and their family members, especially as advanced brain imaging technology is needed to correctly diagnose, a fact that was not known early on during the symptoms. It can also affect the individual's work requirements, which may or may not be passed on to a co-worker. Additionally, the health consequences are often severe and can stay with the member for years, at times even progressively worsening. 
195
From an operational standpoint, the likely use of microwave weapons to induce Havana Syndrome symptoms is taking U.S. officials off the playing field. The other consequences from these attacks are less obvious, but they involve the possible damage to intelligence collection efforts by the United States abroad. Almost half of the known 200 cases at this time are believed to be CIA officers, who are working overseas to cultivate relationships and develop human sources to provide intelligence that will benefit national security. These relationships are personality-based, involving a deeplevel of trust and commitment that take time to cultivate. In other words, it is not as simple as the CIA sending new case officers overseas to replace those with Havana Syndrome.
The constant rotation of new personnel has the potential to seriously impact human intelligence operations. Additionally, the fact that the CIA seems to be intentionally targeted and the effects of Havana Syndrome can be so severe might serve as a deterrent for potential agents, or foreign information sources, to want to work with the CIA, as they may fear themselves or family members being targeted as well. Human intelligence is already facing its share of challenges in an environment of social media, biometric security, smart cities, and the proliferation of electronic devices, and Havana Syndrome is only going to make it more difficult.
There are not only operational consequences, but also strategic consequences for some of these Havana Syndrome attacks, most notably the case of Cuba. Since the Castro regime came to power in Cuba in 1959, the United States has had an adversarial relationship with Cuba but beginning in 2013 the Obama administration took steps to improve that relationship. By early 2016, the U.S. Embassy in Havana had been re-opened and a serious rapprochement between two Cold War foes looked not only possible, but likely. Given this context, the timing of the Havana Syndrome cases is therefore suspicious.
In November of 2016 there was not only the election of Donald Trump-who did not agree with this new approach to Cuba-but also the death of Fidel Castro, who though he stepped down as the President of Cuba in 2008, was still the largest figure in Cuban politics. The fact that the attacks occurred right around this time might be a coincidence but it's not unreasonable to think that Russia might have carried them out as a way to torpedo the warming of ties between the United States and Cuba. Even if that wasn't what was intended, it does not detract from the fact that the Havana Syndrome attacks did contribute to the cooling of ties between the countries and the serious scale-back of personnel at the U.S. Embassy. In other words, whether it was intended or not, the Cuba example demonstrates just how much of an impact these cases can have on U.S. interests.
Compounding the significant consequences of these attacks is the difficulty in knowing if and how the United States should respond. There is not only the problem of attribution-which the United States has not stated as of this writing-but also the right level of response. Even if the United States could definitively identify Russia as culpable, the appropriate response is unclear. Should the United States consider this an act of aggression or war? Should it take military action, impose sanctions, or respond through some sort of gray zone or covert action? The dilemma that Havana Syndrome creates is substantial, especially since it has shown it can create strategic effects for an adversary, which is indicative of the complicated challenge neurowarfare poses in general.
The next chapter provides an overview of the current strategic context, including the United States' two main competitors, and explains why that context is likely to lead to the further development of neurowarfare.
The target of all human conflict, the battleground of all conflict resolution, is the human mind. In reframing all conflict as one form of warfare or another, neocortical warfare rejects the notion that warfare is an aberration. It accepts that conflict will never end and that we must invest resources to win its endless engagements.
-Colonel Richard 
Szafranski, USAF, 1994 196
With this understanding, neurowarfare and its implications begin to make strategic sense, especially as it relates to influence, manipulation, and control, which is the essence of GPC.
The current international security environment is defined by great powers vying for influence in numerous countries and regions of the world as they seek supremacy in global affairs. Top-level strategy documents such as the 2017 National Security Strategy (NSS)
and 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS) highlight the return to GPC, as if there ever was a time in international relations when GPC wasn't occurring. Nonetheless, the United States has undoubtedly entered into an era of geopolitical struggle against peer and nearpeer adversaries of China and Russia-along with regional adversaries of North Korea and Iran while also continuing to engage non-state transnational threat actors-that is likely to shape the next several decades of stability and conflict. At the heart of it, GPC is a contest for access and influence.
In order to gain this influence, states must employ and synchronize the full range of instruments of power (IOPs)-Diplomatic, Information, Military, and Economic (DIME) to name a few, but also Financial, Intelligence, Legal IOPs, and more. However, similar to the ideological battles of the Cold War, the competition space between an American-led world order and a Chinese or Russian-led one is likely to play out on the periphery both in terms of locations and methods more than conventional, direct, state-onstate military conflict.
As evidence to support this assessment of the current strategic environment, numerous U.S. strategic documents echo these claims. The 2017 NSS aptly describes the nature of the struggle that the United States is in with its competitors, and the differences in values between these competing worldviews:
China and Russia challenge American power, influence, and interests, attempting to erode American security and prosperity. They are determined to make economies less free and less fair, to grow their militaries, and to control information and data to repress their societies and expand their influence. At the same time, the dictatorships of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Islamic Republic of Iran are determined to destabilize regions, threaten Americans and our allies, and brutalize their own people. Transnational threat groups, from jihadist terrorists to transnational criminal organizations, are actively trying to harm Americans. While these challenges differ in nature and magnitude, they are fundamentally contests between those who value human dignity and freedom and those who oppress individuals and enforce uniformity. 
197
Adversaries studied the America way of war and began investing in capabilities that targeted our strengths and sought to exploit perceived weaknesses. The 2018 NDS acknowledges this strategic environment, and further illuminates how our competitors are pursuing their goal of disrupting the status quo by taking advantage of obscurity and opaqueness:
Both revisionist powers and rogue regimes are competing across all dimensions of power. They have increased efforts short of armed conflict by expanding coercion to new fronts, violating principles of sovereignty, exploiting ambiguity, and deliberately blurring the lines between civil and military goals. 
199
The United States fundamentally believes in the rule of law and being transparent, for democracies require it to maintain political power in a way that authoritarian regimes do not.
198 White House, 27-28.   199 Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2018), 2, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/ pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf.
With a better understanding of "what" our strategic competitors are doing, we can begin to discuss the implications. Numerous scholars have attempted to define this "new" form of competition that blurs and blends the boundaries below the level of armed conflict, with terms like "Gray Zone," "Hybrid Warfare," "Asymmetrical Warfare," and more. Dr.
Kathleen Hicks, the current Deputy Secretary of Defense (DepSecDef), has called this style the gray zone in describing how this plays out in practice:
The United States is being confronted with the liabilities of its strength.
Competitors are contesting the rules of the international system and U.S. leadership. With the significant costs of engaging the Unites States in combat, and the growing range of indirect and non-military tools at their disposal, rivals are finding avenues for threatening U.S. interests without triggering escalation. Their coercive tools range the spectrum of fake news and online troll farms to terrorist financing and paramilitary provocations. Such approaches lie in the contested arena somewhere between routine statecraft and open warfare-the "gray zone." 
200
Dr. Michael Mazarr describes these actions as "maneuver[ing] in the ambiguous no-man's-land between peace and war, reflecting the sort of aggressive, persistent, determined campaigns characteristic of warfare but without the overt use of military force." 
202
will always compete with each other in an attempt to gain the upper hand in order to further their national interests of peace, prosperity, and security for their people. Mazarr correctly highlights that these strategies are as old as time: "States have been using these kinds of approaches for centuries, in some ways for millennia. Concepts such as political destabilization, support for proxies and militias, information campaigns, and much more have been a staple of statecraft since the city states of ancient Greece were vying for influence." 203
In order to provide more specific context for the current strategic environment, consider how China and Russia view themselves, what their foreign policy aims are, and how they are accomplishing this strategy in practice. DepSecDef Hicks has categorized seven primary tools that China and Russia use in their arsenals to further their ends: 1) information operations and disinformation; 2) political coercion; 3) economic coercion; 4) cyber operations; 5) space operations; 6) proxy support; and 7) provocation by statecontrolled forces. 
204
China sees itself as a rising power that, after a century of humiliation and exploitation by outside powers, is now re-taking its rightful place atop the international system. The Chinese Communist Party (CCP), led by General Secretary and President Xi
Jinping in its one-party system, intends for China to be a regional, and eventually global, hegemon by leveraging and synchronizing all of its instruments of power to increase its influence. It does this by emphasizing non-military means and gray zone activities to disrupt the status quo. For example, the CCP has consistently infringed on smaller states'
203 Mazarr, 3.   204 Hicks and Friend, By Other Means Part I, v.  fishing waters, claiming it as their own and depriving local fishermen of their very livelihood. The CCP has repeatedly breached the territorial integrity of the Senkaku Islands-often using fishermen to conceal Beijing's direct involvement-which Japan has claimed as their own for years. 
205
206
to aggressively assert sovereignty claims and further their interests and influence in the region. 
207
208
209
211
in order "to centralize data platforms into a big data-enabled surveillance infrastructure to manage, monitor, and predict trustworthiness of citizens, firms, organizations, and governments in China." 
212
213
214
As will be discussed in Chapter V, this model of investing in new technologies as a way to shape populations and maintain control is indicative of their approach to neuro S&T.
Historically, Russia views itself as a great power that does not receive the level of respect it believes it deserves from the West and is weary of Western intentions toward it.
As such, Russia has spent the last two decades under President Vladimir Putin attempting to reemerge as a great power after its defeat in the Cold War by increasing its influence on the global stage to gain back its former prestige. Russia often uses irregular methods to combat the lack of conventional military parity with the West, including but not limited to espionage, cyber, and information operations. 
215
216
Russia also employs economic coercion in the form of withholding its vast natural gas supplies to Ukraine and Western European countries-typically during the coldest seasons when natural gas is in most demand. It used cyber to devastating effect against Estonia in 2007, often employing so-called "patriot hackers" with no obvious ties to the government. While it did conduct a conventional invasion of Georgia in 2008, it did so under the dubious pretense it was protecting Russian citizens after issuing passports to residents of the breakaway provinces of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
The overarching purpose of this section was to describe and interpret the foreign policy goals and irregular methods China and Russia currently use in synchronized fashion to weaken and undermine the U.S.-led international world order through nonmilitary ways in order to restore status and influence for these once great powers. It is far from exhaustive, but rather serves to provide a small sampling of actions and intentions. As the next section will show, these states' use of irregular tactics to further upend the status quo is continued in neurowarfare.
Consider again Dr. There are multiple reasons, but the biggest is cost. The United States still has the largest economy and spends more on defense than any of its adversaries (though not as much as when purchasing power parity is considered). As previously mentioned, currently, China and Russia are willing to cede military primacy in part because their ends are regional in nature. At least for the time being. However, they have pivoted to other methods, particularly in space and cyberspace. As the cost of both preparing for and waging conventional war increases in an era of globalization defined by economic, social, and cultural interdependencies, the primary method of aggression and destabilization has shifted from pursuing physical destruction and violence to influencing and controlling large populations. 
220
Sun Tzu, the Chinese military strategist living in 500 BC famously wrote, "Hence to fight and conquer in all your battles is not supreme excellence; supreme excellence consists in breaking the enemy's resistance without fighting." 
221
The main conventional weapons of today-including the fighter jet, aircraft carrier, and tank-seem particularly ill-suited for the future of conflict. Martin Van Creveld predicted such a shift decades ago in his 1991 book, The Transformation of War. 
222
While countries' use of IW is gaining prominence as a major tool to gain influence in the world, neurowarfare seems to fit nicely into this archetype. Armin Krishnan sums up the stakes: "Ultimately, there is no higher valuation in war than subversion of the enemy's mind. If this can be achieved through targeting the enemy's brain directly, it would be the most powerful weapon that has ever been devised by humanity." 
223
224
This natural evolution from IW to direct manipulation has been building for decades. In fact, a similar thesis was put forward in 1994 by then-Colonel Richard Szafranski, USAF. Coining the term "neocortical warfare," Szafranski's thoughts act as a precursor with the aim of attacking the enemy's will to the current concept of neurowarfare:
The object of war is, quite simply, to force or encourage the enemy to make what you assert is a better choice, or to choose what you desire the enemy to choose. Said another way, the object of war is to subdue the hostile will of the enemy. We cannot meet the immediate objective of war until or unless we subdue hostile will…if weapons are means used to coerce an adversary's will, then even our understanding of weapons must go beyond things, implements or tools. Yet, we have concentrated our attention on the concrete means and material ways used to subdue hostile will's host, rather than on the nature of will itself. 
225
226
227
228
230
The premise behind psychological warfare is "the planned tactical use of propaganda, threats, and other non-combat techniques during wars, threats of war, or periods of geopolitical unrest to mislead, intimidate, demoralize, or otherwise influence the thinking or behavior of an enemy." 231 Early PSYOP pioneers correctly intimated "that wars are fought and won or lost not on battlefields but in the minds of men." 
232
There is a clear distinction between psychological warfare and neurowarfare in the method of influence; PSYOPs are limited to communications to influence, whereas neurowarfare involves directly targeting the brain through physical manipulation. The beginnings of that technology is here now, and it's likely to continue to develop over the next several decades.
Dr. Armin Krishnan has expanded Szafranski's "neocortical warfare" concept to develop a comprehensive look at the various applications of neurowarfare. Indeed, he has not been shy in discussing the implications to completely revolutionize warfare, along with the state and society. He boldly asserts "neuroscience will lead to the development of 'neuroweapons,' which can remotely manipulate mental states, emotions, perceptions, thinking, and behavior of adversaries." 233 He contends one of the benefits of this form of warfare is it is "culturally agnostic;" meaning, since it targets the brain, neuroweapons do not need to be tailored to a particular cultural context. 
234
232 Paul E. Valley and Michael A. Aquino, "From PSYOP to MindWar: The Psychology of Victory," Headquarters, 7th Psychological Operations Group, 1980, 6, https://samim.io/dl/From-PSYOP-to-MindWar-The-Psychology-of-Victory-Position-Paper-by-US-Colonel-Paul-E-Valley-and-Major-Michael-A-Aquino.pdf.
233 Krishnan, "Attack on the Brain: Neurowars and Neurowarfare," 4.
often without any awareness from a country that this targeting took place. 
235
236
As history can attest, a big factor in determining whether nations can stay dominant in the international relations system depends on continued technology development. In our current era, that means the fate of the United States and the Western liberal, rules-based world order it has championed for the past seventy-five years will depend specifically on technology development in the realm of neuro S&T as much as it does on nuclear, space, and cyber realms. Throughout the course of history, there has been a continual search for new and better weapons as technological frontiers unlock new areas of discovery and potential. However, "the enemy also gets a vote." As new weapon systems are generated and operationalized, the enemy finds ways to counter in the form of better defensive systems or stronger deterrent methods, which inevitably either counteract, counterbalance, or supersede the previous weapon system. The quest for a superweapon, that which has no defenses or deterrents, continues. 
237
In many ways, we are at a similar time in the technology development of neurowarfare as when Dr. Arquilla and Dr. Ronfeldt highlighted cyberwar in 1993 by publishing their prescient article titled, "Cyberwar is Coming!" about the impending nature of society, and subsequently warfare, to depend on the cyber/information domain as a pillar for all other activities. 238 Though neuro S&T is still an emerging field with many unknowns, there is enough evidence to suggest neurowarfare is likely to become not just an important form of warfare, but the last and most important domain of warfare as it has the potential to dominate the future of conflict for the rest of human history. As stated by Krishnan, "This creates both humanitarian opportunities in making war less bloody and burdensome as well as some unprecedented threats and dangers in terms of preserving freedom of thought and will usher in a coming age where minds can be manipulated with great precision." 
239
240
241
This chapter has discussed the enduring struggle between states in the international system but updated to include the current adversaries and methods. In an era of interconnectedness, there is great value to unconventional and irregular methods that use information rather than physical destruction to manipulate beliefs. Neurowarfare appears to be an extension of this strategy, seeking to influence, manipulate, and ultimately control individuals and populations. This is achieved by investing in new neuro technologies that 241 Krishnan, 17.  impair individuals and create strategic dilemmas in a non-lethal fashion, thus precluding escalation. The intellectual underpinnings are not new, as the basic concepts have been discussed for decades with slightly different terminology, from psychological warfare to neocortical warfare. As the title of this thesis suggests, there are direct parallels with neurowarfare to how cyberwar was viewed in the 1990s, before it became a critical element of military capability and society writ large.
The next chapter provides a deeper dive into the collective perspective of China and Russia in the area of neurowarfare. Giordano has summed up the high stakes of neurowar, stating, "the brain is the next battlespace." 242 242 Requarth, "This Is Your Brain. This Is Your Brain as a Weapon."
Cognitive domain operations have already become the main battlefield for other countries conducting ideological penetration, and is an important domain for both sides in a war to fight for or destroy troop morale and cohesion, as well as forming or deconstructing operational capabilities.
-Luo Yuzhen, Chinese National University of Defense Technology Researcher, 2018 
243
-Lt. Col. V. I. Yakupov, Russian Military Strategist, 2017 
244
The following section refers to China and the Chinese Communist Party.
For much of its 100-year history, the CCP has placed great emphasis on controlling people's behavior through influencing the way individuals think and dictating to them what to believe. This has generally taken the form of total control over information combined with propaganda and indoctrination measures that attempt to shape attitudes and beliefs of individuals. One example of this is in the introduction to a book on Mao Zedong's collected works published in 1944 by Deng Tuo, one of China's most prominent propagandists, where Tuo writes "historical practice has fully demonstrated that Comrade Mao Zedong's thought is the only correct thought," demonstrating an intolerance of dissenting views. 
245
246
Hunter-often credited with coining the term "brain washing"-wrote an article (and later a book on the subject) in September 1950 entitled Brain-washing Tactics Force Chinese Into Ranks of Communist Party, where he argued CCP techniques turned average Chinese people into mindless automations. 
247
248
While China is establishing an important scientific base for the development of neurotechnology, it has also explicitly called for the development of neurological weapons and has established new operating concepts to be able to leverage such weapons. Known as "new concept weapons" (NCW), these weapons range from energy-based (such as directedenergy weapons), information based (advanced computer systems), and even biological/ chemical weapons (such as gene editing) to achieve military advantage over an advanced adversary like the United States. 
259
260
The PLA is also developing new warfighting concepts, or doctrine, for psychological warfare called "cognitive domain operations" that would be able to leverage NCWs. 
261
262
263
In addition to the previously mentioned Havana Syndrome attacks at the U.S. the PLA used a non-lethal microwave weapon against Indian soldiers to retake a strategic hilltop from the Indian Army in disputed territory in Ladakah, near Tibet. 
264
265
267
268
269
270
In addition to historical brain research and development of neurotechnology, Russia has been ideologically committed to influencing individuals' and even states' behavior in order to accomplish its objectives. Russia employed the concepts of reflexive control and active measures during the Cold War with various degrees of success. Reflexive control is a technique whereby certain information is presented to an opponent to get that opponent to make a predetermined decision desired by the initiator, otherwise known as manipulation, and is somewhat analogous to military information support operations (MISO) in U.S. military parlance. 282 However, reflexive control plays a more central role in Russian actions than MISO does with the United States. Seen as a subset of information warfare through the use of accurate information as well as misinformation or disinformation, the Soviets and now the Russians believe it can play an important role in political and military contests. 
283
284
285
287
288
293
294
295
Russia has not only sought to develop various neuroweapons, but also openly acknowledges the importance of targeting the brain to gain military advantage. In 2018, a
Russian military journal published a list of technologies that could be used for reflexive control and explicitly mentions technologies that can target the "cognitive." 296 A year prior, a professor of Russia's Combined Arms Academy articulated that he anticipated future wars will see a combination of information and cyberwar that will ultimately provide inputs for "psywars" and "neurowars," though he didn't elaborate on either of those terms. 
297
China and Russia have some notable similarities but also important differences when it comes to their respective neurowarfare views and capabilities. deniable and yet has effects ranging from the tactical all the way to the strategic, with the cool down of relations between the United States and Cuba being the most significant.
These challenges center around deterring and responding to such attacks. If left unaddressed, these cases will continue to plague U.S. efforts to operate effectively overseas and in particular damage our intelligence collection capability.
Chapter IV contended that Great Power Competition is nothing new in the history of the international system, but the United States is now placing more emphasis on peer and near-peer adversaries instead of on non-state actors during the Global War of Terrorism. GPC is characterized by gaining influence through the full range of the instruments of power at a state's disposal. A large component of this is ideological, as a particular country advances a certain narrative about itself and its adversaries to sway global opinion. While also not new, much of the competition today takes place within the gray zone, something China and Russia do with great effect. Neurowarfare represents the newest manifestation of these gray zone activities that will only become more pronounced with the advancement of neuro S&T.
Chapter V contrasted the views and efforts of China and Russia toward neuroweapons and neurowarfare. Both countries operate from worldviews that emphasize control and wanting to influence beliefs, making the concept of influencing the mind in line with their strategic thinking. Both countries are investing in neuro S&T, with China notably seeking to be a world leader in this field by 2030. Importantly, both countries have explicitly articulated the military benefit of developing weapons that can influence behavior and are developing concepts and weapons to make that benefit a reality. Though Russia appears to be further along in terms of capability, it is likely a matter of time before
China becomes the bigger threat in the neuro domain.
This paper seeks to awaken the national security community to neurowar in a similar manner that Dr. Arquilla and Dr. Ronfeldt did in their "Cyberwar is Coming!" article published in 1993. That article discussed the broad changes from the information revolution three decades ago: "Sea changes are occurring in how information is collected, stored, processed, communicated and presented, and in how organizations are designed to take advantage of increased information."
301
However, in recognition that so much of the current research and analysis of neurowar occurs in the classified space, and hence unbeknownst to us, specific recommendations are somewhat limited. Nevertheless, we pose several broad recommendations.
The national security community, and especially the military, needs to stay keenly aware of the impending dangers of neurowar and its impacts on its personnel. As demonstrated, the national security community seems to be harvesting the potential from the performance enhancement revolution currently underway, as many organizations are investing in ways to leverage neuro S&T R&D for increased human performance. This paper is meant to call attention to the harmful events that are slowly merging into the public arena, and to provide context to the seemingly disjointed manner that neurowar is currently being conducted. All government officials, even those on American soil, are potentially targets for RF waves that disrupt brain processes and severely impede normal operations.
In a larger sense, all military professionals should always study societal trends and look for ways to integrate and improve into military processes, especially in matters of protection.
The United States should decide whether to pursue degradation technologies or not, and if so, to what degree. The authors take no stance on this but believe that the U.S.
government needs to begin thinking about whether neuroweapons are something that should be included in the U.S. weapons arsenal and what role they might play in national defense. Admittedly, this is not an easy task due to the newness of the technologies and the serious ethical issues that come from developing and wielding weapons with such power.
History has shown that if a weapon is created, it increases the probability of employment, as nuclear weapons were eventually used, albeit only twice. When making these decisions, it would be beneficial to consult with relevant experts-scientists, business leaders, military officers, policymakers, and ethicists, to name a few-as there are numerous second and third order effects that spillover into many areas and industries. One thing is certain, though, and that is Russia and China are pursuing these weapons and do not have the same moral qualms that the United States does in developing and obtaining them. This is not to say that the United States must develop them to counter these two states, but rather to be clear-eyed and sober-minded as to what our competitors are doing in this space.
The United States should also continue to place energy and resources behind monitoring the development of neurotechnology and neuroweapons. We have laid out in a completely unclassified forum a detailed analysis of the Havana Syndrome cases, the developments of neuroweapons and concepts of operations for China and Russia, and the logic behind why neuroweapons are likely going to increase given a strategic environment that emphasizes influence, but we're working with incomplete data (lack of access to classified material) and lack of technical expertise behind some of the various technologies in development. The establishment of various task forces within the interagency, and particularly the IC, to get to the bottom of the Havana Syndrome cases are certainly steps in the right direction and demonstrate the United States is starting to take this threat seriously. However, more awareness should be raised within government, academia, research centers, and the private sector as to the dual-use nature of many of the developments within neuro S&T. The IC, in particular, should make the larger issues of neuroweapons-not just ones surrounding the Havana Syndrome-a priority to stay ahead of the curve and closely monitor important trends.
The United States also needs to determine how best to respond to neuroweapon attacks, which as of now and based on publicly available information is limited to the Havana Syndrome cases. Attribution is arguably the largest issue, but the asymmetric and non-lethal nature of the attacks also complicate possible responses. In many ways neuroweapon attacks are similar to cyber-attacks in that they are able to cause serious damage, whether they be economic, political, or chaos and confusion, but the lack of fatalities constrains responses. In the short term, the United States needs to signal something that it is pushing back against these attacks, particularly as the recent attacks in Vietnam, India, and Colombia all took place around high-ranking government officials visiting those countries. Long term, as these attacks and possibly other neuro attacks are likely to increase, the United States needs to decide how best to respond, to include possible military action, if the attack reaches that level.
There are numerous areas of further inquiry that this thesis brings to light.  The organization has several neuro S&T programs currently underway, realizing the potential return on investment for the IC. All of these programs are designed to aid the IC in the tasks of analysis and assessment making, which have become increasingly difficult due to the sheer quantity of information available to intelligence analysts.
The U.S. military is also rapidly embracing the potential of neuro S&T and is investing across all the Services. As recently as 2008, the National Research Council of the NAS "reported that the brain sciences showed potential for military and warfare applications, but were not yet wholly viable for operational use." 320 By 2014, they had reversed course in a report titled "Emerging and Readily Available Technologies and National Security: A Framework for Addressing Ethical, Legal, and Societal Issues,"
stating that "developments in the field had progressed to the extent that rendered the brain sciences viable, of definitive value, and a realistic concern for the military." 321 Ethical issues aside, the capabilities to create and exploit new technologies to harness the power of the brain are happening now across the Services.
The Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR), which falls under the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), is leading basic research efforts to support USAF requirements by investing in "areas that offer significant and comprehensive benefits to our national warfighting and peacekeeping capabilities." 
322
330
331
Similar to the USAF, the U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL), nestled under Army Futures Command, is the Army's fundamental research laboratory charged with scientific discovery, innovation, and bringing new capabilities to the USA. 
332
333
Another area of interest for the USA is using the brain as the primary means of communication. In 2008, the USA began pursuing 'synthetic telepathy,' a technology designed to allow military members to communicate using only their brains. 
334
335
The DOD has entered the fray in creating weapons that have the technological potential to be used as neuroweapons, although that is not their stated or primary intent.
The USA and USMC have been active in creating non-lethal weapons in order to give military options to disrupt hostile activities without causing kinetic effects or collateral damage. The USA has created a prototype system called Solid State Active Denial Technology, or SS-ADT, which "is a DEW that uses RF millimeter waves at 95 GHz traveling at the speed of light to create a brief intolerable heating sensation on the person's skin at tactically useful ranges." 336 See Figures 
1
2
337
338
The Office of Naval Research (ONR) oversees the science and technology programs for both the USN and USMC by organizing, executing, and sponsoring broad investments in basic and applied research applicable to these Services. 
342
348
USSOCOM has been and will continue to be on the leading edge of neuro S&T research, especially for cognitive enhancement. In 2013, USSOCOM sought to establish a Center of Excellence in Operational Neuroscience through a partnership at Yale University with a goal to use neuroscience to provide a tactical advantage to military members in the field. 
350
In 2016, when then-SecDef Ash Carter gave a speech opening up the Defense Innovation Unit Experimental (DIUx) in Cambridge, he highlighted a partnership with a neuro S&T company called Halo Neuroscience:
They've invented a wearable device that looks like a pair of headphones and uses non-invasive electrical stimulation to increase the brain's natural ability to adapt to training. These headsets will be used by teams from our special operations forces who will work with Halo to gauge how effective their device might be to improving marksmanship, close-quarters combat skills and overall strength training. 
351
351 Ash Carter, "Remarks On Opening DIUx East and Announcing the Defense Innovation Board" (Cambridge, MA, July 26, 2016), https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Speeches/Speech/Article/858155/ remarks-on-opening-diux-east-and-announcing-the-defense-innovation-board/. better and faster. 
352
353
355
The Joint Special Operations University (JSOU) put out a call for research in 2020 under the 'Innovation for Future Threats' topic area to discuss the potential implications of neuroweapons on the force, including the commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) technology available to adversaries, the risk posed to SOF, and improving detection and mitigation of neuro threats. 
356
The DHA is "a joint, integrated Combat Support Agency that enables the Army, Navy, and Air Force medical services to provide a medically ready force and ready medical force to Combatant Commands in both peacetime and wartime. The DHA supports the delivery of integrated, affordable, and high quality health services to Military Health System (MHS) beneficiaries and is responsible for driving greater integration of clinical and business processes across the MHS." 
357
358
This appendix highlighted recent progress by U.S. national security organizations in delivering the first iteration of neuro S&T programs. Based on the wide-ranging and cuttingedge work that many important institutions are doing in neuro S&T, including government agencies, DARPA, IARPA, the Military Services, and USSOCOM, it should be clear from the discussion that future technological breakthroughs may revolutionize and alter human society, human consciousness, and war, even leading to a new domain of warfare. 
359
19 John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, "Cyberwar Is Coming!," Comparative Strategy 12, no. 2 (April 1, 1993): 142, https://doi.org/10.1080/01495939308402915.
It begins with the development and early application of neuroscience to provide context on the age of the industry. It continues with highlights from early government efforts in this realm, focusing on the public's fascination with mind control, and continues with more recent efforts by the government to coordinate brain R&D. The bulk of the chapter is dedicated to defining and categorizing neuro S&T into two broad categories: performance enhancement and performance degradation. Included is a discussion on current lines of effort and future military applications within each of these categories. A further discussion on specific efforts is continued in the appendix. The chapter concludes with a broad foundation to the legal challenges in this area. Weaved throughout are the potential and implications of militarizing neuro S&T on the future. The theme is, based on the history of technological progress in other realms and the current technology that is unlocking ways to read and understand the brain, governments will continue to develop, refine, and employ neuro S&T to further national security ends. It is also inevitable that adversaries will try to make strategic gains in this area, similar to how 30 Leonard Lopate Show, "Behold the Most Complicated Object in the Known Universe," WNYC, accessed August 3, 2021, https://www.wnyc.org/story/michio-kaku-explores-human-brain/. 31 Richard F. Thompson and Stephen A. Madigan, Memory: The Key to Consciousness (Princeton, N.J. ; Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2007), vi.
It begins with the development and early application of neuroscience to provide context on the age of the industry. It continues with highlights from early government efforts in this realm, focusing on the public's fascination with mind control, and continues with more recent efforts by the government to coordinate brain R&D. The bulk of the chapter is dedicated to defining and categorizing neuro S&T into two broad categories: performance enhancement and performance degradation. Included is a discussion on current lines of effort and future military applications within each of these categories. A further discussion on specific efforts is continued in the appendix. The chapter concludes with a broad foundation to the legal challenges in this area. Weaved throughout are the potential and implications of militarizing neuro S&T on the future. The theme is, based on the history of technological progress in other realms and the current technology that is unlocking ways to read and understand the brain, governments will continue to develop, refine, and employ neuro S&T to further national security ends. It is also inevitable that adversaries will try to make strategic gains in this area, similar to how 30 Leonard Lopate Show, "Behold the Most Complicated Object in the Known Universe," WNYC, accessed August 3, 2021, https://www.wnyc.org/story/michio-kaku-explores-human-brain/. 31 Richard F. Thompson and Stephen A. Madigan, Memory: The Key to Consciousness (Princeton, N.J. ; Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2007), vi.
44
Richard Condon's novel
Richard Condon's novel
Brain-computer 
Brain-computer 
technology-threat-warning-system/. 88 "Our Organization," SOF AT&L, accessed August 12, 2021, https://www.socom.mil/SOF-ATL/ Pages/Our-Organization.aspx.
91 Royal Society, Brain Waves Module 3: Neuroscience, Conflict and Security, 1. 92 National Research Council, Emerging Cognitive Neuroscience and Related Technologies, 51.
The broadest definition comes from Dr. James Giordano, stating: "The objectives for neuroweapons in 93 Royal Society, Brain Waves Module 3: Neuroscience, Conflict and Security, 1. 94 Krishnan, Military Neuroscience and the Coming Age of Neurowarfare, 14.
The broadest definition comes from Dr. James Giordano, stating: "The objectives for neuroweapons in 93 Royal Society, Brain Waves Module 3: Neuroscience, Conflict and Security, 1. 94 Krishnan, Military Neuroscience and the Coming Age of Neurowarfare, 14.
99 Royal Society, Brain Waves Module 3: Neuroscience, Conflict and Security, 9. 100 Krishnan,
111  
111  
of effort, within each of these camps, including potential military applications. It concluded with the legal and regulatory gap that neuro S&T currently falls into. Interlaced throughout is the potential and implications of militarizing neuro S&T on the future. It should be clear from the discussion that future technological breakthroughs may revolutionize and alter human society, human consciousness, and war, leading to a new domain of warfare.
of effort, within each of these camps, including potential military applications. It concluded with the legal and regulatory gap that neuro S&T currently falls into. Interlaced throughout is the potential and implications of militarizing neuro S&T on the future. It should be clear from the discussion that future technological breakthroughs may revolutionize and alter human society, human consciousness, and war, leading to a new domain of warfare.
About a month after the almost two-dozen cases were reported in Vienna, more cases occurred in Vietnam. On 24 August, Havana Syndrome symptoms were so severe that at least two U.S. diplomats had to be medically evacuated from Hanoi after an attack in their personal residences.
About a month after the almost two-dozen cases were reported in Vienna, more cases occurred in Vietnam. On 24 August, Havana Syndrome symptoms were so severe that at least two U.S. diplomats had to be medically evacuated from Hanoi after an attack in their personal residences.
CIA officers with almost three decades of experience and losing someone of his caliber ultimately hurts national security. If this is continued in a targeted, deliberate, systematic fashion, serious damages to national security will accumulate as key people in senior leadership positions are no longer willing and/or able to do their jobs.
prescribes exactly how a U.S. adversary may seek such an asymmetrical approach to counter American might: "These modes of conflict are generally reflected by instances in which a nation chooses to counter or confront a potential adversary by investing in offdesign technologies and highly innovative concepts of operations, rather than by imitating the structure and doctrine of the opposing forces."
prescribes exactly how a U.S. adversary may seek such an asymmetrical approach to counter American might: "These modes of conflict are generally reflected by instances in which a nation chooses to counter or confront a potential adversary by investing in offdesign technologies and highly innovative concepts of operations, rather than by imitating the structure and doctrine of the opposing forces."
221 Sun Tzu and James Clavell, The Art of War (New York: Delacorte Press, 1983), 20. 222 Martin Van Creveld, The Transformation of War (New York : Toronto : New York: Free Press ; Collier Macmillan Canada ; Maxwell Macmillan International, 1991).
great
Dr. Arquilla and Dr. Ronfeldt asked many pertinent questions about cyberwar in their "Cyberwar is Coming!" article that are applicable here: "What would a
Dr. Arquilla and Dr. Ronfeldt asked many pertinent questions about cyberwar in their "Cyberwar is Coming!" article that are applicable here: "What would a
Robert Bartholomew, "An Open Letter to the Diplomats With 'Havana Syndrome,'" Psychology Today, November 2, 2019, https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/its-catching/201911/open-letter-thediplomats-havana-syndrome.
4 "J5 Donovan Group Radical Speaker Series: Neuroweapons," SOFWERX, August 21, 2018, https://www.sofwerx.org/neuroweapons
/. 5 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2020, An Assessment of Illness in U.S. Government Employees and Their Families at Overseas Embassies (Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2020), x, https://doi.org/10.17226/
25889. 6 Adam T. Biggs et al., "Unconventionally Acquired Brain Injury: Guidance and Instruction About an Emerging Challenge to Warfighter Brain Health," Journal of Special Operations Medicine 21, no. 2 (2021): 43-48.
Krishnan, Military  Neuroscience and the Coming Age of Neurowarfare.
Robert L. Heilbroner, "Do Machines Make History?," Technology and Culture 8, no. 3 (July 1967): 338, https://doi.org/10.2307/3101719.
Heilbroner, 345.    
Eliot A. Cohen, "A Revolution in Warfare," Foreign Affairs 75, no. 2 (March -April 1996): 38, https://doi.org/10.2307/20047487.
Cohen, "A Revolution in Warfare," 51.   
Anna de Courcy Wheeler, "Directed Energy Weapons" (Geneva: Article 36, November 2017), https://article36.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/directed-energy-weapons.pdf.
Krishnan, Military Neuroscience and the Coming Age of Neurowarfare, 117.   
Royal Society, Brain Waves Module 3: Neuroscience, Conflict and Security, 11.   
Torsti Sirén, Winning Wars Before They Emerge: From Kinetic Warfare to Strategic Communications as a Proactive and Mind-Centric Paradigm of the Art of War (Boca Raton: Universal-Publishers, 2013), 86.
DeFranco, DiEuliis, and Giordano, "Redefining Neuroweapons: Emerging Capabilities in  Neuroscience and Neurotechnology,
" 58.
Krishnan, Military  Neuroscience and the Coming Age of Neurowarfare, 1.
Will Grant, "US-Cuba Thaw Halted Amid Diplomat Injuries," BBC News, September 30, 2017, sec. Latin America & Caribbean, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-latin-america-41452606.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2020, An Assessment of Illness in U.S. Government Employees and Their Families at Overseas Embassies, 2.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2020, 2.
Steve Dorsey, "Uzbekistan Incident Raises Suspicions of Russian Involvement in Cuba Attacks," CBS News, November 28, 2017, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/uzbekistan-incident-raises-suspicions-ofrussian-involvement-in-cuba-attacks/.
  133 Dorsey.   
Julia Ioffe, "The Mystery of the Immaculate Concussion," GQ, October 19, 2020, https://www.gq.com/story/cia-investigation-and-russian-microwave-attacks.
Nike Ching, "Blinken Accents Democracy, Migration in Visits to Ecuador, Colombia," VOA, October 20, 2021, https://www.voanews.com/a/blinken-focuses-on-democracy-migration-while-visitingecuador-colombia/6278542.html.
Courtney Kube and Carol E. Lee, "As Mystery Over 'Havana Syndrome' Lingers, a New Concern Emerges," NBC News, June 9, 2021, https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/national-security/mystery-overhavana-syndrome-lingers-new-concern-emerges-n1270082.
  195 Thompson, "What  Are the Mysterious 'Havana Syndrome' Attacks in D.C.?"
Richard Szafranski, "Neocortical Warfare? The Acme of Skill," Military Review, November 1994,  51.   
White House, National  Security Strategy of the United States of America (Washington, DC: White House, 2017), 2-3, https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf.
Andrea Gilli and Mauro Gilli, "Why China Has Not Caught Up Yet," International Security 43,  no. 3 (Winter 2018): 141.   
John Arquilla, "Perils of the Gray Zone Paradigms Lost, Paradoxes Regained," Prism 7, no. 3 (2018): 122.
Department of Defense, Competition Continuum, Joint Doctrine Note 1-19 (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2019), v.
Krishnan, "Attack on the Brain: Neurowars and Neurowarfare," 20.
Krishnan, Military Neuroscience and the Coming Age of Neurowarfare, 139.   
Szafranski, 47.   
Krishnan, 16.   
Krishnan,[17][18] 
Krishnan,[17][18] 
Giordano, Neurotechnology in National Security and Defense, 116.   
Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, "Cognitive Domain Operations: The PLA's New Holistic Concept for Influence Operations," JamestownFoundation, China Brief, 19, no. 16 (September 6, 2019), https://jamestown.org/program/cognitive-domain-operations-the-plas-new-holistic-concept-for-influenceoperations/.
244 Timothy L. Thomas, "Russian Forecasts of Future War," Military Review, June 2019, 86, https://www.armyupress.army.mil/Journals/Military-Review/English-Edition-Archives/May-June-2019/ Thomas-Russian-Forecast/.
Aris Teon, "Brainwashing the People -Mao Zedong, the Chinese Communist Party and the Politics of Thought Control," The Greater China Journal (blog), March 10, 2019, https://china-journal.org/ 2019/03/10/brainwashing-the-people-mao-zedong-the-chinese-communist-party-and-the-politics-ofthought-control/.
246 Miles Maochun Yu, "Beijing's Woke Propaganda War in America," Hoover Institution, May 5, 2021, https://www.hoover.org/research/beijings-woke-propaganda-war-america.
Joy Putney, "Neurotechnology for National Defense: The U.S. and China," The Cipher Brief (blog), July 1, 2021, https://www.thecipherbrief.com/column_article/neurotechnology-for-national-defensethe-u-s-and-china.
256 "Military-Civil Fusion and the People's Republic of China," Department of State, 2017-2021, https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/What-is-MCF-One-Pager.pdf.
Manoj Joshi and Pushan Das eds, "The Future of War in South Asia: Innovation, Technology and Organisation," Observer ResearchFoundation and Global Policy Journal, 2021, 42-43.   
Sharma, "Has India Finally Acknowledged That Chinese PLA Used Microwave Weapons Against Indian Soldiers In Ladakh?"
Hambling, "India Disputes Claim That China Routed Their Troops With Microwave Blaster."   
The World Factbook, "Real GDP (Purchasing Power Parity)," CIA.gov, November 2, 2021, https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/field/real-gdp-purchasing-power-parity/country-comparison.
Krishnan, "Attack on the Brain: Neurowars and Neurowarfare," 20.
Arquilla and Ronfeldt, "Cyberwar Is Coming!," 143.   
The Living Weapon, directed by John
Rubin (2007;
Arquilla and Ronfeldt, "Cyberwar Is Coming!," 154.   
Brittany Fogel, "Solid State -Active Denial Technology," DVIDS, accessed July 15, 2021,  
"Defense Health Agency," Health.mil, accessed August 17, 2021, https://health.mil/About-MHS/ OASDHA/Defense-Health-Agency.
"Wearable Radio Frequency Weapon Exposure Detector," SBIR.gov, accessed July 15, 2021, https://www.sbir.gov/node/1841633.
Krishnan, Military  Neuroscience and the Coming Age of Neurowarfare, 1.
not entire military formations. 
271
272
The following section refers to Russia.
Russia as a government and a society has shown an interest since the 19th century in the study of the human mind and how it can be influenced. 
Ultimately, there is no higher valuation in war than subversion of the enemy's mind. If this can be achieved through targeting the enemy's brain directly, it would be the most powerful weapon that has ever been devised by humanity.
-Dr. 
Armin Krishnan, 2016 300
Indeed, this hypothesis is based on the persuasive arguments made by a growing number of academics, scientists, and thinkers over the past few decades but has recently been brought into sharper focus with the real-world Havana Syndrome cases, as well as the current strategic environment and competitors' actions in this space. Neurowarfare has the potential to radically change the nature of warfare and the state that can harness this potential first will gain a key strategic advantage over potential adversaries.
Chapter II cataloged the various advances in neuro S&T that have provided a fuller, collective understanding of how the brain functions. Though U.S. government efforts at understanding the brain date back to the early years of the Cold War, it has been the technological revolution of computing the past three decades that has critically propelled this emerging field by leveraging communication synergies. When it comes to possible weaponization of neurotechnology, the authors used the United Kingdom's 2012 Royal Society report to distinguish between performance enhancement and performance degradation to best categorize various technologies. While enhancement has clear utility for both military and civilians, degradation technologies will likely be used most often in military, law enforcement, or national security settings for the foreseeable future.