# ID: cd318dc1905749d2bc159ec05deabce9
# Title: Neurowar is Here!
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Mysterious attacks on the human brain have begun plaguing U.S. diplomats and officials with increasing frequency, ranging from overseas diplomatic outposts to right here in the United States.
Known in the media as Havana Syndrome, these attacks appear to be signaling a new form of warfare-one that is focused on enhancing, targeting, and weaponizing the human brain-neurowarfare.
Indeed, the human brain is at the center of a biotechnological revolution currently underway.
At the same time, great power competition has returned to the forefront of international relations, as China and Russia seek to contest America's global leadership.
In an increasingly globalized and interconnected world, this contest is ultimately a battle of ideas and influence, with more value placed on information and non-lethal means to manipulate and control both adversaries and domestic populations alike.
The battle for influence begins and ends in the human mind, where reality is perceived.
The implications of these developments point to both a new form and domain of warfare centering on the human brain.
By highlighting recent attacks targeting the brain and revealing research from the United States and its two main competitors-China and Russia-this thesis seeks to argue that neurowar is not just coming, but rather is already here and is likely to fundamentally alter conflict and warfare.