# ID: cea015ff97f8462bbf86249e6ab0c369
# Title: Civil-Military Relations in the French Fourth Republic during the First Indochina War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The stunning defeat of the French Third Republic by the German Third Reich at the start of the Second World War underscored the vulnerable condition of both France's political apparatus and her army. The political groups of the Fourth Republic experienced turbulence, particularly in the development of a coherent foreign policy regarding Indochina. The French Army emerged from the Second World only to face dwindling troop strength, poor equipment and training, an overreliance on colonial troops, and low morale. France started war with the Viet Minh in hopes of retaining Indochina as a French-controlled territory. France quickly found that this control would not come easy. A rigid foreign policy seeking colonial control and seemingly constant turnovers of leadership within both the government and the French Far East Command in Indochina hindered France's efforts in the region. In 1950, Southeast Asia gained international focus as a new front in the war on Communism. The French continued fighting for control over Indochina under the guise of anti-communism. The war would continue until 1954 when France suffered a strategic defeat at Dien Bien Phu. In the end, an uncompromising foreign and colonial policy required military leaders to view force as the only means to achieve success in Indochina.
The French struggle to pacify Viet Minh nationalists during the First Indochina War from 1945 to 1954 should have cautioned US policymakers and military leaders. Unfortunately, it did not, and the United States picked up where France left off. Nearly twenty years later, America signed a cease-fire with Vietnamese communists in 1973, providing an unexpected end to the Vietnam War. While the US military had success on the battlefield, rigid political goals hindered military leaders from employing an effective strategy to achieve lasting results. France experienced a similar situation after the Second World War as French politicians struggled to develop coherent domestic and foreign policies. The political elite hoped to return France to greatness by restoring their colonial empire, particularly their "crown jewel" of Indochina. 
1
2
The collapse of the French Third Republic and their near-civil war during the Second World War serves a starting point to investigate this question.
The army of the German Third Reich swept across northern France in May of 1940 and destroyed more than just the French military. Unlike the First World War where a united France experienced a shared struggle and victory, France split immediately after Germany's swift defeat of the French military. 
4
5
6
7
4
5
8
The Free French movement formed shortly after the armistice with Germany. Soldier turned statesman Charles de Gaulle urged both French citizens and the Vichy government to resist German occupation, while rallying his countrymen around the idea of a new government under his leadership. 
9
10
11
The Vichy French government fell shortly after the Allied invasion of Europe. Both active and passive supporters of the Vichy government suffered during the process of epuration, a violent movement to remove Vichy politicians, civil servants, and Nazi collaborators. 
13
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
There is considerable literature on French political and social history pertinent to the Vichy years and the Fourth Republic. Modern literature regarding French domestic politics gives attention to many aspects, including the collapse of the French Third Republic, the Vichy French regime and Free French movement, and the transition to the Fourth Republic. These perspectives range from viewing the internal structures of French government to situating French domestic politics within the greater post-Second World War Europe. For example, Philip Buck and John Masland discussed the constitutional arrangements of the Fourth Republic in Governments of Foreign Powers. They pointed to problems created by attempting to carry over a mostly inefficient system of government from the Third Republic to an era that required strong leadership to bring France out of economic and social decline. Alexander Werth, in France:
22 US military doctrine identifies the strategic level of war as one when a nation determines security objectives and guidance. At the tactical level of war, the military plans and executes battles and engagements to achieve higher military objectives. These two levels of war intersect at the operational level of war where campaigns consisting of multiple battles and engagements seek to achieve strategic and political objectives. For more on the levels of war, see Joint Publication 3-0: Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2011), I-12-14.  1940-1955, addressed the French Fourth Republic amidst its collapse in 1956. He pointed to the division of the country in 1940 and the subsequent attempt by the Resistance to create a "new" France in 1944 as the impetus for a reckless foreign policy that perpetuated the eight-year drama of the First Indochina War. Julian Jackson moved beyond what became the typical history of German-occupied France in France: The Dark Years, 1940-1944. Rather than view the Vichy, Resistance, and Nazi collaborators in isolation, he showed the dynamic relationship of the various groups that underscored these tumultuous years. In The Fourth Republic, 1944-1958, Jean-Pierre   Rioux provided a definitive account from the beginnings of the Fourth Republic in 1944 to its collapse in the midst of the Algerian War in 1958. He addressed the fractured nature of French politics, economy, and a rehabilitating society, all within the backdrop of an evolving Europe, France's colonial war, and the emerging Cold War. Irwin Wall, in The United State and the Making of Postwar France, 1945-1954, examined the US role in reshaping France's economy, diplomacy, and society, particularly in America's attempts to combat rising communist influence in both France and abroad.
Observations of the development and implementation of France's foreign policy after the Second World vary from detailed accounts of events leading to the First Indochina War to the war's larger setting within the communist and anti-communist struggle of the Cold War. Eric T. Jennings, in Vichy in the Tropics: Petain's National Revolution in Madagascar, Guadeloupe, and   Indochina, 1940-1944, viewed the Vichy regime's involvement in each of France's three more important colonies. Particularly, he pointed out that Vichy France's rhetoric of colonial equality failed to match reality, a theme that continued in the Fourth Republic's foreign policy. In Vietnam, 1945, David Marr reasoned that although the First Indochina War became a frenzy of intense international competition, the French Fourth Republic and Ho Chi Minh's nationalist uprising were the two key factors. Stein Tonnesson pointed to the clash of two different ideologies and the breakdown in Franco-Vietnamese negotiations in 1946 as the impetus for the war in Vietnam 1946: How the War Began. Bernard Fall's Street without Joy focused on the international concern over communism as the motive for France's changing war aims. Frank Giles, a Times correspondent during the First Indochina War, charted France's postwar international politics in The Locust Years. He focused on the men and issues that dominated the Fourth Republic within the setting of the nationalist uprisings in its colonies. In Ending Empire: Contested Sovereignty and Territorial Partition, Hendrik Spruyt examined the colonial empires of both democratic and authoritarian governments. He argued that a fractured political institution, like the French Fourth Republic, provided more opportunity for hard-liners to reject compromises with colonial nationalists. Frederik Logevall offered a comprehensive account of the First Indochina War in the Embers of War: The Fall of an Empire and the Making of America's Vietnam. Although he focused on growing US involvement as a preface to the Vietnam War, Logevall concluded that there is no single cause for France's failure in Indochina.
Less attention has been given to the French Army immediately before, during, and after the Second World War. Historians often contrast French greatness under Napoleon Bonaparte in the early 19th Century to their failures thereafter, sometimes using their plight to compare the contemporary affairs of the US Army. Paul-Marie la Gorce, in French Army: A Military-Political History, traced the French Army from its defeat in 1870 by Prussia to its failures in Algiers and focused on the interconnected nature of French politics and her military. Similarly, John S. Ambler's The French Army in Politics, 1945-1962 highlighted the French Army's close ties with the French political elite. More importantly, he emphasized that the fracture of French politics, economy, and society in 1940 created a similar fissure in the French Army. Anthony Clayton's Three Marshals of France followed three of France's greatest military leaders. Two in particular, Jean de Lattre de Tassigny and Phillippe de Hautecloque "Leclerc," had a profound influence on the French Army and France's military operations in Indochina. 
23
France emerged from the Second World War with a badly wounded political and military apparatus. The fissure in France's political system widened as the Fourth Republic began to form after the liberation of Paris in 1944. The numerous and disparate political groups prevented any one group from asserting direction over domestic and foreign policy. In both the military and political arenas, distrust remained after the war between those who defected to the Free French movement and those who either actively or passively supported German occupation.
Underwriting this stormy relationship was a fragile society. The German occupation forced a migration of at least two million French citizens. French citizens were slow to regain their confidence in their government's ability to act in the interest of their nation. Similarly, the French military, long known as Europe's most prepared, split along Vichy and Free French lines after their catastrophic defeat in 1940. 
24
From August 1944 to the beginning of 1946, Charles de Gaulle was a central figure in the initial attempt to rejuvenate the French nation. De Gaulle's Resistance Council quickly set to 
23
Logevall,
Embers of War,
118. 24
enacting comprehensive economic and social reforms after the liberation of Paris in August 1944. These reforms included "dismantling of the feudal empires of money and finance, planning-based growth to ensure general prosperity, worker participation, and strategic nationalization," all of which seemed to close the divide between the different political ideologies. 
25
26
27
28
25 Rioux, The French Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 49
26
27
28 Eric Jennings provides an account of the Vichy regimes involvement in Indochina after the collapse of the Third Republic. Specifically, he points to Vichy claims of universalism, or the extending of full French rights and privileges to colonists, while continuing to subjugate their colonists to inequality. Jennings argues this contradiction served as the impetus for the later Indochina War. See Eric T. Jennings, Vichy in the Tropics: Petain's National Revolution in Madagascar, Guadeloupe, and Indochina, 1940-1944 (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,  2001).
reinvigorating. 
29
The ensuing argument over colonial policy created an abyss of political ideas. Calls ranged from approving French citizenship for Indochinese nationalists, but not independence, to those seeing anything different from the pre-war status quo as inconceivable. 
30
31
32
29 Rioux, The French Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 53-4
33
34
De Gaulle formed the RPF in April 1947 around of group of zealous French nationalists.
The party detested much of the political elite and the National Assembly-dominated government. 
35
36
37
1945
-1950
," 135. 37 Rioux, The French Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 156.
38
39
40
41
French politics for many years. Like the RPF, the MRP called for a strong executive branch. They hoped a strong president would counter-balance the popularly elected National Assembly. 
42
43
39 Rioux, The French Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 81.
41 Mark Atwood Lawrence, Assuming the Burden: Europe and the American Commitment to Vietnam (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2005), 157. 
42 Rioux, The French Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 100. 43
44
These two groups remained interested in the capitalist opportunities presented by the colonies. In 1948, the MRP took more of a centrist approach and claimed to balance the extremes of French government consisting of the far right, anti-Fourth Republic RPF and the far left, communist sympathizing PCF. 
45
The SFIO formed around moderate socialists that balanced their traditional socialist beliefs with humanistic principles of Christianity. 
46
Ultimately, the SFIO pitched a ten-year nationalization period where colonists would become eligible for a new form of imperial citizenship, which included expanded political, electoral, and employment rights. 
47
As the war with Vietnamese nationalists progressed, SFIO rhetoric became more anticommunist in response to the growing violence. As cooperation in the socialist camps deteriorated, the idea that a tripartite coalition of the RPF, the MRP and SFIO, and PCF could form colonial policy became inconceivable. 48 
45 Rioux, The French Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 152-6
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
57 Rioux, The French Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 120
58
War, 1945
War, -1950," 147. 59 ," 147. 59
The French Army stood at nine hundred thousand men in September 1939, with another five million in reserves. 
62
63
64
60
61 Paul H. Kratoska, Southeast Asia: Colonial History (New York, NY: Routledge, 2001), 362.
62 Andrew Mollo, The Armed Forces of World War II (New York, NY: Crown Publishers, 1981), 48. 
63
64
65
66
68
69
72
73
74
75
of French troops had also been one of general isolation before the Second World War, and the victory of 1944 did little to erase the memories of 1940. Civilians began to distance themselves even further from troops who not only performed poorly against the Germans but also sympathized with them or defected to the Free French. 
82
83
84
85
86
The French Fourth Republic assumed their pre-Second World War stance of colonialism to pursue national prestige and economic interests. The onset of the Cold War allowed France to continue their colonial war under the banner of anti-communism, although many in the French government had grown impatient with failed efforts. By 1953, this frustration led many French 
82
83
84
85
Annam. 
90
91
92
The Japanese victory over Russia in 1905 gave hope to Vietnamese nationalists, as an Asian power defeated a major European nation for the first time in modern history. 
93
94
95
96
91
92
93
94
95
96
Ho Chi Minh took up the call for independence at the age of seventeen after studying classic Confucian texts and the writings of early Vietnamese nationalists. 
98
100
101
102
103
97
98
99
101
102
103 Office of Joint History, History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 6.
High Commissioner to Indochina. 
108
109
111
109
110
France to retain some level of involvement in Indochina. 
112
Leclerc's military objectives aimed to control the growing Vietnamese nationalist movement in Indochina to achieve French political goals. As early as February 1946, Leclerc declared Cochinchina and southern parts of Annam pacified and under French authority. 
113
114
Leclerc believed that a show of French power in the north would bring the Viet Minh to the negotiating table. He planned Operation Ben Tre to put the FEC in a position to reoccupy Vietnam north of the 16th parallel. 
115
116
112
113 David G. Marr, "Creating Defense Capacity in Vietnam, 1945-1947," in The First Vietnam War: Colonial Conflict and Cold War Crisis, eds. Mark Atwood Lawrence and Fredrik Logevall (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007), 77. 
114
115
Tonnesson, Vietnam 1946, 41. 116
encouraged France and the Viet Minh to come to a resolution. 
117
118
119
120
121
118
119 Rioux, The Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 93
120
122
123
124
125
126
MRP. 127
122 Tonnesson, Vietnam 1946, 42-4
123
124 Martin Windrow, The Last Valley: Dien Bien Phu and the French Defeat in Vietnam  (Cambridge, MA: De Capo Press, 2005), 90. 
125
126
128
129
Indochina until 1950. 130
133
128 Windrow,
The Last Valley,
92. 129
130
131 Tonnesson, Vietnam 1946, 105. 132 Ibid., 104-5.
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
Nineteen forty-eight opened with French forces in the north spread so thinly that they were unable to exploit any of the tactical success achieved the previous year. At home, France continued to suffer through a poor economic situation, further aggravated by the failure of colonial exports to reach their prewar levels and generate the expected revenue. 
141
143
144
145
140
141
142 Cesari, "The Declining Value of Indochina," 182. 
143
144
Windrow,
The Last Valley,
98. 145
The Viet Minh regained the main road leading to and from their former political base captured during Operation Lea, forcing France to resupply this airbase entirely by air. 
146
147
148
149
150
146
147
148 Rioux, The Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 148
149
151
152
153
154
In the latter half of 1949, the Soviets detonated their first atomic weapon and Mao Zedong's Communist forces triumphed in the Chinese Civil War, leading to the establishment of the People's Republic of China. These events encouraged the United States to enter the conflict by providing economic and materiel support. More importantly, the expansion of the Cold War allowed France to maintain their political resistance to colonial change under the guise of anticommunism. 
155
152
153 Giles,
The Locust Years,
[115]
[116]
[117]
156
157
158
159
160
161
156
157
158
War, 1945
War, -1950," 144. 159 ," 144. 159
160
162
Though French troops later regained Dong Khe, they quickly forgot a Viet Minh tactic that proved decisive in 1954. 
163
164
165
166
164
165
166 Fall,
Street Without Joy,
33.
167
After stopping forty thousand Viet Minh troops at the battle of Vinh Yen, the FEC continued with a campaign to clear rebels in the Tonkin delta. 
169
170
The Viet Minh considered Hao Binh significant, because this area allowed free access of troops and supplies to and from Hanoi. 
171
167
War, 1945
-1950," 149. 168 Fall, Street Without Joy, 34. 169
170
171
172
173
174
General Raoul Salan, de Lattre's military replacement, resumed a more defensive strategy in the north. He spent much of the 1952 monsoon season directing security operations aimed at holding the territory his forces currently occupied. 
175
176
172
173
174 Logevall,
Embers of War,
288.
177
178
179
180
Meanwhile, the political debate over Indochina increased in scope.
France's hardline stance on a military victory in Indochina showed signs of weakening in the early months of 1952. The public became increasingly concerned with the inactive nature of French politics and the declining living standards in France, so much that voters called for a more fiscally conservative government to control inflation. 
181
Mendes France and the center-left coalition of Socialists and Communists increased their opposition to the war. Their main argument highlighted the need to return French troops to Paris as the rearmament of Germany seemed inevitable and French relations deteriorated in their more 
177
178 Windrow,
The Last Valley,
123. 179
180
182
183
184
Giap and the Viet Minh ended France's hope of fighting a defensive war in Tonkin by attacking into neighboring Laos in April 1953. 
185
186
182
183
184 Rioux, The Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 210. 185
186
Second, the consolidation of French troops in the north would fight the Viet Minh in a decisive battle in 1955. 
187
Navarre experienced success in the autumn of 1953. Some, particularly the Socialists in the National Assembly, thought these successful raids were enough to negotiate with Ho Chi Minh. The political right, however, argued that negotiating would only embolden the enemy and hurt the morale of the FEC and fledgling VNA. 
190
191
187
Giles,
The Locust Years,
194. 189 Ibid.,
194. 190 Ibid.,
200;
Logevall,
Embers of War,
398.
192
193
194
The Geneva Accords ended a seesaw war of eight years. France experienced some success during the course of the war and nearly ended the conflict many times. A number of problems commonly plagued the French effort in First Indochina War. First, the absence of a political consensus led to a lack of a coherent foreign policy. The lack of a dominant political party allowed the nature of politics to become fractured and disjointed. Second, the constant changing of both political and military leaders prevented a stable theater strategy from taking shape. A stable theater strategy may have helped focus French military operations towards a clearer goal. Third, French forces could not exploit tactical success, because they lacked sufficient resupplies or reinforcements to consolidate gains in an area. Finally, the conventional tactics employed by French military leaders demonstrated that they misunderstood the nature of the war. While successful during the First and Second World War, the large defensive lines and 
192 Rioux, The French Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 216. 193
194 Rioux, The French Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 217.
The stunning defeat of the French Third Republic at the start of the Second World War underscored the vulnerable condition of both France's political apparatus and her army. Training regimens returned to ones of drill and ceremony, so new troops spent their short year on metropolitan duty focused on things other than tactics and maneuvers. Colonial troops had long been a part of the French way of war. That said, the ratio of metropolitan to colonial troops was disproportionate during the last year of the Second World War and into the First Indochina War.
Finally, the morale of the troops suffered for some time after the Second World War. Officers spent most of their time away from their families and made a fraction of the money officers in other countries, while noncommissioned officers made repeated rotations to the French colonies.
All of these issues contributed to the outcome of the First Indochina War.
The Fourth Republic political groups also experienced turbulence, particularly in the development of a coherent foreign policy in Indochina. The left, the socialist and communist parties, hoped to negotiate with the Vietnamese nationalists and extend partial citizenship. The center groups largely argued to maintain the pre-Second World War colonial status quo by returning Indochina to French control, though the means to do this varied from a military solution to one of diplomacy. The right, notably the Gaullists, seemed content with disrupting the political process by drawing attention to the growing ineffectiveness of French politics. The center view of returning Indochina to colonial control dominated foreign and colonial policy early in the war. This view eventually gave way to a one dominated by an anti-communist rhetoric as the Cold War came to Southeast Asia. In the closing years of the war, the goal of the Fourth Republic's foreign policy in Indochina was simply to save face and leave with dignity. Although the parties controlling the key positions within the National Assembly changed quite frequently, the politicians holding these posts simply moved to another influential position within the government. In short, the parties changed, but the people with the power and ideas existed throughout the war.
French High Commissioner d'Argenlieu and General Leclerc represented France in their return to Indochina in 1945. De Gaulle gave clear guidance to both that nothing short of colonial control was acceptable. D'Argenlieu interpreted this directive as solvable only through military action, while Leclerc saw negotiations and talks with Ho Chi Minh as a non-violent way to prevent all-out war. Leclerc's less threatening methods of returning Indochina to colonial control were short lived, and the war continued on for another eight years. Both the position of the High Commissioner and FEC commander-in-chief looked like a revolving door, one politician or military general leaving as quickly as they had come. French forces in Indochina also seemed to outpace itself from their logistics and operating bases. Despite success in clearing large swathes of territory and killing large numbers of Vietnamese fighters, the FEC continually failed to hold these cleared areas and build upon their success. The outlook on the war turned positive for a short time as General de Lattre assumed the position of both High Commissioner and FEC commander-in-chief. De Lattre had success in securing financial and international support for France's cause under the policy of anti-communism. Unfortunately for France, de Lattre died after a successful year enacting French policy in Indochina. After 1952, French military leaders returned to their former ways of clearing areas without the resources to hold the areas long-term.
The FEC also began training and expanding the Vietnamese National Army in hopes that they could bear more of the fighting as the Giap's fighters grew in skill and number. The final blow came in 1954 after the FEC moved into a valley that seemed necessary to cutting off the logistics routes for Giap's forces, a move that the French hoped would end the war. The end did come, just not the one France expected.
The examination of France's experiences in the Second World War, the French Army, the development of the Fourth Republic, and the First Indochina War leads to a number of findings. First, the French Army was neither prepared nor capable of fighting a protracted war.
French Army leaders and politicians made the greatest mistake in the aftermath of the Second World War by failing to incorporate the Resistance fighters. The French Army and its long serving troops emerged from the Second World War a fractured body. The experience of a humiliating defeat in May 1940, choosing sides after the split, and then the thankless downsizing after the war did not instill hope in the French Army. Had the French politicians and Army strategy development, strategy is doomed to failure if generals become too narrowly focused on tactics and military operations.
Third, French politics did experience instability with political turnover and party disputes during the Indochina War. However, political inflexibility was the greatest cause of the failures in Indochina. The parties in power changed throughout the First Indochina War, but the people did not. Politicians in France, whether for or against returning Indochina to French control, failed to move from this initial goal. From the beginning, de Gaulle took an uncompromising position.
This continued throughout the war, though the underlying strategy changed from returning to the pre-war colonial status quo to one of anti-communism. A large source of this inflexibility came from Georges Bidault and Robert Schuman holding key positions in the French government until 1954. Each of these men maintained the stance of armed negotiations. Francois Goguel made a similar point in 1954. Yet, he viewed the continuity of politicians from one government to another as a mitigation to the fifteen cabinets the Fourth Republic saw between 
1947 and 1954. 197
Richard Sinnreich argues that soldiers tend to ignore history or recall it carelessly. 
198
34  
34  
Frank Giles, The Locust Years (New York, NY: Carroll & Graf Publishers, 1994), 47. France consolidated their colonial crown jewel of Indochina in the late 1800s into the five regions of Laos, Cambodia, and the three territories of Vietnam: Tonkin in the north, Annam in the center, and Cochinchina in the south.
Bernard Fall, Street without Joy: The French Debacle in Indochina (Mechanicsburg,  PA: Stackpole Books, 1961),
3 Harry G. Summers, Jr., On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War (Novato, CA: Presido Press, 1982), 1. Summers addressed the similar issues posed in this monograph. He takes an approach focused on the military aspect of the Vietnam War, particularly how the US Army's success on the battlefield failed to achieve political goals.
Julian Jackson, France: The Dark Years, 1940-1944 (New York, NY: Oxford  University Press, 2001), 43. The Vichy regime did not hold the same high regard as Petain did amongst French citizens. It was Vichy laws, not German, which oppressed French Jews and Freemasons. Jackson, France: The Dark Years, 1-2.
Alexander Werth, France, 1940
-1955
Milan W. Svolik, "Power Sharing and Leadership Dynamics in Authoritarian Regimes," American Journal of Political Science, 53: 477.
Buck and Masland, The Governments of Foreign Powers, 314. De Gaulle ironically served under Petain in the First World War and was captured at the Battle of Verdun. After the war, de Gaulle urged French military leaders to consider a doctrine based in mobile warfare. He fled to England after Germany's march to Paris and assumed a mostly political role. After the French debacle in the Algerian War and the resulting collapse of the Fourth Republic in 1958, de Gaulle returned to lead the Fifth Republic.
Werth, France, 1940-1955, 137.    
Ibid., 
Office of Joint History, History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: The Joint Chiefs of Staffand the First Indochina War, 1947-1954 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2004), 9. As Japan's loses began to mount in early 1945, they suspected French colonial officials of aiding the Allies. Thus, the Japanese overthrew the colonial government.
Ho Chi Minh had also gained a reputation as a staunch supporter of communism. So, not only was he leading an imperial revolt, Ho had the backings of Soviet communists. This mix of nationalist and communist motivations proved to be a dilemma later in the First Indochina War as France's colonial policy was driven by economic advantages and the international focus remained anti-communism.
Mark Atwood Lawrence and Fredrik Logevall, "Introduction," in The First Vietnam War: Colonial Conflict and Cold War Crisis, eds. Mark Atwood Lawrence and Fredrik Logevall (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007), 7.
Hendrik Spruyt, Ending Empire: Contested Sovereignty and Territorial Partition (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Press University,
2005), 12. 20 Stein Tonnesson, Vietnam 1946: How the War Began (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2010), 11. 21 Miles Kahler, Decolonization in France: The Domestic Consequences of International Relations (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984), 7.
Spruyt, Ending Empire, 1.    
Kahler, Decolonization in France, 7.    
Thomas, "French Imperial Reconstruction and the Development of the Indochina War,  1945-1950," 132.   
Thomas, "French Imperial Reconstruction and the Development of the Indochina War,  1945-1950," 130.   
Logevall, Embers of War,[5][6][7] 
Logevall, Embers of War, 124.   
Giles, The Locust Years, 27.   
Rioux, The Fourth Republic, 1944-1958, 120-1.   
Office of Joint History, History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 21.
Rioux, The Fourth Republic, 1944-1958, 148.   
Thomas, "French Imperial Reconstruction and the Development of the Indochina War,  1945-1950," 136.    
Giles, The Locust Years, 135.   
Rioux, The Fourth Republic, 1944-1958, 215.   
Lacey and Murray, Moments of Battle, 393.   
Rioux, The Fourth Republic, 1944-1958, 195.   
Office of Joint History, History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 131.
My interest in the First Indochina War grew from a short presentation that I was asked to
origin and Algerian and Moroccan natives fought under French banners during the Second World War. 
76
77
78
79
There was a reasonably strong tradition of civilian control of the military to French civilians during the Third Republic. The embarrassing defeat to the Germans in 1940 eroded this discipline by forcing officers and troops to choose between loyalty to the Vichy government or to de Gaulle's Free French movement. 
80
81
76
77 Laurie Cesari, "The Declining Value of Indochina: France and the Economics of Empire, 1950-1955," in The First Vietnam War: Colonial Conflict and Cold War Crisis, eds.  Mark Atwood Lawrence and Fredrik Logevall (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,  2007), 182.
78 James Lacey and Williamson Murray, Moment of Battle: The Twenty Clashes that Changed the World (New York, NY: Bantom House, 2013), 389. 
79
Windrow and
Mike Chappell, The First Indochina War, 1946-54: Men-at-Arms (Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 1998), 11. 80
81 Rioux, The French Fourth Republic, 1944
-1958, 12.
88
89
87
88 David Marr provided one of the most detailed narratives and analyses on the rise of Vietnamese nationalism. He argues that 1945 was the most significant year in modern history of Vietnam. Nineteen forty-five, Marr suggests, brought the culmination of over "one thousand years of dynastic politics and monarchist ideology" and saw Vietnam become a vortex of intense international and domestic competition for power. For more on some of the most significant factors affecting the First Indochina War and the Vietnam War, see David Marr, Vietnam 1945 Cochinchina and Tonkin. French forces remained strong enough to crush the rebellions by destroying villages, arresting thousands of nationalist supporters, and executing hundreds of rebel cadre. 
104
105
106
107
104
105 Vo Nguyen Giap gained attention for his role as a military leader during the Viet Minh's resistance of Japanese occupation from 1941 to 1945. His life was marked by tragedy as his father and wife, both ardent Communists, died in French prisons in Indochina. James Warren suggested that he made no secret about his opinions of his colonial adversaries: "they were barbaric exploiters of the downtrodden masses." For more on Giap, see James Warren, Giap: The General who Defeated America in Vietnam (New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013). 
106
107
195
Civilian control of the military is an idea quite familiar to US politicians and military leaders. Some politicians may shy from inserting themselves into military strategy, while assertive politicians may engage in discussions of strategy with their military subordinates. During the First World War, French Prime Minister George Clemenceau purportedly said, "War is too serious a matter to entrust to military men." 196 Regardless of who holds the ultimate responsibility for 
195
The political instability, or in the case of the Fourth Republic's inflexibility, can affect their support for US strategic goals and their willingness to accept an adaptive strategy. The greatest lesson learned from this monograph is that history can show trends over time. If we study, understand, and appreciate these trends and the experiences of others, then we can start to avoid past mistakes.