# ID: cefb9be44d694c699bb57d4c3262d747
# Title: Joint General Staff–how Viable an Option?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1985.0
# Fulltext:
This sWi is an examinatioi of how the present JCS system evolved in U.S. history. By reviewing the character of U.S. colonial heritage and implications of past command structures, the uniquely American rationale for the current system can be more readily understood. The present JCS system itself is analyzed in terms of 9 subjective areas of organizational effectiveness. Sach of these areas is discussed and analyzed for optimurm performance, efficiency, and historical success. 4ext this i exauines key debates which are now or have recently been raised. Each of these examinations of the JCS coimand structure is comnpared against historical trends and previous organiaational difficulties--real or perceiven. The 13 purpose ot this effort was to determine the validity o. AvQibdty Codes Avaýi a~dlor I.ici current criticisms as well as to determine their basis, if any, in historical fact. The conclusions otiare that the United States has failed to organize a national command structure that would optimize military support of the national interests. The reasons for this conscious decision are many and complex.
The historical development of warfare has shown three characteristics which have organizational and command significance today.
The first is nationalism and the gradual evolution of war from Othe game of kings' to a massive struggle for survival between nations and coalitions of nation states.
Over the centuries the result of this transition has been the decline of a comparatively isolated caste of professional soldiers and small armies with a corresponding rise of large national armies. These orqani:ations were aumented by complex mobilization systeAs gearei to caximi:e all of a nation'3 regourcea for war. Nations today are capable of fielding aillions of oen equipped with the means to project power across the globe. The ramifications of this gowth and capability of aiodern armies presents a coaiand and ctntrol problem of the greatest magnitude for -p echelon leaders, military and civilian alike.
Second is the impact of technology upon the face of ear.
Since World War LI and the advent of attic weapons,
numerous nations now possess the capability to qeneraLe destruction which a century ago would have been beyond the comprehension of the most perceptive leaders. War has evolved into an event with the potential of oecoming the end itself. Furthermore, non-nuclear technology, especially in the last century, has vastly increased the capability of nation states to more quickly project power anywhere around the world. This greatly reduces the decision and reaction time available to the National Command Authority (NCA).
Enormous quantities of men and materials can transit the UP oceans of the world in days.
Cities can be attacked and destroyed by intercontinental raissile systems which require only minutes to transit the globe from the time the order to initiate a nuclear strike has been given. This multinational capability requires a command authority for control which is cohesive, decisive, responsive, and well trained. Decisions are required in minutes for situations which deny the luxury of deliberatioe.
A final key charactecistie of warfare today is te sustAined requireeuent Cot the conduct of join.-service operations.
Historically, althoogi• these operations are Aot new to the armed forces of the vorld. toe requirements were temporary and genetally liaited to movement of troops and fleets. Today, virtualIy all military operations are characterized by their joint naturet air, land. and sea.
This culti-faceted operational probl4is, oC c.u-se, much more complex.
Leaders at all levels must understand the different capabilities of the "sister" services, not only to enhance their own operations, but also because of the technology involved. These operational systems integrate joint combat power and make the application of force more effective. Add to this requirement the nature of coalition warfare and the problem becomes even more critical.
Procedures between nations are compromises of national operations systems, such as tactical air support. These compromises, although certainly necessary, further complicate the command, control, and action reaction time so vital on today's battlefields.
Clearly, these key facets of modern warfare pose a significant threat to United States security in the event of a major war. How can we train our officers to operate effectively in such a complex environment? Can the nation be assured of a "system•' of defense which is staffed with the highest caliber of qualified officers, and which operates in an efficiently organized command struicture? Does this command structure integrate the different services 6.irectl.vely and responsibly in times of crisis?
The military command structure of any nation has always required a 3ystem which generates unity, decisiveness, expertise, and responsiveness. These characteristics the Joint Chiefv of Staff (JCS) must possess in order to retain its validity as the top military statf of our nation. In past wars, time has been our ally and deliberaLion our forte. In today's nuclear age, however, they have become our greatest enemy.
Historically, the armed forces of the world have required staffs to ease the burden of command, increase the span of control, and maximize the combat power of the fighting force.
Not until the early 1800's. however, was there a need for nations to begin developing an effective means or model
Zor controlling a national capacity for waging total war.
The Napoleonic Wars introduced a new comaplexity to the art of war, and wi•,l ir, the birth of the general staff system.
Both the French and P.ussian General Stafls were specifically organized to provide expertise, order, and a guiding hand to their respective armies. The success of these general staffs in providing the expertise required for planning, mobilization, and command and control enabled warfare to be conducted more efficiently and effectlvely at a national level. This enhanced the capabilities of the SOGreat Captains* and field commanders in impleaenting the national will.
in the United States, however, the use and spread of the two major European general staff systems were viewed with a jaundiced eye. Since before the Revolutionary War, Americans have harbored an instinctive distrust and fear of a powerful, professional military. The premise of civilian control, as well as the value of the citizen soldier, were deeply imbedded in American thought and ideals while still a colony under British rule. The establishment of our decantralized militia system, and the lack of a formal, permanent military command system is a direct reflection of our British lineage and our unique geographical and military situation.
The dismal performaace of America's national military command mechanisms in the 19th century contrasted with the rise and successes of Prussia and its general staff led to a recommendation by Major General Emory L. Upton, in his book
The Armies of Europe and Asia, that such a system be established in the United States. The furor and debate since that recommendation has not ceased and continues today at the highest echelons ot American government and military command circles.
The significance of these historical attitudes has formed the cornerstone of this issue for over a century. Now to resolve the internal conflict betwean an efficient military command structure while insuring that the nation is protected from that very power# still has significant
The issue is no longer simply one of civil-military control, but an issue which involves the independence of the services themselves.
Today the United States possesses global interests and allies.
It is also faced, for the first time, bt a threat which is its near equal in war potential, mobilization, military power, and national will.
In this age of nuclear weapons and technological achievemnent, it is the ability of our national military command structure Lhat will be tested first. The capability * of the JCS to rapidly acquire, assimilate, and accurately assess eno)rmous amounts of intelligence and rezommend unified operations of joint commands is critical to national preparedness and survival. That capability is suspect ani could yet pr2ve .o be the decisive factor in a major war of the fut.ure.
Critics of a strong qgneral staff, joint or otherwise, have repeatedly testified before Con#gress that the orgatizatioas which have characterized America's top military stafts are a necessary evi'; that disunity and inefficiency are acceptable and even necessary in our Shighest military staffs t3 insLOe civil control. iet is this really true? Can we affori to asr-'me any longer Lnat a Sunified, esficient, national militar-command structure is not feasible in a demc.cracy?
The objectives of this research study weret 1. To analyze the validity of the current Joint Chlefs  in an age of mass destruction, the United States is facing a potential threat with enormous military and "technological capabilities. Today there is not time for reorganization as the first battle may be the last.
Therefore the organiational and operational capabilties of our highest staff must be optimized. To insure our itamediate and effective response in war, the efficiency and uAity of peacetime preparedness, unity and command as critical before "-* the first shot has been fired.
This study examin6s the feasibility of achieving a proper balance between two fundamental military requirements; unity and efficiency. These requirements must
be measured against several fundamental assumptions of major significance which have been made in the latter part of this chapter.
SFor purposes of this study it will first be assumed that by reason of political necessity the JCS must continue to be subordinate to U.S. civil authorities.
Secondly, the organizational characteristics of the staff must clearly support the demands currently being met by the JCS system.
Thirdly, the question of sustainability must be considered. It is not enough to establish an organization which does not possess the credibility to insure the support of all of the services which will provide the personnel to run it. This must be assumed as being in each of the services' best interests to assure effective representation and to insure that the highest standards of professional competence are maintained.
Fourth, it must be recognized that no staff system would prove a viable alternative to the current JCS system if its establishment would jeopordize the very institution it was chartered to protect. Since most of the great European staffs developed in environments which are fundamentally dissimilar to American institutions, it is unlikely that a *carbon copy" of these staffs would support national requirements while simultaneously safeguarding American ideals of individual liberty and our democratic system of government as a whole.
Finally, the interface of a joint general staff or any modification of the JCS must be readily adaptable to fit within the current organiztion of the Defense Department and the military services as a whole. Because each of thesse organizations are uniquely American in character, so too must be the staff that commands, coordinates, and supports it.
if these conditions cannot be met, then the ability of the JCS or joint service general staff to operate "effectively over time is doubtful.
This study will'be limited in scope to the overall process of command, control, and functional needs of the military service; the unity of command necessary to iraplemont those needb, and the training, personnel and functional areas necessary to estabilish this required control.
Although numerous general staff syst&,4s have been in existence for over a century, it should be recognized that the United States military as an institution has 9 -•• xc peculiarities which do rot readily lend themselves to the adoption of any specific system past or present.
Therefore, the intent of this study, although certainly .drawing from the examples of history and other nations' experience, will concentrate primarily in the organization and operational needs of the United States in particular.
The unique aspects of our military system will be examined in broad overview and measured against the requirements levied on the current JCS system. The views of many chiefs of statf, past and present, which address apspects of this issue pro and con have been presented to Congress and Presidential committees. It is these views which will be analyzed in detail, and against which the viability of the JCS or a joint general staff will be measured.
The research methodology used in this study was fourfold:
First, an examination of the historical development of The second phase of research consisted of an analysis of the JCS structure itself. Selected principles of staff organization were used in determining the effectiveness of the JCS system. These principles are the opinions of recent participants in the organization as well as political and civilian analysts who are considered experts in the field of civil-military command, control, and interface.
Third was a comparative analysis of current issues versus historical problems. The United States has repeatedly change4 its national military organization in both peace and war. This aspect of the study was to identify present criticisms of the JCS system as it exists today with the historical problems of command and control experienced by the United States in its history.
The volatility of the debate concerning the JCS system provided a wealth of personal opinions both for and against reorganization.
In an absence of historical precedence, the conclusions in this thesis were reached by corroborating the opinions of expects. These opinions from the past and present were compared for the purpose of identifying problems which have historically reoccurred within the U.S. national command structure. By using the staff evaluation guide offered by Colonel Oupuy, a format was obtained for orderly presentation.
The final phase of this study examined the feasibility addressing those key issues through the creation of a joint general staff system. Additionally, every eifort was made to safeguard principles of democracy without sacrificing military efficiency.
In brief, the research methodology utilized in this study examines the need, if any, for the establishment of such a staff within the confines and limitations of vniquely American institutions and requirements. For it is only against these very limitations and requirements that the viability of a joint general staff can be judged.    1984). This is the *purple book" and provides current JCS organization, joint doctrine, procedures, and is written specifically for officers serving in the joint environment.
Any stady of the JCS system will require an understanding of non-topic related subjects in order to achieve a clear picture of how the system functions. An example of these OoutworksO are government and contractual =N k publications on the Planning, Programming, Budgeting System (PPBS) and Joint Strategic Planning System (JSPS). Neither the Budget nor the JSPS is directly related to the JCS staff organization in terms of subject matter. However, a clear understanding of the interrelationships of each with our joint system is critical in order to achieve an accurate picture of how and why the organization truly functions in the manner it does. Implications into staff design, system complexity, as well as historical changes and proposals are more readily appreciated.
While the literature mentioned in this chapter and within the bibliography is by no means all inclusive, all major arguments were examined on both sides of the issue prior to the final analysis.
Each of the research areas yielded significant characteristics of national military command and control which can be readily traced to its historical roots in U.S.
history. This study will address these key areas in detail and, under the parameters previously identiEied, carry them to their logical conclusion. Blitzkrieg received its baptism of fire with the German The first issue simply reflects the fact that the Root Reforms dealt primarily with internal Army organization and command and control. The L)epartment of the Navy was not affected organizationally or operationally, and continued to pursue its own independent strategy and service objectives.
As a result of this act; no specific military headquarters organization was established to control and direct both services.
Louis 
Morton, in
Vortunately. the massive superiority of U.S. resources combined with the severe strategic/resources limitations of the Axis powers minimized the potentially lisasterous effects of this division. The Philippines-Ior~oa controversi previously mentioned was resolved not by a command and control system, but was overcome by events; i.e.
the United States fortunately possessed the resources to conduct both operations simultaneously.
2 0
The gradual evolvement of the United States Air Force into a separate service also began to further compound the problem, although until the dropping of the atomic bo~ib on fHiroshima and Nagasaki, was not significant during the war.
The drive for reorganization of the War Departnent began in earnest after V-J Day, culminating in the National Security Act of 1947.
This act completely reorganized the national military heirarchy into the National Military ... each service is charged with collateral functions, wherein its forces are to be employed to support and supplement the other services...the Navy will not be prohibited from attacking any targets, inland or otherwise, which ar 2 necessary for the accomplishment of its mission.
In reality the conference accomplished little except solidify parochial service positions and obscure any intended boundaries between service areas of responsibility. T ruman finally came to a head over the "insubordination incident", MacArthur's dismissal was assured. Their inactivity, vacillation, and failure to *keep their house in order" exacerbated a problem which, if not unavoidable, could certainly have been delayed or lessened in its impact.
The public and congressional furor over the MacArthur dismissal further discredited the JCS as a viable institution and did the Commander-in-Chief great political harm at an extremely critical period. 
2 5
2 7
General Gavin, the famed ex-commander of the 82nd * Airborne Division in World War II and later a member of the JCS, described the situation in 1958 as:
.... The fundamental shortcoming: the Chiefs "wear two hats...in a larger sense they should keep the national interest paramount. The record will show that (Service) interest usually prevails, though entirely in a patriotic senst...the responsibilities must be separated. Thus, in tetms of mission and concept, the JCS as an entity can only receive mixed reviews at best, as far.as organization and authority is concerned.
The JCS as a "Great staff*
Although the intent of establishing the JCS was never to imitate the general staffs of Europe, certain parallels can be drawn in its charter as the highest national military 52 This Is not to say that the service staffs do not recommend or send quality personnel to duty at JCS, they do; poor performers are "embarrassing" to their parent services.
But, in fact, they are not the best available; those personnel being reserved for the service staffs themselves with rare exception. This "procedure" is common knowledge
within the officer corps of all the services, and as a consequence, joint duty is not sought by the majority of officers in any of the services.  ... we did our best to coordinate the Army and Navy air forces, which was our principal job.
And we were perfectly honest, and perfectly willing to concede something--that is, a little bit, each of us. And we talked more and accomplished less than anybody I have ever been associated with .... I wore out six pairs of pants sitting on that board.
And later Army testimony continued:
... I believe we must develop a general staff who are skilled in the handling of armies, navies and air forces, and who are capable of laying out a campaign, and of using all thde forces, either separately or with one another.
Both testimonials condemn the substitution of cooperation for unified command in military operations. The present "CINCO system has done much to tectify this command and control discrepancy in the field. We still continue to believe, however, that cooperation at an even higher level.
(the JCS) will somehow function effectively tven though the *•.
issue becomes significantly larger and more complex.
The Joint Staff has had little authority or charter to direct equipment compatibility, budget priorities, and joint Firsts the Joint Chiefs, have consistently allowed themselves to be intimidated by political leaders into suporting pol~icies to which they were or should have been opposed.
.. Second, for the most part, the Joint Chiefs have not shown t~hemselves to be innovators in the policy process, even in military areas. The chiefs have generally been reactors rather than initiators...Even when a situation cries out for chaile, the JCS remains addicted to the status quo Moreover, even when field commanders have disregarded, specif~c JCS or Presidential directives, the JCS still would struggle for a strategy. 
Operations.
Since that time, the JCS have been understandably reluctant to risk alienating their services.
In the words of former Chief of Staff General David C.
A Service Chief finds himself in a very tough position when asked to give up or forego significant resources or important roles and missions both because his priorities have been Since fresh approaches to etrategy tend to threaten an instituition's interests and self-image, it is often more comfortable to look to the past than to seek new ways to meet the challenges of the future.
when coupled with a system that keeps Service leadership bound up in a continuous struggle for resources, such inclinations can lead to a preoccupation with weapon systems, techniquesisand tactics at the expense of sound planning. Among the failures of the present system, moreover, is the inability of the nation's top military to properly infuence force planning...but it produces formal staff work that has aroused the dismay of every senior civilian who has been "forced to read it.
It is laborious, cumbersome, and hopelessly comproT ¶sed.
It ignores real-world resource constraints.
The Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), once a small management body designed to provide civilian leadership to the military services, has grown to over 1,800 civilians and military personnel. This fact is certainly not *• a direct result, nor can it be directly attributed entirely to, the Joint Staff's limited capabilities per se.
Nevertheless the ineffectiveness of the Joint Staff is a major contributing faltor in the growth of the OSD.
The significance of this enlargement of OS is not so "much the growth of an additional (and in large part unnecessary) bureaucracy; rather, it is one of experience and training in fulfilling tasks which require an extensive military background. As Lieutenant Colonel Wermuth explains:
To run the Department of Defense, the Secretary must have a staff. And, in fact, he does have one.
Since the law says it cannot be a military staff, the Secretary has been forced to establish a civilian staff...the 1,500 and more civilian incumbents of the staff laurs of the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
Upon further reflection, it can be argued that the OSD does in fact, fulfill certain comptroller and management 68 N. As can be concluded from Admiral Holleway t . statement, the arrival at consensus is viewed by :any proponents of the statas quo as the only way of achieving a true multi-service position on critical issues. The JCS, by maintaining the approach, has allegedly offere& , civilian leadership alternatives which are broader scope, thoroughly As previously stated, a direct correlation between the German General Staff syttem and the JCS is not intended.
What is of value, however, is the proce3s by which general
staff training was permeated throughout the Gervan Army structure.
The scarcity of joint training, educatior., and. service opportunities for our officer corps as a whole, places a high premium on the expertise and quantity of those officers of all branches fortunate enough to have experienced it.
Under present service personnel management systems, little if any consideration is given to the "strategic" placement of these individuals to maximize their abilities.
Even the Joint Staff and JCS itself does not influence the assignment of officers with these rare qualifications.
Considerable argument, pro and con, has been offered by top civilian and military officials who recognize that a "valuable and perishable experience is regularly lost to the military community as a whole because of this process.
A imaor recommendation of the Steadlan Commission, after studying the nation's military command structure was to give the CJCS authority to Jirect assignments of personnel to the Joint Staff, an authority he does not now
The retention, distribution and proper managment of these uniquely qualified personnel is a much larger challenge than that faced by the Gorman General Staff.
Because of the joint nature of the *odern battlefield, retention of this extwrience is critical, yet no procedures exist within the military system to capitalize on this ability.
The effectiveness of the Joint Chiefs of Staff has been the subject of heated debate almost from its inception.
Uniquely American in character, the JCS interface!-; well with the institutions peculiar to the government it was designed to support.
It is the quality of that integration which is suspect for reasons which have been discussed above.
The JCS, as currently structured, certaiuly presents no threat to the American principle of civilian control. But Compounding the lack of resources and the absence of authority is the purely adminstrative problem of staffing procedures. This laborious process, is termed the "flimsy, * buff, green" procedure.
It was developed to achieve concenaus among the services on joint issues and is almost incredible in its complexity and lack of direction. General
Jones briefly describes the intent of the procedure:
... The pressures a -his point create a greater drive for agre( jnt than for quality: the process usually results in extensive discussion and careful draftsmanship of a paper designed to accommodate the views o each Servic.-it least to the extent of not gorng anyone's ox...
Jones could only depict it as "watered down" in content and "well waifled"--a severe indictment for a product of our highest military staff.
A more detailed description of these current staff procedures is described by General Jones in testimony provided to the Subcommittee of the House krmed Services Committee during 1982.
This description was received with a considerable amount of concern. 
2 3
If its role as an advisory body is desired and intended then surely the cormmitment of "''-'•'400 officers and the senior representatives of each service to this end is excessive.
On the other hand if the JCS is to perform as a "Great Staff"j, and its mission statement certainly implies this as reflected in DOD directive 5100.1, then the authority, and characteristics and additional resources discussed in this chapter must be delegated to it.
V.  of the unified commands historically led by the Army.
SBecause of the unusual nature of the mission, questions over who in fact had command responsibility for the Mari as
,F permeated the entire Army chain of command.
Additionally, BUCOR's unfamiliarity with the area, the terrorist threat, and its primear mission of deterring war in Europe all served as major contributors to the atmosphere of ... it would somehow be improper to tell (the Marine commander) how best to protect his force. A second key factor which has defied resolution is the specter of the "General Staff." Oddly enough, the disputing factions here again generally line up along traditional service lines rather than pitting civilian versus soldier as one might ordinarily expect from an issue of tOis nature.
.4
Proponents of the "corporate system* contend that the creation of i Joint General Staff would place too much power in the hands of an individual supported by a highly select group.
In the wo:ds of the Hudson Institute committee cited above, strengthening the JCS would give the cbair.man, I speak next about the so-called German general staff objection that is often made, and made in my judgment on a complete misreading of history. The German general staff was an army general staff, it wasn', a unified one; and, in fact, the problem was that it dominated in the Kaiser's day but not in Hitler's, the civilian authoritylso that is a red herring in my judgment.
This argument has been reiterated constantly by supporters of change within the military infrastructure, who are quick to point out that a comparison of the society, history, and Officer Corps of pre-war Nazi Germany is totally incompatible to the Americar environmient and cultural heritage. General David C. Jones, testifying earlier before the same committee, had also interpreted the historical role of the German General Staff in much the same way. He re-emphasized not only the subordination of the General Staff to civilian control (Hitler), but also cited its failure to integrate service efforts as a primary cause for defeat in World War I1.I Whether or not these fears of resurrection are justified would require some insight into the future which is, of courte, impossible.
This uncertainty added to the understandable inability of any advocates of change to guarantee civil control which creates much cause for alarm.
Interestingly, General Upton and Secretary Root would both be quite familiar with this particular arguoent were they living participants in current debates. For though Prussia passed from history after the German unification of the late 1870's, the fear of hcr military staff and legions is very much alive and well today. It has been one hundred and nine years since General Upton's book was first published. Yet the standard of efficiency he so admired in that long dead state, still conjures an emotional fear that is extremely difficult to quell.
MilitaZy issues is also hotly debateA by supporters of a strong joint staff. Secretary Brown emiphatically discoentec this argument ia his testimony before the White Commis.sion.
HAs rationale was that P President or Secretary of Defense could always get divergent views if they wanted them, simply by exercising their legal position of authority within the Defense Departuent.12 Although this admittedly Zircumvents the militacy chain oC command, the civil authohity is there to demand it if required.
In regard to the key issue that a Joint General Staff would become a rigid structure enforcing a strict, singular conformity.of view, Secretary Brown raised another important point and also aderessed this key issue in -is testimony before the White Commission:
It-is my experience that enforced conformit?.
of view i1 much less likely in a joint ene~a! staff than with a military service. The latter's strong traditions and sense-of cohesion and community make the headquarters staff of a military service more monolithic than any other organizational unit of the U.S. military; pignty of argument goes on, but it is kept inside.
The fear and relevance of a "resurrected German General
Staff" in American uniforms is significant, not because of its probability, nor even because of its possibility. The perception of that threat is of import because it is supported by a fear that is as real as our past. From minuteman to astronaut, the American people have long cherished the ideal of the citizen soldier just as they have cherished their liberty. From these early ideals, fear has evolved and justified or not, that fear is real.
As important as this perception may be politically to the future outcome of events, the subordination of service perogatives is no less significant. ?or the advent of a Joint General Staff, or even a lesser strengthening of the current JCS, will have significant impact upon the ability of any one service to control its own destiny.
This loss of authority is more than a simple loss of command and control, as each of the military arms is fully aware. N centralized national military command structure will have substantial impact, especially over the long term, on areas which have alwys been considered traditional service "fiefdoms*. Strategic planning, resource allocation, and conkiguration of operational forces would immediately be absorbed by a powerful joint staff if reorganization were to be ac-omplished. Moreover, substantial impacts would, of 89 necessity, be felt in personnel management, administration, logistics, and procurement.
These areas cut to the heart of each service's understandable and natural desire to sustain itself.
Numerous and sweeping changes would be needed in varying degrees to effectively support a centralized staff; as such, they represent the real threat to the services. It is this * fact perhaps, which makes the JCS debate so volatile among senior military officials.
A closely related issue to service perogatives is the role of the Joint Chiefs themselves. For it is through their lual role as JCS members and service chiefs, that control over the system is maintained.
This "dual hatting* renders the system nearly impotent Also, defenders of the current JCS maintain that the "dual hatting* situation is not a problem at all. They argue that supposed organizational failures are merely a direction to the services as a whole.
Additionally, the staff tends to prioritize naturally along historical service lines thereby greatly reducing efficiency and cohesion. 
1 7
Prior to 1903, the Commanding General of the Army was the head of all Army forces. He did not, however, possess command authority, dealing instead through the various Bureaus for administrative and logistics matters, and the Military Departments for operational requirements.
The Bureaus represented the Commanding General's "staff* in a loose semi-autonomous arrangement whereby he was provided support. He could not, however, directly control the coordinated actions of the various agencies.
Although it is obvious that this "systemO failed miserably in the Spanish-American War, it was an Army system, not a joint system. Because of this fact opponents of a strong JCS do not consider the model relevent. They contend that Sbecause of the inherent differences between the services no amount of centralization that took place in the interest of eficiency could possibly justify the inevitable loss of expertise and diversification provided by the present system.
On the other hand, the "committee" approach to military planning and decisionmaking is diametrically opposed to any accepted principles of military leadership and chain of command, therefore should not be expected to work efficiently. The importance of unity of command, a key principle of military leadership, can be more readily appreciated by understanding why it is needed, what it achieves, and how it achieves it.
In 1962, the U.S. Army described these aspects in it Field Manual 100-5, Operations;
The decisive application of full combat power requires unity of command.
Unity of :ommand * obtains unity of effort by coordinated action of all forces toward a common goal. 4hile coordination may be attained by cooperation, it is best achieved by vestingla single commander with the requisite authority.
The importance of differentiating between the levels at twhich command is exercisedis also addressed in the same 
That the JCS system •.an and does function is "w ndeniable--one look at American mdiitary power stationed around the world shows .even the most casual observer that same system of commanrd aad control is present. The key question thea becomes how vell, and is this enough to insure U.S. survival? This study evaluated the JCS capability in terms of three key factors: l)concipt and mission
2)aistorical perfor~nce and 3) the threat. In a sense the Grenada operation could possibly perform much the same role for joint command and control, as did the.
Spanish-American War for justifying the Army's internal reorganization. 'Advocates are increasing their efforts to strengthen the role of the chairman and create some type of general staff system to negate tnis inter-serv:'e rivalry. 
2 5
Clearly singular directive authoity and a corresponding responsibility for its actions.
The impact of technology on present and future military operations is the third key factor in demonswrating the need "for a strong centralized command structure. Tachnology, for all its wonders has placed two substantial burdens on all military command structures today which were not present in the not-so-distant pasts time and the threat of mass nuclear Jestruction.
Today, complex satellite communications cao bring world events into the public's ).iving room alhost instantly. 
This study has dealt with the specifics of concept, intent, command, and control at the national level. To institute a Joint General Staff properly, however, the organization must be efficiently imposed in the chain of command between the OSD and the service staffs.
Consequently, the Joint General Staff would have to be organized efficiently and yet provide effective interface with four widely differing organizations--one civilian and three military.
Establishing an organization of thi 3 complexity will require considerable study to insure responsiveness, control of vital staff views,'and proper service interface.
For a Joint General Staff system to be truly effective over time, the integration of each service's personnel system must be effected in support of staff sustainment.
This would require an identification and selection criteria system which could identify superior performers-in each Next the general staff would have to track and control those personnel through their cac:eers to insure those needs were adequately met in a timely manner.
One final thought concerning personnel is in order.
Much has been made of the lack of quality available to the JCS under the current joint system. This would be extrcutenly unlikely under the Joint General Staff. The services would have to provide their best people in order to "share" in the powerful new organization.
While not ideal motivation for supporting the system, the impact of not providing one's best would surely be regarded as an unaffordable option over the long term.
As mentioned before, the long term sustainment of a Joint General Staff would be as critical, if not more so, to overall success than its initial establishment. For if the system cannot self-perpptuate high quality, the product ceases .to be a desirable czoal for which to strive.
A key factor in this area would be education and training, at~d the manner in which our services train and select their officers would have to be coordinated carefully. Officers would need to be selected early-on 14. The budget system as it is presently constructed could be maintained in support of the Joint General Staff. True -modifications of procedures would be necessary but certainly not a major overhaul. Ultimately, a considerable redtction in staff personnel would'be realized from OSD level through CINC. By eliminating duplication and fixing a single control staff of responsibility, major cost efficiencies would be realized long term.
"116
The services must, of necessity, retain execution an-d planning authorities over the suppoct of their components worldwide. Under any system the services would always remain the subject matter experts within their fields and rightly so, However, the directive authority to prioritize and quantify that support should be retained by the Joint General Staft. The measure of priorities is a strategic question that cannot be'addressed from a singular viewpoint. Although interesting and well illustrated, it was of limited value. This book was used solely as the source for a specific reference )n unity of command. 10. Upton, Emory L. The Armies of Asia and Europe.
Greenwood pres, New-York, 1968   Historically, this book is one of the standard bearers recommending a General Staff System. Written before the inception of the JCS, it is Army oriented, but still had scue utility as an historical reference. This document provides an in depth explanation of the Army budgeting system. The discussion of the interrelationships between joint force planning, strategy and the service budget processes were of major importance to this thesis. This article is basically a debate in interview format between two government officials regarding JCS reorganization.
The arguments -re isefil and the discussion emphasized the civil-military interface at national level.
Des~jockey, LrC. "Suasion for Shillelagh." Infantry Journal. September 1949.
This article is 3 rebuttal of a previously published prior article advocating a General Staff.
It is hrmy oriented and does not provide useful data to this stuod. In this interview with Armed Forces Journal General Jones discusses his perception of thecurrent problem with the JCS command/ structure. Detailed in content, it provided a major source of material for the discussion in Chapter IV.
Kyle, Deborah M. "*OD Oeaaline on JCS Reiorm Recommendations Ray Delay Reorganiztion Bill." Armed Forces Journal, September This is a short article :iescri~ina "he unsu-citie pvisition of the DO on the proposed| JCS rerzranization bill.
It ioes aideess pro anJ con SA:%uments of the proposals in general and was used as a source in this study.
Kyle, oeborali M. and Schemrer, Oenjamin F., ".avy, marines Adamantly Oppose JCs ,eforms most Others Tell Congress Are Long Over-i-e." Armed Forces Journal. June IiV2, pp. This interview is an in iepth discostsion oi the present &avy/Marine Coerp position on the JCs 'iebate. Qsed as a source for this study, the article provides key information from military authorities against any proposed reorganization. author provides significant, if indirect, arguments for centralizing resources in the pursuit of national interests.
" Institute, 20th Century war: The Amerioai Experience, pp. 66-70, Fort Leavenwortl-," Kansas.
Willaims' article describes the Army performance during the Spanish-American War and during the turn of the century.
It also discusses the rai iications and proposed reforms gnerated b, those campaigns. This slide used as a reference in this study identifies a list of international events wnich niave resulted in the initiation of the JCS Crisis Action System.
Arms 
Morton's article discusses the evolution of joint warfare in the United Stateq prior to and during World War It. Also discussed is the disparity in strategic thought between the Arty and a•avy, and its impact on combat operations. 
3 6 U.S. Historical Division, Joint Secretariat, JCS: _ Chronology of JCS Organization 1945-1985, (Washington, D.C., oecember 1984) ppo 335-351. It's intent and purpose was to fulfill -n urgent need for a military headquarters to plan and coordinate the military services effectively at the national level in order to assist the President in accomplishing national military objectives. Officially sanctioned by the National Security Act of 1947, the JCS organization, although modified several times, has remained basically unchanged in concept since its inception in World War II. The mission of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as stated in Department of Defense Directive 5100.1 "Functions of the Department of Defense and its Major Components" is described as fol 1 ],s:" FUNCTIONS OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF--The and perf-:, .... " This fact is not a mere exercise in semantics but the crux of the entire issue--the heart of the .)ate. For if the JCS organization is intended by Congress to be only an advisory body as the concept clearly implies, then it is probably staffed, equipped, and supported far in excess of what is necessary. On the other hand, if the mission statement reflects the true ihtent of Congress, then the JCS seriously lacks those essential elements of command and control and directive authority to insure success. Since 1942 this fundamental disparity between concept and mission has been debated before Congress and Presidents. The disparity represents power--power to advise vs. power to direct; civilian control vs. military efficiency. This chapter will examine this disparity in terms of JCS organization anJ staff characteristics, The t.estimony of "key players,* each thoroughly familiar with the JCS system, will be examined in an effort to shed some light on this basic question. ?Chairman, of the JCS (CJCS) a position which is rotated among the three main services and asually consists of the senior military member of the staff. As a non-voting member of the group, the CJCS does not represent his parent service organization, but instead is the only member of the -. 44 organization with a full time joint responsibility. The Joint Staff, limited by law to 400 officers drawn equally from each of the services, is designed to support the JCS in accomplishing its primary function of advising the National Command Authority on military matters. It performs a secondary role of augmenting the staff of the Secretary of Defense (OSO) on matters requiring military expertise and experience. At present the Joint Staff is 46 ~~~~z V-~&ŽA* GOVERNMENT INTERFACE Since its inception, one of the primary criticims of the JCS has been the dual nature of the organization and the impact of this characteristic upon the highest echelon of American government. First, the JCS is an advisory body for the NSC and as an organization has no command authority. The intent of the organization, as first established, was for each service chief to run both his service and function as a member of I Council, he is not a voting member of the organization. As a 49 "0; example, is done independently by each service staff. It is justified (as necessary) to Congress by each service chief independent of JCS control and coordination. Priorities and tradeoffs are accomplished not by the JCS, but instead by the Congress and OSO working through each service secretary with the services. The significance of this major disconnect as a chain of command may at first be deceiving. The fact is that the NCA relies on strategic policy recommendations of the JCS, forwarded in a document known as the Joint Strategic the Secretary of Defense as a substitute for OSD. His justification for this is based on unity of command, military expertise, and simplification of the bureaucratic chain of command at that level. 3
are in fact actually discouraged. To emphasize his point he noted that only one Director of the Joint Staff, Army General Earle Wheeler, ever became chief of his service or the Chairmnan of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.7
are in fact actually discouraged. To emphasize his point he noted that only one Director of the Joint Staff, Army General Earle Wheeler, ever became chief of his service or the Chairmnan of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.7
7.
7.
23 !
Combat Studies Institute,20th Century War The American Experiencew ft. Leavenworth, Kansaspp. 146-164.
7 W. Graham Clayton, Jr., "JCS Reform: Necesc.ary, but in Moderation", Armed Forces Journal, (May 1982,) p. 69.1 8 Wermuth, "A General Staff in the Sixties", p. 11.
Armed Forces Journal, (March 1982) cover page
T'ý0~j~
Several individuals provided substantial assistance in the completion of this study.
well as establish him as a full member of the National Security Council.
Additional reform measures included the stabilization of joint staff tours for three years and the opportunity to extend any officer's tenure for an additional tour of duty.
The chairman would also be empowered to manage the activities of the Director and Joint Staff in support of his efforts.
Unfortunately, the bill stops far short of the desired goal. The Joint Staff would be denied executive authority over the services and is forbidden from operating as an I.
armed forces general staff. Congressman White described the effort as a *compromise effort at best" and stated that he would have supported stronger language if he thought it had a chance of passage.
A separate study was recently conducted over an 13 month period at Georgetown University and completed in January 1985. This committee also recommended strengthening the JCS to facilitate military operations, reduce inter-service rivalries, and economize budget and procurement procedures.
The significance of this recommendation reflected the committee's principle finding:
that the natural tendency of the multiservice "consensus* system was to create an overlapping, uncoordinated ... if an officer cannot find time to handle both his Service duties as well as his joint 16 duties, then he is not qualified for either job.
The role of the chairman has also been the object of dissent although the perceptions and extent of his powers varies widely--even among proponents of a strong JCS.
1. Should the chairman mown" the Joint Staff? 2. Should the chairman be placed in the operational chain of command?
Should the chair-man have command aad control authority over the services? BG Hittle discusses each of the major staff systems in existence today. The functions and an analysis of the French, German, sritish, Soviet, and U.S. JCS are discussed at length.
First Twenty-Five Years, Bloomington: IndiaCn University Press# 19796
Korb's work provided a primary source for this thesis. Nis in depth study of the JCS covers virtually every aspect of the concept, development and effectiveness of the Joint Chiefs of Staf.
Leach, Barry. German General Staff. ballantine Books, Inc., New York, 1973.
This book emphasizes the organizational, political, and personality aspects of the German 12% L% The author discusses at length many of the same issues being discussed toJay.
He advocates centralizinq service logistics, administration, and also the formation of an Armed Forces General Staff with a singular chief of staff. 