# ID: d0717a63ef354436a05eaa073c314935
# Title: United States military presence in Central Asia implications of United States basing for Central Asian stability
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2006.0
# Fulltext:
This thesis examines the United States policy for establishing overseas military bases particularly in Central Asia. The major transformational trends in improving United States military capabilities over the past two decades, and the changing international security environment, have shaped the way American leaders focus on their global military posture strategy. Immediately following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attack, the United States moved quickly to establish a presence in Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan, and after the defeat of the Taliban, several bases became available in Afghanistan. Soviet military influence in Central Asia will be examined and compared to current United States policies and procedures. While military bases still maintain several strategic advantages in terms of response times and maneuver, there needs to be an equally sized effort to explore how these bases can provide stability. Achieving stability in Central Asia will require the United States to move away from the conventional ideology of basing, which it has used for many years, and to embrace policies and procedures that can meet the military mission and gain the trust of the host country 15.
This thesis will examine both the domestic and international policy implications associated with the establishment of long-term United States (U.S.) military presence in Central Asia. Specifically, this thesis will focus on the implications of United States basing in the Central Asian region. The strategic and tactical advantages of military installations in Central Asia were explicitly proven during Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF).
This thesis will assess the policy implications of permanent United States presence in this region. United States presence in Central Asia has the potential to either cultivate stability in the region or aggravate an already volatile situation. Past experiences in countries such as Germany and Japan after their defeat in World War II offer seemingly little direction as to the ultimate implications of United States military basing in Central Asia, in part, because the region presents unique challenges. Central
Asian challenges include: a legacy of corrupt and authoritarian regimes, intense Russian interest and influence in the areas, ethnic, tribal and religious societal tensions, and the emerging geopolitical importance of an area that is part of the so-called "arc of crisis."
1
The presence of United States military in areas of the former Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact countries is a dynamic that will gain policy salience in the coming years.
The fact that the United States was asked to leave Karshi-Kanabad Air Base, Uzbekistan, underscores the importance of an in-depth understanding of the unique challenges faced by the United States in the pursuit of bases in such countries.
Prior to September 11, 2001, the United States had approximately a quartermillion troops abroad. More than 100,000 were stationed in Europe: the majority of these were in Germany (75,000 troops total, almost 60,000 of them Army soldiers);
another 13,000 were in Italy, almost 12,000 in the United Kingdom, and smaller numbers elsewhere. Nearly 100,000 American military personnel were in East Asia, divided between Japan, South Korea and the waters of the western Pacific. About 25,000 were ashore and afloat in the Persian Gulf; smaller numbers were in Latin America and Africa. 
2
During George W. Bush's second presidential campaign, instead of closing locations in Europe, the discussion of U.S. overseas military presence focused on the restructuring of troops in Europe and reducing the number of military personnel by 40,000 to 60,000. According to United States Air Force General Charles Wald, there are currently "110,000 troops in Europe, mostly in and around Germany" and with the proposed reductions most would still be based in Germany. 
3
4
Central Asia and Eastern Europe share a history replete with former Soviet Union influence. United States' attention to Russia in the execution of the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT) suggests that any actions by the United States in the former Soviet sphere of influence will face a number of daunting policy issues. Issues such as authoritarian regimes, deep-seated corruption, ethnic fragmentation, human right violations, underdeveloped economies, as well as a host of other issues need to be considered when assessing the implications of American basing. While some would argue that United States basing can have positive implications for such ills that plague Central Asia, others would argue that United States basing can contribute to these problems. A major objective of this thesis is to address the positive as well as negative repercussions of United States basing on both the Central Asian domestic situations as well as United States foreign policy concerns.
The majority of the literature focusing on United States military basing discusses the strategic implications of basing abroad and the accepted benefits and potential costs.
The five primary considerations of the United States military for potential basing opportunities, according to much of this literature, are: the nature of relevant regional threats; geographical location of installation; number and types of forces stationed at location; existing facility inventory; and existing host nation agreements. Noticeably absent from much of this literature is the base's impact on the surrounding communityit is certainly a factor, but is not often the significant consideration to United States basing strategies. Aside from the discussion of strategic significance and security there is ample literature that discusses overseas basing as evidence of United States hegemony and empire-building.
The Department of Defense has been tasked to develop a basing strategy that includes planning a redeployment of armed forces that will enable a military response to the threats of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, wherever they may occur. The watchwords are "capabilities," rather than specific threats, and "flexibility," a clear statement that the intended targets for the use of United States military forces are not necessarily known in advance. Dr. Gordon Adams, who currently teaches international affairs and national security at the Elliot School of International Affairs at Washington's George Washington University and has written extensively on defense resource and planning issues suggests that the military has been strapped with a formidable task because all of the unknown parameters. In an interview about military presence in Iraq, he said, "There's a huge advantage to land-based infrastructure. At the level of strategy it makes total sense." 
5
6
7
Empires are defined as major political units that possess a territory of great extent, a number of territories or peoples under a single sovereign authority. Johnson's premise is that bases have taken the place of colonies and that bases translate into militarism, which ultimately lends itself to imperialism. The end result is that the spread of bases will bring about financial insolvency and severely damage republican institutions, or the establishment of republican institutions in the host country. The relationships between United States basing and such arguments will be examined by this thesis.
Other areas of relevant literature cover a wide range of concerns and ideas. The strategic significance of basing abroad is widely debated with pros and cons from both sides. Before the terrorist attacks on 9/11, the push in the United States government was to bring more troops home from overseas citing lack of threat and surplus of costs as the primary drivers. The Bush Administration's proposal was the result of a review of This review also led to the establishment of the Overseas Basing Commission. 
9
7
8 Chalmers Johnson, The Sorrows of Empire: Militarism, Secrecy, and the End of the Republic. (New  York: Metropolitan Books, 2004), 152. 
9
10
11
12
Can United States basing in Central Asia satisfy strategic objectives and simultaneously meet an important political goal of improved stability in the region? The Bush Administration's official position is "security and democracy are indivisible"13, placing the promotion of democracy as a cornerstone of present United States foreign policy. Yet in regions such as Central Asia, the governing regimes have been much more interested in the pursuit of stability at the expense of democracy, freedom, and human dignity. The United States must realize that democracy does not automatically translate to stability, especially in Central Asia. Security and democracy may not be indivisible, but they need to be connected with a chain of generous length. Central Asian regimes understand the tenets of money and power, while the idea of democracy (as defined by the United States) may not be embraced. The Central Asian experience following the collapse of the Soviet Union was one of reluctant independence with populations that experienced an overall decline in their quality of life. Given the entrenched corruption of the authoritarian regimes in Central Asia, money and power alone are not enough to ensure lasting relationships. Russia does not have the fiscal depth of the United States, but it enjoys a long (politically friendly) history with the region and has available instruments of power for use (geographic proximity, personnel, weapons, etc.) China has less historical significance, but its future energy requirements have led to very significant financial investment in the region.
The primary methodology of this thesis will center on case studies of military presence of the Soviet Union/Russia and the United States in Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Afghanistan. Special emphasis will be placed on Karshi-Khanabad (K2) Air Base, Manas Air Base and Bagram Air Base respectively. The case studies will zero in on the countries' past relationship with the former Soviet Union (and current Russian government) and indicators that might predict success or failure. Was the base presence a result of cooperation or occupation? How critical are bases in Central Asia to Russia?
How critical are bases in Central Asia to the United States? Can the United States military presence help provide stability in the region? How critical are bases to the host countries? The last three questions will provide answers upon which to build future policy implications. This set of questions will be asked with the Soviet regime and the United States being the interchangeable variable. There will also be a discussion of the reactions of Russia and China to having these United States bases in their "backyard."
Sources will include United States State Department, Department of Defense and other official government sources, as well as statements by Central Asian governments and scholars. News sources will also be referenced to document impact at the local level, as well as national and international levels. K2 will present an interesting case study since the United States has recently decided to honor Uzbekistan's wishes and has relinquished the base.
This chapter introduced the most critical research questions and the methodology to be used in answering those questions. Chapter II will examine United States interests in Central Asia with emphasis on its instant transformation into independent states. Also 
Central Asia is an interesting region with a number of dynamic aspects that were unknown to the United States for many years. Instability, however, is one category that is very familiar and combating sources of instability in Central Asia will require unconventional methods and strategies. As the United States military finds itself waging a war against an unconventional foe; it is once again learning how difficult counterinsurgency operations actually are but continues to frame unconventional conflicts incorrectly. This is telling since the enemy we face is likely to become more unconventional rather than more conventional. Indeed, there is every reason to expect that the threat will become even more complex and more dispersed. That transnational terrorists, localized insurgents, and transnational crime networks will become more intertwined is not only possible, but likely. The fact that these kinds of threats are on the horizon is not a particularly newfound realization. Sam Sarkesian, in his 1993 book, Unconventional Conflicts in a New Security Era, wrote:
The United States remains best prepared to fight the least likely wars (conventional European-style) and least prepared to fight the most likely wars (unconventional). 
14
This chapter will be an examination of U.S. interests in Central Asia since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Unlike Eastern Europe, the countries of Central Asia were easier to envelope into the Soviet fold due to tribal culture and lack of political aspirations. This is not to say that the respective peoples enjoyed the Soviet influence, but their ability to handle their oppressive reality created a culture that is much more different than previously dealt with. This chapter will also discuss the interest of external entities in the natural resources of the region.
The only thing certain in today's international environment is uncertainty. This dynamic looms large in the restructuring of U.S. policy in a variety of areas-from homeland defense to overseas military basing. another priority-to discourage attempts by radical regimes and groups to block or subvert progress toward these goals or otherwise threaten regional peace and stability.  United States interests. 
22
24
25
This goal was being pursued by advocating democratization (because it is "the long-term guarantor of stability and prosperity"), free markets, cooperation within the region (including on building east-west pipelines and on defense) and its integration into the Euro-Atlantic community, and responsible security policies (including nonproliferation, counter-terrorism, and counter-narcotics). Although the states were making halting progress in some areas, he stated, the Administration was committed to continue working with them. In testimony in May 1998, Sestanovich stated that the United States had a "big stake" in assisting the peaceful and historic integration of Central Asia and the South Caucasus into the world community, interests that were seen as "strategic" and "vital." 
26
27
Afghanistan's Taliban regime and how to address these threats. Of the Central Asian states that border Afghanistan, two of them-Uzbekistan and Tajikistan-had seen themselves as particularly vulnerable to militant factions harbored by the Taliban. 
28
29
The Central Asian states, the poorest part of the former Soviet Union, witnessed steep declines in gross domestic product (GDP) after they gained independence. Average per capita income in the region, according to the World Bank, was less than $800 in 1999, with Tajikistan described by the Asian Development Bank as one of the poorest countries in the world. The declines in GDP appeared to reverse in the late 1990s in all the states, but their economies remain fragile. The Kazakh and Turkmen economies are dependent on energy exports; if export revenues decline, the regimes may collapse.
Economic growth was increasingly threatened by corruption, the deteriorating health of the populations, and crime, including that linked to drug trafficking and production.  Besides bilateral and regional aid, the United States contributes to international financial institutions and nongovernmental organizations that aid Central Asia. Policy issues regarding United States aid include whether the states are properly using it, what it should be used for, and who should receive it.
The might of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) was the primary concern of United States military strategist for over forty years. Although not in direct confrontation, wars in Korea and Vietnam cemented the opposing ideologies. As the 34 Nichol, 14-16. Western world recovered from the surprise of a collapsed Soviet Union, the regimes of Central Asia were recovering from shock of sudden independence. This sudden independence forced the existing regimes to scramble to establish ties strong ties with Russia in some cases (Tajikistan) and a more independent stance with others, such as Kazakhstan. As the Warsaw Pact disintegrated, attention turned to security concerns.
Since it gained independence from the Soviet Union, the military actually sent teams into these new countries to survey airfields and itemize potential uses for strategic uses, but no official political interest was expressed until the GWOT.
Immediately following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the level of nuclear threat confronting the United States was significantly reduced; however, an estimated 30,000 nuclear warheads were spread among the former Soviet Republics 36 The American perspective on the Tajik civil war (1992-96) was that it was a power struggle involving clans or regional cliques, and was engineered by Russia with a view to justifying its military presence in Central Asia. But, its reasoning was seriously flawed -that there were no Islamist elements in Afghanistan interested in a spillover into Central Asia; the Taliban was an indigenous Afghan phenomenon who did not have any regional agenda; Afghan fratricidal strife was purely about capturing power in Kabul; and that the Taliban would be ultimately a factor of regional stability. Americans were not alone living in a different intellectual universe. "French scholar Olivier Roy laughed off the very thought that there could be 'revolution-exporting Islamic fundamentalists in Afghanistan.'"
38
The Central Asian Peacekeeping Battalion exercise CENTRASBAT is a series of exercises designed to improve interaction with the Central Asian states by focusing on peacekeeping/humanitarian operations and exercising command, control, and logistics within a multinational framework. Focused on strengthening military-to-military relationships and regional security between Central Asian and other regional militaries, the first exercise took place in 1995. Military units from the national peacekeeping battalions of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, as well as a United States battalion, used this exercise as a tool to increase interoperability and improve the participating forces' abilities to conduct basic peacekeeping and humanitarian operations. 
39
42
Commander, tours Central Asia in 2000 in an attempt to build military aid relationships with nations there, but was unsuccessful. Russia's power in the region appeared to be on the upswing instead. Russian Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev writes, "The actions of Islamic extremists in Central Asia give Russia the chance to strengthen its position in the region." 
43
44
The Clinton Administration's approach to the regions was ad hoc. It tackled a laundry list of initiatives in response to crises and shifting policy priorities. Issues such as oil and gas pipelines, conflict resolution, and human rights were targeted at different junctures, but an overall strategy-which was essential, given limited government resources for the regions-was never fully articulated. As a result, United States priorities were not communicated clearly to local leaders, resulting in frequent misinterpretations of intentions. Domestic constituencies in the United States undermined leverage in regional conflicts. 
45
In fairness to the administrations, it is important to note that while the relatively peaceful collapse of the Soviet Union was welcomed, and the generation of more than a dozen independent states was exciting (especially to a democratic nation such as the United States), there were other world events competing for its attention. Operation Hindsight is 20/20, but most of the initiatives into this region were positive.
Anything candidate Bush vehemently defended bringing more troops back to the United States as he criticized the Clinton Administration for allowing the military to be spread too thin. 
46
Current world situations dictate that the United States pursue expanding allied roles and building new partnerships. Uncertainty is the only known and it is important to develop policies that include flexibility to deal with that uncertainty. During the Cold War, it was standard to believe that you would fight where you were based, but the last 15 years have proven that that is no longer the case. Taking advantage of existing partnerships is the logical course to take.
There are some inherent risks associated with this concept. One of these risks in Central Asia is operating in a location that has a long history with Russia. In fact, actually sharing the same resources and airspace is a new experience. As can be expected, Russia looks at United States military presence with wary eyes. 
46
53
The new independent states of the former Soviet Union formed the CIS to ensure cooperation after the dissolution of the Soviet Union; however, many of its goals were never achieved. Yeltsin pushed for the CIS because he, like a lot of the world, felt that the Central Asian states were not capable of creating independent policy and were susceptible to foreign governments. The former republics rushed into the league without much thought of the CIS's basic principles other than the full independence of each member. 
54
55
56
Signed in Tashkent in 1992, the CST looked to be another avenue for strengthening Russian military influence in the region, but it only amounted to a paper organization. Russia stressed the CST because it would ensure close military and security relations between Russia and the CIS countries. In other words, it would ensure Russia's leading role in the organization as the strongest military. The treaty mainly 53 Syroezhkin, "Central Asia Between the Gravitational Poles of Russia and China," in Central Asia, A Gathering Storm? 170. 
54
55
56
All the Central Asian states except Turkmenistan signed the treaty. The CST never met its expectations because it never led to the creation of joint forces or policy. Councils convened to discuss security, but most of the signatories refused to integrate militarily.
In 1999, Uzbekistan, the strongest military force in Central Asia, withdrew from the CST weakening it even more. 
57
The post-Soviet regime was also concerned about what it believed to be the Turkish Government's Pan-Turkic policy in Central Asia. Concerning the convening of the second Turkic Summit in Istanbul in October 1994, Mikhail Demurin, spokesman of the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs commented, "It is unthinkable that a summit based on the principle of nationality will not disturb Russia." 58 There were a number of initial meetings that were viewed as aggressive as well as grassroots contacts in the region; however it became clear that Turkey's influence in Central Asia was limited.
After this realization trade between Turkey and Russia actually increased. This increase in commerce caused some rifts in Central Asia, primarily with Turkmenistan.
Yeltsin did not assert a clear policy toward Central Asia and was torn between strengthening relations in the near abroad or the west. His government lacked clear objectives and focused on maintaining status quo. However, the status quo didn't fulfill the Central Asian's states' needs and they looked west for military assistance. Joint training, exercises and programs like NATO's Partnership for Peace developed in the 1990s. Yeltsin recognized the growth of western influence and in a 1996 speech to the Russian Parliament, he called, "actions by states and their alliances…to undermine Russia's relations with former Soviet republics' a threat to national security." 59 Even so said, Russia did not take action in the 1990s to counteract western influence in Central Asia. Yeltsin wanted to stay cozy with the west to keep the potential economic progress that a relationship with them might provide. Central Asia, the soft underbelly of Russia, 
57
58
59
In Putin assigned tasks in Central Asia to a number of security and defense savvy officials. Putin's representative to the CIS states is the former head of the Foreign Intelligence Service. Former heads of the Federal Security Service and of the Foreign Intelligence Service have taken on roles in the private sector that deal mostly in Central Asia. 
63
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) is an intergovernmental organization founded in Shanghai on June 15, 2001, by six nations: China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. Its member states cover an area of over 30 million square kilometers, or about three fifths of Eurasia, with a population of 1,455 billion-about a quarter of the world's total population. As the principal architect of the SCO, China plays a leading role in its functioning, and aids the crystallization of the common interests that brought the six countries together in order to form the SCO.
The United States-led war on terror is generally deemed to be the beginning of a new alliance against terrorism, the fact that is overlooked in most quarters is that regional cooperation such as the SCO had proclaimed their union against terror well before the al- 
67
Qaeda-led attack on the United States. Indeed, such multilateral collaboration against terrorism cannot be said to be the result of the events of September 11, 2001-in all probability, it was perhaps mooted much earlier, in order to keep the United States from decisively entering the region. Led by the Peoples' Republic of China, the SCO has been able to ably address not only the question of terrorism, but has hammered out a coalition of states that have common security and economic concerns. However, criticism about the effectiveness of the SCO has been voiced in certain quarters because of the noninclusion of important nations such as India in the coalition. Such criticism gains in degree when one considers the fact that India is a country that has been a victim of crossborder terror for a relatively longer period than most of the present SCO members.
Moreover, the reported Sino-Russian concern that it would be difficult to keep Pakistan out of the SCO were India to be admitted meets skepticism because of the recognized sponsorship of not only anti India terror provided by Pakistan, but also because of the Islamic Republic's emergence as a fountainhead of Islamist terror in the region.
The earlier incarnation of the SCO was the Shanghai Five, a mechanism that originated and grew as a result of an endeavor by China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgystan, and Tajikistan. The primary goal of the apparatus was to strengthen confidence building and disarmament in the border regions. In 1996 and 1997, the heads of state of the five aforementioned nations met in Shanghai and Moscow respectively and signed the "Treaty on Deepening Military Trust in Border Regions and the Treaty on Reduction of Military Forces in Border Regions". Thereafter, the annual meetings became a customary practice and were held alternately in the five member states. The issues that were raised and discussed in the meeting gradually extended from building up trust in the border regions to mutually beneficial cooperation from building up trust in the border regions to mutually beneficial cooperation in the arena of politics, security, diplomacy, economics, trade, and other such areas.
On the fifth anniversary of the Shanghai Five, on June 15, 2001, the heads of state of its members and the President of Uzbekistan met in Shanghai, the place of birth of the mechanism. The convening heads of state signed a declaration admitting Uzbekistan as the sixth member of the Shanghai Five apparatus and jointly issued a "Declaration on the establishment of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization". The document announced that for the purpose of upgrading the level of cooperation more effectively, to seize opportunities, and to deal with new challenges and threats, the six nations had decided to establish the SCO on the basis of the Shanghai Five mechanism.
In June 2002, the heads of SCO member states met in St. Petersburg, Russia, and signed the "SCO Charter," which clearly expounded the purposes and principles of the mechanism, its organizational structure, form of operation, cooperation orientation, and external relations, marking a tangible institution of this new organization within the limits of international law. According to the "SCO Charter" and the "Declaration on establishment of the SCO," the main purposes of SCO are:
• Strengthening mutual trust and good-neighborliness and friendship among member states. • Developing their effective cooperation in political affairs, economy and trade, science and technology, culture, education, energy, transportation, environmental protection, and other fields.
• Working together to maintain regional peace, security, and stability, and • Promoting the creation of a new international political and economic order featuring democracy, justice, and rationality. 
68
• Adherence to the purposes and principles of the "Charter of United Nations." • Respect for each other's independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, mutual non-use or threat of use of force.
• Equality among all member states.
• Settlement of all questions through consultations.
• Non-alignment and no directing against any other country or organization, and • Opening to the outside world and willingness to carry all forms of dialogues, exchanges, and cooperation with other countries and relevant international or regional organizations. 
69
68
70
Soviet interest in Central Asia was primarily restricted to natural resources and manpower pools. While the interest in natural resources may be the same for the current Russian administration, there is a significant interest in regional security. This concern about security has brought about increased pressure on the United States in the form of directives from the SCO, as well as a vested interest in strengthening military presence in these countries. The next chapter will outline Soviet and Russian military presence in Central Asia and the significance it holds for United States interests in the same region. 
70
The lack of geographical boundaries with Russia was just the beginning of boundary issues with its northern neighbor. Once the Great Game was complete, Central Asia was firmly in the control of Russia and ultimately the Soviet Union following the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution. In order to create a buffer zone in the south, Stalin set about creating artificial republics in Central Asia. Created by a series of decrees from 1924-36, artificial boundaries were created for the five countries that did not reflect historical realities, ethnic groups or languages. The republics were not supposed to be viable independent entities. As Stalin was establishing in Eastern Europe, Soviet nationalities policies were aimed at breaking existing nationalities, or the fusion of people into a homo sovieticus. This Soviet social engineering was to be accomplished through declaring Russian the official language; breaking up large linguistic and cultural groups (e.g.
Turkic) and religion (e.g. Islam); transforming minorities into majorities and vice-versa.
For many years following World War II and even after Stalin's death, the decision to publish Soviet strategy was not a primary concern. Eventually however, the relationship between policy and military strategy was analyzed in a book entitled Military Strategy written by a team of authors appointed by Krushchev. This book was published in three editions, 1962, 1963, and 1968. With a primary goal of causing concern in the West, this book did not provide in-depth analysis of policy or doctrine. It included statements such as:
The recognition of war as a means of policy defines the relationship between military strategy and policy which is based on the principle of complete subordination of the former to the latter…[and] the goals and tasks of strategy are defined by and directly stem from the aims and goals of state policy, of which military strategy is one means. 
71
Uzbekistan has been more influenced by the west than Russia in the recent past, but that is changing rapidly.  With the United States departure from Uzbekistan, Russia has the opportunity to move its own forces in. Russia will take over the airbase at Karshi-Khanabad within the next year as soon as Uzbekistan is officially a member of the CSTO.
74
Yuri Baluyevsky, the Russian chief of the General Staff, said "Russia sees no need to deploy troops to Uzbekistan, even though an alliance treaty signed last month allows that." He also stated that Russia reserves the right to defend its interests in the former Soviet sphere of influence. 
75
In base in the Osh region. However, in November, the Kyrgyzstan defense minister stated that Russia has no intention of moving into the Osh region. He also mentioned that the Russian base in Kant is a powerful stabilizer in the region. 
82
The ongoing squabbles over unresolved border issues constitute another factor contributing to the instability in the region. This problem directly emanates directly from Esen Topoev has ensured that Russia's air base will have a "sobering effect" on terrorist groups planning to destabilize the region. The agreement will be in force for at least 15 years, but may then be extended by five-year terms. More than 500 military and civilian personnel and about 20 aircraft-including attack planes, fighter planes, transport planes, and helicopters-will be based in Kant. Four trainer planes will also be transferred from Kyrgyzstan's armed forces.
The support or at least to have subdued acceptance of the regime 3) building up the armed forces of the DRA to make it capable of defending the regime and 4) eliminating the resistance. 
85
Soviet operations in Afghanistan can be divided up into four phases: invasion and initial occupation, occupation, counterinsurgency, and turning point. Four months after a general staff team visited Afghanistan, another team consisting of over 50 officers from the Soviet Ground Forces made a similar visit. In September 1979, several divisions in the Central Asian military district began to mobilize, followed in October with similar movements in Turkestan. Repositioning of aircraft and logistical stockpiles were moved to the Soviet border. These were all in preparation for phase one. Phase two, which began in January 1980, included 50,000 personnel that were a part of the Limited Contingent of Soviet Forces in Afghanistan (LCSFA). The LCSFA's primary responsibility was to provide a base of stability so that the DRA Armed Force could go out and capture and/or neutralize insurgents, ensuring that the Soviet forces would have minimal contact with the local population. Ultimately the plan was for the LCSFA to be withdrawn within two years time.
After three years of war, however, the LCSFA had made little progress toward achieving its objectives, the DRA Armed Forces continued to be ill-trained and nontrustworthy. Meanwhile the Mujahideen increased in strength, numbers and amount of territory controlled. Based on these facts and the unwillingness to send in the more than 500,000 troops it would take to achieve its objectives, phase three turned to  By 1994, the Mujahideen had been replaced by the Chechens as the target of military operations. In November 1994, the bulk of the operations in Chechnya were clandestine using special Soviet forces to stir unrest, even attempt to take out elements of Dudayev's regime. 
88
Once the counterinsurgency phase was enacted, the tactics for carrying out the operation went from bad to worse. In an effort to wage economic warfare, the Soviets used whatever they could to destroy agriculture and villages that were thought to be sympathetic to the Mujahideen. Bombers, artillery, rockets, anti-personnel mines and chemical munitions were all used to bombard villages, destroy agricultural infrastructure, burn crops, contaminate food stocks and water, and kill livestock. 
89
This support greatly shifted the balance in favor of the Mujahideen.
Despite the events in the early 1990s, including the Tajik civil war and the incident in the Namangan province of Uzbekistan, radical Islam was not considered a major problem in Central Asia until 1996 when the Taliban came to power in We had constantly been indicating that the threat to our interests, a real threat at that, was coming from the south, primarily from the territory of Afghanistan. It is clear that Russia could hardly have tackled the task of eliminating the seat of terrorism in Afghanistan on its own, singlehandedly. It had been accomplished by the efforts of the international coalition. Have our southern borders become more secure as a result? Absolutely…Yes, we have to make compromises, one of them has been the appearance in this region of U.S., and not only U.S., servicemen who are solving the task connected with the international operation in Afghanistan. 
93
On November 14, 2005, the presidents of Russia and Uzbekistan signed a military treaty forging an alliance that reasserts Moscow's influence in the former Soviet republic.
The deal, which could foreshadow the establishment of a Russian military base there,
The attack on United States soil rallied public support for decisive military action even stronger than the first Gulf War. As suspects were named and ties to Al Qaeda were verified, that decisive military action was just a matter of time. As with all military actions there are contingency plans to help guide the forces in obtaining objectives.
President Bush told the country that terrorists would be pursued and brought to justice no matter where they were or no matter how long it would take. This open-ended declaration will be important in examining the military presence situation. Part of a successful operation is being able to supply and sustain forces to carry out the mission in the field. As plans became reality a new partnership arose in the form of agreements between the United States and many of the Central Asian countries. The objective of this chapter is to discuss the negotiations and permissions needed to secure United States military presence in Central Asia-from the bandwaggoning war on terror to the inward look of each regime for sustained relationships.
Since September 11, 2001, the United States has fought two wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. In these wars, the United States has sustained forces in Central Asia and the Caucasus over an extended period by sea and air for the first time in history. Thus, American leaders and commanders revealed that United States forces would and could be optimized for global power projection capabilities, and that new theaters like Central Asia were of considerable strategic importance to Washington. Their actions reflected the importance of that area as a potential theater of strategic operations.
The challenge is that these zones are epicenters of domestic instability and great power rivalry. Moreover, the United States concept of foreign access is changing dramatically due to the new Global Posture Review. Therefore, our future access to these areas will not resemble that of the past with sprawling bases, but will remain relatively austere pending future contingencies. To secure and maintain that access, it is not enough to have a purely contractual military relationship with these states when a crisis arises.
Instead, we need a holistic and strategically conceived program of interaction with them to help them ward off challenges to domestic security and threats from nearby great powers who would like to subordinate these new and fragile states to their own quasiimperial designs. Thus the United States has to help strengthen our partners not only against terrorism, but also against threats that could lead to it if state order breaks down.
In other words, our presence must become one that is regarded by local governments as not being a purely contractual or one-shot deal, but rather as having a legitimacy acquired by an overall improvement of domestic and foreign security.
Since the United States cannot count on direct unmediated access to battlefields, even in less distant and remote regions than Afghanistan, it must pioneer in creating new joint, expeditionary fighting organizations that can project power to distant theaters and gain access to them in peacetime and wartime. 
95
97
Freedom. Armenia, Bulgaria, Turkey, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, and Pakistan granted over flight privileges.
In preparation for the war in Afghanistan, USCENTCOM and the USAF completed site surveys of many Central Asian airfields, entered agreements with three of the countries, and negotiated limited use of airfields in the other two. 
98
The Karimov regime had begun rethinking the notion that friendship with the United States could make good relations with Russia unnecessary. In the meantime, the Uzbek regime did not appear to have become less repressive, and popular disaffection in the country also seemed to be on the rise, driven not just by the limited capacity for political expression but increasingly by the economic hardships caused by border closings. Prices rose, and corrupt officials continued to take their share of proceeds. Protests grew, including in rural farming areas.
100
In May 2005 in Uzbekistan's Andijan province, there was a jailbreak, followed by a public political demonstration, which resulted in bloodshed. On the night of May 12-13, a number of prisoners, many of them reportedly held on charges of Islamic radical activism (which they denied) were freed from the local jail by a group of armed men. The armed men took hostages, and, according to Uzbek officials, killed at least some of them.
They seized the main municipal building and attempted to capture the national security service headquarters, but failed in the attempt. They then led a street protest in the square in front of the seized municipal building. Local residents joined in complaint against
Andijan and Uzbek authorities. Security forces fired into the growing crowd, which included both the armed men who carried out the jailbreak and unarmed civilians.
Authorities eventually blocked off and stormed the square, according to eyewitness reports. Uzbek officials report that 187 people died, including Uzbek security personnel. Some human rights groups have cited much higher numbers of dead, in the thousands. 
101
Both countries declined. Russia, on the other hand, expressed support for Uzbekistan, as did China, which Uzbek President Islam Karimov visited on the heels of the crisis.
In   By mid-October 2001, 44 countries had provided over flight permission and 33 had provided landing rights. In addition, 36 offered military forces or equipment for raids against the Taliban, and 14 had accepted United States forces on their territory. Special Forces were deployed to Afghanistan by Britain, Australia, and Canada. All these countries were helpful in the cause against the Taliban; however, none were absolutely essential in that they did not hold veto power over American action. This was a key because countries may have felt pressured to veto American activity based on Muslim/Arab ties. As it turned out, American sea power provided mobile bases near Afghanistan in international waters, and the United States conducted the initial phase of the war prior to completing assembly of the coalition. Since the United States demonstrated it would conduct the war on its own if necessary, it freed many countries into feeling less pressure to join the cause.
While it may be true that access issues have never stopped an operation in which the United States was seriously committed, without access, the operation becomes more difficult and more costly. Access may be afforded by various methods; however, there is no such thing as assured access. 
112
The Air Force is heavily dependent on overseas bases for its wartime effectiveness. But the number of foreign bases to which that service has access has declined over 80 percent since the height of the Cold War, and all of the 30 or so bases that remain are subject to political constraints on their use. In many areas of the world, such as Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, and southern Africa, the Air Force does not have assured access to a single nearby base. The base-access issue is likely to grow worse in the future as the interests of the United States and its allies diverge. Indeed, experience suggests the prepackaged presence of United States forces at foreign bases can contribute to such a divergence by becoming a political embarrassment for the host government. 
113
Unlike the Cold War, the United States focus is on the ability to move to the fight not fight in place. The September 11 attacks clarified that the key security challenges that will be faced in the 21 st century are: the nexus among terrorist organizations, their state supporters and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; ungoverned and undergoverned areas within states; and asymmetric warfare that adversaries will use to counter conventional military superiority. The United States Global Defense Posture has five key policy themes: strengthened allied roles; flexibility to contend with uncertainty; focus within and across regions; develop rapidly deployable capabilities; and to focus on capabilities, not numbers.
In August 2004, President George Bush announced plans to reposition approximately 70,000 United States troops from overseas bases. The president stated that American forces are more agile, more lethal, and more capable of striking anywhere around the globe on short notice. Some of these troops would be withdrawn, others positioned in other areas around the world to be able to quickly respond to unexpected threats. United States administration officials noted that America is attempting to portray the strength of its commitment to its allies in terms of capabilities, not in the number of troops. The technological prowess of the United States military in terms of its ability to project power over great distances, supports such troop withdrawals. 
114
115
The narcotics trade in Central Asia is also a primary source of funding for militant Islamic groups. The IMU reportedly has been using its militants to move opium and heroin through the region into Russia and to their contacts in Chechnya and eventually onto the European market. The revenue earned from moving just a kilogram of heroin through Central Asia is well worth the risk in a region fraught with poverty. According to retired United States Ambassador Grant Smith, "profit from moving a kilogram of heroin across Tajikistan, ranges from $4000 if the destination is neighboring countries, to $14,000 if the destination is Moscow." 
118
Dr. John Hamre, former Deputy Secretary of Defense and now president of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, stated, "It appears to me that the kinds of changes to United States military posture that DOD is contemplating today are driven by operational expediency, rather than strategy. The problem with this is that, to be sustainable over the long-term, United States bases overseas must be part of an overall political, diplomatic, and strategic framework." 119 Taking the initiative to extend assistance created an atmosphere where the regimes of Central Asia responded in overwhelming support of United States efforts. Current and future administrations, however, have to adjust United States policy to ensure stronger relationships if there is a desire to maintain an influence.
The list of de-stabilizing factors also includes human rights violations, ethnic tensions, water rights, and the competing efforts of Russia and China. All of these factors can be negatively or positively impacted by American military presence in the region.
Each country researched for this study provided insightful information that highlights other ways to conduct stability operations, while still being able to accomplish strategic objectives.
As stated earlier, the Bush Administration made it clear that security and democracy are indivisible and the tenet of human rights under the umbrella of democracy was put to the test with the Andijan incident. Before approaching the Uzbek regime about basing rights, there was already an understanding that Uzbekistan was not a democracy and there were known human rights violations committed by the regime. The States stand by and not address human rights violations with a country that it has diplomatic relations with? Certainly not! However, there is a way to address the issues without putting the regime on the defensive. Germany has a military presence in Uzbekistan and it did not issue any formal statements concerning Andijan, and they are still operating there. Does that make Germany any less a democracy? Addressing
Andijan, the way we did, pushed Karimov into the arms of Russia, and the resulting treaty is even stronger than relations since 1991. Uzbekistan, the most populated, and arguably the most influential in the region may be lost to the United States for a long time to come. The point is that battles have to be selected carefully and the level of engagement even more so.
Manas Air Base survived the Tulip Revolution and the United States was guaranteed continued access despite the recommendation of the SCO. The latest obstacle for the United States to negotiate is the demand on behalf of Kyrgyz President Bayev that the United States pay 100 percent the amount it paid to the previous regime, claiming that Akayev was corrupt and the money is not accounted for. A great example of the corruptness imbedded within Central Asia's regimes. This situation will be dealt with in a much more thought out manner since this is the last base the United States has in this part of the region.
The bulk of the operations conducted at K2 Air Base have moved to Manas Air Base and currently, the relationship between the base and the local population is agreeable. As noted in Chapter Four, Russia has opened Kant Air Base not more than ten miles away and the desire for the United States to leave altogether is no secret.
United 
During the occupation of Germany following World War II, the American forces were provided with a Pocket Guide to Germany to help educate and guide the military personnel's behavior. The guide included many points of interest, but namely excerpts from the occupation directive, JCS 1067, which spoke directly to the banning of fraternization. For military officials the fraternization bias served as a security measure and a form of punishment for the German people. 
121
U.S. armed forces, both in wartime and in peacetime, must help assure security in areas like Central Asia. Any concept of United States victory in America's current wars that does not also insist that those forces dominate not only the combat, but also postcombat phases of operations to achieve strategic victory, is intrinsically wrong. For example, if future contingencies necessitate the presence of United States combat forces in former Soviet republics, their peacetime and wartime missions could include engagement in protracted peace and support operations due to the strategic nature of the mission and the theater's socio-political configuration. Or, if these governments do not succumb to insurgencies, United States forces there can perform missions to help them modernize their armed forces and render them increasingly interoperable with those of NATO. These tasks and goals include military missions to help achieve this interoperability and to conduct priority operations such as anti-terrorist operations, peace support operations, counter drug, counter proliferation operations, and border security.
Security professionals active in these areas already embrace this expanded mission. They know that security includes the entire range of activities necessary to reconstruct viable states and societies. Language, tour duration/rotations and overall asset coordination are three important areas that these security professionals (military and civilian) need to focus on in order to recognize success in this region. All three are interconnected in the unconventional process of establishing relationships.
The Department of Defense has long recognized the importance of language proficiency in the intelligence field, and has already begun the process to expand the base number of personnel that are conversant in many languages. As with many things, the push for learning Arabic languages got a stronger push following Operation Desert Storm, as it was reinvigorated following the attacks of 9/11.
As in the Great Game, the representatives from Great Britain, Russia and other countries that mastered the local languages of Central Asia found much better success. In an effort to establish relationships and trust with a local population, to have interaction with the population that speaks English is only scratching at the surface. Insurgents and terrorist usually have the advantage when it comes to communication. Essentially those that are trying to stabilize and those trying to de-stabilize are competing for the same population. Each can only be fully successful by, with and through the people.
The United States Air Force is now making mandatory that junior officers become proficient in another language, it has the danger of becoming another square-filler for promotion without targeted languages for targeted purposes. There is a monetary threshold that would encourage military members to become proficient and then know that their training would be used directly in the country or countries that need it.
Tours of duty in undesirable locations are usually short, six months to one year, with the service member trying hard not to go back. If they do, in fact, go back, it is usually not to the same unit, and most certainly not with the same personnel. The majority of the personnel that report to Kyrgyzstan and Afghanistan are on a six to nine months rotation schedule with some senior leadership pulling one year tours.
To break the conventional mindset would mean that the tours would be longer and that the same individuals would rotate back to the same unit and location. With the exponential element of language proficiency, there is a very real opportunity to establish relationships. First, with those that work on or service the base and this net widens as relationships grow. The local that continues to meet different people all of the time has loyalty that goes as deep as the money earned.
The traditional military mindset of having to make an impact will also have to take a backseat to furthering the ongoing effort to gain the trust of the people. This is another aspect that is at odds with the conventional mindset that determines success, which in turn determines promotion. The personnel that do rotate through these locations will be responsible for actively coordinating and participating in areas that are not the norm.
Most stability operations plans speak to the importance of working with other government organizations and at the least establishing liaisons with the nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and other tenant countries as well. Stephen Blank of the RAND Corporation suggests that: …using all the instruments of power, America, either alone or as a part of a coalition, will help these states expand their governing capacities and make them more capable of defending themselves against threats, as well as fostering an end to their isolation from the West.
122
The idea that America can do it alone is a dangerous assumption, especially in Central Asia. Unfortunately, this is too often the case and true partnership just receives lip service.
Part of the blame goes to the operations tempo at the location, but a large part goes to the fact that military organizations prefer not to work with other organizations.
One of the successful "take-aways" of Great Britain's successful counterinsurgency in Malaysia was the coordination of all resources (military and civilian) in the overall execution of the strategy. 
123
In considering how to approach local regimes, we must take care to tailor United
States programs to the needs of each country. At the same time, those programs should reinforce each other as part of a coordinated larger regional strategy. For instance, we While one can defend each of these actions on its own merits, they create an impression that our policies are incoherent, not truly interested in Uzbekistan's democratization, and that the Uzbek regime can disregard calls for democratization because of our alliance with it, leading Uzbeks to think that we were not serious and can therefore be played.
Hence, the need for well-conceived interagency and multidimensional strategy of engagement becomes apparent. That strategy should assign priorities to our engagement with local governments and make them known to avoid such embarrassments.
The United States will have to move outside of its conventional paradigm concerning military presence if it is to have longevity in Central Asia. The desire for security, or stability, in the region has to be stronger than the push for democracy.
Security is cemented in control. Control has three distinct requirements: 1) having the capability to see everything 2) having the capability to reach out and touch everything seen, and 3) possessing the will to do what is necessary to maintain control. The level of control realized is in direct correlation to stability. Clearly, the United States has very little control in Central Asia, but the potential to gain access is an important first step.
This thesis presented some unconventional proposals for military presence-not necessarily new, but rarely part of the military presence strategy. Clearly, Russia is gaining military influence in Central Asia. The addition of two new bases and the promise of more, and the strengthening of the CST with the CSTO show this to be true.
Foreign to conventional thought, the presence of Russia adds stability to the region which supports our security goals. Russia's support of the regimes in power lowers the chance of a violent regime change. The presence of Russian military forces also lowers the chance of radical Islamic violence. Its assistance to border patrolling
The terrorist attack on September 11, 2001 in the United States forced a new way of thinking about and combating a now dangerously lethal enemy. As suspects were named and ties to Osama bin Laden and the Al Qaeda organization were verified, decisive military action against Al Qaeda's base of operations was just a matter of time. Central Asia took center stage. Every potential conflict has an operations plan associated with it to help guide the forces in obtaining objectives, but even these well thought-out plans did not envision United States military presence in countries such as Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan. September 11 galvanization the United States against terrorism, but relevant information involving the attacks and their implications were unclear. The New York Times reported in October 2001 that the countries of Central Asia "are unknown to most Americans but are now being urgently courted as the United States seeks to destroy terror bases in nearby Afghanistan." 15 While it is true that most Americans were ignorant about Central Asia (and many still are) there were some organizations in the United States that were paying close attention to the developments there. During the 1990s, Russia attempted to control this part of the world to further their foreign policy ambitions. In what became known as the "Great Game" these countries sent numerous spies and emissaries into Central Asia to map out territory and woo various leaders to side with them for economic and security purposes. Eventually a succession of "ambitious Tsars and ruthless generals crushed the Muslim peoples" of Central Asia and occupied their lands. 16 Great Britain, who had established a solid foothold in India became concerned that Russia would not stop until India was theirs. This resulted in Great Britain's infiltration of Central Asia in order to track and monitor Russian interests and maneuvers. President George H. W. Bush, who learned his foreign policy under the détente of Nixon, presided over the end of the Cold War, the demise of the Soviet Union. He directed a foreign policy success in the Gulf by masterfully putting together the largest and most successful war coalition since the Second World War. Financially speaking, the Gulf War cost the United States very little and Bush refused to expand the war beyond the limits set by United Nations resolutions and the United States Congress. 17 Many United States policy makers in the 1990s asserted that the United States was on the verge of becoming the unchallenged superpower. President George H. W. 19 After the collapse of the Soviet Union at the end of 1991, the United States recognized the independence of all the former Central Asian republics and offered diplomatic relations to Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, which were viewed as following responsible security and democratic policies. Citing the dangers the Central Asian states faced from Iranian-sponsored Islamic fundamentalism, United States diplomatic relations were quickly established with the remainder of the region by mid-March 1992. Faced with calls in Congress and elsewhere to formulate a policy on aiding the New Independent States (NIS), former President George H. W. Bush sent the Freedom Support Act to Congress, which was signed into law on October 24, 1992. This law directed the President to designate a responsible agent to coordinate assistance to the independent states of the former Soviet Union and report an overall assistance and economic strategy. 20 The incoming Clinton Administration in 1993 soon pledged to focus on close ties with the NIS as a top foreign policy priority.
http://www.brookings.edu/comm/events/hill20021112.htm accessed 11 December 2005.
earmarks and priorities led to an allocation of $112 million. Estimated spending in FY2001 was $115trans-Caspian links to Central Asia, as part of a "Eurasian Transport Corridor" plan given impetus in 1997. In 1998, a Special Advisor to the President and the Secretary of State for Caspian Basin Energy Diplomacy was appointed to coordinate TDA, OPIC, Eximbank and other agency programs to ensure the "development of the Caspian and open commercial access to its energy" (this post was retained in the new Bush Administration). In 1999, TDA, OPIC, and Eximbank opened a Caspian Finance Center in Turkey. The policy of the Bush Administration regarding Caspian energy development was explicated by Ambassador Elizabeth Jones, Senior Advisor on Caspian Basin Energy diplomacy. In a State Department televised interview with residents of the region on April 12, 2001, she stated that the United States would continue to support the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline and other approaches of the previous administration. She also stated that the United States would not intervene with force to halt incursions by Islamic terrorists into the region, but would help regional states to defend themselves through NATO's Partnership for Peace and by providing counter-terrorism aid. The Central Asian states have been pressured by Russia to yield portions of their energy wealth to Russia, in part because Russia controls most existing pipelines to export markets. Among the NIS, Russia, Ukraine, Armenia, and Georgia ranked highest in cumulative United States government aid obligated as of September 30, 2000, with most Central Asian states receiving much less (including food, medical, and technical aid, and aid for nuclear weapons disarmament and safeguards for Kazakhstan). Kazakhstan and 34 The value of Defense Department excess commodities and privately donated aid transported at United States expense are not included in the cumulative obligations in the
earmarks and priorities led to an allocation of $112 million. Estimated spending in FY2001 was $115trans-Caspian links to Central Asia, as part of a "Eurasian Transport Corridor" plan given impetus in 1997. In 1998, a Special Advisor to the President and the Secretary of State for Caspian Basin Energy Diplomacy was appointed to coordinate TDA, OPIC, Eximbank and other agency programs to ensure the "development of the Caspian and open commercial access to its energy" (this post was retained in the new Bush Administration). In 1999, TDA, OPIC, and Eximbank opened a Caspian Finance Center in Turkey. The policy of the Bush Administration regarding Caspian energy development was explicated by Ambassador Elizabeth Jones, Senior Advisor on Caspian Basin Energy diplomacy. In a State Department televised interview with residents of the region on April 12, 2001, she stated that the United States would continue to support the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline and other approaches of the previous administration. She also stated that the United States would not intervene with force to halt incursions by Islamic terrorists into the region, but would help regional states to defend themselves through NATO's Partnership for Peace and by providing counter-terrorism aid. The Central Asian states have been pressured by Russia to yield portions of their energy wealth to Russia, in part because Russia controls most existing pipelines to export markets. Among the NIS, Russia, Ukraine, Armenia, and Georgia ranked highest in cumulative United States government aid obligated as of September 30, 2000, with most Central Asian states receiving much less (including food, medical, and technical aid, and aid for nuclear weapons disarmament and safeguards for Kazakhstan). Kazakhstan and 34 The value of Defense Department excess commodities and privately donated aid transported at United States expense are not included in the cumulative obligations in the
After invading Afghanistan, the establishment of numerous bases in that country represented the first openly consistent military presence outside of the Soviet Union (other than Cuba) in decades. Russia is now faced with re-establishing military presence by negotiation and compromise in a region it all but abandoned in 1991 as other countries, namely the United States and China, take a decidedly stronger interest.
After invading Afghanistan, the establishment of numerous bases in that country represented the first openly consistent military presence outside of the Soviet Union (other than Cuba) in decades. Russia is now faced with re-establishing military presence by negotiation and compromise in a region it all but abandoned in 1991 as other countries, namely the United States and China, take a decidedly stronger interest.
The Russian takeover instigated numerous revolts against tsarist authority, and many Kyrgyz opted to move into the Pamir mountains or to Afghanistan. The suppression of the 1916 rebellion in Central Asia caused many Kyrgyz to migrate to China. Soviet power was initially established in the region in 1918, and in 1924, the Kara-Kyrgyz Autonomous Oblast was created within the Russian Federal Socialist Republic. (The term Kara-Kyrgyz was used until the mid-1920s by the Russians to distinguish them from the Kazakhs, who were also referred to as Kyrgyz.) In 1926, it became the Kyrgyz Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic. On December 5, 1936, the Kyrgyz Soviet Socialist Republic (SSR) was established as a full Union Republic of the U.S.S.R. During the 1920s, the Kyrgyz Republic saw considerable cultural, educational, and social change. Economic and social development also was notable. Literacy increased, and a standard literary language was introduced. The Kyrgyz language belongs to the Southern Turkic group of languages. In 1924, an Arabic-based Kyrgyz alphabet was introduced, which was replaced by Latin script in 1928. In 1941 Cyrillic script was adopted. 51
The Russian takeover instigated numerous revolts against tsarist authority, and many Kyrgyz opted to move into the Pamir mountains or to Afghanistan. The suppression of the 1916 rebellion in Central Asia caused many Kyrgyz to migrate to China. Soviet power was initially established in the region in 1918, and in 1924, the Kara-Kyrgyz Autonomous Oblast was created within the Russian Federal Socialist Republic. (The term Kara-Kyrgyz was used until the mid-1920s by the Russians to distinguish them from the Kazakhs, who were also referred to as Kyrgyz.) In 1926, it became the Kyrgyz Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic. On December 5, 1936, the Kyrgyz Soviet Socialist Republic (SSR) was established as a full Union Republic of the U.S.S.R. During the 1920s, the Kyrgyz Republic saw considerable cultural, educational, and social change. Economic and social development also was notable. Literacy increased, and a standard literary language was introduced. The Kyrgyz language belongs to the Southern Turkic group of languages. In 1924, an Arabic-based Kyrgyz alphabet was introduced, which was replaced by Latin script in 1928. In 1941 Cyrillic script was adopted. 51
Putin added emphasis to Central Asia from the beginning. His first trips as Prime Minister in 1999 were to Tajikistan and Uzbekistan where he signed new bilateral agreements after Uzbekistan left the CST. In a speech to the Federation Council in 1999 he described Uzbek-Russian relations as a "strategic partnership" and placed all the Central Asian countries high on the foreign policy list.
Putin added emphasis to Central Asia from the beginning. His first trips as Prime Minister in 1999 were to Tajikistan and Uzbekistan where he signed new bilateral agreements after Uzbekistan left the CST. In a speech to the Federation Council in 1999 he described Uzbek-Russian relations as a "strategic partnership" and placed all the Central Asian countries high on the foreign policy list.
the most powerful force among the Central Asian states. Russia overlooks Uzbekistan's awful human rights record and appreciates the state's hard line actions on radical Islamists. Uzbekistan's reentry into the CSTO and new agreements with Russia show Russia's growing military influence in Central Asia. Uzbekistan will be a key ally to Russia.
the most powerful force among the Central Asian states. Russia overlooks Uzbekistan's awful human rights record and appreciates the state's hard line actions on radical Islamists. Uzbekistan's reentry into the CSTO and new agreements with Russia show Russia's growing military influence in Central Asia. Uzbekistan will be a key ally to Russia.
has spent 3.3 million dollars in reconstruction, and will spend another 10 million dollars to modernize it.
has spent 3.3 million dollars in reconstruction, and will spend another 10 million dollars to modernize it.
Term first used by Jimmy Carter in 1980 State of the Union address, but created by his National Security Advisor, Zbigniew Brzenzsky.
United States Department of Defense. 1994. Report on Overseas Basing, by Gary D. Vest. Report to the Senate and House Armed Services Committees. Washington, DC, March.
Vince Crawley, Bush re-election may signal smaller European Command. Air ForceTimes, 22 November  2004, 33.    
Agence France Press. "Pentagon to recommend base closures in U.S., Europe," 12 May 2005.
Charles J. Hanley, "Elaborate U.S. bases raise long-term questions," Daily News Headlines Digest, 21 March 2006. http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/article12427.htm accessed 27 March 2006.
Jon D. Klaus, U.S. Military Overseas Basing: Background and Oversight Issues for Congress, (CRS Report for Congress, 17 November 2004), 5.
Elizabeth Wishnick, Growing U.S. Security Interests in Central Asia, (Honolulu, Hawaii: University Press of the Pacific, 2004), 16.
Alexander Cooley, "Base Politics," Foreign Affairs, November/December 2005, 2.
The Honorable Daniel Fried, Assistant United States Secretary of State, public address following talks in Tashkent,Uzbekistan, 27 September, 2005.   
Sam Sarkesian, Unconventional Conflicts in a New Security Era, Lessons form Malaya and Vietnam  (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1993), 1.
Stephen Kinzer, "Ex-Soviet Asian Republics Are Now Courted by the U.S.," New York Times, 10 October 2001, sec B, p. 7 (F).
Peter Hopkirk. The Great Game: The Struggle for Empire in Central Asia.(New York: Kondansha  International, 1994), xv.    
Cliff Staten, "U.S. Foreign Policy Since World War II: An Essay on Reality's Corrective Qualities," http://www.unc.edu/depts/diplomat/item/2005/0709/stat/staten_reality.html, accessed 5 November 2005.
Central Intelligence Agency, Russia Over the Next Four Years: The Prospects for Democratization and Marketization, Published 1 May 1992, Released 21 May
  20  Freedom for Russia and Emerging Eurasian Democracies and Open Markets Support Act of 1992 or FREEDOM Support Act, Public Law 102-511.
On the record briefing of Stephen Sestanovich, NIS Ambassador-at-Large, Testimony Delivered on U.S. Policy Toward Russia, 20 May 1998, Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on European Affairs. http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/library/congress/1998_h/98052003_wpo.html
Nichol, 2.   
Kenneth Katzman, Afghanistan: Current Issues and U.S. Policy. Congressional Research Service, Report for Congress, 1 August 2003, 21.
Zbigniew Brzezinski, The Great Chessboard: American Primacy and its Geostrategic Imperatives.  (New York: Basic Books, 1997), 210-11.   
Central Intelligence Agency, Russia Over the Next Four Years: The Prospects for Democratization and Marketization, Published 1 May 1992, Released 21 May 2001.
UN World Food Programme, http://www.wfp.org/country_brief/indexcountry.asp?region=6&section=9&sub_section=6&country=762, accessed 21 November 2005.
Nichol, 11.   
M.K. Bhadrakumar, "The 'Talibanization' of Central Asia", Asia Times, 12 May 2005.
CENTRASBAT, http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/centrasbat.htm, accessed 15 November 2005.
Thomas E. Ricks and Susan B. Glasser, "U.S. Operated Secret Alliance with Uzbekistan," The Washington Post, 14 October 2001, p. A01.
Robert G. Kaiser, "U.S. Plants Footprint in Shaky Central Asia, " The Washington Post, 27 August 2002, p. A01.
A. Elizabeth Jones, Assistant Secretary for European and Eurasian Affairs Testimony Before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Subcommittee on Central Asia and the Caucasus, Washington, DC, 13 December 2001. U.S.-Central Asian Cooperation
Ian Traynor, War In Afghanistan: Russia Edgy at America's Military Build-Up in Region," The Guardian, 10 January 2002.
David Leigh, "Attack and Counter-attack," The Guardian, 26 September 2001.
Hopkirk, Peter.  The Great Game: The Struggle for Empire in Central Asia.(New York: Kondansha  International, 1994), xv.    
Daniel C. Diller. Russia and the Independent States (Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Inc., 1993), 263.
United States Department of State, Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs (July 2005) http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2924.htm accessed 15 March 2006.
Soloviev, Safronov and Zuverink, "The Change of Guards," Kommersant, Russia's Daily Online, 24 November 2005.
Isachenk, "U.S. Presence in Asia Concerns Russia," Associated Press, 1 Dec 2005.
The Russian General Staff, The Soviet Afghan War: How a Superpower Fought and Lost, translated and edited by Lester W. Grau and Micheal A. Gress (Lawrence, KS: Kansas University Press, 2002), xiv.
TheRussian General Staff, 113.   
Patterns of Global Terrorism, 2001. The U.S. Department of State website available at http//www.state.gov/documents/organization/10291.pdf
Totskiy in British Broadcasting Corporation Summary of World Broadcasts, SU/4422, 7 February 2002, quoted in Mark A. Smith, Russia, the USA & Central Asia, F77 (Camberley, England: Conflict Studies Research Center, May 2002), p. 3. Available at http://www.csrc.ac.uk
Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Igor Ivanov, interview with the newspaper Rossiiskaya Gazeta, 30 December 2002. From the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Information and Press Department.
"Air Force Lacks Basing Options for Airstrikes on Afghanistan," Inside the Air Force, October 12, 2001, p. 1.
Robert Harkavy, "Strategic Geography and the Greater Middle East," Naval War College Review, Vol.  LIV, No. 4, Autumn 2001, 45.    
Blank, Stephen J. After Two Wars: Reflections on the American Strategic Revolution in Central Asia. (Strategic Studies Institute: July 2005),
William D. O'Malley, Central Asia and South Caucasus as an Area of Operations: Challenges and Constraints, (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, 2003), 249.
O'Malley, 249.   
Olga Oliker and David A. Shlapak, U.S. Interest in Central Asia, (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, 2005), 27.
Yekaterina Tvorogova, "A Military Base is a National Issue," Delovaya Nedelya (Bishkek), 8 March 2002.
Ann Scott Tyson, "New U.S. strategy: 'lily pad' bases," The Christian Science Monitor, 10 August 2004, p. 6.
William D. O'Malley, Central Asia and South Caucasus as an Area of Operations: Challenges and Constraints, (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, 2003), 249.
Norman Friedman, Terrorism, Afghanistan, and America's New Way of War, (Annapolis, Maryland:  Naval Institute Press, 2003), 137.   
On the record briefing by Assistant Secretary of State Elizabeth Jones, 11 February 2002.
Susan V. Lawrence, and David Lague, "Marching Out of Asia," Far Eastern Economic Review, 26 August 2004, 1-2.
Bradley Graham, "U.S. May Halve Forces in Germany," The WashingtonPost, 25 March 2004, 1.   
Ahmed Rashid, Jihad:  The Rise of Militant Islam in Central Asia, (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2002) 57.
Niklas Swanstrom,"The Prospects for Multilateral Conflict Prevention and Regional Cooperation in Central Asia," Central Asian Survey ,Vol.XXIII,No.1, March 2004,pp.41-53    
Chris Strohm, "Effort to Realign Military Bases Abroad Seen as Short-sighted," http://www.govexec.com/news/index.cfm accessed 13 September 2005.
Cooley,
3.
Petra Goedde, GI's and Germans: Culture, Gender, and Foreign Relations, 1945-1949 (New Haven:  Yale University Press, 2003), 43.   
Stephen J. Blank, After 2 Wars: Reflections on the American Strategic Revolution in Central Asia (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, 2005), 22.
R.W. Komer, The Malayan Emergency in Retrospect: Organization of A Successful Counterinsurgency Effort (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, 1972), 60.
Blank, 21.   
I have the distinct pleasure of thanking my wife, Jackie, for her outstanding support and unconditional love. The stay in Monterey was sweetened by the addition of our two daughters, Amani and 
Tracy. Much
Professor Tom Johnson
Professor James Russell
The views expressed in this thesis are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the 
Department of Defense
United States Government
also discourage military competition and prevent wars from starting; therefore, according to Vice Admiral Arthur Cebrowski, it must be positioned around the world. 
116
The smaller sites in remote regions will be designated as cooperative security locations and will not have a permanent military presence but will serve as staging areas for troops requiring quick access for training or for engaging a threat. The major United States-led conflicts since the end of the Cold War reflect similar themes in terms of the keys to their success. The United States built coalitions, gaining the necessary access into the regions of interests and providing legitimacy for its cause; and America demonstrated overmatching military capability based on technological prowess, precision weapons, joint integration, and strategic logistics, including pre-positioned materiel in the region.
The United States military's strategic and logistical advantages of basing in Central Asia are known and are currently being used in the Global War on Terror.
United States military presence in the form of bases coupled with lessons learned from previous Soviet Union occupations and political relationships can not only provide "bread and bullets" to our troops in harm's way, but will also lead to increased stability for all of Central Asia. As stated earlier, the military advantages of these overseas bases are underlined daily in the on-going Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom campaigns. Furthermore, the respective governments have received significant financial support for the right of access. The success of the bases can be narrowly defined in terms of operations support, but lasting impact in Central Asia will also Manas Air Base). The successful combination of these four areas will ensure long term benefits for United States and Central Asian interests.
Clausewitz noted that war is an extension of politics. Therefore, the manager of violence, the military, is a tool of politics as well. Overseas basing provides an extension of United States policy. But flexibility is the key to the survival of these relatively new independent states of Central Asia. Calling for democracy in these countries, while commendable, is potentially destabilizing. Democracy may not answer the need for "effective" and "responsive" governance, which can deliver the domestic security, social and economic goods the populations of these countries seek and require. Responsive and effective governance, let alone democratic, has been hard to establish from Eastern Europe, through the Middle East, Central and South Asia and Southeast Asia. This is not to say that democracy was impossible, because it has certainly been fruitful in many of these areas, but the authoritarian governance and entrenched corruption common in Central Asia as a result of the Soviet system may be the rule for some time to come. The United States has to exercise wisdom and patience to deal with this very real probability.
Severe poverty, repression, narcotics smuggling, corruption among key leaders, and a continuing rise in radical Islamic fundamentalism have led to growing instability in the region. Most of the region's problems can be traced back to the pre-independence period, when the Soviet Union still controlled these states.
The Soviet policies of closed borders, forced cotton agriculture, farm collectivization, population relocation, and-most significant-Stalin's redrawing of the map of Central Asia to create five incongruous states had left the region economically hard-pressed, ethnically and politically divided, and forced to practice its majority religion-Islam-in secret. 
117
While not all of us may be able to grow a beard, get tanned and blend in with the peoples of Central Asia like Professor Tom Johnson, a concerted effort to invest the funding and unconventional thought can produce positive changes. All of the suggestions presented here require time-a commodity that is very precious and current United States administrations and military policies don't allow for. Again, as in the Malaysian success story, the counterinsurgency took twelve years to complete. How critical is United States military presence in Central Asia? Time will certainly tell.