# ID: d0eb1f39465544cc86d630083edaa5b7
# Title: Interoperability for Joint All-Domain Operations: Lessons from Operation Desert Storm for the Korean Peninsula
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The 2017 US National Security Strategy discusses increasing threats and capabilities of near-peer adversaries, mainly from China and Russia, and not insignificantly from North Korea and Iran.
According to the document, those near-peer adversaries attempt to create stand-off throughout all domains of warfare to achieve their political advantage, as seen in Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014.
Also, the near-peers continue building capabilities such as hypersonic missiles, fighter jets, and other advanced weapon systems that can be utilized against United States (US) forces and its allies during a possible future conflict.
Accordingly, each of the US military service departments has invested much effort in developing future operating concepts and doctrines to fulfill the defense strategy against the adversaries.
US Army's Multi-Domain Desert Storm, the Air-Land Battle concept was successfully applied against the Iraqi military, the fourth largest military in the world.
The operation also showed a high level of interoperability among multinational partners.
This monograph will also draw more specific implications for the Joint All-Domain Operations on the Korean peninsula, where the US and allied forces can face two of the four near-peer adversaries: primarily North Korea, and potentially China.
This monograph is significant in the field of military studies in three ways.
First, examining Operation Desert Storm in terms of operational interoperability provides some vital insights into the future interoperability implications of Joint All-Domain Operations, an important, but not heavily researched, subject.
The successful interoperability of the past operation with the focus of synchronizing air and land domains can undoubtedly provide some lessons to a possible future operation; integrating multiple domains with added complexity when dealing with multiple domains is considered.
Second, the implications drawn from this monograph can inform the development of future warfare concepts and capabilities of both the US and its allied nations, such as the Republic of Korea and NATO countries.
Successful and legitimate military operations are rarely conducted unilaterally.
If fighting with the allied nation(s) is a general assumption for the US military operations against near-peers, coordination among the allies on future war concepts and subsequent capabilities development becomes crucial.
Finally, this monograph will enable readers to understand how effective interoperability contributes to exercising operational art.
Although the focus of this monograph is the operational interoperability among multinational partners, interoperability's effectiveness can only be assessed within the context of the application of operational art.