# ID: d0eb1f39465544cc86d630083edaa5b7
# Title: Interoperability for Joint All-Domain Operations: Lessons from Operation Desert Storm for the Korean Peninsula
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Operation Desert Storm in 1991, where Air-Land Battle doctrine was put into practice, demonstrated a high level of multinational interoperability with thirty-nine countries participating. Multi-Domain Operations (MDO), the US Army's future war concept, seeks to deter and defeat future adversaries such as Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea by optimizing combat power in multiple domains. Joint All-Domain Operation (JADO) is a joint warfighting concept being developed at the joint level integrating all services' concepts to include MDO. The monograph examines the reasons why the coalition forces in 1991 were able to achieve a high-level of interoperability and the implications for JADO if it was to apply on the Korean peninsula. The ROK and US forces maintain combined readiness and requirement for interoperability to counter North Korean conventional and asymmetric threats in Korea. Also, considering the UN Security Resolution 84, which became the basis for armed intervention with sixteen force providing countries during Korean War, is still in effect with continuing armistice status from Korean War. Thus, the next possible North Korean attack will most likely be responded to with multinational efforts, again. The monograph concludes that the high level of interoperability during Operation Desert Storm was due mainly to proper application and development of doctrine, materiel, and leadership of major participating nations' militaries with systems thinking. And, these three aspects along with systems thinking, will stay crucial for the conduct of JADO on the Korean peninsula as well, but on a different scale due to the complex nature of integrating operations in all domains.
15.
Schwarzkopf considered the Coalition's center of gravity to be the Coalition itself. If the frail bonds of the Arab-Islamic commitment to the US-led Coalition could be broken, perhaps by drawing Israel into the war, the Coalition would quite likely be fragmented and torn apart.
-Robert H. Scales, Certain Victory: The US Army in the Gulf War
The 2017 US National Security Strategy discusses increasing threats and capabilities of near-peer adversaries, mainly from China and Russia, and not insignificantly from North Korea and Iran. According to the document, those near-peer adversaries attempt to create stand-off throughout all domains of warfare to achieve their political advantage, as seen in Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014. Also, the near-peers continue building capabilities such as hypersonic missiles, fighter jets, and other advanced weapon systems that can be utilized against United States (US) forces and its allies during a possible future conflict. Accordingly, each of the US military service departments has invested much effort in developing future operating concepts and doctrines to fulfill the defense strategy against the adversaries. US Army's Multi-Domain Desert Storm, the Air-Land Battle concept was successfully applied against the Iraqi military, the fourth largest military in the world. The operation also showed a high level of interoperability among multinational partners. This monograph will also draw more specific implications for the Joint All-Domain Operations on the Korean peninsula, where the US and allied forces can face two of the four near-peer adversaries: primarily North Korea, and potentially China. This monograph is significant in the field of military studies in three ways. First, examining Operation Desert Storm in terms of operational interoperability provides some vital insights into the future interoperability implications of Joint All-Domain Operations, an important, but not heavily researched, subject. The successful interoperability of the past operation with the focus of synchronizing air and land domains can undoubtedly provide some lessons to a possible future operation; integrating multiple domains with added complexity when dealing with multiple domains is considered. Second, the implications drawn from this monograph can inform the development of future warfare concepts and capabilities of both the US and its allied nations, such as the Republic of Korea and NATO countries. Successful and legitimate military operations are rarely conducted unilaterally. If fighting with the allied nation(s) is a general assumption for the US military operations against near-peers, coordination among the allies on future war concepts and subsequent capabilities development becomes crucial. Finally, this monograph will enable readers to understand how effective interoperability contributes to exercising operational art. Although the focus of this monograph is the operational interoperability among multinational partners, interoperability's effectiveness can only be assessed within the context of the application of operational art.
This monograph seeks to provide answers to the primary research question: what are the implications of multinational operations in Operation Desert Storm in 1991 for the future interoperability of Joint All-Domain Operations on the Korean peninsula? In so doing, the monograph will also attempt to answer three secondary research questions. The first secondary research question is: how did the coalition forces achieve effective multinational interoperability during Operation Desert Storm with the simultaneous synchronization in the land and air domains? The second secondary research question is: What are the implications of that interoperability for Joint All-Domain Operations, given the increasing complexities of integrating operations in all domains? The third secondary research question is: What are doctrine, capability, and leader development implications of interoperability for possible Joint All-Domain Operations on the Korean peninsula in the future? Based on initial historiography and doctrinal readings, this monograph proposes the hypothesis that effective interoperability during Operation Desert Storm was possible due mainly to proper application and development of doctrine, capabilities, and leadership of major participating nations' militaries. And, these three aspects will stay crucial for the conduct of Joint All-Domain Operations on the Korean peninsula as well, but on different scales due to the complex nature of integrating operations in all domains.
This monograph will use the lenses of history (a case study on Operation Desert Storm), doctrine (primarily Allied Joint Doctrine 01), and theory (Peter M. Senge's The Fifth Discipline and other theories) to answer the proposed primary and secondary research questions. With access to the Combined Arms Research Library (CARL) and various electronic academic sources, the research will concentrate on multiple analysis in the form of books or articles on Operation Desert Storm, Department of Defense background information, and written documents including interviews conducted with various military leaders involved in the operation. To inform my research, the historiography of the Gulf War and a case study on Operation Desert Storm will provide a basis for the beginning. The lens of doctrine will be particularly important, as Allied Joint Publication 01 lays out the interoperability principles during multinational operations and enables the research to analyze the operation. Meanwhile, Peter M. Senge's The Fifth Discipline will provide the lens of theory in analyzing interoperability during Operation Desert Storm, as his theory emphasizes on how to achieve an organization's goal by enabling systems thinking among various participants and teams. Finally, through the interoperability analysis of Operation Desert Storm, this monograph will draw implications for the Joint All-Domain Operations in the future, primarily when the multinational forces conduct operations on the Korean peninsula (See Figure 
1
13
14
2
15
16
15
22
23
According to US Air Force General John Hyten, the Vice-Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint All-Domain Operations (JADO) combine air, land, sea, space, cyber, electromagnetic spectrum, and "everything that we need to operate in the future."2 3F 
24
25
22
23
24 Colin Clark, "Gen. Hyten On The New American Way of War: All-Domain Operations," Breaking Defense, accessed 10 October 2020, https://breakingdefense.com/2020/02/gen-hyten-on-the-newamerican-way-of-war-all-domain-operations. 
25
26
On 1 June 2020, the US Air Force published a doctrine, the first one regarding the JADO, Annex 3-1 Department of the Air Force Role in Joint All-Domain Operations. The doctrine recognizes the increasingly interconnected, interdependent nature of future joint operations and seeks "convergence across domains that present adversary dilemmas at an operational tempo complicating or negating adversary responses and enabling the joint force to operate inside the adversary's decision-making cycle."2 6F 
27
In describing the ROK military's modernization process, Michael Raska, in his article "RMA diffusion Paths and Patterns in South Korea's Military Modernization," argues that the ROK military pursued modernization to "acquire advanced military capabilities to counter the widening spectrum of threats, mitigate technological and interoperability gaps with US forces, and eventually attain a self-reliant defense posture."2 7F 
28
Despite continuous improvements in interoperability, according to the retired ROK Lieutenant General In-Bum Chun, there are also deficiencies. He argues that language and cultural differences between the ROK and the US continue to be barriers to effective interoperability.3 0F
31
32
Much of the literature on Operation Desert Storm heavily focuses on how the US military was able to transform itself after the Vietnam War and successfully conducted the operation as a result of the transformation. The topics of such discussions include the US Army's effective modernization preceding the operation, the doctrinal evolution of Air-Land Battle and its fruition during the operation, and the application of operational art during Operation Desert Storm. What is missing is a holistic analysis of multi-national interoperability during the operation. Even the publications that do discuss interoperability touch primarily on the technical aspect of interoperability such as communication systems and logistics, rather than looking at the interoperability from a systems perspective. The literature on MDO and JADO are not prolific, as the topics are relatively recent and still in their formative stages. Thus, the emphasis of the 30 Ibid. literature has been mainly on clarifying and elaborating different aspects of the concepts. Thus, not much attention has been paid to how applicable these concepts will be to different allied partners or what implications these concepts will have in a specific region within the regional strategic or operational context. The current US and ROK interoperability, according to existing literature, does not seem to have too much problem for now due to relatively aligned doctrine, equipment, and combined Command and Control (C2) structure. Nevertheless, the literature lacks on forecasting the future interoperability and implications when new concepts such as MDO and JDO are applied as doctrines to US forces in Korea.
Colin Gray, in his book, Airpower for Strategic Effects, argues that a theory not only explains how "the parts relate to one another," but also "connect the field of study to other human endeavors," and "anticipate how changes in the future will affect the field of study."3 2F
33
34
Allied Joint Publication 01, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) doctrine published in 2017, begins with emphasizing the importance of interoperability in multinational operation. According to the doctrine, the effectiveness of multinational forces in peace, crisis, and conflict to achieve a military end-state, depends on interoperability, which is defined as "the ability of the forces provided to operate together coherently, effectively and efficiently."3 4F 
35
Joint Publication 3-16: Multinational Operations JP 3-16, Multinational Operations, further offers insights on how to achieve effective interoperability among multinational partners. The doctrine states that nations must consider eight tenets of "respect, rapport, knowledge of partners, patience, mission focus, team-building, trust, and confidence" to achieve effective multinational interoperability.3 5F 36 Although these tenets do not guarantee the success of a mission, since there are more requirements than interoperability to fulfill the mission, disregarding the tenets can certainly fail a mission.3 6F 37 Although this doctrine mainly guides the US commanders and staff, these tenets can be applied to most multinational forces in general.
First, respect during multinational operation refers to acts of considering each partner nation's honor and prestige.3 7F 
38
39
37
38
39
40
42
43
44
45
46
47
42
43
44
45
46
47
49
50
51
52
53
55
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
The discipline of building shared vision emphasizes the skill of having a shared picture of a future that "foster genuine commitment and enrollment rather than compliance."5 5F 56 A shared vision, as opposed to a mere vision statement or a vision solely laid out by a leader, is translated from the members' personal visions. Thus, a shared vision motivates the members to commit themselves to achieve the vision of the organization.5 6F 57 Members feel more responsible for achieving the organization's vision because they contributed to building the vision.
The discipline of team learning also can have an impact on one's quest for mastering operational art. The discipline of team learning pursues a process that produces extraordinary results as a team and significant individual growth.5 7F 
58
Then, the commonality of direction, which is a product of harmony, would make the team efforts greater than a simple sum of the individual efforts.5 8F 
59
60
61
62
56
58
59
60
61
62
63
3
The physical capabilities of the coalition forces during Operation Desert Storm cannot be separated from military modernization efforts done before the operation. Each of the major coalition forces went through military modernization to achieve national goals and was ready to demonstrate those physical capabilities in the air-land battle. The primary vehicle driving the modernization during the 1980s, especially for the NATO countries such as the US, UK, and modernize by 1987.8 2F 83 The study showed that the modernization efforts of NATO countries if implemented as planned, would increase the NATO capability by 23 percent and would thus be able to maintain the 1.5 to 1 ratio.8 3F 
84
85
86
87
88
83
84
85
86
87
Saudi Arabia heavily invested in its military modernization during the 1980s as well: however, unlike the NATO coalition forces, its motivation was focused on deterring threats from Iran and Iraq.8 8F 
89
91
92
93
94
95
Throughout Operation Desert Storm, the coalition forces fully utilized state-of-the-art military technology in multiple domains. In the air, approximately 2,000 combat aircraft, operated by coalition aircrews and support personnel, ranging from F-117A stealth fighter jet to more conventional F-15s and British Tornado, bombers such as B-52s, electronic warfare assets such as EF-111A Ravens, Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS), and aerial tankers allowed the coalition forces to conduct all levels of air operations.9 5F 96 On land, the Big Five weapon systems, Multiple-Launch Rocket Systems (MLRS), self-propelled artilleries, Army and Marine helicopters, dominated the Iraqi ground forces.9 6F 97 At sea, Aegis class cruisers, Tomahawk landattack missiles (TLAMs), frigates, mine-clearing ships, carrier battle groups, naval aircraft, and amphibious assault ships provided seaborne punch against Iraqi forces, transportation of bulk of coalition ground troops, and isolation of the theater.9 7F 
98
96 Finlan,
20. 97 Ibid.,
22. 98
99
Griffin,
173. 100
Secondly, the coalition forces were also interoperable procedurally by being able to apply the Air-Land Battle doctrine. This procedural aspect of interoperability closely relates to the concept of the mental model in Senge's Fifth Discipline. The procedural aspect in this sense refers to the compatibility of military forces in terms of standardization or doctrine. Mental models are "deeply ingrained assumptions, generalizations, or even pictures or images that influence how we understand the world and how we take action."1 00F 101 Thus, it is essential for an organization not only to have a common mental model but also to be able to shift mental models to the one that best profits the organization according to the changes of the environment. Being of numerical inferiority."1 03F 104 Surprisingly, subsequent criticisms of the doctrine created a cognitive crisis within the military and ignited professional debates that eventually led to the crystallization of the Air-Land Battle doctrine.1 04F 
105
108
109
Lastly, the human aspect of interoperability among the coalition forces was at a high level. This human aspect of interoperability closely relates to the concepts of team learning, building shared vision, and systems thinking in Senge's Fifth Discipline. The human aspect in this sense refers to types of activities that only humans can do such as the exercise of leadership.
Building shared vision involves "the skills of unearthing shared pictures of the future that foster genuine commitment and enrollment rather than compliance."1 16F 117 Team learning essentially is becoming more than a sum of the elements and a better member by dialogue, thinking together, and learn new things.1 17F 118 Systems thinking, or the fifth discipline is "the discipline that integrates the disciplines, fusing them into a coherent body of theory and practice."1 18F 
119
The coalition forces from various countries had a similar goal of repelling Iraqi aggression on Kuwait; however, the willingness of committing forces, and how to conduct operations were different for each country. For example, French forces deployed to defend Saudi Arabia from possible Iraqi invasion, but they were initially reluctant to participate in offensive operations due to economic relations with Iraq.1 19F 
120
117 Senge,
9. 118
119
Each of the commanders of the coalition forces interacted with each other so that the coalition forces could achieve team-learning and become a learning organization as a whole. As soon as he found out that the 1 st Marine Division was going to work with the Saudis to liberate Kuwait, the division commander of the 1 st Marine Division immediately ordered his Assistant 121 Griffin, 172. 
122
123 Ibid, 468. 
124
125
There are also various instances where leaders of the Coalition forces were applying systems thinking approach to achieve desired effects and facilitate all five discipline concepts to maximize overall interoperability. Air Force Colonel John A. Warden III, the Air Staff's Deputy Director of Plans for warfighting concepts, at the request of General Schwarzkopf to the Air Staff had to come up with a plan to conduct air campaigns that can shape the conditions for the ground offensive.1 28F 
129
130
The human aspect of interoperability combined and synchronized the efforts of different aspects as systems thinking does for the other disciplines. The human aspect enables a joint combined 
126 Westermeyer,
8. 127
Although they do not match perfectly, all three aspects of interoperability have a certain degree of conceptual connection to Senge's five discipline concept. And Operation Desert Storm was an ideal case study where those aspects and disciplines align. This is because multinational interoperability must be considered as a dynamic system; not merely as compatibility in communications equipment.
The systemic approach to multinational interoperability during Operation Desert Storm provides various lessons for different occasions. The lessons are especially relevant to the future application of the Joint All-Domain Operation as the US military look into incorporating cyber, space, Electro-Magnetic Spectrum (EMS) domains with the traditional domains of land, air, and sea to counter growing near-peer threats. More specifically, the interoperability lessons in the Persian Gulf in 1991 provide important insights for future Combined Forces Command in Korea to prepare Joint-All Domain Operations to counter evolving North Korean threats in all domains.
The interoperability becomes a more complex issue if an armed conflict breaks out on the Korean peninsula again because then more countries would send national troops to Korea as the UN Storm. Nevertheless, two ideas stand out in the JADO concept for the joint forces and the MDO concept: competition and convergence. In competition, the JADO attempts to "incorporate alldomain approaches into flexible deterrent options; expose and counter malign influence; and maintain freedom of access and maneuver in the global commons."1 30F 131 This concept is different from the Air-Land Battle doctrine in that it pursues military role even before the armed conflict to counter the adversary's evolving new concept of warfare using advanced technology below the threshold of the armed-conflict and to create multiple dilemmas for the adversaries to prevent them from ever beginning the armed conflict.
The tenet of convergence seeks to combine kinetic and non-kinetic forces and capabilities across domains that "present adversary dilemmas at an operational tempo complicating or negating adversary responses and enabling the joint force to operate inside the adversary's decision-making cycle."1 31F 
132
There certainly are similarities between the current North Korean military and the Iraqi military in 1991. Despite differences in force ratio for each armed service, the sheer size of the militaries is fairly comparable for both militaries. Just as the Iraqi military was ranked the fourth largest military in the world in 1991, North Korea's military strength in terms of the size of its conventional forces stands at the fourth largest in the world, with more than 1.1 million active personnel, which is about 5 percent of the entire population as of 2019.1 32F 
133
Although one might argue that the majority of North Korean military equipment is outdated and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) will not be able to sustain them in a war for an extended period, the mass concentration of conventional forces near the border between the South and the North poses a significant threat for both South Korea and the US troops stationed in the South.
Nevertheless, the North Korean military in 2020 or the near-future is not the same as the Iraqi military in 1991 when it comes to asymmetric military capabilities and possession of a reliable and powerful ally. According to an analysis written by the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), the publisher of Foreign Affairs magazine, North Korea's nuclear stockpile is estimated to be between 30 and 60 bombs; the regime seems to have succeeded in testing the Inter-Continental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs), capable of reaching the continental US (See figure 
2
135
136
134
135
136
137
the peace on the peninsula but do not have regular unit-level interactions with the CFC in reality other than limited staff assignments at the UN command in Korea.1 39F 
140
141
There are several implications for the CFC and other UN command force-providing countries to achieve successful interoperability in operations to counter a possible future North Korean aggression. The ROK and US forces are the most important actors for the implications discussed in this monograph because they comprise the CFC and other UN forces providing countries may or may not join them in case of possible North Korean aggression depending on each country's calculations at the moment. Nevertheless, it is still important to include those force-providing countries in this discussion as the UNSCR 84 is still standing and those forceproviding countries are technically committed to maintaining peace of the peninsula. These implications are by no means to suggest how the concept should be written or how the allied forces should conduct all-domain operations. Rather, the implications are meant to suggest what to prepare now for a future combined joint all-domain fight with a high-level of interoperability.
First of all, the ROK, US, and UN force-providing countries need to build military capabilities that are compatible and able to counter North Korean threats in all domains. Just as personal mastery of each member is the basic requirement for Senge's effective learning organization, each of the CFC and UN member countries' military capabilities is the basic ingredient for effective interoperability. For example, the coalition forces during Operation Desert Storm could not have achieved a high level of interoperability if the US, British, French, or Saudi forces did not possess armored units that are capable of swift, deep maneuver and counter the Iraqi Republican Guard armored units. Not possessing a proper level of fighter jets for coalition forces could have jeopardized Air-Land Battle's concept of synchronization or attacking through the depth of Iraqi formations. These compatible capabilities in 1991 were the result of the coalition forces' modernization efforts largely coincided and driven by the need to counter conventional war threats from countries such as the Soviet Union. Today, there is no central driving force or common threat to necessitate such changes for the military capabilities of the US, ROK, and other UN forces. Early, conscious coordination of compatible capabilities among the countries is crucial to deter and prepare for a potential North Korean attack, whose capability is evolving in all-domains.
Of particular concern for the military capabilities to improve the JADO interoperability is the compatibility of Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) network system. For the multinational forces to effectively converge effects across all-domains to negate adversary responses and operate inside the adversary's decision-making cycle as the JADO pursues, the C4ISR network of each national force must be compatible. This is because the number of nodes and systems of the multinational forces throughout all domains is so vast that without a compatible network, there is no practical way to converge those effects at the right time and space to defeat the North Korean system. In the age of Air-Land Battle, the network was important as well. However, the liaison teams could make up for some deficiencies because there were mainly two domains and the concept was to synchronize and deconflict rather than converge different effects in all-domains. With the increased number of domains and advancement of technology, the importance of compatible network grew larger. At the same time, the risk is the increased reliance on the C4ISR networks.
North Korean military possesses the ability to disrupt various military networks using jamming, cyber and physical attacks. It is, therefore, crucial to develop compatible military capabilities, especially the C4ISR network systems that are compatible among ROK, US, and UN forceproviding countries and robust enough to protect themselves from North Korean jamming, cyber, and physical attacks.
Secondly, the ROK, the US, and the UN force-providing countries need to develop a compatible operating concept to deter and defeat North Korea's possible armed aggression. As Senge discussed in The Fifth Discipline, having a mental model that guides the actions of each member towards a common goal is a crucial aspect of an effective learning organization. In 1991, the Air-Land Battle doctrine was the mental model for the coalition forces to conduct operations.
Since the doctrine was to counter threats from Warsaw Pact countries, the doctrine was discussed written in coordination with the NATO forces before the Gulf war. Although French forces were not directly involved in writing the doctrine, they paid attention to how other nations were developing doctrine and updated theirs accordingly. Saudis were also not much familiar with the concept, but with help from liaison teams and preparation during Operation Desert Shield, and culminating at the battle of Al-Khafji, Saudis also had chances to familiarize themselves to finally apply the doctrine in Operation Desert Storm. Nevertheless, the ROK, US, and UN forceproviding countries do not have any common concept or doctrine to conduct the operations in alldomains yet. The JADO and MDO concepts in the US are largely driven by Air Force and Army respectively, and there is no concept that all services in the US DOD agree upon as of 2020.
Nevertheless, now is the right time to initiate the conversation between the allies to develop their concepts and doctrines in a mutually compatible way. The earlier the process initiates, the better for the future interoperability in a possible conflict.
Particular attention needs to be paid to how to realize the concepts of competition and convergence within the context of multinational operations. Competition pursues all-domain approaches to "achieve flexible deterrent options", to "counter malign influence", and to "maintain freedom of access and maneuver in the global commons," but not seeking to escalate to armed conflict.1 41F 142 There needs to be discussions and coordination between the allied forces to frame the scope and limits of activities during competition and how best to achieve those effects in all-domains. Those activities can include combined and multinational all-domain exercises demonstrating solidarities among the allied nations to deter North Korean armed attack, combined information, and cyber operations to counter North Korea's malign influence, and counter-jamming activities to prevent the North Korean military from jamming the communication satellites. The concept of convergence seeks to synchronize effects across alldomains in time, space, and purpose to "operate inside the adversary's decision-making cycle."1 42F 
143
143
on those limits and scopes can create friction between national forces when maximum convergence is required.
Last, but not least, the ROK, the US, and the UN force-providing countries need to develop leaders at all levels who can think systemically and apply multinational operations tenets.
Leadership is the most significant factor in the human aspect of interoperability. Leadership relates to Senge's concepts of building shared vision, team learning, and systems thinking in that effective leadership can create products that are more than the simple sum of factors belonging to an organization. The coalition forces during Operation Desert Storm in 1991 did possess more and better military assets compared to what Iraqis possessed: however, the very much lopsided result of operation could not have happened if coalition leaders were not able to properly utilize the doctrine and military capabilities that they had. There is enough evidence that General Schwarzkopf understood and applied the eight tenets of multinational operations: respect, rapport, knowledge of partners, patience, mission focus, trust and confidence, and team building.1 43F 
144
With the increased number of domains and given complexities of the region, the application of Joint All-Domain Operations on the Korean peninsula requires leaders who have an even higher level of systems thinking and can apply the multinational operation tenets. The military leaders operating on the peninsula must understand the complex environment of a divided Korean peninsula surrounded by the worlds' major powers. The leaders must understand how any type of military operation impacts the dynamics of the region; understand different forces committed to the peninsula; build a shared vision; build an effective team; and be able to achieve desired effects using assets in all-domains in coordination with other national forces or 
144
To answer the primary research question of "What are the implications of multinational operations in Operation Desert Storm in 1991 for the future interoperability of Joint All-Domain Operations on the Korean peninsula?" this monograph closely assessed how the coalition forces in 1991 achieved the high degree of interoperability, and what implications could be drawn from them. After examining the question through the lens of theory, history, and doctrine, the initial hypothesis of the monograph seems to be true. The effective interoperability during Operation Desert Storm was possible due mainly to proper application and development of doctrine, materiel, and leadership of major participating nation's militaries. And these three aspects will stay crucial for the conduct of the JADO on the Korean peninsula but on a larger scale due to the increased number of domains and complex operational environment. Some can say that organization or training were more significant factors in achieving interoperability. However, it was coalition forces leadership to include General Schwarzkopf that enabled the command structure and achieve the level of training. This research found that interoperability is not merely the compatibility of communication systems. Interoperability must be approached from a systems perspective that enables a learning organization. Member countries should consider all three technical, procedural, and human aspects to achieve a high level of interoperability.
First, ROK, the US, and other willing UN force providing countries should start investing in C4ISR systems that are compatible with each other. Second, the allied forces should develop capabilities in all-domains that can be protected by physical, cyber, and EMS attacks from North Korea. Third, the allied forces should start discussing Joint All-Domain Operations concepts that are feasible, suitable, acceptable to each nation but at the same time compatible with each other.
Fourth, the allied forces should include activities such as combined all-domain exercises, counter cyber/information operations, and counter jamming operations in competition concept to deter and counter North Korean threats below the threshold of armed conflict. Fifth, the allied forces should reach an agreement on the definition of convergence and decide the scope and scale of participation when converging their assets to create unified effects. Sixth, the allied forces professional military education should include a curriculum to develop a leader who can do systems thinking and apply eight multinational operations tenets. Lastly, the allied forces should expand staff exchanges, military student exchanges, and conduct combined exercises to have a better knowledge of each other and build rapport.
Operation Desert Storm, while it provides great insights for interoperability and many other aspects of modern war, cannot be the only case study that one needs to examine to find lessons for effective interoperability in a complex environment of future war. Expanding studies to other historic cases such as the Burma Campaign and Battle of Bulge during World War II, Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), where allied nations faced different challenges of interoperability in different contexts would be beneficial to analyze how those past experiences can inform future multinational interoperability. Furthermore, while this monograph mainly discussed multinational interoperability at the operational and tactical level, one can also focus on a strategic level and examine how politics and national interests of each nation affect interoperability at the operational level. Then theories or lenses to examine the problems can diversify further. Theories such as operational design, systems thinking, international relations, and game theories can be beneficial in examining the strategic level impact on the operational level interoperability between multinational partners in the future.
US Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The US Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028 (Fort Eustis, VA: TRADOC, 6 Dec 2018), 3.
Eric J. Wesley and Robert H. Simpson, "Expanding the Battlefield -An Important Fundamental of Multi-Domain Operations," Land Warfare Paper 131 (April 2020): 2.
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, iii.
In-Bum Chun, "Korean defense reform: History and challenges," The Brookings Institution, accessed 11 October 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/research/korean-defense-reform-history-andchallenges/.
  32  Ibid.
Colin S. Gray, Airpower for Strategic Effects (Montgomery, AL: Air University Press, 2012), 268.
Geoffrey Till, Sea Power -A Guide for the Twenty-First Century (London: Routledge, 2013), 51.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Allied Joint Doctrine 01 (Brussels: NATO Standardization Office, 2017), 1-2.
Ibid., 63.   
Ibid., 4.    
Ibid., 2.
Eleanor Albert, "What Are North Korea's Military Capabilities?" Council on Foreign Relations, accessed 2 December 2020, https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/north-koreas-militarycapabilities.
Shannon Tiezzi, "In Korean War Commemoration, Xi Warns That China Will Use War to Prevent War," The Diplomat, accessed 30 October 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/10/in-korean-warcommemoration-xi-warns-that-china-will-use-war-to-prevent-war.
  139  Ibid.
Euan Graham, "Back in focus: The United Nations Command in South Korea," The Interpreter, accessed 16 November 2020, https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/back-focus-unitednations-command-south-korea.
  141 Schwarzkopf, 449.   
First, I would like to express my gratitude to my wife, 
Eunju Lee
Dr. James K. Greer
COL Gaetan R. Bedard
Interoperability for Joint All-Domain Operations: Lessons from 
Operation Desert Storm
____//signed/11 MAR 21/JKG//________
Monograph Director James K. Greer
Seminar Leader Gaetan R. Bedard
20 APR 21/BAP//
School of Advanced Military Studies Brian A. Payne, COL
during Korean War, China is ready to support North Korea militarily and economically, since China considers North Korea to be an important buffer for its security. In his address of 70 th Anniversary of China's entry into the Korean War in 2020, Chinese President Xi Jinping described the US military intervention on the Korean internal matter, referring to North Korean invasion of South Korea during the Korean War, as an existential threat to China.1 37F 
138
139
Combined Forces Command (CFC) has been a single war-time headquarter of ROK and US combined forces for the Korea Theater of Operation (KTO) since 1978 to deter and win against North Korea's armed aggression. CFC is an integrated command organization with a US four-star general as the commander and a ROK four-star general as the deputy commander; chiefs of each staff organizations and members are also combined between ROK and US forces. As of 2020, negotiations for Operational Control (OPCON) transfer, in which ROK four-star general would become the commander of the CFC thereby transferring OPCON from the US to ROK, is underway between the two countries: however, the transfer of OPCON will most likely not change the integrated nature of the CFC. As the UN Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 84 still stands, the sixteen force providing countries are technically still committed to maintaining inter-agencies. It is therefore important to incorporate a curriculum to educate leaders to do systems thinking and multinational operation tenets. Also, the allied forces should exchange staff positions, military students and conduct combined all-domain exercises to increase knowledge, rapport, confidence, and trust. Since there will most likely not be time to reinforce, move, prepare as the coalition forces did during Operation Desert Shield, it is important to build rapport with each other during peacetime.