# ID: d2483c0bf9ec42bbaa03f3a2f1506d69
# Title: Mission Command During the War of Movement in World War I—Initiative and Synchronization of the German Right Wing in August and Early September 1914
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including
It is difficult to defend Moltke's prosecution of the 1914 campaign, but it is easy to sympathize with him. Especially toward the end, during the battle of the Marne, Moltke lost control of the operation. Alone in his office, far from the front, carrying the fate of Germany on his slumped shoulders, his desk piled high with a mountain of paper that he did not even have time to read, let alone digest, he was the first victim of a twentieth-century problem: information overload. . . . Moltke reacted by "pressing the delete button," in a sense, abdicating his command and sending [Lieutenant] Colonel Richard Hentsch on his fateful journey to the front, with orders to "coordinate a general withdrawal," if necessary.
1
German strategic planning prior to World War I relied upon the notion of a quick decisive defeat of Belgian, French, and, if required, British forces in Belgium and eastern
France. With victory in the West, subsequent deployment of a majority of German units to the Eastern Front for the defeat of Russia, believed to mobilize more slowly, became a likely option that would conclude the war. General Count Alfred von Schlieffen developed the operational concept that would achieve this objective and General Helmuth von Moltke, his successor, adapted it. Schlieffen's operational construct foresaw a large enveloping movement of the three armies attacking at the German right wing through Belgium and northern France. 
2
3
4
5
3 Holger Herwig describes the meeting of Moltke's emissary, Lieutenant Colonel Richard Hentsch, at Second Army's headquarters on the evening of September 8 as pivotal to the decision to halt the attack. While he discussed the general situation and the potential threat caused by the French Seventh Army attack against First army's right flank and a gap between First and Second Army with Second Army's key leaders, a breakthrough of French XVIII Corps through Second Army's VII Corps and a subsequent threat to Second Army's rear was reported. Commander Second Army, General Karl von Bülow immediately and without consultation of First Army ordered three corps of his right wing to fall back fifteen to twenty kilometers to escape envelopment. Through this decision, he created the facts that lead to the end of the German offensive. See Holger H. Herwig, The Marne, 1914: The Opening of World War I and the Battle That Changed the World (New York: Random House, 2009), 273-275. The forcing function of Second Army's right wing's withdrawal is also stated by Commander First Army, General von Kluck. See Alexander von Kluck, The March on Paris and the Battle of the Marne 1914 (London: Edward Arnold, 1920), 134-139. 
4
5
disciplined initiative [to] create opportunity by taking action to develop the situation." 
6
7
8
The Science of Control improves the commander's understanding and supports the accomplishment of missions through information provided by means of communication, defined by the command structure. 
10
11
7 US Army ADRP 1-02 C2 defines operational initiative as "[t]he setting or dictating the terms of action throughout an operation."
8 US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication 6-0, Mission Command, iv. 9 Ibid., 5-7. 
10 Ibid.,
[7]
[8]
12
13
The terrain focused, tightly scheduled approach of Aufmarsch 1913/14 resulted in a massive change in terms of the required balance between initiative, synchronization, and command and control to create a cohesively advancing front. Interestingly, the implications of this fundamental change of the operational approach did not seem to have been obvious to the practitioners of the time. There is no evidence of a discussion of the implications of this change and neither of the capstone manuals, the Instructions for Large Unit Commanders and the Exerzier-Reglement, adjust to account for it. 
14
12 Helmut Karl Bernhard von Moltke, "Aus den Verordnungen für die höheren Truppenführer vom 24. Juni 1869," in Moltkes Militärische Werke, Zweiter Theil, Die Tätigkeit als Chef des Generalstabs im Frieden, ed. Preußischer Generalstab (Berlin,  Germany: Ernst Siegfried Mittler und Sohn, 1900), 175-177, 179-182. Preußisches  Kriegsministerium, D.V.E. Nr. 130 Exerzier-Reglement für die Infanterie, including changes  until August 1906 (Berlin, Germany: Ernst Siegfried Mittler und Sohn, 1906), 16. 
13 Ehlert,
Epkenhans,
and Gross,
Der Schlieffenplan,
Analysen und Dokumente,
[467]
[468]
[469]
[470]
[471]
[472]
[473]
[474]
[475]
[476]
[477]
The quote from Citino at the opening of this chapter vividly described information overload at the supreme army command, yet Holger H. Herwig, in his book The Marne 1914, indicates the opposite, instead suggesting information and a common operating picture were lacking. This work analyzes how the philosophy of Auftragstaktik, the command structure, and communication, influenced decision-making and the army level execution of the initial campaign at the Western Front in 1914, contributing to its eventual failure. Analyzing the roughly five weeks of the initial campaign until its culmination, with a focus on the command philosophy, the command structure, and communications at the strategic and army level of the German right wing,
15
Current US Army Mission Command doctrine, rooted in the German concept of Auftragstaktik, describes a concept of command that accounts for the nature of operations as characterized by human interaction and the contest of wills in complex, ever changing, and uncertain operational environments. 
16
As a second step, the third section analyzes the conduct of the opening weeks of the 1914 campaign and the interactions between First, Second, and Third Armies and Moltke's supreme army command against the above-mentioned framework and secondary literature about the topic. This part of the study assesses three key indicators through the identification of decision points, those points in space and time when key choices concerning a specific course of action occurred or should have occurred.
17
18
At the same time, [early September 1914] . . . it was proved on the Marne that the age of armies numbering millions, with their improved armament and the widely extended fronts which they necessitate, engenders very special conditions. 
19
When Lieutenant General Baron Hugo von Freytag-Loringhoven wrote these words in 1918, he had the benefit of hindsight having fought through four years of war. His account, while written with the purpose of drawing conclusions for the rebuilding of the German Army, provided a first-hand testimony of the mindset of a pre-war military leadership that, in its majority, was oriented more towards preserving the romantic glory of the wars of unification than towards analyzing the implications of warfare in the machine age. Lessons from the Boer and Russo-Japanese wars were mostly neglected as not being applicable for a large European war. 
20
21
22
Putnam's Sons, 1918), 95. 20 Ibid., v-vi, 81-101. 21
As shown above, discussions about strategy and the tactical implications of technological developments took place in the German Army. Notably, an assessment of their effects on what is today called the operational level seems to be missing. This section focuses on an analysis of the doctrinal framework in place at the outbreak of World War I, specifically on the descriptions of the rules for command philosophy, command structure, and communications. Due to the lack of pre-war operational level discussion, the analysis has to go as far back as the first manual for the operational level, the Instructions for Large Unit Commanders, published in 1869.
Reprinted in 1885 and 1910 with minor changes, the manual covered the echelons from division up to the field army; its principles shaped the German Army's understanding of the command of large units well into the 1930s. 
23
24
Chapter I-General Remarks pointed out the difficulties of the command of large units as described by the Clausewitzian concepts of the human factor in war and friction. It described how danger, deprivation, and suffering affect the decisions and reports of commanders in the front and how available information gets less complete and reliable the higher up in the chain of command. In addition, the period available for making a decision that can be effective on the ground in time becomes more condensed. 
25
26
For commanders of smaller units, the "old rule of marching towards the sound of the guns"
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
Describing the events accompanying the battle Columbey-Nouilly on 14 August 1870, the case study explained again the need to coordinate the operations of the First and Second Army. General Steinmetz's now much more passive and defensive conduct of operations was described in a very balanced way. Steinmetz's attempt to preserve his independence by hiding the position of his headquarters was the only point of obvious criticism. 
38
35
36
37
38
39
41
42
An additional useful resource to explore the German understanding of the implications of initiative and coordination can be found in the Exerzier-Reglement für die and when one of his divisions engaged the withdrawing French at Columbey he ordered them to break off combat. This inconclusiveness however may have been caused by very ambiguous orders by Moltke, which stated that a close coordination with Second Army was necessary, the concentration was not to be executed before the positions of the French were known and a passage of First Army north or south of Metz was to be expected. See Preußisches Kriegsministerium, Extracts from Moltke's Correspondence, No. 137; Wawro, The Franco-Prussian War, 146-147. 
39
40
41 Preußisches Kriegsministerium, Extracts from Moltke's Correspondence, No. 177-180. 
42
43
Infanterie (Infantry Drill Regulations) that were updated in 1906. They continued the trend towards individualization of the soldier on the battlefield and independent action of smaller units. Auftragstaktik, in a form comparable to the current German Army's understanding, was defined:
Orders (Anordnungen) given from rearward commands will easily be made obsolete by the events. Timely action is often only possible upon independent decision. The lower command units though have to observe that they are destined to solve the tactical problem (Gefechtsaufgabe) as intended by the higher commander. [original emphasis] 
44
The foremost quality of a leader remains the willingness to take responsibility (Verantwortungsfreudigkeit). It would be understood falsely, if one aimed at making arbitrary decisions with disregard of the whole or not precisely following given orders and let know-all manner take the place of obedience.
But in the cases in which the subordinate has to say to himself that the ordering person could not sufficiently oversee the circumstances or where the order has been rendered obsolete by the events, it becomes an obligation of the subordinate not to obey but to alter the execution of orders received and report this to the superior. The full responsibility for not obeying the order remains with him.
All leaders have to constantly stay aware and inculcate in their subordinates that forbearance and dereliction weigh heavier than mistaking in the selection of an action. [original emphasis] 
45
46
47
48
49
47
51
52
53
54
When the Schlieffen concept became the military paradigm in the early twentieth century, apparently no discussion of the operational level implications of the shift from an operational level force centric approach, to a strategic level envelopment took place. Doctrine described the tension between the execution of initiative and the need for coordinated action, but only 
51
The highest authorities above all lack time for calm reflection, and, just as frequently, the certain evidence that alone allows full insight into the prevailing situation. The reports that should form the basis for such full insight are sometimes insufficient, perhaps contradictory, or even entirely absent. They exaggerate danger on the one side or overlook it on the other. They may intentionally or unintentionally be misrepresentative, and they will more or less always reflect an individual interpretation. From such surrounding darkness what is correct must be discovered (often will only be guessed at), in order to issue orders. In the path of the execution of these orders enter incalculable chance and unforeseeable hindrances.
But in this fog of uncertainty at least one thing must be certain: one's own decision. One must adhere to it and not allow oneself to be dissuaded by the enemy's actions until this has become unavoidably necessary. 
55
58
In 312 hours, roughly eleven thousand trains shuttled 119,754 officers, 2.1 million men, and six hundred thousand horses to the various marshaling areas under stage seven ("attack march") of the Military Travel Plan. The 1.6 million soldiers of the west army-950 infantry battalions and 498 cavalry squadrons-rolled across the River Rhine bridges at a rate of 560 trains, each of fifty-four cars, per day at an average speed of thirty kilometers per hour. 
59
57
58
Marne, 1914, 48. 59
60
decisions must be clearly and exhaustively communicated." 
61
65
66
Its span of control consisted of the seven armies at the western front and the Eighth Army in East Prussia. Although the Emperor, as the supreme commander, officially led the war effort, naval operations were not integrated in the headquarters. The OHL lacked sufficient telecommunications to the armies deployed into Belgium and France. The eastern theater was 
64 Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 119. 65
66
67
The Supreme Command's heavy task will consist in making a picture of the general situation with the aid of scanty and inaccurate information. . . . But if the inevitably separate battles of the different armies lead to general loss of cohesion because every army follows its own objectives instead of working together, then the Supreme Commander will have let reins fall from its hands, it will not have known how to create the basic unity in the battles and manoeuvres of separate groups. 
68
69
67
68
69 Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 120, 122.
In accordance with the focus of this work, the analysis omits the strategic decisions that lead into World War I, as well as the different considerations for the war plan. The clockwork-like execution of the deployment of the forces, vividly described by Holger Herwig, 71 not only did not require, but in fact did not allow, for commanders interference through individual decisions. From 8 August to 9 September 1914, seven key decisions were made or should have been made by the commanders introduced above, all of them requiring some sort of interaction between them. The decision points will be analyzed critically to trace objectionable patterns that illuminate how the tension between the art of command and the science of control was resolved to their causes. 
72
71 See page 18.
After Belgium had rejected the call for free passage, the German war plan Aufmarsch 1913/14 required the three armies of the right wing to open the sixteen-kilometer-wide Liège Gap between the Ardennes forest and the Dutch-Belgian Border covered by Belgian fortresses before they wheeled into France. The contingency, in case the gap could not be opened in a timely manner, was an invasion into the Netherlands. This would have destroyed the hope that the neutral Netherlands could be persuaded to serve as a way to import strategic resources through the blockade, assumed to be set up by Great Britain. 
73
74
73
74
75
76
75 Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 110-115. 76 Ibid., 114-117. 77
through Belgium-and to develop the situation. Within today's understanding of strategic risks, an operational level commander taking a similar risk on his own is outside of the realm of the conceivable. In the German pre-World War I environment however, operational necessities had long taken precedence over tying ways to an end. Apparently, the commanders did not discuss the change in the command structure and Moltke's intent had when ordering it. Kluck, acknowledging the difficult tactical situation of Second Army in the center of the right wing, argued nevertheless in his book later that it was a bad decision if one considered First Army's "situation pre-eminently strategical in its aspects." 80 At a conference in Namur on 17 August, there was an opportunity for the key 
78
His approach was well suited to achieve this aim, but as mentioned above, Kluck understood the mission of the right wing as aimed at a strategic envelopment. US Army Mission Command describes the principle of creating shared understanding of the higher commander's intent and the approaches to solving the operational problems. The decision point exemplifies the risk of operating in absence of a shared understanding about the operational approach. Communications, although permitting overall coordination by Moltke, took ten and a half hours from the Army to the OHL and back, thus denying time for planning and preparation of Third Army to counter emerging intelligence. 
85
By 28 August, the German right wing had advanced further into northern France. The Battle of the Frontiers, costly for both sides and without operational encirclement, had forced the BEF and French 5th Army into a retreat towards the southwest. Reports from the army commanders reflected a euphoric assessment of the situation and an overestimation of the successes, not only from the right wing, but along the whole front. Although Moltke remained skeptical that this already constituted the quick blow against the French that would justify the shift of forces, he had on 27 August, stripped the right wing of two corps to reinforce the eastern front against the Russians. 86
Victory apparently in reach, Moltke issued a general instruction for the continuation of the campaign in the evening of 27 August. Deviating from the Schlieffen concept of a wheel aimed at outflanking the French and British forces and herding them against their fortifications, Moltke ordered all armies to commit to the offense against an obviously dislocated enemy in order to drive them in a southwesterly direction away from Paris. 
87
86 Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 156, 169-172.
88
Moltke identified an opportunity to force a decision and acted appropriately and provided the army commanders with the required guidance.
During the next days, the right wing continued its advance at a high pace, but was nevertheless not able to force the withdrawing enemy into a decisive fight. On 29 August,  German advance. Criticism that Kluck had arbitrarily deviated from the Schlieffen Plan that had foreseen his advance west of Paris is wrong. First, the Schlieffen Plan, as a concept, had never detailed the question of the position of the individual units in the field; it was a deployment plan with an employment concept. Secondly, although most images depict an envelopment including Paris, Schlieffen's last Kriegsspiel (war game) in 1905 actually covered both axes of advance with the scenarios Kuhl II west of Paris and Freytag II east of the fortress. Finally yet importantly, Kluck claims that he informed the OHL in the evening of 30 August and gained Moltke's approval. This is credible because Third Army shortly afterwards gained approval for its advance in a southerly direction, including the information that Second Army would link up. This only makes sense if Moltke had agreed to pivot his right wing to the south. 
90
Born out of the tactical necessity to support Second Army, it made sense through the operational lens, as well. A defeated enemy fleeing northwest of Paris did not constitute a valuable operational objective. In addition, the strain on his forces and the logistical services supported a less ambitious advance. Given the unreliability of communications to the OHL, making the decision and informing his superior after the fact, was consistent with the command philosophy and culture of the German Army. 
90
On 31 August, the French 5th Army in front of Second Army began to withdraw.
While he assessed the British forces to be outside of First Army's reach, Kluck initiated a relentless three-day advance south to fall into 5th Army's flank and force battle upon them.
They fought continuously against rear guards but could not catch up with the BEF or threaten the French flank. Second Army spent the day in preparation for the assault on the fortress of La Fère. As a result, it lagged one day behind when both armies continued the advance against a withdrawing enemy, until First Army reached the river Marne area in the evening of 2 September. Third Army had to overcome some resistance until the enemy, in the afternoon of 1 September, joined the general retreat. 
91
With a delay of more than a day, information flow between First and Second Army and the OHL, now located in Luxembourg, became increasingly limited. The successes in the center and the obviously rapid advance of the right wing was interpreted at the OHL as an opportunity to push the French Army from Paris in a southeastern direction and envelop it.
Given that First Army seemed to have gained the French flank by a wide margin, it was supposed to provide the flank protection against Paris for this endeavor. Although this task would be at the cost of the forward reaching envelopment force, Moltke hoped that Second Army could apply sufficient pressure on the French left flank by reaching out into a southwestern direction. 
92
War,
439. 92
94
95
First and Second Army remain facing eastern front of Paris: First Army between [rivers] Oise and Marne, holding Marne crossings west of Château-Thierry, Second Army between Marne and Seine holding the Seine crossings between Nogent and Méry, inclusively. Third Army marching in the direction of Troyes and east. 
96
97
98
99
100
98
September 1914, 38-41;
Kluck, The March on Paris and the Battle of the Marne, 104-107;
Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 238-240. 99
100 Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 240-244, 249.
101
For the first time in the campaign, this decision point depicts the loss of a common operational picture of the commanders involved. The only remedy to this was detaching General Staff Officers from the OHL to the different armies to merge the situational awareness of the different levels, a practice frequently used through the course of the campaign, in accordance with the German pre-war doctrine. 
107
105 Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 282
In our reflections on the theory of the conduct of war, we said that it ought to train the commander's mind, or rather guide his education; theory is not meant to provide him with positive doctrines or systems to be used as intellectual tools. Moreover, it is never necessary or even permissible to use scientific guidelines in order to judge a given problem in war, if the truth never appears in systematic form, if it is not acquired deductively but always directly through the natural perception of the mind, then that is the way it must also be in critical analysis. [original emphasis] 
108
The quote from Clausewitz about critical analysis is preceded by several pages that discuss the inability of identifying direct cause and effect relations in warfare, and the psychological context success or failure has on this analysis. This section, in addition to not engaging the counterfactual question whether the decisions described in the third section were right or wrong, aims at providing a natural perception informed by the lens of US Army doctrine and insight into the German Army's command philosophy, command structure, and communications. It identifies objectionable patterns that illuminate the tension between the art of command and the science of control.
The analysis shows that the German Army possessed a doctrinal framework and a culture that endorsed decentralized execution and initiative. Preparation for the war, however, had failed to achieve clarity about the operational approach and omitted the development of a functioning command structure. Means of communications did not allow for adequate transmission of reports, due to deficiencies in both the speed and volume of traffic. Exempt by doctrine from reporting during an ongoing battle, commanders culturally did not see an importance in keeping the OHL and their adjacent units informed about their own situation and intentions.
The second section illustrates the affection of the German Army for decentralized execution through the culture and philosophy of Auftragstaktik. A key requirement for the decentralization is a unifying element that aligns the actions and initiative to a common purpose. Its representation in doctrine is the commander's intent, which is necessary but not sufficient. In addition, common understanding about the operational approach and a common operational picture are required.
The analysis of the individual decision points shows that decisions of the different commanders reflect the adherence to two competing operational approaches. On the one hand, the official Schlieffen approach called for a synchronized advance into France, aimed at a strategic level envelopment of the French Army either in the fortified region west of Paris or against the Swiss and German border. This approach is reflected in Kluck's insistence on outflanking the French and British forces and in Moltke's directive of 2 September. On the other hand, Bülow and Hausen focused on operational level envelopments to defeat the French armies. Moltke's directive of 27 August also follows this approach.
In terms of the common operational picture, a specific aspect of the inadequate communications played a crucial role. As the analysis of the decision points shows, until the last phase of the campaign a certain level of information flow between the armies and the OHL was possible-even if it was only from overhearing the communication between subordinate armies or with their cavalry corps. From the beginning however, the picture was incomplete because the means of communications lacked what today would be called bandwidth. The cumbersome process of encrypting, transmitting via relays, and decrypting, prohibited comprehensive situation reports. The simplified reports, for example, stressed successes without providing detail about indicators of effects on the enemy, like prisoners and captured guns, and hence misled the assessment of the OHL. The last decision point exemplifies the difficulties with this lack of a common operational picture. Absent detailed knowledge about the situation and assessments of First and Second Army, decisions about further operations, relied on assumptions and estimates.
The time delay in the transmission of reports and orders caused the final issue with decentralized execution. When the delay amounted to twelve hours for a one-way received coordinating authority for the right wing, the implications within an operational approach that would make First Army the key player on the right wing had not been discussed. A justification for reestablishing First Army's independence on 27 August, other than the fact that Kluck's and Bülow's personalities seemed to have caused some friction, could not be found in the literature. Overall, the command structure does not seem to have played a prominent role in considerations prior to and during the campaign.
The analysis clearly shows that the German Army heavily relied on the art of command as they had during the wars of unification. The doctrinal framework promoting decentralized execution aimed towards a common goal was not a hollow theoretical construct;
it was deeply engrained into the culture of the officer corps. This combination of the philosophy of Auftragstaktik and the culture that hailed taking responsibility was able to mitigate some of the negative effects of communications. Aligning decisions towards a unified effort however, requires the ability to communicate the higher commander's intent and a common operational picture. Neglect of the required science of control, represented by an inadequate command structure, caused some of the most significant problems the German Army had coordinating the right wing of the Western Front in the early weeks of World War I.
A final qualitative consideration this analysis aims for is the value judgment of whether the individual decisions reflect professional reasoning, given the information available. Following Clausewitz's premise, that critical analysis is to train the mind or inform the education, this "acquaintance with the subject" 109 is the ultimate aim. Attempting to "accurately trace all the circumstances and individual events" 110 and being aware that this attempt is highly subjective, the analysis shows that erratic behavior or the aim for individual gains did not play an identifiable role in the actions of the commanders. All decisions presented, and the ones analyzed in the course of the research, were initiated by professional 
109 Clausewitz,
On War,
141. 110
[W]ithout insight and vision there can be no orientation to deal with both present and future. Without focus and direction, implied or explicit, there can be neither harmony of effort nor initiative for vigorous effort. Adaptability implies variety and rapidity.
Without variety and rapidity one can neither be unpredictable nor cope with changing and unforeseen circumstances. Without security one becomes predictable, hence one loses the benefits of the above. (original emphasis)
111
The German Army in 1914 went to war with an unclear operational concept, executed through an inappropriate command structure and overextended respectively overwhelmed communications. The command philosophy compensated for the deficiencies, but could not fully overcome them. Unable to apply a sufficient level of the science of control, the OHL had to rely on the art of command and initiative of the army commanders.
At first glance, the challenges of World War I commanders to gain and maintain an overview of their own forces and intelligence about the enemy, communicate their intent, and coordinate their action, resist the notion of being relevant to current warfare. Blue force tracking and integrated information systems seem to diminish friction, modern communications systems allow for the integration of real time full motion video from the individual soldier to the commander in chief. All these means and efforts, however, only create the delusion of understanding the situation on the ground in all its complex facets.
The current US Army Operating Concept describes requirements that are as applicable today as they were in 1914:
Joint combined arms operations allows joint force commanders to operate consistent with the tenet of initiative, dictating the terms of operations and rendering the enemy incapable of responding. . . . Units possess the ability to operate dispersed over wide areas because they are able to integrate intelligence and operations to develop situational understanding through action while possessing the mobility to concentrate rapidly. 
112
113
The more extensive dispersion of forces on modern battlefields, enabled by improved means of communications and increased firepower, leads to smaller and smaller units operating on their own in overstretched areas of operations. This requires that higher commanders refrain from interfering in the execution of small unit operations and allow for initiative comparable to the one shown by World War I army commanders at the lowest possible level. A prerequisite for this is training and education that enables the lower level leaders to evaluate their actions within the framework of the larger concept of operations.
Higher commanders have to provide guidance that creates the harmonizing effect Boyd describes.
Complex environments prevent planning for all eventualities and contingency prior to their occurrence. Depictions of the situation based on integrated information systems or video feeds create the delusion of a situational awareness. This poses the risk of making decisions in a comparable manner to the one Hentsch faced on 8 and 9 September 1914. 
114
113 John Boyd argues, that initiative and decentralized execution require harmony, a unifying aim that ensures that the decentralized efforts of different units follow common goal. It consists of common understanding about the operational approach and the higher commander's intent. See 
Osinga,
Science,
Strategy and War,
The Strategic Theory of John Boyd,
[189]
[190]
[194]
[195]
[196]
[197]
A variety of forces operating with diverse purposes, in a common area of operations pose the risk that effects are not coordinated and operations become fractured, as can be seen in the lead up to decision point 7, when the German First and Second Army each fought its own fight. 
115
48  
48  
54 E.
54 E.
Source: Created by author.
Robert M. Citino, Blitzkrieg to Desert Storm: The Evolution of Operational Warfare (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas,
2004), 15-16.2  The existence and form of Schlieffen's concept-generally termed Schlieffen Plan has been subject to intensive discussion of historians during the last century. Latest research 1
In total, the German Army employed seven armies at the Western Front; the mobilization plan Aufmarsch 1913/14 planned for an envelopment movement starting at mobilization day plus ten days around the pivot point of Metz-Diedenhofen. The forces north of it consisting of First, Second, and Third Army are the designated right wing. Aufmarsch 1913/14, deployment and mobilization plan printed inEhlert, Epkenhans, and Gross, Der  Schlieffenplan, Analysen und Dokumente, 480.    
US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Reference Publication 6-0, Mission Command, v.
The construct of decision points is a planning tool to anticipate where and when decisions have to be made. US Department of Defense, Joint Publication 5-0, Joint Operations Planning (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 11 August 2011), GL-8. By using it as means of historical analysis, the anticipation is replaced by an ex-post assessment defining when decisions had to be made.
For a description of the theoretical framework of the critical analysis and the use of historical examples, see Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1976), 156-159, 170-174.   
Dorn Brose, The Kaiser's Army.   
Moltke, "Aus den Verordnungen für die höheren Truppenführer vom
Juni  1869," 175-176; Daniel J. Hughes, ed., Moltke, On the Art of War, Selected Writings, trans.  Daniel J. Hughes and Harry Bell (New York: Random House, 1993), 171-172. The 1910 edition, named essentials of higher troop command explicitly stated at the beginning of the manual that applicable parts written by field marshal Moltke had been retained. Deutsches Kriegsministerium, D.V.E. Nr. 53. Grundzüge der höheren Truppenführung, 4.24  Moltke, "Aus den Verordnungen für die höheren Truppenführer vom 24. Juni 1869," 167-169.
Moltke, "Aus den Verordnungen für die höheren Truppenführer vom 24. Juni 1869," 171-172. Deutsches Kriegsministerium, D.V.E. Nr. 53. Grundzüge der höheren Truppenführung, 7-10.
Moltke, "Aus den Verordnungen für die höheren Truppenführer vom 24. Juni 1869," 174. The 1910 version stated, "Where subordinate leaders wait for orders the opportunity of the circumstances will never be utilized." DeutschesKriegsministerium,  D.V.E. Nr. 53. Grundzüge der höheren Truppenführung, 13.    
Deutsches Kriegsministerium, D.V.E. Nr. 53. Grundzüge der höheren  Truppenführung, 17.    
Ibid.,[16][17][18] 
Moltke, "Aus den Verordnungen für die höheren Truppenführer vom 24. Juni 1869," 179-182. DeutschesKriegsministerium, D.V.E. Nr. 53. Grundzüge der höheren  Truppenführung,[50][51][52][53] 
Deutsches Kriegsministerium, D.V.E. Nr. 53. Grundzüge der höheren  Truppenführung,[49][50] 52,[57][58] 
For a detailed description of the change process, see Craig, The Politics of the Prussian Army 1640-1945, Chapter 2-4.
Volume 4 of Moltke's Militärische Werke was assembled and published by the military history section of the General Staff. Although there is no proof of Moltke's personal involvement or his specific selection of historic case studies the work expresses the official history respecting the official thought of exemplary doctrinal behavior. They are specifically valuable for an analysis of the contemporary understanding of Auftragstaktik. For details, see Hughes, Moltke, On the Art ofWar,[15][16][17] 
Martin Sonnenberger, "Initiative within the Philosophy of Auftragstaktik, Determining Factors of the Understanding of Initiative in the German Army 1806-1955" (Master's thesis, US Army Command and General Staff College, Ft. Leavenworth, KS, 2013), 22-28.
Hughes, Moltke, On the Art of War, 79-80; Geoffrey Wawro, The Franco-Prussian War, The German Conquest of France in 1870-1871 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 108.
Preußisches Kriegsministerium, D.V.E. Nr. 130 Exerzier-Reglement für die Infanterie, 126a.
Ibid.,[90][91] 
Ibid., 84.   
Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 118-119;
Kluck,
For a description of the theoretical framework of the critical analysis, seeClausewitz, On War,[156][157][158][159] 
Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 164; Osborne Humphries and Maker, Germany's Western Front, Translations from the German Official History of the Great War, 179-180.
Osborne Humphries and Maker, Germany's Western Front, Translations from the German Official History of the Great War, 68-73.
Osborne Humphries and Maker, Germany's Western Front, Translations from the German Official History of the Great War, 301-307.
Osborne Humphries and Maker, Germany's Western Front, Translations from the German Official History of the Great War, 445.
Osborne Humphries and Maker, Germany's Western Front, Translations from the German Official History of the Great War, 449-454.
For a detailed analysis of appropriate levels of initiative within Auftragstaktik see Sonnenberger, "Initiative within the Philosophy of Auftragstaktik, Determining Factors of the Understanding of Initiative in the German Army1806-1955."    
Osborne Humphries and Maker, Germany's Western Front, Translations from the German Official History of the Great War, 480.
Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 246-253.   
Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 261-265, 271-273.    
Ibid., 274.    
Ibid.,[273][274][275][276] 
Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 276, 281-283;
Kluck,
See page 10.
Clausewitz, On War, 168.   
John Boyd on Organic Design for Command and Control, cited in Frans P. B.Osinga, Science, Strategy and War, The Strategic Theory of John Boyd (New York:  Routledge, 2007), 190.   
See page 36-41.
AGENCY 
NAME(S)
AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
In a ventured interpretation of the OHL order from 17 August, Kluck assumed that First Army, after crossing the Sambre, was no longer subordinated to Bülow. After the OHL clarified that the contrary was intended and demanded close coordination with Second Army, Kluck remonstrated on the cause of First Army's role and importance. The issue remained unresolved. 
83
While Third Army's Commander Hausen was still planning for this assault to the northeast, he received information from his left neighbor, Crown Prince Albrecht, that suggested bypassing Dinant to the south and then attacking to the west would separate the French 4th and 5th Armies and allow for an encirclement of the latter. The night from 22 to 23 August saw Hausen contemplating how to resolve this dilemma and it was not until dawn with the attack on Dinant under way that Moltke ordered the attack to the south. As a result, Third Army was split into three and the chance for an operational level encirclement went unexploited, due to lack of fighting power and preparation of the individual groups. 84 83 Osborne Humphries and Maker, Germany's Western Front, Translations from the German Official History of the Great War, 173. 
84 Herwig, The Marne, 1914, 162-166
102
104
Bülow decided to initiate the retreat and informed First and Second Army accordingly. When Hentsch arrived at First Army, he was dumbfounded upon being briefed by the Chief of Staff that the BEF advance into the gap was not assessed to be serious, as experience had shown that the British were operating slowly. First Army's right wing was about to turn the French of the state of Second Army as "cinder," instead of providing the conclusion, based on Bülow's assessment, that it could hold its position if First Army would protect its flank to enforce a retreat. transmission, a decision made by the OHL was based on one-day-old information when the order was received at the army level. A comparison of the quick succession of decision points with the increasing delay of (at the end) twenty-four hours one way or two days until an order based on a situation report would reach an army shows the difficulties of providing an overarching intent in a timely manner to unify the operations of the different armies.
Initiative and the willingness to take responsibility as a highly praised cultural value in the German Army can, with one exception, be seen throughout the execution of the advance into France. In general, holding the reigns of commanders more than willing to make decisions based on their own judgment was a larger challenge than fostering autonomy. The one exception is Commander Third Army, General Hausen. The analysis of decision point 3 indicates his indecisiveness resulted in splitting his forces to serve all masters. Similar instances during the following days are for space restrictions omitted in the analysis.
Turning to the science of control element of the analysis; the German Army was doctrinally aware of the restrictions wireless communications, the "high tech" of its age, brought with them. Culturally however, overcoming such inadequacies seemingly did not have a high priority for the army commanders. Relieved by doctrine from the responsibility to report their situation during battles, the analysis of the decision points does not indicate a larger concern with keeping Moltke or the adjacent units informed other than in cases where a commander requested support. Given the restrictions of communications, none of the literature reviewed indicates for example the use of airplanes to exchange information or liaison elements.
The analysis of the command structure on the German right wing does not indicate a high priority for consideration either. No pre-war preparations like the creation of army group commands had been taken and the war plan itself did not foresee specific command relationships. The OHL was formed by simply renaming the peacetime structure of the General Staff. The armies on the right wing started off as independent units under the OHL.
When, on 17 August, Moltke subordinated First Army to Second Army and General Bülow judgment based on the knowledge of the day, the paradigms of warfare in the German Army, and the attempt to meet an overall aim.