# ID: d282a9202b7e4a88bad1fbb77cddeba4
# Title: Mikhail Frunze and the unified military doctrine
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2004.0
# Fulltext:
From 1925 to 1991, the Soviet Red Army attempted to epitomize the union of military and political thought. One may wonder just how the Red Army came to be formed in this manner. This thesis attempts to answer that question by addressing the debate over a Unified Military Doctrine beginning in 1921, through the lens of providing a critical analysis of the military and political experiences of its staunchest supporter: Mikhail Frunze. In this paper, it will be argued that, despite the vast military experiences of Mikhail Frunze, his political experiences were more influential in creating the framework from which he crafted his version of a Unified Military Doctrine. These political experiences were shaped by the writings of Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx, whose ideology formed the nucleus of the Bolshevik Party. Through his foresight and persistence, Frunze was able to implement his version of the UMD, thus transforming the Red Army and setting the conditions for the subordination of all elements of power to the State.
Marx and forged them into a Soviet ideology. In the Soviet Union, at the strategic level, this ideology was comprised of the ideas from the extreme radical faction of Russian social democrats, as well as the ideas, thoughts, and observations generated by Soviet military leaders. This Soviet ideology provided direction and purpose to Soviet political, military, and strategic thinking. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The chapters that follow seek to provide an answer to these questions. Chapter two will focus on Mikhail Frunze's early political experiences. In this chapter, I will discuss Mikhail Frunze's childhood, his general disposition and personality, his early There are a number of scholars who have written works either on Mikhail Frunze   or that refer to Frunze and the Unified Military Doctrine debate. John Erickson, perhaps the best known of these scholars, published the book, The Soviet High Command: A Military-Political History, 1918-1941, in 1944. In this book, Erickson portrays Frunze as a jejune, impetuous zealot. Erickson's work often disparages Frunze, because of Frunze's lack of professional military qualifications. This lack of experience was the norm for the Red Commanders, the name for those political activists who were given military command during the Russian Civil War. Not surprisingly, it was these officers who emphasized that Marxist thought should permeate throughout every military task.
Erickson grudgingly admits that almost all Soviet leaders thought well of Frunze by the end of his career. However, Erickson argues that Frunze was not a deep thinker; rather he asserts that Frunze was a low-level ideologue that displayed some small skill at military command. Erickson's book is not specifically about Frunze, which may explain his negative appraisal of Frunze's talents.
In 1990, Jacob Kipp wrote a book for the Soviet Army Studies Office entitled Mass, Mobility, and the Red Army's Road to Operational Art, 1918-1936. In this book, Kipp portrays Frunze as a major force (the champion of the left flank) in the UMD debate. While Frunze's views were clearly leftist in the traditional sense of being Socialist and pro-Communist, within the Party, Frunze was more of a centrist who was backed by others because he envisioned a way to focus the many sides of this debate to a single purpose. While Kipp does not address the reasons that Frunze used to establish UMD, nor does he address any of Frunze's experiences, he argues that by 1921, Frunze had identified that the future threat to the Soviet State was Capitalist encirclement. 
8
In 1961, Walter Jacobs wrote a dissertation entitled Mikhail Vasil'evich Frunze and the Unified Military Doctrine. In 1969, Jacobs published his dissertation in the form of a book entitled Mikhail Frunze: The Soviet Clausewitz. In this book, Jacobs portrays Frunze as an original thinker, a military genius, and a highly effective political leader. Jacob's position, that Frunze was a military genius and highly effective political leader, is confirmed by Frunze's service record and corroborated by his autobiography. However, Frunze was not an original thinker; he was a well-read Bolshevik who venerated Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx. His talent was to be able to apply the writings of Engels and Marx to improve the structure, training, and composition of the Red Army, with some deviation from Marxist ideology based on his personal experiences in the Russian Civil War and his assessment of the situation in the Russian Socialist Federation Soviet Republic (RSFSR).
In 1992, Matthew Hurley wrote a thesis entitled "A Worker's Way of War: The Red Army's Doctrinal Debate, 1918-1924." In this thesis, Hurley portrays Frunze as a "military Communist" who sought to formulate a proletarian military doctrine based solely on the lessons he had learned during the Russian Civil War. Hurley also argues that Frunze won the UMD debate against Leon Trotsky, not because Frunze had the more effective argument, but rather because the political struggle within the Communist Party was geared toward ousting Trotsky. While this paper will not specifically address the political struggle within the Communist Party regarding the UMD debate, it is clear that Frunze was able to convince the majority of the Central Committee, as well as many other Bolshevik military and political officers that the UMD was the proper course of action to take. Keeping in mind that Frunze's participation in this debate spanned four years, and that he eventually claimed the highest possible post for a military man within the RFSFR, Frunze was obviously both persistent as well as competent, and allusions that the success of the UMD was due to Party squabbling somewhat ignores the effort that Frunze put into the acceptance of his position.
There are several key terms used in this thesis. While most of them will be defined throughout the text and again in the glossary, two key terms, doctrine and UMD, require early, detailed discussion. The first key term is "doctrine." According to the United States Army, doctrine is defined as the "fundamental principles by which military forces guide their actions in support of national objectives." It should be authoritative but requires judgment in application. 
9
10
11
12
The major feature of German military doctrine in its technical dimension is an extremely pronounced offensive spirit . . . training and education of troops were conducted on the basis of offensive tactics and, in the final analysis, yielded a perfect military force . . . which later demonstrated its outstanding fighting capabilities on the gigantic battlefields of the imperialist war. 
13
14
15
Neznamov's points on doctrine included a view that the society in whole would be geared for war, with an organized armed forces, children raised on military virtues, and clear field regulations to instruct and inform commanders, as well as to serve as rallying points for the masses in the army. 
16
In essence, the debate by Red Army officers over the UMD in 1921 was a continuation of the efforts that were made by Tsarist officers on the eve of the First World War, a debate that was hamstrung by the Tsar, and ultimately overcome by the events of 1914. 17 However, toward the end of this later debate, Frunze suggested the following definition of Unified Military Doctrine: Unified Military Doctrine comprises the teachings adopted by the army of a particular State which establishes the character of the development of the armed forces and the methods used in combat training and troop management based on the State's prevailing views on the nature of the military missions lying before it and the means of executing them, which reflect the class nature of the State and are determined by the country's level of economic development. 
18
Finally, during his presentation at the 11th Party Congress, Frunze had condensed his thoughts regarding UMD to five fundamental theoretical tasks, five basic factors, and five statements that encompassed the direction the Red Army must take in order to implement UMD. According to Mikhail Frunze, the UMD consisted of five basic factors: political, communication network, human and material resources, barracks and billets, and transportation. Frunze believed that the total commitment of a nation's population and resources increased the importance of preparation and planning. Frunze stated that the Red Army must be "unified from top to bottom by a community of views both on the character of military tasks themselves and on the means of their solution." 
19
It was clear that Frunze's position regarding UMD continued to evolve well into 1925, when he wrote The Front and Rear in Future War, when he predicted the necessity to transition to total war during peacetime, in order to prepare for the inevitable clash with Capitalism. His evolution of political-military thought was likely a result of his insistence on continual reflection of Marxist doctrine, his increased scope of duties as the Commissar of War, and the results of the report he commissioned to discover lessons learned from the First World War. The specific points and contradictions within Frunze's evolving definitions of UMD will be brought out in greater detail in chapter four.
The main primary source documents that will be used in this paper come from the Izbranniye Proizvedenniia (Selected Works) of Mikhail Frunze. This is a 560-page compilation of Frunze's works. Some of the many writings of Frunze that provide additional insight or clarity to this thesis include Frunze's Autobiography, the Red Army and Her Missions, the Reorganization of the Red Army, The UMD in the Red Army, Memories from the Civil War, the Way of Military Organization, the Front and Rear in Future War, and Questions of Higher Military Education. In addition to these articles, the Selected Works has a list of the main events that occurred in Frunze's life in the form of Frunze's Service Record.
In sum, this thesis will show that, despite Mikhail    I give myself wholly to the Revolution. 
Mikhail Frunze, 1905 1
Mikhail Vasilyevich Mikhailov-Frunze was born on 21 January 1885 (2 February according to the modern calendar) in the city of Pishpek (modern-day Bishkek), region of Semirechia, administrative division of Turkistan. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
After a brief time in Shuya, Frunze posed as a worker in the Ivanovo-Voznesensk industrial region. Frunze was one of the organizers and leaders of the famous Ivanovo labor strike of textile workers in 1905, which encompassed all heavy industry in the Ivanovo-Voznesensk region. 17 He was arrested near the river Talka, due to his chanting shouts of "Down with Autocracy" and was sent to Kazan, another falsely listed home. 
18
Due to his agitation work in the Ivanovo strike, the Ivanovo-Voznesensk Russian Social-Democratic Party apparatus selected Frunze as its representative to the Fourth United Congress of the RSDRP in Stockholm, Sweden. 
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
March, 1914. 28
29
30
At the end of 1915, Frunze and several comrades created a Bolshevik weekly publication entitled Eastern Review. 
31
33
Frunze went to Moscow Party headquarters in April 1916. The headquarters told Frunze to go to the Western Front in Minsk and begin to agitate under cover of a military volunteer, which he did without hesitation. 
34
35
36
At the time of the February Revolution, Frunze had branches of his clandestine organization in both the 10th and the 3rd Armies. 
37
38
After the Tsar's fall, Frunze facilitated the disarmament of Minsk policemen and locals who were sympathetic to the Tsar, and became the leader of the Minsk Citizen's Militia. He was the organizer of the Minsk Council of Worker's Deputies and in March 1917 and became a permanent member of its Executive Committee. From 18 April 1917, he was the organizer of the Council of Peasant's Deputies in Byelorussia, and he facilitated two Congresses of Byelorussian Peasants. 
39
In May 1917, the Bolshevik Party leadership selected Frunze to be a delegate to the First Congress of Soviets of Peasant Deputies in Petrograd. While at the Congress, he again spoke with Vladimir Lenin, who directed him to return to Ivanovo-Vozhnesensk. At the time of the October Revolution, he became the head of the Armed Forces of Shuya-Ivanovo region, and went to Moscow on 28 October 1917. On 30 October 1917, Frunze decided to order his workers to come to Moscow to aid in the revolution. 
42
43
44
47
48
49
1
Frunze's military career began 26 December 1918, when the RVSR selected him to be the commander of the 4th Army, Southern Group, Eastern Front, though he did not fully assume his duties until 31 January 1919. 
2
3
4
5
6
Due to his successful attack, Frunze was appointed Commander of Forces of Southern Group of the Eastern Front on 5 April 1919. His new mission was to secure Ural'sk and Orenberg and to maintain contact with Tashkent. Frunze described the pride that he felt at the time of his selection to this position:
In April 1919, at the moment of the greatest course of events of the offensive of Admiral Kolchak's Army, and the threats which were developing against Kazan, Simbirsk, and Samara, I was appointed the commander of the Southern Army Group of the Eastern Front with the 4th Army, 1st Army, Turkistan forces, and 5th Army. 
7
8
10
11
From there, the main attack was to procede south of Bugul'ma toward Ufa." 
12
Frunze recognized the importance of the key railroad junction in Bugul'ma, but he thought it more critical to mass his forces to attack and split the two White Army Corps.
The fundamental difference between Frunze's plan and the plan of Kamenev was that Frunze's objective was enemy oriented and Kamenev's was oriented on key terrain.
Frunze's plan was quite bold, using both speed and surprise to put the Whites off balance.
With his usual fervor, Frunze was able to convince Kamenev to approve his plan.
From 23 to 25 April 1919, Frunze went to his front lines to conduct final inspections of the readiness of his subordinate units. Finding his command prepared, Frunze began his offensive on 28 April 1919, by attacking the flank of Kolchak's forces with great speed, severing the link between the 3rd and 6th Corps, and exploiting this penetration with a pursuit. 
13
14
15
Frunze began his attack on 25 May 1919. His plan was to deny the White Army time to prepare defensive positions and also prevent them from repositioning their forces.
Frunze's operation was successful because he combined elements of mass, economy of force, surprise, and maneuver in a bold offensive. Due to his political successes in 1905 and 1917, coupled with his earlier military successes in this campaign, Frunze became more convinced that it was through offensive action that one can impose one's will on the enemy and be victorious. His original plan was flexible, with enough uncommitted forces in reserve to be able to reinforce success wherever it may occur. From the outset, Frunze's forces quickly overwhelmed the White forward positions. By 4 June, Tukhachevskii's Army was crossing the Belaya north of Ufa. However, from 5-9 June 1919, the main attack at the southern crossing of the Belaya River was repeatedly stopped by the stubborn defense of White Army forces, even after Frunze assumed personal command of the Turkistan Army during the crossing.
Because Tukhachevskii was successful, and the main attack was not, Frunze flexibly redesignated Tukhachevskii as the main effort and planned to press the attack in the north. Yet again, Kamenev thought that Frunze's plan was too risky and too difficult to execute, but Frunze convinced him for the second time that the White reserves were in the south, so the Red Army should attack in the north, where they had already achieved a penetration. Though the Whites attempted to shift their reserves to meet this new threat in the north, the Red Army repulsed those attacks and began to encircle Ufa. After the White reserves were committed to the north, Frunze was able to penetrate to the south, eventually surrounding Ufa and splitting Kolchak's forces into two parts. Frunze was decorated for his bold leadership in the Ufa campaign. Frunze's own words made this operation seem quite simple, as he described the operation in the following way: I carried out the Ufa operation by crossing the Belaya River on 7-8 June, breaking the forces of the enemy defending the approaches to Ufa, and occupied the last portions of the city on 9 June 1919. For that operation, they awarded me the Order of the Red Banner. 
16
Vatsetis wanted to redirect Frunze's forces from Ufa to battle perceived threats in the south, but Frunze jumped the chain of command all the way to the top and appealed directly to Lenin for permission to continue the attack. Frunze may have felt compelled to advise the Central Committee on what he perceived to be the correct way of continuing this campaign, as he was completely committed to continuing the offense and pursuing the fleeing enemy, rather than dividing the forces and allowing the enemy to escape. In any case, Frunze's belief in the offense was reflected in his later advocacy of UMD, despite opposition from the Commissar of War. Lenin endorsed Frunze by replying that: If we do not conquer the Urals before winter, I think the destruction of the revolution is inevitable; exert every effort; look everywhere for reinforcements; mobilize the population in the front territory; take care of political work; inform me every week by cipher telegram of the results; you are responsible for seeing to it that the units do not begin to disintegrate and that morale does not collapse. 
17
18
After Ufa, Kolchak split his army into two groups: one fled to Turkistan and the other went to Siberia. Lenin and Trotsky split the Eastern Front into two Fronts, the Eastern and the Turkistan, and sent Frunze south as the Commander of the Turkistan Front to pursue Kolchak's forces under General P.A. Belov. 
19
In August of 1919, with the division of the eastern front into two directions, Siberian and Turkistan, I was appointed as the commander of the Army of the Turkistan Front with the 11th, 4th and 1st Armies as well as the Turkistan forces. During the course of September, I conducted operations to encircle and destroy the southern army of Kolchak, under the command of General Belov. The result of this operation was the restoration of communications with Turkistan and secured passage of the Orenberg Cossacks on the side of Soviet power. 
20
On 21 September 1919, after the defeat of General Belov, the Central Committee appointed Frunze head of the Southern Army Group, Eastern Front. He may have gotten this command at Lenin's own insistence. On 30 December 1919, Frunze attacked Gur'ev and on 5 January 1920, the Ural Front was liquidated. Frunze took 150,000 prisoners of war from 31 January 1919 to 5 January 1920.
After defeating the forces of Admiral Kolchak and his subordinates in January 1920, the Central Committee appointed Frunze as Commander of the Eastern Front.
Trotsky spoke highly of Frunze's achievements in the 7th Congress and labeled him a "commander of distinction and merit." 
21
The formal beginning of the Basmachi movement was associated with the Tsarist Imperial Decree of 25 June 1916, which rescinded the previous exemption of Muslims from military service. The Basmachi movement was a reaction, not only to conscription, but to the Russian conquest of the region, and it became an action for national liberation for many Central Asians. The majority and the most influential of the Basmachi groups founded after 1918 were composed of village leaders and were among the most highly educated of the population. The Khivan Khanate and the Bukharan Emirate were both Basmachi strongholds and centers of counterrevolution. 
22
23
24
25
By the end of February 1920, Frunze began to implement a policy designed to win the native population through concessions. 
26
Frunze knew that concessions alone to the Muslims in Central Asia would only encourage the anti-Soviet Basmachi movement, so he began to undermine the leadership of the movement itself. Frunze knew that it would be very difficult to defend the Bolshevik Revolution if the indigenous people were hostile to it, so he began a policy of empowering local peasants and placing them into positions of power. 
27
28
29
As Commander of the Turkistan Front, Frunze divided his time evenly between his subordinate units, the 1st Army, the 4th Army, the 11th Army, and the 2nd Turkistan  By order of the RVSR, for uncommon energy and persistence in carrying out the plans leading to the crushing defeat of Wrangel's White Guard units in Northern parts of Tavrichesk Province and in personal leadership of units in storming the strong positions at Perekop and Yushoon, the award of honor of revolutionary arms.
After Wrangel was defeated, Frunze still had to quash several internal rebellions in Ukraine in order to reestablish control and consolidate Bolshevik power, most notably a rebellion led by Nestor Makhno. 
34
35
These three pillars, along with the many personal lessons that Frunze had learned throughout his two years of campaigning, would continue to be instrumental in Frunze's success, and would help him to shape his concept of the UMD.  Gusev, who was the head of the Red Army's political administration. 
1
Many influential political leaders and officers joined this debate, such as Mikhail
Tukhachevskii and Leon Trotsky. When the debate narrowed to two camps, Trotsky's and Frunze's, Tukhachevskii joined Frunze's side. Even within the two main groups, there was a broad spectrum of beliefs regarding the UMD. Initially, Tukhachevskii was on the far left of the scale. He advocated creating an international general staff that would spread revolution through military assistance to all nations, an idea that Frunze later incorporated into his own reforms. Trotsky was on the right of the scale, and he did not think that there was a need for a UMD, because warfare was very fluid and did not lend itself to a rigid dogma. Frunze was a centrist, and he wanted to create a UMD that reflected the proletariat way of war, one that corresponded to Marxist thought. To Frunze, the purpose of a UMD was to link military actions to Party goals. It is important to present a nuance of the translation of the "U" in UMD. The word "yedinnaya" can conceivably mean three distinct things in the Russian language.
Though it is derived from the word "odin," which means "one," it can also mean "unified" or "universal." Taken one way, the translation for UMD is "one military doctrine," which is the position espoused by Trotsky. Trotsky believed that a military doctrine was based upon the experiences of past wars, and that the participants of the wars mattered little. What mattered was that the lessons learned in that conflict were recorded and synthesized with the body of military knowledge in order to produce new tactics with which to fight. Trotsky thought that, because doctrine does not change all that muc h, having a specific military doctrine based on proletariat principles is ridiculous.
Doctrine, in his mind, was based on using past events to predict future outcomes, and in the case of military doctrine, was virtually unchanging and timeless.
Another way of interpreting UMD is "unified military doctrine." As figure 
1
The final translation is "universal military doctrine," which is what Frunze proposed. Frunze's position early in the UMD debate was that Marxism should be the single philosophy that forms the foundation to all doctrine. 
3
There is only one way to wage war
One doctrine that can be applied in many forms, each different Though alike in the fact that they share the same base (Marxism)
The foundation of Frunze's political and military framework was the writings of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. Their writings are replete with references to the military.
Even in his most abstract works, Engels made ample use of military terms and experiences, because he regarded himself as a soldier and a military theorist by trade. 
4
The declared policy of Marx and Engels was one of enmity toward the "military machine," the military caste, and the military State. 
5
Later in the UMD debate, when Frunze used the writings of Marx and Engels to help give form to the Red Army, Trotsky took issue. "The nation in arms" had become the declared military ideal of Engels. He regarded as futile the campaign to destroy militarism in nineteenth century European society, so he instead advocated eradicating its feudal traditions and awakening its democratic tendencies by means of universal compulsory military service. In his later writings, Engels expressed increasing revulsion at the prospect of a future world war, one that threatened to destroy all the advances made not only by the working class and by Socialist movements, but also by western civilization itself. However, it was likely that the earlier writings of Engels, writings that stated that revolution had to come about through war and violence, had inspired Frunze more than the latter ones.
To make the proletarian revolution a reality, Marx and Engels discussed tactical problems and military considerations at length in their writings. 
6
This observation influenced Frunze later in the UMD debate, as he attempted to grapple with the technological backwardness of the Red Army. But there were three major themes that Engels continued to address throughout his writings that influenced Frunze the most. These themes are the nature of the proletarian way of war, the type of army that is appropriate for a Socialist State, and the total integration and subordination of all aspects of power to the State. These themes surely rang true with Frunze because they reinforced his experiences in the Russian Civil War, as well as his earlier political experiences in Ivanovo-Voznesensk and in the 1905 Revolution.
The first theme was that the proletariat would have its own distinctive way of war.
Engels said that the proletariat would produce its own independent proletariat strategy and tactics. Engels also said "The emancipation of the proletariat…will have its special expression in military affairs and will create its special new military method." 
7
8
The second theme was the composition of the Red Army itself. Should a Socialist
State strive to create a militia or a standing army? Lenin, Engels, and Marx all declared the militia (the concept of a citizen's volunteer army, the armed working class) to be the appropriate form in the Socialist era. This force would be voluntary, as would all employment in the Socialist State, each worker willingly contributing according to his ability. Engels stated that in a Communist society, no one would think of a regular army, because there would be no need. Although Engels regarded the militia system as a final goal, he hastened to caution Marx that "only a Communist society could get really near the full militia and even that approach would only be asymptotic," meaning that even a Communist society could never truly reach a full militia concept because not all workers would be able to perform military duties, some may not be inclined to perform them, and in a true utopian, Communist State, there would be no need for any type of military force. Frunze's mind, until the population became predominantly working class, there could be no militia. In addition, Marx and Engels did not predict that Russia would be the first society to undergo this type of change; rather they thought that Germany was ripe for revolution. In their minds, Russia was far too backwards and too agrarian to become a successful worker's State. Frunze determined that the Red Army existed to protect the dictatorship of the proletariat, meaning that the Red Army must be available to continue to push international revolution forward. It would only have the ability to do that if it was a professional, well-trained force -a cadre-led conscript force, rather than an allvolunteer force. On this point, later in the debate, Frunze and Engels diverged, though it was a divergence due to the particular circumstances within the Soviet State.
The third theme from the writings of Marx and Engels was the total integration of the means of power in the Socialist State. The basic Marxist position that all means of power in the Socialist State would be subordinate to the goals of the Party was a basic tenet of Frunze's UMD. Marx and Engels agreed with the greatest theorist of modern total war, Carl von Clausewitz. The supposed discovery of national-Socialist ideologues such as Adolf Hitler, that modern war is of a fourfold nature, diplomatic, economic, psychological, and only as a last resort military, was common knowledge to Marx and Engels. 9 Marxists refused to draw a line between military and political affairs. Marx and Engels realized how closely foreign policy, war, and internal affairs were connected.
Narrow definitions of military strategy that neatly separated war and peace, or the army and society, were foreign to the Bolsheviks. Lenin and his cohorts were impressed with Clausewitz' analysis of the interaction between politics and war. There was no doubt in their minds that war, revolution, politics, and society were inseparable. 
10
11
12
Stated "I agree with Engels completely." 
13
14
After the Kronstadt Rebellion was put down and after Lenin gave his directive for Party unity, Gusev and Frunze presented a series of twenty two theses. These theses called for the development of a unified military doctrine to bring unity to the Red Army. 
15
Frunze's first thesis stressed the desirability for a common political ideology within the Red Army, as well as "a unity of views about the character of military problems facing the republic, the means of solving them, and methods for the combat preparation training of troops." 
16
This thesis also supported Engels' theme that the military should be subordinated to the political through Marxist ideology.
In his second thesis, Frunze called for a Unified Military Doctrine representing the "scientific proletarian theory of war" to be institutionalized in the regulations, manuals, and directives of the Soviet military." 17 According to Frunze, the basic mission of the Red Army was the protection of the dictatorship of the proletariat from the encroachments of internal and international counterrevolution. Frunze believed that the military apparatus, guided by general State policy, would ensure the unity of the armed forces, instilling a common outlook on the nature of military missions (protecting the dictatorship of the proletariat) and how to conduct them. 
18
In his third thesis, Frunze said that the development of this proletarian doctrine "may not be entrusted to the narrow specialists of military affairs" but would rely only partially on the military expertise of those specialists and primarily on the proletarian consciousness of political workers. 
19
Frunze; he simply stated it as a desired end state.
Frunze made clear with his fourth thesis that this unity of views should be expressed in regulations, manuals, and directives, organized on the general basis of Marxist teachings. This was the first attempt to build a military theoretical system based on Marxism, which implied that military officers must know Marxist thought in order to transform the Red Army. In order to fully understand Marx and Engels, Frunze called to have the State press publish all of Marx' works in Russian, as well as all foreign articles that provided analysis of Marx with regard to the military. The goal was to build a program that would provide a foundation of Marxist thought to every worker-soldier in the Red Army, particularly Socialist thought on the relations between the military and politics.
In his fifth thesis, Frunze called for the general staff to transform into the militarytheoretical staff of the proletarian State. His idea was to create a think tank that would provide a solid base of ideological theory and be able to apply it to solving military problems in a Marxist way. This thesis was partially an overture to Tukhachevskii, who wanted the Red Army Staff to be the staff of the international proletariat. Frunze did not think that the Red Army Staff was currently ready to take on the role that Tukhachevskii wanted it to play in the global arena, because of the backwardness within the Red Army regarding technology; but he envisioned an alliance between the Red Army and the proletariat in other countries in the future. Frunze argued that, on the whole, the experience of the Civil War was largely one-sided, because in the course of both the Russian Civil War and the Soviet-Polish War, Russia had to face an enemy with equal or somewhat superior strength to the Red Army in terms of technology. 
20
In his final thesis, Frunze argued that the nature of the new State, the Red Army, and its combat experience in the Civil War had forged the preconditions for the formulation of a UMD, which was determined by the character of the country's armed forces, the methods of combat training for troops and command personnel, and the nature of the State. 
21
After the theses had been presented, Trotsky rose to challenge them. While
Frunze was earnest, relentless, and serious in his presentation, Trotsky was sarcastic, spiteful, and used clever phrases in an attempt to belittle Frunze and to show the folly of Frunze's position. Frunze merely listed his main and supporting points, while Trotsky constantly reproached Frunze for his lack of understanding. Trotsky had three major concerns. These concerns dealt with the issue of a standing army, the issue regarding a proletariat way of war, and the practicality of creating a military ideology or philosophy with which to manage the Red Army. Ironically, these three issues were the same three themes that Engels used in his writings.
The first issue was with the concept of a standing army. Many Bolsheviks were never completely satisfied with Trotsky's Red Army, knowing that it had been created as a temporary device in 1918 to be demobilized and replaced by the militia as quickly as possible after the Russian Civil War. But at the 10th Congress, Frunze announced that the Red Army existed to protect the dictatorship of the proletariat both in and out of Russia, which shed a whole new light to the role of the Red Army. In light of this new role, centralized, disciplined and trained forces were critical for victory, since the Red Army must be prepared to assist workers in other nations to revolt against their Capitalist bosses. To Trotsky, the main flaw of this aspect of Frunze's theses was that it sounded like he wanted to resurrect the Tsarist standing army that they had so recently destroyed.
The main difference between the Tsarist army and the Red Army, Frunze pointed out, was that the Red Army was run by the will of the workers and promoted worker's aims and goals. Frunze's concepts of UMD were still insufficiently mature at this point to explain to Trotsky that the volunteer, militia system was not possible in a nation of peasants, however he attempted to explain by pointing out that Trotsky himself remarked that the peasants of Russia will never aid foreign workers in their revolution; that is why, Frunze said, in order to do this, the peasants must be turned into worker-soldiers. To
Frunze, the only way to do that was by teaching Marxist thought to peasants, so they understand the reasons behind their actions.
The second of Trotsky's issues was that there was not really such a thing as a proletarian way of war. Trotsky said that strategy and tactics are not derived from a proletarian outlook, but from such objective factors such as military technique, logistics, geography, and the enemy's capabilities. Frunze countered by stating that the proletarian way of war was defined by taking the initiative and continually pursuing the offense. Trotsky also argued that any kind of military doctrine required both internal and external stability in order to develop. That stability was not present yet in the Soviet State, and, according to Trotsky, until such a time as this stability occurred, no new doctrine could be implemented. Frunze argued that there must be a UMD precisely because there was such turmoil, in order to prevent total chaos and further disunity of purpose between the Soviet State and the Red Army.
However, Trotsky's main complaint regarding Frunze's position was the matter of Frunze's continued insistence on viewing military matters through a Marxist prism.
Trotsky's main question, after all, was one of the feasibility of creating a UMD by the application of the Marxist method. Trotsky argued that UMD should be "concrete, precise and filled with historical content." 
22
However, Trotsky often tried to show that it was Frunze who was mired in the past. One way Trotsky tried to undermine Frunze's concept of a proletarian military doctrine was to claim that Frunze took his ideas from Suvorov, the eighteenth century nobleman who commanded a Tsarist army of serfs. 
23
1
The bottom line to Frunze was that the military should do whatever is necessary in order to accomplish the goals of the State--in the case of the Soviet State, meeting Marxist objectives by preparing to defeat international capital. According to Frunze, in order to accomplish this goal, military doctrine must be unified in order to use resources wisely and ensure that all efforts of the nation were focused in the same direction. 
2
3
The purpose of the government of the USSR, as part of the dictatorship of the proletariat, was to facilitate the destruction of Capitalistic production relationships. 
4
5
In the same article, Frunze described his method for solving combat problems by relating those problems to Marxist principles. The essence of the UMD world view corresponding to Frunze's proposals can be summed up in the following quote:
There exist deep and principled contradictions between the structure of proletarian Statehood on the one hand, and the surrounding bourgeois Capitalist world on the other. This makes confrontation and struggle between these two feuding worlds inevitable. Thus, the aim of political education in the Red Army is to maintain and enhance its constant preparedness to fight against world capital. 6
This worldview, according to Frunze, was the driving force behind the need for a UMD, to ensure that all of the Red Army actions would assist in achieving the end state of the defeat of world capital. Though to us this is propaganda of the first order, Mikhail
Frunze, in all probability, believed this statement to be true. He was also convinced, possibly after seeing the repression of the workers in the 1905 Revolution first hand, that the Red Army stood as the protector of imminent revolution:
At the first convenient moment, the waves of the bourgeois Capitalist ocean surrounding our proletarian island will rush in to attempt to sweep away all the achievements of the proletarian revolution. At the same time, the flames of revolutionary fires are erupting more and more frequently in various countries of the bourgeois world, and the formidable tramp of proletarian columns preparing for the attack reveals in part the plans of the other side. This contradiction can be eliminated only by force in a bloody battle between class enemies. There is and can be no other way out. 
7
It is accurate to say that Trotsky wanted many of the same things that Frunze was advocating; however Trotsky believed that Frunze's second line of thought, offensive operations against world Capitalism, was dangerous at that time. Trotsky believed that the Red Army should be used to defend the USSR against the bourgeoisie and landlords, in essence to protect the gains that had already been made. Trotsky's reasoning did not discount assisting other revolutions, but in the first place he believed that the USSR was still too weak and backward to transition to the offense, and he also believed that the Soviet peasants could never be rallied to support an international war. 
8
In the German example, the German military doctrine was offensive in nature because the German State itself was aggressive. The Army's spirit was a reflection of the State's active and offensive nature. In the case of France, Frunze described them as having an economic character of rapacity, deviously seizing property to search for a way to catch up with the other great powers, which were greedily dividing the world to add to their empires. To Frunze, French military doctrine was a reflection of its political policies of temporizing and opportunism. In the case of England, the military doctrine also mirrored its economic policies and class character. Frunze thought that England exploited her colonies through naval dominance, therefore her military was sea based and focused on exploitation. In the case of the Tsarist military, lack of flexible doctrine was bad; the Tsarist State was both orthodox and autocratic. Therefore, according to Frunze, the military principles reflected the system of life of a given people and in particular, the essence and character of that social class which holds the power at a given time. 
10
After this lengthy explanation regarding his examples, Frunze then drew five conclusions regarding the basis of a UMD. The first conclusion was that the military matters of a given State are entirely shaped by the general conditions of life of that State.
This allowed Frunze to determine the nature of any given army by analyzing the nature of the conditions of life within that State. Secondly, Frunze determined that the character of the military doctrine of a given State is determined by the character of the political line of the ruling social class of that State. This statement gave purpose to promoting revolutions abroad, and granted that the nature of an army must change, based on the character of the ruling Party. These first two conclusions directly support Frunze's assertion that the proletarian has a unique way of war, but still come no closer to defining the details of that unique method.
Thirdly, Frunze determined that the basic conditions for the vitality of a military doctrine were contained with the general aims of the State and with those material and spiritual resources at its disposal. In the case of the USSR, Frunze argued, the nature of the Soviet State was its manifestation of Marxist doctrine. Therefore, the Red Army must follow the general aims of Marxist thought, providing the baseline for political education and the requirement for a UMD. More importantly, UMD was a link between the policies of the State and the plans of the Red Army. According to Frunze, without UMD the goals of the State could not be accomplished. Fourthly, Frunze determined that vital military doctrine cannot be invented, but it was a product of material conditions supplemented by theoretical work and the requirements of the military art. That meant that the nature of the doctrine of a given army was inherent in the conditions that reside within that country.
When those conditions change, the doctrine must change as well, as military doctrine is inextricably linked to the conditions of the State. Conclusions three and four attempted to support Frunze's assertion that the doctrine of the Red Army must be entwined with the political doctrine of the State, which, for the Soviet State, meant Marxist doctrine.
However, Frunze was beginning to temper theory with reality, especially the backward nature of the Soviet State regarding technology, industrialization, and workers.
Finally, Frunze determined that the fundamental theoretical tasks of Communists with reference to the Red Army were the following:
To study the international environment (threat analysis) To define the character of the Soviet State and the military tasks that flow from it Study the material and spiritual resources for the fulfillment of those tasks Study the construction of the Red Army and its combat methods Study the demands of a proletarian State in a revolutionary epoch Those five fundamental theoretical tasks, Frunze argued, formed the basis for a Unified Military Doctrine, defined its purpose, and provided direction for the Red Army to fulfill that purpose. After establishing Marxist doctrine as the basis for all doctrine in the Red Army, the next step, Frunze argued, was to take the lessons learned from the Russian Civil War and to apply them to this framework to discover the true nature of the Red Army, its relationship to the Soviet State, and its responsibility to the rest of the world. This goes back to Frunze's main point of contention with Engels--that the Soviet State was different from the State that Engels envisioned would become a Socialist State.
These differences mainly consisted of the nature of the population within the Bolshevik State, which, at this time, was of peasant origins. As he discusses in his earlier writings, according to Frunze, peasants have their own way of war, characterized by individual, partisan action and night operations. While a necessary substitute until such a time as the Soviet Union gained technological superiority over Capitalism, a peasant army was not conducive to the proletariat way of war.
Regarding the responsibility of the Red Army, Frunze asserted that it included seizing the initiative from Capitalists, when the conditions were favorable. These conditions depended on the level of maturity of the international revolutionary process, the level of economic He said, "Only now can we consider the education of the Army concerning training and nature of the Army and its possible missions. Before that we were absorbed with the practical matters." 
12
13
The basic premise within the Ukrainian Theses was the need for some documented concept to provide a unity of will and thought in the Army using the Marxist method. According to Frunze, this document should be the UMD. Frunze asked the question: What would be the nature of the future military clashes? To him, the nature of future clashes was the conflict between international capital and the international counterrevolutionary movement, and the Ukrainian Theses were meant to address how to educate and restructure the Red Army to deal with that threat. The Ukrainian Theses were broken down into fourteen separate points, each of which help to clarify Frunze's position within the UMD debate. It is important to remember that Frunze never laid claim to inventing any aspect of this UMD. He observed the situation in the Soviet State, compared it to his framework for success that had been developing since 1905, and looked at it through a Marxist prism. The results were these fourteen theses; the third attempt by Frunze to present his thoughts to a body of military and political Bolsheviks in order to affect his views of necessary cha nges over the weakening institution of the Red Army.
The first thesis was that the UMD should not be a dogmatic system, but a guide to action. Initiative was not to be stifled, so long as actions were taken in accordance with Marxist precepts. It was important to Frunze to emphasize the holistic nature of the sources of power within the Soviet State. Frunze explained that this doctrine (which he later called worldview) would constitute a guide to action rather than an inviolable dogma so that the "economic and socio-political conditions of a given epoch" can also be taken into account. 
14
The second thesis was that the army is composed of toilers. The Red Army, as a class army of toilers, existed for the defense of the proletarian revolution from bourgeois counterrevolution and the onslaught of world imperialism and for the support of the coming Socialist revolution in Europe. This thesis encompassed Frunze's belief that Engel's second theme, to build a militia rather than a standing army, was not yet applicable to the Soviet State. Frunze believed that the Soviets must first make workersoldiers out of the peasants that comprised the Red Army.
The third thesis was that the clash between the proletarian State system and the bourgeois Capitalist world was inevitable. Frunze addressed the nature of the struggle between communism and Capitalism as ceaseless. He remarked that the threat of Capitalist encirclement demanded constant vigilance and military preparations. 
15
16
17
The fifth thesis was that new tactics and strategy would develop with the coming to power of the working class. The nature of these tactics would be based on Marxist ideology, but the specific tactics had yet to be determined, and the tactical direction that
Frunze wanted the Red Army to take would not be clear in Frunze's mind for another eight months. This thesis emphasized Engels' first theme and his third theme: that the proletariat has its own unique way of war and that all of the power in a State is subordinate to the political. Similarly, it addressed one of Frunze's pillars for success: loyalty to the Party. In this thesis, Frunze acknowledged that the military was subordinate to the political, and that Marxist ideology is the baseline from which all Red Army doctrine must be developed.
The sixth thesis was that the offensive character of maneuver from the Russian Civil War resulted from the class nature of the Soviet State. This aspect of the Ukrainian theses directly correlated to the earlier "The Red Army and the UMD" article, in which
Frunze associated the nature of the State to the nature of the army in any given country.
Though done in a rather superficial way, Frunze attempted to show that the military of any given country would mirror that of its society. This would become very important in showing the link between the proletariat of the Soviet Union and its unique way of war, which consisted of offensive operations, seizing and maintaining the initiative, and loyalty to the State.
The seventh thesis was that future wars would be wars of maneuver. Both the bourgeois and proletariat used maneuver, Frunze argued, but the bourgeois used maneuver to gain an advantage (do something to gain something for the Capitalists) and the proletariat uses maneuver because it is in its very nature to create or produce something. This concept was a bit unclear, but Frunze was talking about the inability for the proletariat to stand still. To Frunze, the proletariat embodied the divine spark that strives to create. Creation required constant forward movement. The proletariat, according to Frunze, must take the initiative because it is in its very nature necessary to do something for its own sake. 
18
The eighth thesis was that the objectives of both the Soviet forces and those of the enemy would not only be enemy focused (destroy and defeat armies), but also terrain and information focused (seize his logistic bases, influence his centers of power, create a fifth column). While still immature at this point, Frunze's concept of total war meant that all levels of society would be involved in future warfare, not only the Red Army. This would be true for the Capitalists as well. Destroying the army of the Capitalists was not the main thing for Frunze; to him, those soldiers were merely exploited workers. Frunze believed that the Red Army would have to destroy the means of production to feed the Capitalist war machine. Frunze believed that as long as either side had the means of production to continue the war, the loss of a field army would not be decisive.
The ninth thesis was that the basic form of maneuver would be the offense to gain the initiative. Frunze conceded that there is a place for defensive operations, but only as a way to transition into the dominant form of maneuver, the offense. Frunze thought that the goals of the revolution could only be served by a program of training for the armed forces that stressed the spirit of the offensive. This thesis encompasses the third of Frunze's pillars of success: to seize the initiative and continue the offense.
The tenth thesis was that the tactics of Red Army would be offensive in nature, due to its proletariat class nature. Frunze discussed the class character of the workerpeasant army and the spirit of the bold and energetically executed offensive operations that took place during the Russian Civil War as being essential to framing tactical problems in future wars. This thesis provides further clarification of the fifth thesis, but no new insight. As Frunze continued to refine his position, as will be shown with his presentation to the 11th Party Congress, he consolidated these two somewhat redundant theses into a tighter package.
The eleventh thesis was to not waste resources on defensive systems because the war of the future will be a war of maneuver. Frunze stated that "By no means do we reject defensive operations, but we consider retreat to be part of the offense. Accepting the idea of retreat alone, disconnected from the idea of taking the offense must not occur." 
19
The twelfth thesis called for the maximum elasticity and flexibility in the training of the command personnel of the Red Army, so that they could in turn train the rest of the Red Army. This would be done by increasing the military qualifications for each soldier, revising military regulations, and strengthening the bonds between soldiers and their commanders, which Frunze referred to as a spiritual bond. This thesis was an amalgamation of Frunze's military and political experiences. Militarily, Frunze knew that the Red Army was not well trained during the Russian Civil War. In Frunze's view, they succeeded because the will of the officers who led them was greater than the will of the White forces, and that will was directly tied to their belief in their political cause. Frunze wanted, above all, a set of regulations that were the baseline of all Red Army soldiers to learn so that the Red Army could be of one mind. Being of one mind was the whole purpose behind UMD. Frunze believed that this would only be possible under the same system that the political element of power used for its legitimacy: the teachings of Marx and Engels. This thesis was the basis of Red Army transformation in 1925. 1. The Red Army must be trained and educated on the basis on unified concepts, and its activities and tasks must correspond to the views of the State.
2. This unified concept must embrace the manifestation of proletarian life in both peace and war. In other words, this UMD must reflect the life of the Soviet State. These first two points supports Frunze's detailed explanation within the "UMD and the Red Ar my" article that discussed the reason that each State must have its own unique doctrine, based on the nature of each individual State.
3. The UMD should be composed of two sections: technical and political. While
Frunze believed that the military should be subordinate to the political, he acknowledged that there were distinct tasks that the military must accomplish that, while they could be governed by Marxist doctrine, were purely military tasks.
4. The technical section will outline the methods of combat training, organization of the Red Army, and methods of leadership. These are the military tasks that would be developed based on the successes of the Russian Civil War.
5. The political section will determine the tasks facing Soviet State, discuss the internal regimen of the Red Army, and the political education of the worker-soldiers. This is the link between the Red Army and the Soviet State, to ensure that the Red Army is acting in accordance with Marxist writings and that the Red Army is accomplishing the goals of the Soviet State. 
21
22
Next, Frunze attacked the concept of a territorial militia. Because the Soviet Union was "a few island cities in a sea of peasant villages," Frunze called for a standing worker army rather than a peasant militia. 
23
On the other hand, peasants excelled in individual actions, small unit (squad) actions, and partisan warfare. 
24
Frunze required a UMD to help transform the Red Army into an effective tool of the State. According to Frunze, the nature of the Soviet State demanded the transformation of the peasants into ideologically changed worker-soldiers, and this could only be done through the structure of a Unified Military Doctrine. 
25
5
6
7
8
As Deputy Commissar, Frunze began to implement the concepts that he had previously addressed during the UMD debate. He was able to initiate reforms in four broad areas: discipline and education, technology, personnel, and the proletarian way of war. Frunze had discovered that the discipline of the Red Army was very low, and he attributed it to a lack of education. Frunze said that discipline was to be maintained in the Red Army in two ways. The first change would be to instill the desire to "do the right thing" into the consciousness of the mass of the Red Army through political education. An additional aspect of discipline was an issue regarding obedience. Frunze believed that the internal organization of the Red Army should approximate the ideal of Communist society, but condemned those who believed that the enlisted masses and the command personnel (officers) should share the complete equality that the Communist system espoused. Frunze knew from his personal experiences in the Russian Civil War that complete equality within the ranks would destroy an army, and he said this many times to the Central Committee. In war, someone must command and others must obey in order to accomplish those military tasks that are in direct contradiction to personal survival. In a perfect system, one in which every worker-soldier knew Marxist thought, this most basic and most important command relationship may be mitigated, or even made irrelevant, since each worker-soldier would do his full duty, but in the reality of the Red Army, some must lead, based on education and experience, and the rest must obey. 9
The second area that Frunze concentrated on was that of technology. Frunze was convinced that technology would play an increasingly important, even decisive, role in the next war. This conviction was partially derived from the staff study of the First World War that he had commissioned in 1924 as the head of the military academy, but probably also derived from his personal experiences during the Russian Civil War. Time and again, Frunze faced White forces that had been given technologically advanced weapons, such as communications devices, by western powers. Frunze presented a program to the Central Committee to transform the technical level of the Red Army rapidly, encompassing enhanced communications, enhanced firepower and protection, developing chemical warfare, and increasing the role of airpower. 
10
The main personnel issue with which Frunze had to wrestle was the very nature of the Red Army, whether it would be militia-based or a professional standing force.
Contrary to Marxist thought, Frunze advocated a standing Red Army, not a militia system. He thought that workers could create an effective militia, but the reality was that 90 percent or more of Russian was comprised of peasants, who were effective at individual or partisan warfare, rather than the mass formations that would be needed in the armies of the future. To make the militia system work, Frunze would have to turn peasants into military soldier-workers. 
11
13
14
In 1925, Frunze's position changed. He conceded that the Red Army had not discovered a uniquely proletarian method of warfare; that other factors, such as the geography of the Soviet Union, gave the Red Army the ability to conduct a strategic withdrawal. This was not directly in contrast with the offensive nature of the proletariat, nor was it in complete contrast with Frunze's other writings and assertions; rather these other factors forced Frunze to recognize that other than a broad, general offensive strategy, there might not be specific proletarian tactics unique to UMD.
Frunze most important quality with respect to the UMD debate was the ability to take new information and adapt his views according to that new information. This was seen in the tactics he used in the Battles of Ufa and Perekop, the approaches he used in Central Asia in dealing with the Basmachi, his response to Trotsky's counter arguments in the 10th Party Congress debate, and now again with the very nature of the proletariat and war. The changing of Frunze's beliefs might have been a result of many factors, some of which must have included a more broad perspective due to his elevated position within the military and Party, greater time to reflect on his earlier proposals, and the analysis that came from the study he had directed on the lessons of the First World War, but ultimately it was due to the mental flexibility that Frunze used to incorporate new ideas into his Marxist frame of reference. Despite many other changes, Frunze continued to maintain that the Red Army's class character engendered an offensive spirit until his death later that year. 
15
16
17
While not the solution that the Bolsheviks wanted to implement, the realities of money and resources had to take precedence over ideology.
In  
17
17
which took place on
which took place on
1 Condoleezza Rice, The Making of Soviet Strategy, in Paret, Peter, ed. 2 Walter Darnell Jacobs, 5 6 Mikhail V. Frunze,
Anarchy Archives, Makhno's Biographical Information at http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/Anarchist_Archives/bright/makhno/makhnobio.html accessed on 22 October 2003.
was not well polished. According to John Erickson, Frunze was both clumsy and vague in his first attempt at the UMD. 
25
26
2
3
4
On 7 December 1924, Frunze outlined the principles for the military academy of the Red Army. He made sure that military science would be guided by the Marxist method, by ensuring tha t the military academy based its instruction on the teachings of CHAPTER 7 CONCLUSION While Frunze began the UMD process with firm convictions regarding the direction which the Red Army must travel due to its very nature, in the end, the reforms he implemented were compromised due to the limited resources of the Soviet State.
Frunze was successful in implementing a comprehensive system of political education within the Red Army, thereby providing both direction and purpose to the workersoldiers of the Red Army. However, some scholars argue that Frunze's views regarding UMD eroded over time. According to Hurley, Frunze was ambivalent to one-man command and administrative reorganization, and had spoken out against the militia system, and was forced to compromise his position. 
1
2
It is to Frunze that the Soviet Union owes the legacy of a whole nation that devoted itself to the preparation for war and the creation of the Soviet garrison State. He argued for the militarization of key industries and the centralization of authority in military decision-making. 
3
4
5
6
7
The integration and subordination between the political and technical aspects of military strategy, as developed by Frunze, was first formed through study of Marx, political experiences through agitation and leadership of cells, and military experiences in the Russian Civil War. Karl Marx stated that "The Philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point, however, is to change it" 
8
However when he became a Red Army commander, and a highly successful military leader in the Russian Civil War, he realized that theory must be tempered with realism. Frunze confirmed his framework of three pillars while serving as a military leader in the Russian Civil War, but then realized that some of Engels' concepts would have to be modified in order to implement them in the case of Russia. He also discovered that the peasant and the worker each have their own strengths, and that to harness the true differences that exist for the proletariat, that class of workers that was quite small in the early days of the Soviet State, he must both emphasize and modify Marxist thought.
Frunze's experiences in the Russian Civil War probably taught him that a military force that is not implementing the goals of the State will be ineffective, and that the full 