# ID: d2d92927310e4118ad96bc4f0677b1dd
# Title: Undergoverned Spaces and the Challenges of Complex Infinite Competition
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
In recent years, the JPC has been scrutinized for several reasons, and alternatives for thinking about the operational environment are emerging.
New frameworks that emphasize continuous, fluid, and nonuniform movement among conflict, competition, and cooperation have developed as alternatives to guide military planning, operations, and NSE activities  more broadly.
This section discusses how perspectives on the JPC have evolved, while subsequent sections in this chapter present several alternatives that emphasize continuous learning through engagement.
3   Evolving Views on the JPC From its inception, the JPC faced criticism.
Although it situated military planning in a longer time line of competition that involved noncombat operations and broader national engagement, critics argued that it militarized conflict between states by placing the military at the center of planning and interventions that were best performed by nonmilitary organizations.
In addition, critics observed that the JPC divided engagements into discrete phases in which different members of the NSE might have more or less prominent roles.
4  As time passed, additional concerns emerged over the JPC's utility as a framework for organizing military operations because complex, real-world engagements did not move among conflict phases in a linear, stepwise fashion.
5 Moreover, although the JPC broadened temporal dimensions of military planning, it did not automatically encourage the commitment of resources, energy, and imagination to all the activities that could be performed across each phase.
Detractors argued that Phase 0 shaping actions were simultaneously and contradictorily viewed as both the responsibility of non-DoD agencies (to prevent escalation) and an opportunity for the military to take steps to ensure advantages in later phases because of the belief that open, violent conflict was the inevitable, natural state of the international system.
Exercises, experiments, and scenarios showed that military operators viewed the early phases as a "race to Phase III" in pursuit of the opportunity to decisively gain control over the conflict.
6  These limitations became especially acute as Russia and China each developed broad capabilities and the will to advance their interests in the conceptual space between Phase 0 and Phase I, in which aggressive actions were subtle, diffuse, and below the thresholds that would prompt a military response and meet criteria for armed attack according to international law, treaties, and plans.
7 As Antullio Echevarria has noted: