# ID: d2e4e56f392c4071bc52d95b5d52cc6e
# Title: Learning from Experience: How the US Army Can Extend the Learning Process Started at the National Training Center
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The National Training Center provides rotational training units tough, realistic training to prepare them for combat. This study examines how the Army can improve the outcomes of each rotation beyond training. This study answers the research question, how can the US Army manage National Training Center rotations as learning events for the Army instead of training events for the rotational training units to increase the benefit of each rotation for the whole Army? Experiential learning theory is critical to answering this question. Experiential learning theory, through the experiential learning theory model, focuses on four stages of learning. The four stages are concrete experience, reflective observation, abstract conceptualization, and active experimentation. Effective learning requires the learner to embrace each stage of the experiential learning theory cycle. For the Army to extend the learning process that begins during the concrete experience of a National Training Center rotation, it must elevate the other stages of the experiential learning theory cycle to the same status as concrete experience.
It is difficult to argue that NTC fails to provide better trained soldiers and leaders for the US Army. However, since its founding in 1981, there has been an on-going argument about whether NTC provides valuable lessons learned to the whole Army. That argument became a crisis in the mid-1980s when Congressional oversite led the US General Accounting Office to investigate NTC's training benefit compared to its cost. One of the 1986 General Accounting Office report's objectives was, "to determine whether the Army was developing Army-wide lessons learned from the exercise results."0 F 1 The General Accounting Office concluded that NTC did not meet its full potential. One of the reasons NTC failed to meet its full potential was because the Army lacked a system to initiate army-wide solutions for problems identified during rotations.1 F 2 Since the first training unit completed a rotation at NTC, Army leaders have struggled with ways to collect, process, and analyze the lessons learned during rotations. In the summer of 1985, the Combined Arms Center at Fort Leavenworth established the Center for Army Lessons Learned (CALL). Thirty-four years later the CALL continues the collection and dissemination of lessons learned at NTC. CALL uses similar techniques to those used by the early leaders of NTC; publishing a collection of Observer-Controller articles and observations from NTC rotations.
Although this system is valuable, there is an on-going discussion on how to improve the lessons learned from NTC rotations.
Realizing the full potential of NTC is a difficult task. The mission of NTC states, "the National Training Center conducts tough, realistic, Unified Land Operations with our Unified Action Partners to prepare Brigade Combat Teams and other units for combat while taking care of Soldiers, Civilians, and Family members."2 F
3
Wright wrote, "So let's say hypothetically speaking a CTC re-examines how it communicates observations, trends, training shortfalls to the force. What are some methods, platforms, venues that #MILTWITTER would recommend?"3 F 4 COL Michael Simmering, the Commander of Operations Group, tweeted a poll in October 2019 asking a similar question. Simmering asked, "Here's a good question. Our Divisions have gotten exponentially better because CDRs are sharing info from WFX experiences openly and MCTP is as well. BN/BDE CDRs-do you think dirt CTCs should partner with RTUs to do the same? Openly sharing to make the Army betterfaster?"4 F
5
This monograph seeks to answer the following research question: How can the US Army manage NTC rotations as learning events for the Army instead of training events for the rotational training units (RTU) to increase the benefit of each rotation for the whole Army? This study must answer three subsidiary research questions to answer the primary research question.
The three subsidiary research questions are; how do individuals and organizations learn, how does the Army learn, and how can an NTC rotation, as a learning event, benefit the entire Army?
This monograph consists of eight sections to inform the analysis that answers the research question. The first section is the introduction. The second section is the literature review.
The literature review identifies common trends from history and theory literature. Each of the following three sections conduct a deeper analysis of the literature as part of the sections overall purpose. The first section following the literature review is the theory section. The theory section focuses on Kolb's experiential learning model, its origin, and application to military organizations. The next section is the history section. The history section uses a historical case study to demonstrate how an army learned quickly between major operations. This section relies heavily on historiography to set the context for later analysis. The third section following the literature review focuses on Army doctrine and publications to explain how the Army views learning and how NTC fits into the overall Army learning environment. The theory, history, and doctrine sections build on each other to set a foundation for the analysis and implications section.
The analysis and implications section evaluates the information from each of the previous sections to answer the third subsidiary research question: how can an NTC rotation, as a learning event, benefit the entire Army? The recommendations section is the penultimate section, it answers the primary research question of this study and provides examples of how to answer it.
The recommendation section also recommends areas for further research that fell outside the scope of this study. The final section is the conclusion section. This qualitative research approach integrates history, theory, and US Army publications to identify the nature of learning for military individuals and organizations. A limitation is that human subjects were not included in this research. Nor does this research include surveys of relevant leaders or subject matter experts to improve the Army's use of lessons learned from NTC rotations. Quantitative analysis of the lessons learned published by CALL supports would also support the qualitative research methodology, but it is not the foundation for this analysis. This monograph is not a critique of CALL or any on-going attempts to improve the process of collecting or disseminating NTC lessons learned, but rather seeks to identify areas for overall Army improvement.
The methodology of this literature review mirrors the organization of this study. Dividing the literature review into three sections focused on theory, history, and doctrine provides continuity through the study. The literature review identifies the sources that serve as the foundation for each section and outlines common themes that connect all the literature. The type of literature used in each section is diverse, but common themes throughout the literature are identifiable. The most important theme is that learning from experience is a long process. Sure, if a child touches a hot stove it learns very quickly from the experience to stay away from hot stoves. However, complex events and experiences require more time to digest, especially when reflecting on an experience while simultaneously dealing with new experiences.
The second theme is a branch off the first. Learning is really relearning. Individuals always bring prior experiences, preconceptions, and biases to new experiences. The last theme seen within the literature is the dialectic nature of learning. There is a constant tension, even if it is subconscious, between acting and deliberating. A proper balance is needed to learn efficiently and effectively.
Kolb's Experiential Learning Theory (ELT) is a valuable theoretical model for understanding how military organizations learn because it is based on experiences and is represented by a cycle that serves as a helpful lens to understand how militaries have learned from experience in the past and can serve as a deliberate framework for learning in the future. This section will explain the origins of ELT, its major ideas, and how ELT relates to military organizations. Understanding ELT is critical to answer the first subsidiary research question, how do individuals and organizations learn. In the experiment, trainers spent the day working with trainees while research observers collected data. At the end of the day, trainees went home while trainers and research observers analyzed the events of the day. One day a small group of trainees asked to participate in the training analysis sessions.7 F 8 What ensued was a discussion many military professionals would recognize as a contentious, but productive after-action review. During the analysis discussion one of the research observers made a remark about the actions of one of the trainees in the room. The trainee responded by disagreeing with the observation and explained the situation from her point of view. The trainer added his own perspective of the event and an active dialog ensued about the event. Trainee participation in the analysis sessions became standard and the most significant learning experience of the day, even more than the training itself.8 F 
9
Kolb believes the breakthrough from the T-group experiment came from a dialectic tension between experience and observation. The interaction between those who had a concrete experience, the trainees, and those who had an analytic detachment to the experience, the research assistants, facilitated an environment of creativity and learning.9 F 10 The analysis of this dialectic led Kolb to create a simple, but foundational experiential learning model. Figure 
1
8
12
13
John Dewey, writing in the first half of the 20th century, was a contemporary of Lewin.
Like Lewin, Dewey believed in the importance of observation and reflection inside of a learning model. However, Dewey's ideas differ from Lewin because Dewey stresses the need to control impulses on further action that prevent observation and reflection on the previous action. Dewey writes, "the critical education problem is that of procuring the postponement of immediate action upon desire until observation and judgement have intervened."1 3F 14 This is a common problem discussed in today's US Army. Leaders want to conduct better after action reviews, counsel soldiers, develop leaders, and update standard operating procedures, but they feel the pressure to focus on the next task or "fire." This is where Kolb identifies the next dialectic found in experiential learning. Experience requires action to learn, but to fully learn from an experience requires observation and reflection. The theories generated during observation and reflection give 
12 Kolb, Experiential Learning (2015)
13
14 John Dewey, Experiences and Education (New York: Kappa Delta Pi, 1938), 69. direction to instinct. As Kolb writes, "postponement of immediate action is essential for observation and judgment to intervene, and action is essential for achievement of purpose. It is through the integration of these opposing but symbiotically related processes that sophisticated, mature purpose develops from blind impulse."1 4F 
15
2
16
17
15 Kolb, Experiential Learning (2015)
16
creates knowledge and forms meaning based on his or her experiences. Kolb relates Paiget's theory of cognitive development directly to the learning models of Dewey and Lewin because all three show that learning takes place in an interaction between an individual and the environment.1 7F 
18
19
Piaget's theory of accommodation and assimilation could describe different units' approach to a training event. One unit, on the purely accommodation end, just copies what other units have done before. It brings nothing new to training event and any lessons learned for the unit are already known by the larger organization before the training event even started. The other unit, following a purely assimilation approach, ignores all prior experiences and norms going into the exercise. It does not follow the exercise framework or appear to be interested in participating at all. Any learning that may take place is devoid of purpose for the unit or the larger organization. Balancing the tension between accommodation and assimilation is critical to the learning process, and thus to the effectiveness of training. 
18 Kolb, Experiential Learning (2015)
19
The review of the Lewin, Dewey, and Paiget's ideas about learning from experience demonstrate that learning takes place from conflicting dialectics. Combining the relationship between Lewin, Dewey, and Paiget's dialectics informed Kolb during his development of ELT.
For Lewin the conflict is between concrete experiences and abstract concepts. For Dewey the conflict is between the impulses that force people to act on their ideas and reason that provides direction to those same ideas. To Paiget the interplay between the accommodation of ideas and assimilation of experience drive cognitive development.1 9F 
20
Analysis of the varying concepts, dialectics, and models discussed in this section led Kolb to develop his own theory and model, figure 3. Kolb defines ELT as, "a dynamic view of learning based on a learning cycle driven by the resolution of the dual dialectics of action/reflection and experience/abstraction."2 0F 
21
20
21
23
Kolb describes the learner's capability to incorporate a step of the cycle as an ability.
Abilities correspond to the four steps of the ELT model. A learner with concrete experience abilities can take part in a new experience fully and without bias. Reflective observation abilities allow a learner to think about an experience from different perspectives. Abstract conceptualization abilities mean that a learner can develop theories based on their reflections.
Demonstrating abstract conceptualization abilities requires the learner to test their theories to solve problems or make decisions.2 3F 
24
25
23
24
25
The following case study demonstrates how an army can learn from major operations. The case study is not an in-depth study into the complexity of the strategic situation or operational art. Instead, this study examines multiple events in the case study and tethers them to As Scharnhorst reflected on his experience against the French, he developed some theories about modern warfare. He became famous, even before the War of the First Coalition, for writing field manuals and military journals for professional consumption. After the experience of combat, Scharnhorst's theories and writing changed. As Charles White writes in The Enlightened Solider, "The last six volumes [of the Neues Militarisches Journal] appeared after his experience in the War of the First Coalition (1792 to 1797). His attitude had by then changed considerably."2 6F 27 Scharnhorst hypothesized that modern combat, brought about by the French revolution, required a new degree of professionalism.2 7F 
28
29
4
27
28
29
30
Scharnhorst was only in Berlin for a few months when he began to make the most of his prior experiences and theories. In the summer of 1801, Scharnhorst was invited to attend a dinner by six fellow officers and two civilian professors working closely with the Prussian Army. At the dinner the group decided to establish a military society with Scharnhorst as its director.3 0F 31 The purpose of the military society was to learn through the exchange of ideas with a focus on the current state of warfare.3 1F 
32
The military society dissolved when Prussia began to mobilize for the War of the Fourth Coalition in 1805. The War of the Fourth Coalition demonstrated that Prussia was not prepared for war with Napoleon and France. Although Scharnhorst had managed to influence some reforms in Prussia, they were not enough to prevent disaster. Defeat at the twin battles of Jena and Auerstedt, and the pursuit that followed caused the complete collapse of the Prussian Army.
For Scharnhorst, the ashes of the old regime presented an opportunity for learning and future reforms. As Thomas Kuhn explains in his book, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, crisis allow new theories to take root by destroying old paradigms. Kuhn writes, the "failure of existing rules is the prelude to a search for new ones."3 3F 34 Scharnhorst found himself perfectly positioned to oversee the experiential learning process when Frederick William appointed him as the chairman of Prussia's Military Reorganization Commission. 
31
32
33
37
College, what would later become the famed Kriegsakademie.3 7F 
38
Scharnhorst reformed the Command and Staff system within the Prussian Army to further address the changing conditions of modern war he observed. Leading huge and dynamic armies required better systems for command and control on the battlefield. The new concept assigned a small staff to assist commanders at the division, corps, and army level. At the corps and army level, this staff included a chief of staff to act as a personal advisor to the commander.3 8F 
39
40
41
The Reorganization Commission published two new manuals in early 1812, one for cavalry and one for infantry. The infantry manual was based on the existing theories of another Prussian General and member of Scharnhorst's military society. General Hans Yorck was a regimental commander who had begun experimenting with new tactics as early as 1806 after his own experiences with, and observations of, the French.4 1F 
42
37
38
39
40
41
42
44
The doctrine section of this study focuses on Army publications that concentrate on unit and leader development, or organizational and individual learning. This section is not a historical analysis of CALL NTC trends. Although that analysis may be useful in framing the problem this study seeks to address, the scope of that kind of analysis does not fit the scope of this monograph.
This section will answer the subsidiary research question of, how does the Army learn? Answering this question is important because it links the experiences taking place at NTC to the overall learning of the Army and allows for a comparison of how the Army believes it learns to the ELT described in the theory section.  The words emphasized in the forward of the ALC-TE; think, analyze, and implement relate directly to two of ELT's four phases while learn obviously encompasses the overall purpose of ELT. The use of think relates the ALC-TE to the abstract conceptualization phase of the ELT. Kolb uses the word think himself to describe abstract conceptualization. Kolb writes, "an idealized learning cycle or spiral where the learner 'touches all the bases'-experiencing (CE), reflecting (RO), thinking (AC), and acting (AE)-in a recursive process that is sensitive to the learning situation and what is being learned."4 8F 
49
The lack of an emphases on the need for reflection is a common theme in the ALC-TE.
The lack importance placed on reflection leaves the Army vulnerable to not effectively learning from experience. In the Dewey model of experiential learning (figure 
2
50
Peter Senge is best known for his national bestselling work The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization. In The Fifth Discipline Senge describes five disciplines that make a learning organization. The five disciplines are systems thinking, personal 
49
50
Senge's organizational learning disability, the fixation on events is recognizable to any staff officer used to constantly putting out fires. Senge describes an organization with the fixation on events learning disability as conditioned by events and viewing each event as having a single obvious cause. This concept of event explanation distracts organizations from, as Senge writes, "seeing the longer-term patterns of change that lie behind the events and from understanding the causes of those patterns."5 1F 
52
53
Senge's other learning disability that bears importance on this study appears, at first, to be a counter argument to ELT. Senge titles the disability, the delusion of learning from experience. In describing the delusion of learning from experience Senge admits, "the most powerful learning comes from direct experience."5 3F 54 He also asks, "what happens when we can no longer observe the consequences of our actions?"5 4F 55 This is a critical question within the Army learning environment. How can units be learning organizations when they turn over all their 
51
52
53
54
58 US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 7-0, Training (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), 4-3. 
59
on their experience, further grasp what happened through abstract conceptualization, and decide on ways to make their unit better through active experimentation. Sometimes not completing an extra repetition is ok, if it means the unit has time to progress through the ELT cycle as part of a retraining process. Moving a unit to an increasing difficult event too quickly compresses the ELT cycle and prevent the critical steps required to grasp and transform the experience into new knowledge. Operations Group is also pushing commanders to lead learning organizations, even if not explicitly stating it, by urging them away from the fixation on events learning disability.
Senge discusses personal mastery as a discipline of organizational learning, but how can an organization learn if its personnel are constantly changing out for new, less experienced personnel? Can a unit ever strive for organizational mastery if it does not maintain the personnel in key leadership positions long enough to, continually clarify and deepen a vision, focus energies, and develop patience.5 9F 60 Thomas P. Odom, the CALL liaison to the Joint Readiness Training Center (JRTC), theorizes on the disconnect between individual and organizational learning in the JRTC COG Issues and Trends 1st and 2nd Quarters FY 2019. Odem first identifies the problem when he writes, "Over the 19 years, 190 rotations, 3 dozen trends collections, and another 150+ handbooks and newsletters compiled on issues at the JRTC, let me say that we have never reversed a single trend."6 0F 61 Odom continues, What then is the root cause of this seemingly fruitless struggle to improve our collective training as a fighting Army? The answer is basic: our personnel system focuses on the individual instead of the unit. We create superb leaders with tremendous experience. Yet our units from squad to corps develop almost no collective experience longer than a year. In truth, the continuity inside a division, brigade, battalion, or company is far shorter than a year. No CEO in his right mind would tell everyone to change jobs every year; we do just that in the Army. Whether two, three, or more years per assignment, we change jobs almost every year. Put another way, we discard the collective experience of 10 x 25 
60
61 JRTC Operations Group, JRTC COG Issues and Trends 1st and 2nd Quarters FY 2019 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Center for Army Lessons Learned, 2019), 1. million dollar training rotations per year only to start all over again, every year for every unit.6 1F 
62
The Army cannot afford to focus on unit mastery of task. It must improve the learning process within and between units.
for their 2016 Army Press Online Journal article, "A Better Approach to Developing Leaders."
Their article provides a framework for how the Army can extend the learning process started at NTC. Walker and Bonnot use the Center for Army Leadership Annual Survey of Army Leadership (CASAL) as the bases for their argument that the Army needs to improve its leader development approach. In this article Walker and Bonnot explain, "leaders are learning by doing according to the CASAL survey through leading others, on-the job training, and operational experience."6 2F 
63
64
63
64
65
66
7
67
Unfortunately, NTC rotation 20-02 did not focus on a Stryker Brigade Combat Team conducting reconnaissance and security for a higher headquarters. The 3rd Cavalry Regiment conducted a standard decisive action training environment rotation to meet training requirements 
69
for an upcoming deployment. NTC is not the National Experimentation Center, but experimentation should play a larger role in each rotation.6 9F 
70
Reducing the rate of experiences to increase learning Slowing the rate of NTC rotations allows for more opportunity to learn from NTC rotations. This goes beyond the adage of quality over quantity. As Senge writes in description of the fixation on events organizational learning disability, "generative learning cannot be sustained in an organization if people's thinking is dominated by short-term events."7 0F 
71
With less NTC rotations more units will be able to "plug" into the most recent concrete experience of the RTU with the support of units who shared the experience. Units on the periphery of the concrete experience like NTC Operations Group and 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment (OPFOR) are key players to extending the learning process. More time between rotations for Operations Group and the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment (OPFOR) means more time to reflect, conceptualize, and experiment with the entire Army. A better, more developed ELT cycle means better rotations, integrating the needs of each RTU with more specific needs of higher headquarters and the Army, and escaping the ever-present learning disability of the fixation on events.
The Operations Group and 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment (OPFOR) are not the only units and organizations on the periphery of the RTU. Other brigade combat teams and echelon above brigade units can also benefit from "plugging" into the ELT cycle of RTUs. Divisions are already sharing lessons learned with other divisions following warfighter exercises to help improve others. As Simmering stated in his October 15, 2019 tweet, "Our Divisions have gotten exponentially better because CDRs are sharing info from WFX experiences openly."7 1F 
72
73
Each RTU receives a take home package at the end of an NTC rotation. The Forces Command regulation that governs training at NTC states, "take home packages provide training tools for the chain of command to refine homestation individual and unit training programs."7 3F 74
The take home packages are not actually that valuable to the RTU that has just completed a concrete experience. This unit is most vulnerable, probably unavoidably vulnerable, to Senge's learning disabilities. The unit is fixated on events like reset, upcoming deployments (the reason the unit conducted an NTC rotation in the first place), or changes of command. This last point, changes of command, links to Senge's other learning disability, the delusion of learning from experience. The take home packages are extremely valuable to the other brigade combat teams preparing for their own NTC rotations.7 4F 
75
9
75
76
should be able to reflect on the experiences and take appropriate action to adjust their behavior and thinking-the epitome of personal self-development."7 6F 
77
Utilizing the meaning making phase of leader development as a framework to extend learning started at NTC is the step needed to grow from believing that learning is taking place to driving the learning process. Walker and Bonnot's meaning making phase consist of a six-step cycle. The meaning making phase is represented in figure 
9
The second step in the cycle is observation. Walker and Bonnot stress that their observation step is coming from someone outside the personal experience of the leader, a superior, peer, or follower. Since this study is focused on learning beyond leader development a modification of Walker and Bonnot's ideas is needed. This study will continue to use unit A, an RTU recently complete with its NTC rotation, and unit B, a unit preparing for an NTC rotation. In the situation of unit B "plugging" into unit A's ELT cycle from NTC observations would be the take home packages and Operations Group observations. The third step is feedback. This is the step where outside participation to drive learning increases. Walker and Bonnot explain the feedback when they write, "observers share comments on what they saw. The superior should put the comments in context with the purpose of the activity and the expected outcomes. If it is a collective activity, the feedback will most likely come in the form of an after action review."7 7F 
78
77
78
The fourth step in the meaning making cycle is dialogue. During the dialogue step the receiving unit, in this example unit B, continues to develop understanding and take ownership of the meaning making cycle, and therefore the learning cycle. As Walker and Bonnot explain, "dialogue means two-way communication, and includes active listening to reach shared understanding . . . without interaction, learning is sterile and passive, never fundamentally changing the learner."7 8F 
79
80
The recommendations section answers the primary research question of this study, how can the US Army manage NTC rotations as learning events for the Army instead of training events for the RTU to increase the benefit of each rotation for the whole Army? To answer this question the US Army must embrace every facet of experiential learning to extend the process started at NTC. The ELT cycle serves as a framework to guide the changes needed. The following recommendations based on this study are ways for the Army to begin effectively learning from NTC rotations and starting points for further research on this topic.
Harness the Power of the ELT Cycle. The Army must give primacy to the reflective observation, abstract conceptualization, and active experimentation stages of the ELT cycle.
Experience is great, but what ideas lead to an experience and came from the experience is more important. The ideas of the leaders and soldiers following an NTC rotation are an opportunity to enact change. This idea is central to the other recommendations of this study.
Share experiences openly and fully. To prevent the learning that took place from an experience being lost or underdeveloped it must be shared openly and fully. The concrete, publicly shared, reference point for testing the implications and validity of ideas discussed by Kolb is impossible without full and open sharing of experiences. Combing and filtering experiences and observations for future publication only waters down the effectiveness of the learning process. NTC should post all rotational information on a common access card secured website. This information includes all rotational design products and rotation event data, like battlefield summary videos, for consumers' situational awareness as well as all post rotation after action reviews and take home packages. All digitally recorded information will be particularly useful so consumers can essentially "sit-in" on other units' self-assessment process. When members of Operations Group travel to support units during home station training, they will use the same unfiltered, unsterilized information. This level of openness will require a shift in culture, but it is critical. Commanders and units must put ego aside and understand their experiences, be it a failure or a success, is enhancing learning across the Army.
Guide leaders and units through the ELT cycle. Just because the conditions are set and an opportunity is there, does not mean that someone, or an organization, will take advantage of it.
There needs to be an external organization that guides units through the ELT cycle, whether it is based on their own experience or others. We have Operations Group to support the RTU during the concrete experience stage of the ELT cycle, but no one to guide the process beyond that. The Army must create, or repurpose, a unit that can support RTUs after their experiences have ended or when a unit is "plugging" into another units ELT cycle. The NTC Operations Group is the unit best situated to guide others through ELT cycles. Operations Group shares in the experience to begin with so learning would remain efficient. Operations Group teams would move around the country to different units like the Mission Command Training Program teams. Operations Group team visits would serve one of two purposes. The first type of visit would be a follow up with an RTU that had recently completed a rotation. Operations Group would support the unit to ensure it was moving effectively through the remainder of its ELT cycle. The second kind of visit would be a "plug-in" visit. Operations Group would facilitate meaning making for a unit training up for its own rotation. As discussed in the previous section, meaning making enables a unit to "plug" into the ELT cycle of another unit and extend the learning that has already begun. This step will also require a culture change. Commanders are responsible for ensuring their units are trained, but that does not mean they could not use some support to increase the effectiveness of learning.
Slow down to speed up learning. An organization consumed by events cannot effectively learn from those events. As Kolb and Lewin point out, a certain level of detachment from experience is required to learn effectively. The slowing down of events goes beyond the RTU experiencing a rotation. The supporting units on the peripheries, CALL, and follow on RTUs will all benefit from less experiences and an opportunity to engage with the other stages of the ELT cycle. In order to make the previous two recommendations a reality, something must give. For example, Operations Group cannot design brand new rotations based on a Corps or Division active experimentation while simultaneously traveling to check in on a unit that recently completed a rotation and a unit training for their own rotation using the ELT cycle based on a different units experience. Fully and openly sharing experiences and supporting units through their ELT cycle are events in themselves. Without reducing, or at least maintaining the number of events NTC is vulnerable to being overcome by a fixation on events.
This study focuses on how to extend learning for the Army as an organization. However, as discussed in the doctrine section, the Army is a unique organization. Leaders and members within the organization are constantly moving between sub-organizations and into new positions.
If this study focuses on extending the learning process horizontally between units in hopes that learning will build on itself and improve over time, then further research is required on vertical 
This monograph answered the research question of, how can the US Army manage NTC rotations as learning events for the Army instead of training events for the RTU to increase the benefit of each rotation for the whole Army? By viewing each rotation as a concrete experience through the lens of ELT this study recommends the Army must focus as much effort and resources on the other three stages of the ELT cycle. Giving primacy to the reflective observation, abstract conceptualization, and active experimentation stages of the ELT cycle will enable the Army to learn more during this important transition from unified land operations to multi-domain operations.
US General Accounting Office, National Training Center's Potential Has Not Been Realized  (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1986),  
US General Accounting Office, National Training Center's Potential Has Not Been Realized,  
3 Western Regional Partnership, "Fort Irwin: California," November 2016, accessed November 5, 2019, https://wrpinfo.org/media/1142/ft-irwin-wrp-mal-final-nov-2016.pdf.
David Write, Twitter Post, June 20, 2019, 2224hrs, accessed June 20, 2019, https://mobile.twitter.com/102ndblackhawk6/status/1141909718253752320.
Michael Simmering, Twitter Post, October 17, 2019, 2009hrs, accessed October 17, 2019, https://mobile.twitter.com/simmering216/status/1184999997114404864.
David A. Kolb, Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and Development (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2015), 8.
Ibid., 9.   
Kolb, Experiential Learning (2015), 32.
Kolb, Experiential Learning (2015), 51.
Charles E.White, The Enlightened Soldier: Scharnhorst and the 'Militarische Gesellschaft' in  Berlin, 1801-1805 (Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilms International, 1986), 36-37.   
Senge, The Fifth Discipline, 7.   
This rejection of NTC as the national experimentation center came during a phone conversation with COL Michael Simmering, the Operations Group Commander at NTC. The conversation took place November 23, 2019. The conversation focused on how learning from NTC rotations can be improved.
Senge, The Fifth Discipline, 22.   
Michael Simmering, Twitter Post, October 17, 2019, 2009hrs, accessed October 17, 2019, https://mobile.twitter.com/simmering216/status/1184999997114404864.
Kolb, Experiential Learning (2015), 32.
Walker and Bonnot, "A Better Approach to Developing Leaders," 9.   
Walker and Bonnot, "A Better Approach to Developing Leaders," 8.   
The initial idea for this study lacked any coherent structure or way forward. I am indebted to 
Dr. James Greer
Most importantly, I cannot express the gratitude and admiration I have for my wife, 
Chelsea Linvill
.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Joshua W. Linvill
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
The analysis and implications section of this study answers the third subsidiary research question, how can an NTC rotation, as a learning event, benefit the entire Army? This section covers three key ideas. The first part focuses on how the Army can harness the power of the ELT cycle. The second part of this section examines how slowing down the rate of experiences improves learning. The third and fourth parts of this section examine how sharing ELT cycles between units can extend the learning process started at NTC.
Learning as an Organization: Harnessing the power of the ELT cycle 
If RTUs are too consumed by events to properly share their own experience, reflections, and observations with other units than how can a new unit properly develop their own theories and experiments? Someone or some organization needs to facilitate the "plug in" process. It is not enough to assume, or even tell, the follow-on units insert themselves in the learning process of a previous RTU. The Walker and Bonnot article about a better approach to developing leaders provides a framework for extending the learning take place at NTC.
Walker and Bonnot define two phases to leader development. The first, assessment and integration phase, is discussed in the learning as an organization subsection of this analysis and implications section. The second, meaning making phase, provides a framework for how the Army and NTC can support units to extend the learning taking place at NTC once sharing of information is greatly increased. Simply setting the conditions for learning by making information available is not enough. Walker and Bonnot observe this phenomenon in leader development. They observe, "many senior leaders believe leader development is happening because they are setting the conditions for it to occur . . . senior leaders believe subordinates