# ID: d3433ae84ec84a829e686578f7297090
# Title: Future War Paper
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Russia's use of information warfare has existed for over a hundred years.
History provides the U.S. military with a deep archive of evidence and analysis that illuminates the foundational origins, philosophy, and techniques used by the various Russian and Soviet organizations in their employment of information as a weapon.
As the U.S. military prepares for future conflict with Russia in the information domain, history is the greatest resource.
While the delivery systems and the Russian national objectives have evolved the tactics and employment of information warfare have remained relatively constant.
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, the U.S. military lost its focus on the Russian threat and subsequently became increasingly vulnerable to Russian information warfare.
Though the resident knowledge is not where it was, the archival information is relevant and accessible.
Additionally, Russian actions in Central and Eastern Europe have provided the U.S. and its allied partners with a front row seat to the latest Russian actions in the information domain.
Russian ability to target populations, cultivate ideas, and subsequently harvest information has made the U.S. military increasingly vulnerable to this utilization of information as a weapon.
The initiative to counter this threat will set the stage for future success against a hardened and experienced adversary such as Russia.
The U.S. military needs to increase its information warfare capabilities to address and match the Russian threat.
If not, America will continue to be outpaced and out performed by the Russian disinformation machine.