# ID: d3433ae84ec84a829e686578f7297090
# Title: Future War Paper
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The 21 st Century has experienced substantial development in both the digital and the information environments. The world's population, through the advancement and access to technology, can now transmit and receive thoughts, opinions, and ideas regardless of geographic location.
Internet access introduced a delivery platform to communicate information globally and at previously unseen speeds. Additionally, it now allows unrestricted contact with the world's population regardless of demographic. This advancement in technology has allowed malign actors to access previously inaccessible data by targeting information available through digital profiles and on-line personas. Specifically the ability to target populations, cultivate ideas, and subsequently harvest information, factual or fictitious, has made America's military increasingly vulnerable to Russian's utilization of information as a weapon.
The Russian use of Information Warfare (IW) 1 is not a new phenomenon. The Russian State has used some variation of IW for over a hundred years, dating back to the era of the Czar. Imperial Russia used the Okharana, the state's secret police, to target, disrupt, discredit, and with some frequency silence the Bolsheviks and other revolutionary groups during the later part of the 19 th century and into the early portion of the 20 th century. During the Soviet era, the state actively used IW in the form of both Reflexive Control 2 and what is referred to as Active Measures 3 to wage Political Warfare 4 against both internal and external threats to the Soviet Union. The term reflexive control is further defined and expanded upon throughout this essay. The use of disruption, deception, subversion, and active disinformation were main staples of Soviet doctrine and more importantly is currently a major component of modern Russian strategy. If the Russian State has used IW for over a hundred years, why is the United States substantially more vulnerable today than it was in the past? Furthermore, how and why is Russia able to influence the opinion of American citizens and additionally shape the effects that impact U.S. society as a whole? The above belief has been strongly articulated by James Clapper the former Director of National Intelligence along with other influential intelligence experts within the U.S. intelligence community. 
5
6
7
8
10
Russia's contemporary employment of IW is linked to its historic use of disinformation.
Throughout the history of imperial Russia, secret police organizations existed to inform and protect the royal family. In 1881, as a result of the assassination of Czar Alexander II the Okharana was established to protect the Czar and ultimately the imperial ruling system. The scope of the Okharana expanded with time to cover influence, disinformation, penetration, and subversion operations. The Okharana's focus became Russian political and revolutionary groups both domestically and abroad. 
11
The Okharana mastered the art of infiltrating groups through the use of penetration, source operations, and asset development and employment. Their ability to intercept, monitor, and alter personal communication between key leadership within the numerous revolutionary groups was well developed and continually refined. A major source of information came from the Okharana's ability to intercept mail between targeted groups and individuals. Their activities became so successful that they were referred to as the, "gendarme of Europe" 13 based on their steady, accurate, and up to date flow of actionable information. There are many reoccurring themes between the various Russia intelligence and military organizations that existed during the19 th and 20 th century. The extensive human intelligence networks both inside and outside of Russia, the penetration of governments and organizations perceived as threats to the state, and the ability to continuously refine the application of IW. 
14
The Okharana specialized in eliciting personal information related to the opinions and activities of targeted social revolutionary groups. This ability to penetrate courier systems and intercept correspondence proved effective in the disruption of oppositional groups and was adopted by the Soviet security services for future use inside Russia as well as abroad. 
17
18
However, it was never as brutal as its Soviet counterparts and from an historic perspective, though its operations were ground breaking, they were ultimately unsuccessful in preventing the Russian revolution and the toppling of the Romanov family from power. According to Ben B.
Fischer's essay, "Okharana: The Paris Operations of the Russian Imperial Police," both Lenin and Stalin viewed the Okharana's methodologies as not brutal enough. Though impressive in their manipulation of public opinion and distortion of contemporary current events they were unable to prevent a small group of revolutionaries from violently overthrowing the government of the Czar. The Soviets would be forever influenced by the effectiveness of manufacturing and promoting false information for consumption by the masses. Russia's use of disinformation and IW is traceable to the 19 th century. As we look at current and future operations much may be learned from Russia's historic past. 19
The Imperial Russian understanding of IO evolved into an extensive and effective system to collect, inform, influence, and disrupt groups identified as threats to the Czar. The Soviets further refined IO and its application for subsequent use against internal and external threats to both the Soviet Union and her satellite states.
The Soviet employment of Information and Political Warfare is rich with history. However, the volume of Soviet techniques and case studies is too vast to adequately cover within this essay.
With this understanding, the Soviet use of Reflexive Control will be briefly discussed.
Reflexive control is defined as, "a means of conveying to a partner or an opponent specially prepared information to incline him to voluntarily make the predetermined decision desired by the initiator of the action." 
20
21
Russian philosophy currently promotes the belief that Reflexive Control is capable of playing a pivotal role in disrupting and ultimately defeating nation states. 
22
23
Reflexive Control complements IW through the process of gleaning, understanding, and inserting information about the enemy, its culture, its personalities, its beliefs, its capabilities and any other factors that may influence its decision-making cycle. The reflexive aspect understands when to imitate the adversary's reaction. This understanding aids in predicting actions and reactions and how and when to inject information to elicit desired responses. The ability to apply reflexive control successfully hinges on the understanding of the culture, philosophy, economic status, and capabilities of the adversary. How and when will they react, how do they make decisions, what motivates them, what influences them. All of the above require a rigorous study of culture and a concerted effort to understand human behavior and dynamics. 
24
Over the past 20 years the world has witnessed Russia's increased use of IW. Targeted nations have varied from the Ukraine and Crimea to Estonia and Georgia. The use of the cyber realm and the speed and reach of accessing and penetrating information reservoirs and systems has modernized as has the ability to conduct disinformation campaigns to achieve national objectives. However, the playbook that post modern Russia is using was collectively written by the nation's Soviet and Imperial Russian forefathers. The previous example of the Okharana's mail interdiction operations has been modernized into the form of email interdiction, same concept new platform. 
26
28
For the purpose of this essay Active Measures are defined as:
"Different to espionage and counter-intelligence and included written and spoken disinformation, efforts to control the media in foreign countries, the use of foreign communist parties and front organizations controlled by the Communist Party's International department, clandestine radio stations, blackmail and political influence through collaborative elites. The means for the USSR to pursue active measures included forgeries (a well-known example was that of a US military manual and 'secret' diplomatic letters), rumors, insinuations and 'altered facts' and lies." 
29
31
32
33
34
35
Russia's military campaigns in the Ukraine and in Crimea are extraordinary examples to study in preparation for future operations in the information domain. In an effort to use information to discredit and disrupt the 2004 Ukrainian presidential elections Russia employed a "directed chaos" 36 approach using Soviet era active measures to plant and cultivate disinformation depicting unfavorable candidates as fascists, anti-Russians, U.S. puppets, and neo-Nazis. This use of directed chaos is incredibly effective as it saturates the media and the citizenry with information that requires time to validate. That time works against the target and slows and or distorts the ability to make informed decisions. Fundamental to this Russian approach is the deliberate use of denial, disinformation, and deception. This is an example of where culturally the U.S. and Russia are diametrically opposed in their approach to conflict. During the invasion of Crimea, Russian military forces surreptitiously crossed onto the peninsula, seized key infrastructure, and shut down media platforms. Russian forces were reported by the now famous description as polite "Little Green Men." When publicly asked if they were Russian troops, Vladimir Putin responded, "There are many military uniforms. You can find them in any shop." 
37
Once Crimea was annexed, the 2014 invasion of the Donbas in eastern Ukraine followed.
Russian information warfare promoted pro Russian, anti Ukrainian "protests" that were staged and thoroughly covered by state media. These protests, supported by Russian backing evolved into armed revolt and eventually a staged and funded pro Russian fake insurgency. As this charade continued it began to appear that Ukrainian government forces were on the verge of defeating the Russian proxy force. Russia stepped in and escalated the conflict in support of their proxy formations and the make believe Russian backed anti Ukrainian insurgency continues today. 38
Postmodern Russia's use of IW differs in approach from that of the Soviets. Today's Kremlin employs a targeted method to divide alliances, erode public trust in national institutions, and confuse and distract populations with the end goal being the, "intensification of geopolitical, economic and ideological competition in areas that are crucial to U.S. interests." 
39
40
Additionally it lacks the adequate institutional knowledge, training, and resources to fight for and employ information as a weapon. In order to prepare for and counter this threat, the U.S. military needs to perform a paradigm shift. The U.S. military is very comfortable in the realm of direct confrontation dealing with overt threats that can be addressed with technological or tactical solutions. However, as discussed earlier in this essay it is not comfortable with indirect approaches to conflict such as working in the ambiguous environment of IO. 
41
In her study of Soviet reflexive control, Diane Choikul assessed that during the Cold War an Current Russian IW themes have a common narrative. They use "conspiratorial discourse and a strategic use of disinformation to trash the information space, break trust, increase polarization and undermine the public space for democratic debate." 
45
As with all forms of military operations the IW of the future will involve a symbiotic relationship between the offense and the defense. It may initially require analysis more so than direct action.
To effectively counter Russian IO, military units will have to have the ability to analyze why an audience was targeted and gauge the reaction. Based on the above factors an initial offensive response may not be appropriate. The counter messaging information strike must be targeted and relevant, with a clearly defined purpose if not it becomes ineffective, stray rounds on an information battlefield. Additionally, U.S. military units will have to have the ability to identify and analyze Russian disinformation and have quick fire responses. Depending on the situation the transition from defense to offense may require speed and the need to saturate an area or a targeted audience with information to drown out, discredit, or expose the identified Russian disinformation. Key to this challenge is having the ability to monitor social media, news outlets, and local and national personalities and leadership. 
46
Russia's use of information warfare has existed for over a hundred years. History provides the U.S. military with a deep archive of evidence and analysis that illuminates the foundational origins, philosophy, and techniques used by the various Russian and Soviet organizations in their employment of information as a weapon. As the U.S. military prepares for future conflict with Russia in the information domain, history is the greatest resource. While the delivery systems and the Russian national objectives have evolved the tactics and employment of information warfare have remained relatively constant. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, the U.S. military lost its focus on the Russian threat and subsequently became increasingly vulnerable to Russian information warfare. Though the resident knowledge is not where it was, the archival information is relevant and accessible. Additionally, Russian actions in Central and Eastern Europe have provided the U.S. and its allied partners with a front row seat to the latest Russian actions in the information domain. Russian ability to target populations, cultivate ideas, and subsequently harvest information has made the U.S. military increasingly vulnerable to this utilization of information as a weapon. The initiative to counter this threat will set the stage for future success against a hardened and experienced adversary such as Russia. The U.S. military needs to increase its information warfare capabilities to address and match the Russian threat. If not, America will continue to be outpaced and out performed by the Russian disinformation machine.
1 Information Operations -The integrated employment, during military operations, of information related capabilities in concert with other lines of operation to influence, disrupt, corrupt, or usurp the decision-making of adversaries and potential adversaries while protecting our own. JP 1-02, DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms 2 Chotikul, Diane. The Soviet Theory of Reflexive Control in Historical and Psycho Cultural Perspective: A Preliminary Study. C3CM Joint Task Force 3 Mitrokhin, Vasili, Andrew, Christopher. The Mitrokhin Archive The KGB in Europe and the West. Penguin, 2000 Active measures is a term for the actions of political warfare conducted by the Soviet and Russian security services (Cheka, OGPU, NKVD, KGB, FSB) to influence the course of world events, in addition to collecting intelligence and producing "politically correct" assessment of it. Active measures range "from media manipulations to special actions involving various degrees of violence. They were used both abroad and domestically. They included disinformation, propaganda, counterfeiting official documents, assassinations, and political repression, such as penetration into churches, and persecution of political dissidents.
4 Smith, Paul A. "On Political War ". Washington: National Defense University Press, 1989 Political warfare is the use of political means to compel an opponent to do one's will, based on hostile intent. The term political describes the calculated interaction between a government and a target audience to include another state's government, military, and/or general population. Governments use a variety of techniques to coerce certain actions, thereby gaining relative advantage over an opponent. The techniques include propaganda and psychological operations (PSYOP), which service national and military objectives respectively. Propaganda has many aspects and a hostile and coercive political purpose. Psychological operations are for strategic and tactical military objectives and may be intended for hostile military and civilian populations. 
5
News & World Report, July 21, 2017. 6
7
16
American shortfall was its ethnocentric approach to the Soviet Union. In direct contrast, the Russians studied American culture, American society, and the American approach to decision making. The effort that was dedicated to understanding the American thought process tied into the Soviet's ability to effectively employ IO. 
42
43
The fight in the information arena needs to center on the social, ethnic, economic, religious and political aspects of Russians. 
44
Current U.S. military capabilities to generate and counter act propaganda pale in comparison to what they were during the Cold War. Additionally non-military government organizations such as the U.S. Information Agency and the Active Measures Working Group no longer exist. To successfully initiate and counter Russian information warfare an interagency approach is required. The targeting of military commanders and troops is directly connected to targeting population centers and specific demographic groups. A linkage between civilian government agencies that focus on information operations in civilian population centers supports the capabilities of military operations. It generates a greater understanding of parallel operations and additionally enhances the military's understanding of full spectrum IW targets.
During the Cold War the U.S. military studied Soviet doctrine. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union the U.S. military has lost its focus on the Russian threat. For the future fight in the information environment the American military once again needs to study the Russian playbook.