# ID: d508ef3d0339405c981e00ac47b76a11
# Title: The Army's 21st Century Quandary: Preparing for Today or Looking at Tomorrow?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph analyzes whether or not the United States Army should maintain its full spectrum capability while fighting two counterinsurgency wars
The Army's Operational Concept emphasizes that Army forces must be prepared to conduct a combination of offensive, defensive, and stability or civil support operations to create opportunities and achieve desired results. The 2010 Quadrennial Defense Review Report further outlines the need for a balanced force, capable of operating across the spectrum of conflict. This monograph questions whether the United States Army should attempt to maintain its full spectrum capability while fighting two counterinsurgency operations. Since the September 11, 2001 attacks on the United States, the United States Army has shifted the preponderance of training toward stability and counterinsurgency operations to meet the requirements in both Afghanistan and Iraq, leaving many units untrained on their core mission essential tasks (CMETL). The most recent national security policy documents and the Army's recently published doctrine require the United States Army to maintain a well balanced force, capable of operating in a very dynamic operational environment. The 2006 Israeli-Hezbollah War provides a case study supporting the requirements of a full spectrum force and the dangers of limiting the focus of an Army to a particular portion of the conflict spectrum. This monograph shows that the United States Army must develop the capacity to not only succeed in today's conflicts, but also must maintain CMETL capabilities to support future contingencies
This enemy is different from the one we war-gamed.
As the United States emerges from the first decade of the twenty-first century, the only constant in the operational environment facing it is change. This next decade will vary greatly from the previous one and will continue to surprise even the most ardent planners and commanders. The threats that face the country will continue to adapt to the capabilities of the United States military, continually seeking vulnerabilities to exploit and opportunities to create instability. Enemies will not look like those that faced the country during the Cold War in the Fulda Gap, nor will they completely look like those in either Iraq or Afghanistan, and will more likely combine conventional, unconventional, irregular, asymmetric, hybrid threats and criminal tactics to counter United States hegemony. 
2
The challenge the military faces in the future is to not find itself in a situation where commanders on the ground are wondering about the viability of their war plans or the capabilities of their units in a rapidly changing operational environment. In order to accomplish this mission, the Army's capstone doctrine outlined in FM 3-0, Operations discusses its Full Spectrum Operational Concept. This operational concept states: "Army forces combine offensive, defensive, and stability or civil support operations http://wwwatimes.com/atimes/Middle_East?EC29AK07.html, (accessed November 10, 2009).
simultaneously as part of an interdependent joint force to seize, retain and exploit the initiative, accepting risk to create opportunities to achieve decisive results." 
4
attempting to maintain a Full Spectrum Operations capability while viewing the world and the contemporary operational environment through the lens's of the current conflicts in both Iraq and Afghanistan.
The end of the Cold War did not bring the "Peace Dividend" that many throughout the government thought it would bring. 
5
6
5
military forces would play. 
7
Numerous trends, such as the effects of globalization, the rapid growth and spread of technology, democratic changes, rapid urbanization, increased demands for diminishing natural resources, climate change and natural disaster, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and the rising number of failed or failing states around the world are fueling the sense of insecurity and unrest around the world.
These trends are currently at the forefront of much military thought and planning and will likely continue to shape the security environment for the next several decades.
9
The environment of the next decade will likely introduce a greater level of uncertainty and insecurity. Threats will likely become more varied and harder to anticipate. In John J. Mearsheimer's article, "Why We Will Soon Miss the Cold War", he argues the security situation of the bi-polar Cold War was a much more secure environment than the one now experienced around the world. The relative parity between NATO and the Warsaw Pact virtually ensured peace across Europe, even though that parity was based on nuclear weapons. Now the fractured inequities of the multi-polar world are likely to invite war in the future.
10
11
As the United States develops policy and doctrine for managing the challenges of this unstable 21 st century operational environment, multiple threat streams continue to emerge. Although the United States does not have a peer competitor on a global scale, it does have numerous threats from regional competitors seeking global influence. Regional powers and terrorist organizations seeking to upgrade their military capabilities and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and other technologies will further challenge United States hegemony around the world.
Regional powers such as China, Russia, and North Korea continue to attempt to increase their influence by expanding and upgrading their military forces. For example, China maintains the world's largest army and is currently expanding its military budget in order to modernize its armed forces. Much of China's emphasis remains in the high technology arena including: anti-access and area denial, long range strike and space and information warfare capabilities. It's surface and submarine fleets recently upgraded its weapon systems to include high-speed torpedoes capable of exceeding 200 knots and the Mach 3, SS-N-22 anti-ship cruise missile which ranges in excess of 125 miles. Both of these systems could pose a significant threat to the Unites States naval forces operating in the Pacific. 
12
13
14
United States Department of State report, the United States currently tracks over eighty terrorist organizations. Many of these organizations have a regional base of operations and objectives such as, the Shining Path in Peru, 17 November in Greece, Hamas in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, Hezbollah in Lebanon and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia (FARC), but some have a global network and a disruptive ideology such as al Qaeda. 
15
16
Jordan,
Pakistan,
and Morocco. 17
19
20
Weapons in the hands of such countries as Iran or Syria potentially threaten peace in the Middle East with their on-going hostile stance towards Israel and the West and could threaten oil supplies transiting through the Strait of Hormuz and the Persian Gulf. continues selling advanced air defense systems such as the S-400 series systems and the SU-35 fighter aircraft to Algeria and surrounding countries. These systems potentially destabilize the region either through resulting arms races, through their use during state on state conflicts, or as a counter to United States influence in the area. 
22
23
In addition to cyber attacks on the country's internet systems, government officials are also concerned about the development and proliferation of advanced missile technology exemplified by China's use of a direct-ascent, anti-satellite (ASAT) weapon to destroy one of their orbiting satellites. These missiles could be used in the future against the United States or its allies to limit or degrade the capacity of its growing internet and satellite dependence during a future crisis. 
24
The nation involved the Army in numerous operations throughout the 1990s. These military operations included numerous peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance, counter-drug, fire-fighting and civil disturbances operations. The lack of a warfighting focus and training on mission-essential tasks during this period worried Army leadership, specifically then-Army Chief of Staff, General Gordon R. Sullivan, who promised "No more Task Force Smiths," referring to the lead elements that entered the Korean War untrained and poorly-equipped for the type of combat they faced. He vowed that Army forces at the end of the 20 th Century would not be unprepared for the future because of a focus on missions other than war. 
25
According to FM 7-1, Battle Focused Training, Army forces at the division, brigade, and battalion levels are organized as combined arms organizations in order to generate combat power that enables the commander to accomplish a wide array of missions. The enduring capabilities and effective integration of all Warfighting Functions (intelligence, maneuver, fire support, air defense, mobility, counter-mobility, and survivability, combat service support, and command and control) provide the commander on the ground the flexibility and agility to adapt to the changing situation and successfully accomplish the unit's mission. 
26
28
29
29 Ibid., 4-10.
remaining units have recently returned from a deployment and are resetting personnel and equipment and are not prepared for immediate deployment. 
30
The establishment of training priorities is a critical issue facing commanders who are challenged to reset their unit in a short period of time, conduct all required training, and prepare their unit for its next deployment. The high operational tempo (OPTEMPO) units are faced with during this era of persistent conflict and repetitive deployment cycles causes units to pick and choose between tasks on their CMETL and their DMETL lists. These directed tasks relate specifically to their perceived next mission in theater, such as training police forces or escorting provincial reconstruction teams, as opposed to their CMETL tasks that might include conducting offensive and defensive operations. 
31
32
33 U.S. Department of the Army, Field Manual 7-15, The Army Universal Task List, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Press, 2006), i-viii. This manual provides units with a list of tasks used to develop a METL or to develop a specific listing of possible directed missions. The final task: Train Host Nation Police and Army Forces is not specifically stated as a task in FM 7-15, but is often one that is derived by commanders based on their mission analysis of their future mission and one that is often executed in theater. 
The categories of warfare are blurring and no longer fit into neat, tidy boxes. One can expect to see more tools and tactics of destruction -from the sophisticated to the simple -being employed simultaneously in hybrid and more complex forms of warfare. The Army's training model also needed to adjust for the new environment. A military force trained solely for offensive and defensive operations does not equal a force that is capable of conducting effective stability operations. Also, forces that have been extensively trained for years to conduct counterinsurgency operations require extensive training to regain proficiency 37 Thomas D. MacDonald, Preparing Leaders for Full-Spectrum Operations, (Carlisle Barracks, PA: U.S. Army War College, March 21, 2008), 1-3. FM 3-0, Operations, updated in 2008, outlines the need to ensure the military is prepared to engage a wide variety of foes in a period of persistent conflict. This manual focuses on maintaining a Full Spectrum capability to ensure the Army is capable of achieving decisive results in any theater. FM 3-24, Counterinsurgency, published in DEC 2006, in conjunction with the United States Marine Corps, outlines the strategy and operations currently being employed in both Iraq and Afghanistan to counter the insurgent threats.
in their CMETL tasks. 
38
The risk facing the Army is placing too many training resources against one portion of the spectrum of conflict, leaving other portions uncovered. 
39
40
38
39
40
41
This lack of training on CMETL tasks mirrors the concerns outlined by General Casey concerning an Army that is out of balance and not postured for operations covering the entire breath of potential conflicts.
The challenge the United States military faces during this dynamic era of greater instability, an increasing number of unpredictable world actors, and global trends that seek to further destabilize the operational environment is building a campaign quality military that is capable of achieving success in 
41
42
• Preserving the peace and security, and providing for the defense of the United States, the Commonwealths, and possessions, and any area occupied by the United States. • Supporting national policies • Implementing the national objectives, and • Overcoming any nations responsible for aggressive acts that imperil the peace and security of the United States. 
43
44
45
This QDR stated "America's interests and role in the world require armed forces with unmatched capabilities and a willingness on the part of the nation to employ them in defense of our interests and the The nation's objectives and policies may vary greatly; having a multidimensional force is critical to achieving those aims.
common good." 
46
The examination of these national security documents once again points out that the military, and specifically the Army which provides the majority of the land power to the joint force, cannot be optimized for the current fight without regard as to how current needs may impact the future requirements and expectations. 
Army doctrine for many years has continued to reinforce the concept for all Army organizations, from squad and crew level through battalion, brigade and division to "train the way we fight." The realism and intensity that units put forth during training will bear fruit and potentially save lives during combat. 
58
59
The maintenance of this capability is critical to the execution of the ongoing counterinsurgency operations. Throughout Operation Iraqi Freedom, the commanders on the ground have witnessed the pendulum swing rapidly from one end of the spectrum to the other based on the changing threats and conditions in their particular area of operation. For example, even after the Army recognized that a counterinsurgency fight was under way, units still conducted offensive operations requiring armored vehicles, artillery, and close air support. The Second Battle of Fallujah in November -December 2004 is a prime example of the need to maintain a high end capability even while engaged in a counterinsurgency fight. This operation involved armored and mechanized forces from Marine 59 Field Manual 3-0, Operations, 2-1 -2-5. Regimental Combat Teams 1 and 7, the Army's 2nd Brigade Combat Team, 1st Cavalry Division, and 2 nd Brigade Combat Team, 2nd Infantry Division supporting in nearby Ramadi. The nearly two-month fight required the use of artillery, armored, mechanized and light infantry forces in a very high intensive fight throughout the city of Fallujah. 61 FM 3-24, Counterinsurgency outlines multiple principles for the successful execution of counterinsurgency operations. Among those directly relating to the Army's Full Spectrum Operational Concept are: insurgents must be isolated from their cause and support, security under the rule of law is essential, and counterinsurgents should be prepared for a long term commitment. All of these principles call for varying amounts of offensive, defensive, stability effort, at varying times depending on the situation and the location of the unit.
Conducting of counterinsurgency operations, similar to conducting major combat operations, requires flexible and agile forces capable of executing multiple tasks to support the larger mission. Maintaining an agile force that can conduct a wide array of tasks, both CMETL and DMETL tasks, provides the commander the greatest amount of flexibility. The combination of a unit's CMETL tasks such as conducting offensive and defensive and selected DMETL tasks such as training host nation security forces and supporting governance are critical to enabling a unit to effectively operate along all 62 Field Manual 3-24, Counterinsurgency, 1-20 -1-22.
63 Ibid., 5-1 -5-17. lines of operation. For example, key tasks along the "Conduct Combat and Civil Security Operations" logical line of operation may include a wide array of offensive and defensive tasks beyond those stability tasks a unit may already be conducting. These may include securing the population, separating the insurgency from the people, isolating the insurgency, securing national and regional borders, and integrating with host nation forces. FM 3-24 calls for forces that can easily operate under multiple conditions, and rapidly transition from one type of task to another depending on the conditions on the ground. 
64
67
68
Unfortunately, there are a number of examples of institutions and organizations failing to train for full spectrum operations, potentially leaving vital elements of the combined arms team on the sidelines during the next fight. Major General Donald Campbell, Commanding General of the United States Armor Center, is recently quoted in an article outlining his concerns that traditional military functions are eroding as a result of the "overemphasis" on the current counterinsurgency fight at the expense of traditional tasks that support offensive and defensive missions. He goes on to state that the high operational tempo within many units has greatly reduced the opportunities for tank crews to train and conduct gunnery qualification to standard and other competencies such as conducting vehicle Both of these mission statements state the focus as one providing a full spectrum capability. Yet, even with this emphasis on developing leaders and units to be able to effectively navigate the myriad of missions facing them in theater, many units still have seen the individual and collective tasks that support CMETL tasks erode.  Training individual and collective tasks that that support a unit's CMETL is critical to the long term development of the young sergeants and lieutenants who will lead tomorrow's units during future contingencies.
A further examination of the survey conducted within the Command and General Staff Officer Course reveals that maintaining core competencies is also of high importance to the midgrade officers that are charged with conducting daily combat operations within Iraq and Afghanistan. Offensive tasks remain relevant in the current operational environment according to 78.13% of the Majors (25%strongly agree and 53.13% -agree). The vast majority of Majors, 85.18% (28.93% -strongly agree and 56.25% -agree) concur that the Army's ability to maintain proficiency in core offensive and defensive tasks is critical to its ability to react to future contingencies. 71 69 Spencer Ackerman, "How Much Counterinsurgency Training." The Washington Independent. November 11, 2008.
tasks that support a unit's CMETL may limit a future force from effectively conducting operations along http://washingtonindependent.com/17598/a-lesson-in-counterinsurgency, (accessed November 7, 2009), 2. 
The first, the supreme, the most far-reaching act of judgment that the statesman and commander have to make is to establish by that test the kind of war on which they are embarking; neither mistaking it for, nor trying to turn it into, something that is alien to its nature.
Israeli -Arab conflicts have been an ongoing issue since the creation of the State of Israel in   1947, with conflicts raging in 1948-1949, 1956-1957, 1967, 1973, 1978, and a 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon, Operation Peace For Galilee. For eighteen years, the IDF conducted operations in Lebanon in order to destroy the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) militants and prevent further attacks on Israel from the occupied territories. Finally in 2000, Israel withdrew its forces in accordance with the UN Security Council Resolution 1559 that stated that the country of Lebanon was to secure the area with military forces, preventing militants from returning and rearming. Unfortunately for Israel that did not happen. 
75
76
78
A team of approximately twenty Hezbollah fighters quickly pulled two of the wounded from the burning vehicles and returned to Southern Lebanon before IDF forces could respond. The capture of these two soldiers and the rapid Israeli response was the final spark that initiated the 2006 War. 79
The capture of the IDF soldiers may have been the spark that ignited the conflict, but after many years of conflict between Israel and its neighbors, war seemed almost inevitable as tensions flared on both sides of the border. Foreseeing such a conflict with Israel, Hezbollah preparations for war began immediately after the 2000 withdrawal of Israeli forces from Southern Lebanon and by 2006 they were well prepared for a fight. Hezbollah Secretary-General Hasan Nasrallah stated in a May 2006 speech that "Israeli society is weak" and was determined to take the next fight well into Israel and tax the social network of the Israeli people. From 2000 -2006, Hezbollah amassed a rocket force that consisted of between 12,000 and 13,000 short, medium, and long range surface-to-surface missiles. In order to protect these assets and the forces charged with firing them from the overwhelming Israeli precision fires, Hezbollah scattered these missiles with teams across Southern Lebanon, hiding them in both rural and urban areas. 
80
These forces were further supported by an undetermined number of local militia. 81 79 Matthews. We Were Caught Unprepared, 33-36.
Hezbollah forces were equipped with modern anti-tank weapons that included AT-14s, AT-5s, Sagger AT-3s, Fagot AT-4s, Milan anti-tank missiles, American-made TOWs, RPG-29s, and RPG-7s. In addition to the large array of 80 Ibid., 16-17. 
81
2006. 82
83
84
83
84 Ibid., 19. 
85
In the summer of 2006, the Israeli General Staff believed that the supremacy of air power would be the guiding force in all future conflicts. Since Desert Storm in 1991, there had been a tremendous focus on the development of air power and precision strike capabilities, leaving many to believe that a future war in Lebanon would be nothing more than an updated version of the 1999 aerial operation in Kosovo. Many were seeking ways to produce quick conclusions to future conflicts, resulting in the need for small ground forces. Air power was the panacea for which many were seeking.
The Israeli strategy for achieving their goals differed significantly from that of their enemy. Their initial plan relied heavily on their asymmetric advantage of precision strike weapons and not on the employment of their ground forces. belief in airpower's leading role in future conflicts. 
88
89
Precision strike capabilities were the key ingredient to make this concept of warfare valid, not large ground forces. 
90
91
92
Due to the lack training resources and their involvement in policing duties during the Second Intifada, many of the battalion commanders, both regular and reserve, never observed or planned training for their unit. To further complicate the issue of fielding capable ground forces, senior leaders, such as division commanders and their staffs, were no longer training either due to the belief that division's were being dismantled in the near future. Officers assigned to Reserve Divisions viewed the assignment as a "rest period" from their involvement in the Second Intifada. By the summer of 2006, tactical proficiency was lost within the IDF, leaving a force that was unprepared for what was around the corner. 
93
94
95
As the IDF quickly realized, the realities of this conflict would be significantly different and would require a vastly different skill set than what was required during the previous six years.
Following the capture of the Israeli soldiers, the Israeli Air Force responded as part of Operation Ice Breaker. This operation was designed not to completely defeat Hezbollah, but rather to produce the "effects" that would cause them to disarm. Chief of the IDF General Staff, General Dan Halutz felt that air power alone could win the war and initially hesitated activating any reserves or allowing ground forces to participate in the war. The destruction of fifty-four Hezbollah Zelzal long range rocket launchers on the first night of the air campaign by the Israeli Air Force gave reason to believe that their strategy of aerial precision bombing would prevail in this campaign. 
97
Harel and Issacharoff. 34 Days,
45. 96
97
98
99
100
In fact, they're fighting harder." These same observations concerning the fighting capabilities of the Hezbollah forces would be repeated over and over again as the IDF forces continued to encounter a determined foe that was not acting as intelligence reports had predicted. 
101
99
43-44. 101
102
103
102
Biddle and Friedman, The 2006 Lebanon Campaign and the Future of Warfare, xi-xv. 103 Ibid., 36-38.
104
105
110
111
111 Cordesman, Sullivan, and Sullivan, Lessons of the 2006 Israeli -Hezbollah War, 51-52. 112 Ibid., 53.
We cannot accurately characterize the security environment of 2025; therefore we must hedge against this uncertainty by identifying and developing a broad range of capabilities. Further, we must organize and arrange our forces to create the agility and flexibility to deal with unknowns and surprises in the coming decades. The lethal, agile, expeditionary force the Army is building for the future is not designed around a particular threat, but as General Pace believed, it is built around the ability to react to uncertainty. In 2006, the Israeli Defense Forces wrongly perceived that the possibility of a major war had been greatly reduced and that in the event of a major crisis, there would ample time and opportunity to deploy and train ground forces prior to operations. This assumption left them lacking the agility and flexibility needed for that campaign. 
114
113
114
115
116
The dilemma facing so many commanders is balancing the need to develop and maintain a force that retains its expeditionary capabilities needed in today's conflicts, while also maintaining each unit's CMETL proficiency. These proficiencies may eventually be called upon during these or future crises that emerge. There is no easy answer to this dilemma right now due to the high operational tempo, but the first step in the process is expanding the training time. All of these forces bring specific capabilities that enable the joint force commander to operate under any condition along the entire spectrum of conflict. 
119
120 118 Quadrennial Defense Review Report, February 2010, 45 -47. 119 Field Manual 7-0, Training For Full Spectrum Operations, 4-10. 120
The Army absolutely needs to maintain its full spectrum capability, even while engaged in two counterinsurgency operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. Failure to retain such capabilities, coupled with the failure to train our junior officers and noncommissioned officers for the uncertain future, invites the same failure experienced by Israel during the 2006 War. 
17 White House,
the military line of operation plays a significant role in the following tasks: strengthen alliances to defeat global terrorism, work with neighbors to defuse regional conflicts, prevent enemies from threatening us or allies, and transforming America's national security institutions.
the military line of operation plays a significant role in the following tasks: strengthen alliances to defeat global terrorism, work with neighbors to defuse regional conflicts, prevent enemies from threatening us or allies, and transforming America's national security institutions.
53  
53  
68
U.S. Department of the Army, Field Manual 7-0, Training for Full Spectrum Operation, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, December 2008), 1-3.
U.S. Department of the Army, Field Manual 1, The Army, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, June 2005), 1-1.
U.S. Department of the Army, Field Manual 3-0, Operations, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, February 2008), 3-1.
Francis Fukuyama,  The End of History and the Last Man, (New York: The Free Press. 1992), xi -xxiii.
Thomas Donnelly and Frederick W. Kagan, Ground Truth:  The Future of U.S. Land Power,(Washington,  D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 2008), 6-7.    
Norman Friedman, Terrorism, Afghanistan and America's New Way of War, (Annapolis: Navy Institute  Press, 2003), 13-17.    
Field Manual 3-0, Operations, 1-1.
John J. Mearsheimer, "Why We Will Soon Miss The Cold War." in Conflict After The Cold War: Arguments on Causes ofWar and Peace, Second Edition, ed. Richard K. Betts, (New York: Longman Printing,  2002), 17-32.    
Field Manual 1, The Army, 2-2.
Michael W. Isherwood, "Airpower For Hybrid Warfare." Mitchell Institute for Airpower Studies, Mitchell Institute Press, June, 2009, http://www.afa.org/mitchell/Reports/MP3_HybridWarfare_0609.pdf, (accessed 4 NOV 2009), 5-6.
U.S. Department of Defense, National Defense Strategy, June 2008, Washington, D.C. http://www.asiaing.com/ 2008-national-defense-strategy.html. (accessed September 10, 2009), 4.
Patrick Barta, Evan Ramstad, and Jay Solomon, "Officials Probe North Korea Arms Cashe." Wall Street  Journal, December 14, 2009, A8.   
Carnegie Non-Proliferation Project, World Missile Chart -Countries Possessing Ballistic Missiles,  http://www.carnegieendowment.org/npp/resources/ballisticmissilechart.htm, 2003, (accessed 12 DEC 2009), 1-12. This report lists 35 countries currently possessing ballistic missiles, the types of missiles, their range and their payload.
Sahit Muja, "Russian Arms Sales to Iran and the Arab World Concern US and Israel." Examiner.Com,  http://www.examiner.com/x-20010-NY-Economy-and-Politics-Examiner-y2009m10d9-R.org, October 9, 2009,  (accessed November 5, 2009), 2. The S-400 Air Defense System (SA-21 Growler) is the latest generation of Russian made air defense systems. This system is believed to have much greater capabilities than previous ones, including the ability to engage up to six targets simultaneously out to 400km. This system may also have the capability to counter current stealth technology.
Siobhan Gorman and Evan Ramstad, "Cyber Blitz Hits U.S., Korea." WSJ.com, July 9, 2009, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB12470180617609691.html, First Accessed December 28, 2009, 1-2.This article outlines the cyber attack against U.S. government websites that included the Defense Department, National Security Agency, Treasury Department, Secret Service, State Department, Federal Trade Commission, and the Federal Aviation Administration. These attacks were most likely from North Korean agents and were conducted in conjunction with a North Korean missile test and a United Nations' decision to impose additional sanctions on North Korea.
Leonard David, "Pentagon Report: China's Growing Military Space Power." SPACE.com, March 6,  2008, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/080305-china-2008-report.html, (accessed: December 28, 2009), 1-2.
Donnelly and Kagan, Ground Truth, 13.   
U.S Department of the Army, Field Manual 7-1, Battle Focused Training, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, September 15, 2003), 3-3 -3-6.
COL Sean MacFarland, COL Michael Shields, and COL Jeffery Snow, "White Paper -The King and I: The impending Crisis in Field Artillery's Ability to Provide Fire Support to the Maneuver Commanders." May, 2008, hppt://www.npr.org/documents/2008/may/artillerywhitepaper.pdf, (accessed September 27, 2009), 1-3.
General Charles C. Campbell, "ARFORGEN: Maturing the Model, Refining the Process." Army, June 2009, 50
Major Erick Sweet, The True Meaning of Balance: The Leadership Challenge of Executing Full Spectrum Operations, (Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: Command and General Staff College, 2009), 6.
 Battle Focused Training, 
Field Manual 3-0, Operations, 2-1 -2-5.
Matthews, We Were Caught Unprepared,[49][50] 
Donnelly and Kagan, Ground Truth, 71.   
Colin S. Gray, "The 21 st Century Security Environment and the Future of War." Parameters, (Winter 2008 -2009), 23.
MG Peter W. Chiarelli and Patrick R. Michaelis, "Winning the Peace: The Requirements for Full Spectrum Operations." Military Review, (July -AUG 2005), 4-17.
LTG James D. Thurman, "A Balanced Army for the Future Strategic Environment", Army,(October  2009), 190.   
United States Army Combined Arms Center -Collective Training Directorate Interview and Brief conducted on January 27, 2010. The Point of Contact for the Information concerning standardized METLs is Mr. Ronald Coaxum, (913) 684-7230, ronald.coaxum@us.army.mil. Further specifics of the briefing are classified. Those requiring additional information may contact Mr. Coaxum.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
US Army School of Advanced Military Studies
US Army Command and General Staff College
United States Army
Department of Defense
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
officers and soldiers were killed, including two company commanders, over fifty others were wounded and 11 tanks were hit. 106
The 34-day war between Israel and Hezbollah left significant scars on both societies, with the most significant impact levied against the badly-shaken Israeli Defense Forces. The conflict left 161 casualties across Israel, 53 of whom were civilians, over 1000 Lebanese casualties, and the IDF seriously questioning their doctrine and overall military capabilities. 
107
Questions concerning the events leading up to the war, IDF preparedness, and actions during the conflict were examined in the Israeli after action review of the conflict and published in the Winograd Commission Report. 
108
108
109
Purpose: The purpose of this survey was to identify the training challenges that mid-grade officers identified during the last several years while their units (Active, Reserve, and National Guard) were preparing for deployments to both Iraq and Afghanistan. The second purpose was to see if this population saw the "out of balance" problems facing the Army the same way senior leaders perceived the problem. 