# ID: d5befd2111934fe49bc1c9e1a590eb30
# Title: USAF Relevance in the 21st Century: A First Quarter Team in a Four Quarter Game
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2005.0
# Fulltext:
The rise of terrorism by non-state actors as a primary threat to U.S. national security challenges the relevance of air and space power. This study first looks at the current and foreseeable security environment and identifies weak/failing states as the largest strategic threat to the United States since the Cold War. Next, the paper describes the culture of the U.S. military as a whole and assesses the relevance of the current American way of war to meeting the challenges of the weak/failing state security threat. If the military studied military operations other than war (MOOTW) lessons as much as the combat lessons, they would see that the U.S. has always struggled with winning the peace in operations short of major combat. Third, the author examines how the United States Air Force's preferred way of war coupled with a service bias toward combat flying has manifested itself in a body of doctrine that limits the ability of the service to provide a stronger contribution to the nation. Just as the Air Force balanced the nuclear and conventional force structure in favor of conventional forces, the USAF must now think about tailoring its conventional forces for major combat operations to ones more suitable for MOOTW. Finally, the author provides recommendations for the Department of Defense in general and the USAF in particular, to transform educational and doctrinal thinking to embrace capabilities ready to respond throughout the spectrum of conflict.
In default of knowing how to do what they ought, they are very naturally led to do what they know.
The rise of terrorism by non-state actors as a primary threat to U.S. national security challenges the relevance of air and space power. Although the U.S. has repeatedly demonstrated the ability to achieve decisive effects using air and space power in conventional war, it has not mastered the use of these tools against terrorists and guerillas. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
Furthermore, MOOTW will continue to become the primary function of the military in the 21 st century security environment. To make the military in general and the USAF in particular more relevant in the global war on terrorism (GWOT) and today's security environment, there must be a change in the cultural views of war and the primary contributions of the military services.
Beginning in section two, this paper will examine the current security environment and the nature of today's threats and those in the near future. Globalization has amplified the impact of weak or failed states on the rest of the world. Non-state actors use these states as bases of operations to further an ideological agenda or prosecute criminal activity. The challenge for the U.S. is to decrease weak/failing state sanctuaries and thus limit the amount of power non-state actors can wield on the global stage. A vital element in combating the danger from weak and failing states is a military force optimized for meeting the challenges inherent to these unconventional threats. 
7
9
Stealth technology coupled with precision guided munitions serves to fortify that belief. The search for aircraft that fly higher, faster, farther is illustrative of the USAF's continued quest to justify its service autonomy by developing capabilities other than those for supporting other services. 
10
11
The U.S. military has been in the position to refocus its attention on MOOTW before. These types of forces and missions "have been around much longer than many would think. Nineteenth-century Americans may not have referred to army activities associated with the punishment of recalcitrant Indians in the trans-Missouri West or the interposition of federal troops between hostile factions in Kansas as peace operations, but in essence that is what they were." 
12
6 Air Force Doctrine lists the following as MOOTW missions: enforcement of sanctions, enforcing exclusion zones, protection of shipping, strikes and raids, combating terrorism, counterdrug operations, ensuring freedom of navigation, noncombat evacuation operations, peace operations, recovery operations, arms control support, domestic support operations, foreign humanitarian assistance, nation assistance, show of force, and support to insurgency 7 "In today's global security environment, sustained, large scale conventional war between states is unlikely, at least in the short term. But the conditions that generate internal conflictdiscontent arising from globalization, the failure of economic development to keep pace with expectations; the collapse of traditional political, economic and social orders; widespread anger and resentment; environmental decay; population pressure; the pervasiveness of weak regimes; the growth of transnational organized crime; and, the widespread availability of arms-persist. As a result, insurgency has become both common and strategically significant. This poses a direct threat to American security. In today's world, stability within states affects others. Interconnectedness, the permeability of states, the globalization of economies, the transparency arising from information technology, and the intermixing of people around the world give every conflict wider repercussions. Internal conflicts create refugee flows that destabilize neighboring states. They often spawn organized crime, as rebels turn to smuggling to raise capital and acquire weaponry. As the images of internal war are broadcasted or e-mailed around the world, awareness rises and, with it, demands for action or intervention. And internal conflicts and the weak states or areas outside government control which they create often serve as breeding grounds for terrorism." Steven Metz. "Unlearning Counterinsurgency." ROA National Security Report (December 2004)  8 Antulio J. Echevarria II. "An American Way of War or Battle?" Strategic Studies Newsletter, (January 2004) 9 "How can battle time be critical in a war that lasts decades? Or what do we do if the enemy works hard not to produce any collectible signals? Rather than deal with the complex political, economic, and social aspects of the conflicts we are currently fighting, they focus on technological solutions to problems at the tactical level of war…strategic victory is not the sum of incredible, tactical victories…We continue to focus on technological solutions at the tactical and operational levels without a serious discussion of the strategic imperatives or the nature of the war we are fighting." Thomas X. 11 "If the mission of the air force is to remain centered on air power, then air power must somehow be defined as more than force, airplanes or pilots: Air power must be more than force because the problems of the world must increasingly be addressed by the military with more than force. Air power must be more than airplanes because the power to be projected through the third dimension is also increasingly derived from critical space and ground support systems. Air power must be more than pilots because the power to be projected throught the third dimension can often be more effectively derived from self-guided missiles, remotely-piloted vehicles, and unmanned platforms. Air power must be defined as more than combat, since the nature of conflict is changing worldwide. Regular warfare between nations is becoming less attractive, while irregular warfare Notes between factions-ignoring national boundaries-is becoming more so." Builder, The Icarus Syndrome, 262 
12
13
The New Cold War: 21st Century Security Exporting security demands more than responsive and punitive action, more than stopping some action from occurring, and more than fighting major combat operations. 6 "The United States wants to fight short, well defined wars" 7 but shrinking the number of weak/failing states will be a decades-long commitment and the U.S. military's stealth, speed and precision will take a backseat to low-tech persistence. In fact, "persistence may very well be more important than speed in small wars, where resolve and the tangible commitment of boots on the ground are more important commodities than raw firepower." 8 Conflicts in Somalia, Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq have shown that skill sets, apart from those needed in major combat operations are required from our military. As historian Martin Van Crevold observed,
The roughly three-hundred year period in which war was associated with the type of political organization known as the state-first in Europe, and then, with its expansion, in other parts of the globe as well-seems to be coming to an end. If the last fifty years or so provide any guide, future wars will overwhelmingly be of the type known, however inaccurately, as "low intensity." Both organizationally and in terms of equipment at their disposal, the armed forces of the world will have to adjust themselves to this situation by changing their doctrine, doing away with much of their heavy equipment and becoming more like police." 9
With this in mind, the military will almost inevitably be called upon to do more than just fight and win the nation's wars. 
10
11
12
Just as our preeminent large-scale conventional and nuclear capabilities of the 20th century pushed warfare to guerrilla and insurgency warfare, so the information, sensing, and strike capabilities of the 21st century will push the inevitable conflict of this century toward small wars. In these small wars, we may be forced to fight on terms far removed from our traditional way of war where massive firepower and mass production trumped all other capabilities." 
13
To accomplish this task, the U.S. needs to reexamine its post-World War Two strategic thought. The most crucial item the second Bush administration must accomplish is to "explain what the United States is doing about state failure and why it matters. A broadly defined policy couched in terms of the full range of American interests and values has some chance of becoming sustainable. A narrowly defined foreign policy couched mainly in terms of military confrontation, rogues and terrorists will not garner the breadth of domestic and international support required for sustainability." 
15
1) rational/balanced policy of self protection, 2) patient/protracted effort to pacify the more volatile regions of the globe, 3) sustained effort to engage friendly nations in a joint framework to contain/eliminate dangers, 4) recognize globalization has a moral dimension, 5) foster a domestic political culture aware of the responsibilities inherent in global interdependence. 
16
In 1947, George Kennan, the U.S. Ambassador to Russia wrote the "X-article" in Foreign Affairs that described the world's security environment and then outlined the U.S. strategy for containing communism over what turned out to be the next 50 years. Engaging weak/failing states, like containment in the Cold War, will require a global strategy and a long-term commitment. The National Security Strategy presents some key ideas for a weak/failing state engagement plan: "We will defend the peace by fighting terrorists and tyrants. We will preserve the peace by building good relations among the great powers. We will extend the peace by encouraging free and open societies on every continent." 17 Furthermore, President Bush reiterated the call for an endeavor of Cold War proportions in his second inaugural address when he said, "The survival of liberty in our land increasingly depends on the success of liberty in other lands. The best hope for peace in our world is the expansion of freedom in all the world…America's vital interests and our deepest beliefs are now one…it is the policy of the United States to seek and support the growth of democratic movements and institutions in every nation and culture, with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world." 18 With these words, President Bush announced the "great objective of ending tyranny as the concentrated work of generations." 
19
The fight against terrorist groups with local reach, in short, looks more like a long "twilight conflict," as the Cold War was once described, than a series of operations involving U.S. forces in sustained or large scale combat operations. This is not to say that the fight will be easy or risk-free; far from it. But it will call for capabilities that have not, by and large, been at the forefront of U.S. planning and resource allocation for large-scale combat operations." 20
The goal of the U.S. is not to conquer territory in such a "conflict", it is to provide security, ensure delivery of economic aid/humanitarian assistance, and assist local governments with solving their own problems.
An "X-Article" strategy provides the Nation and the military much-needed guidelines for action. Buy-in from the American public, successive administrations and the international community is essential to successful engagement with weak/failing states. The American public must understand the strategy beyond the tactical military goals of striking terrorists or states that harbor them. As was done at the outset of the cold war, "the president must do more than stir the American people; he must also educate them." 
21
Notes 1 NSS, 1 10 "The phrase, 'fight and win the nation's wars' is used increasingly to more narrowly define the purpose of the U.S. military. It appears to have its origins in the Army in the post-Vietnam era; but the phrase is now invoked as an enduring truth, obvious to all. However, more than 200 years of U.S. history suggest that the military has always been used to do much more than fight and win the nation's wars. " Carl H. Builder and Theodore W. Karasik. Organizing, Training,  The American Way of War or Battle?
The first, the supreme, the most far-reaching act of judgment that the statesman and commander have to make is to establish . . . the kind of war on which they are embarking; neither mistaking it for, nor trying to turn it into, something that is alien to its nature.
Each of the services has its own dominant image of the next major war for which it must (or wants to) be prepared to fight. That image is the one that defines (or reflects) the essence of the service-who it is and what it is about. There may be other images of war, other contingencies or missions, for which the service must be prepared, but they do not occupy that central position of importance, urgency, or priority that goes to the heart of the institution.
- Carl Builder   "The dominant concepts of war held by military institutions have a significant effect upon the kinds of forces they acquire and train and, therefore, upon the kinds of wars they are prepared to fight." 
1
must build and maintain defenses beyond challenge serves as an enabler to proponents of hightech warfare against peer competitors. These perspectives have led the military to resist operations not related to combat because they do not mesh with their preferred way of war. 3
In his article "Toward an American Way of War," LTC Antulio Echevarria describes the theories of Russell Weigley and Max Boot regarding the American Way of War. According to Echevarria, Weigley "concluded that the American style of waging war centered primarily on the idea of achieving a crushing military victory over an opponent." 4 Additionally, Echevarria observes that Boot augments the Weigley thesis by reminding us that Americans also waged small wars that did not necessarily involve the overthrow of an opponent. 
5
6
7
RAND analyst Brian Jenkins concurred with this assessment when he wrote that in the "armed forces, there is still a tendency to view the current situation as an anomaly-as the 'other war' as opposed to the 'real war,' as missions to be consigned to specialized units rather than to main forces, as opportunities to gain valuable field experience but not a compelling argument to radically alter how we organize to fight." 9 As a result of this failure to accept a change to its roles and missions the military has in essence forced its members to practice for football only to find out in the enemy stadium that the opponent is playing soccer. The fact that the U.S. has spent the last fifteen years participating in more "anomalies" than "real wars" and that the prospects for the future are more of the same, illustrates the need for increased focus on MOOTW and less on MCO. As a start, the primary form of MOOTW to be studied is war termination and conflict resolution. The way the U.S. military fights affects the context of settlement. "Military victories do not themselves determine the outcome of wars; they only provide political opportunities for the victors." 
11
12
13
Notes 
1
The Air force, conceived by the theorists of air power as an independent and decisive instrument of warfare, sees itself as the embodiment of an idea, a concept of warfare, a strategy made possible and sustained by modern technology. The bond is not an institution, but the love of flying machines and flight.
- Carl Builder   The USAF must leverage its entire portfolio of capabilities, both flying and non-flying to meet our nation's needs in the GWOT. This paper proposes that the USAF must first address three challenges. The first is the same challenge that all the armed services face-the "big war" mindset.
A second challenge for the USAF is to change its cultural bias in favor of combat flying over all other USAF missions. Finally, the Air Force must codify these changes into doctrine and education. Using airplanes enabled by unmanned vehicles, information technologies, space systems and precision guided munitions, the USAF has revolutionized warfare. In the future, these same unmanned vehicles, information technologies and space systems may become the primary contribution of the USAF to the fight against terrorists.
"Large organizations like the USAF adapt very slowly if at all to changes in the security environment. This is especially true when the change lies outside the scope of conventional war." 
1
Capabilities. The purpose of the workshop was to identify noncombat capabilities needed for the USAF to respond to four hypothetical scenarios. Instead of identifying capabilities to conduct these types of operations, many USAF participants argued the merit of performing noncombat missions at all. Instead of fulfilling the purpose of the workshop, the RAND team found itself confronted with an unexpected institutional resistance. The conference organizers found themselves with a group sharply divided into two camps. The first being that the basic mission of the USAF is to fight, all others missions reduce this capability. This view is only valid if one believes the basic mission of the USAF to be fighting. "No nation goes to war to fight. It goes to war to attain its national purpose." 2 Further, attaining the national purpose in the 21 st century will require more skill sets than just fighting. The other argument was that the USAF should expand the concept of itself into a force capable of superiority across the growing mission spectrum. Key to this second argument's view was the notion that "the nation's needs are changing and that, as a servant of the nation, the Air Force should broaden its vision beyond traditional combat roles." 3 Thirteen years later, rapid decisive operations using stealth and precision remain the USAF's focus. It remains a major challenge for USAF leaders to consider assets other than fighters or bombers as primary contributors in future operations. Any search for a new service identity will require serious reflection on USAF culture.
The USAF has traditionally seen "flying and fighting" as its reason for being and its "identity is based largely on its organizational and conceptual history and the primacy of the technology over warfighting theory. These lead to a culture in which small, often technology-based, subcultures flourish." 4 In this environment, bomber pilots and later fighter pilots became the senior leaders of the air force. Under combat pilot control, the USAF has "identified itself with the air weapon, and rooted itself in a commitment to technological superiority. The dark side of this commitment is that it becomes transformed into an end in itself when aircraft or systems, rather than missions, become the primary focus. Identity in the Air Force has become associated with a specific airplane rather than the institution or military art, with a resulting weaker sense of community than the other services." 
5
Despite using terminology stressing strategic effects, the military still tends to focus on outputs (keeping score on targets) instead of on outcomes (the effects they seek to achieve)." 6 A transformed air force where airlifters, special ops pilots or even non-rated officers could ascend to leadership of the service would be very difficult for the fighter/bomber cultures to visualize.
Furthermore, while senior leaders may recognize the necessity to champion all capabilities in which the service excels, they will find it difficult to see the USAF employed in a way different from "flying and fighting." Nevertheless, it is imperative USAF leadership not forget that serving the nation is the primary reason for a separate service, not to field fighters or bombers. Donald When the Korean War began, the primary focus of USAF thought was on conducting nuclear warfare using manned bombers against the Soviet Union. It was also believed that the threat of total nuclear war would prevent the occurrence of limited conventional wars. However, after these assumptions were proven wrong when conflict broke out on the Korean peninsula, the U.S. fell back on its previous doctrine of strategic bombing.
Unfortunately, this doctrine was not appropriate for the theater in which the U.S. found itself.
Strategic bombing is only effective against societies that have industrial centers to bomb. Korea had very few such centers. Once the few strategic targets were destroyed, the Air Force was left with no strategy to pursue. Furthermore, classical strategic bombing theory did not provide insight into how to handle an enemy who receives its war making capability from third party nations.
Interdiction was the next theory attempted in the Korean theater. These efforts at interdiction resulted in technologies such as those that enabled the U.S. to bomb by radar. In addition, since the U.S. was not supposed to have to fight limited wars, there was no organization able to coordinate the proper use of all air forces. At the end of the Korean conflict, valuable lessons for applying air power in a limited fashion were discarded as being irrelevant to the nuclear strategy of the nation. 8
This disregard of limited war lessons come back to haunt the U.S. in Vietnam.
When the U.S. entered the Vietnam conflict, it was not prepared to effectively fight a limited war. Since nuclear confrontation between the U.S. and USSR remained foremost in the minds of the USAF, tactical aircraft were designed to intercept Soviet nuclear bombers or deliver tactical nuclear weapons rather than carry out a conventional war. Further, tactical air forces in the early 1960s received minimal training on conventional weapons and tactics. The result was the wrong technology based on inflexible thought to prosecute the war. Additionally, as in Korea, no organizational structure was designed to present/employ force in a conventional conflict because conventional conflict was seen as unlikely. When assets were placed in a conventional role in Southeast Asia, there was no organization built to coordinate and employ all air forces in theater.
USAF aircraft belonged to 7 AF and SAC while the Navy controlled Navy aircraft. As a result, the Route Package system divided Vietnam into areas where each service could bomb. This system deconflicted friendly forces but did nothing to build a coordinated air campaign or take advantage of synergies. The outcome of this second failed attempt at air operations in a limited role resulted in conventional theories such as Air-Land Battle or parallel operations that placed conventional capabilities at the forefront. Some technology resulting from this thought included precision weapons, stealth and tactical aircraft capable of performing multi-roles. These new capabilities coupled with the idea of a single air boss came together to produce allied victory in Desert Storm.
Since 1991, the U.S. entered into what seemed to be a period of "simmering peace," we increased our attention on being able to conduct military operations other than war. In many cases, this required developing special capabilities that we had previously assumed were lesser abilities residing within our threat-based force structure. More so than ever before, our military today must be able to conduct operations across the full spectrum-from nuclear deterrence and high-end conventional warfare to lower-end, yet potentially volatile, peacekeeping, humanitarian, and noncombatant-evacuation operations-and it must have the capability to execute those operations rapidly, anywhere in the world. 9
Despite the recognition by some that the USAF needed to focus on the full spectrum of conflict, challenges still existed. As Poyner observed, our problem is that our philosophical underpinnings-what I call the force-centered view of airpower-will no longer serve the Air force in the next century because the nature of international conflict is changing in ways Mitchell and his contemporaries could not envision." 
10
"Airpower doctrine has lagged behind fast-moving developments in the U.S. OOTW experience." 
11
12
13
Unfortunately, none of these documents addresses MOOTW as a primary responsibility for the USAF. The USAF Vision Global Vigilance, Reach and Power mentions utilizing air and space power across the full spectrum of conflict but does not go any farther with regard to recognizing MOOTW operations as a primary mission for the service. Likewise, all USAF CONOPS lean toward combat or direct support to combat. There is no CONOPS for stability operations to complement the joint operating concept efforts. The Transformation Flight Plan mentions operations across the full spectrum but looks at technology as the primary vehicle for change with its primary focus on better prosecution of combat operations. "Doctrine must be incorporated into our thinking and operations while at the same time developing service wide capabilities to support these operations." 
15
James Corum, former instructor at the USAF School for Advanced Air and Space Power Studies (SAASS), observed: "U.S. military schools are mired in curricula better suited for conventional war than the types of unconventional wars likely to be fought in the next decades.
There is very little history, theory, or doctrine on counterinsurgency and counterterrorism taught in the U.S. military staff colleges today." 
16
SAASS students received a 15-day course on low-intensity conflict as part of their year long program. Unfortunately, SAASS only educates approximately 30 officers per year so the chance of their MOOTW education impacting the force is fairly small.
Currently, the primary focus of the USAF is to conduct force on force engagements. The majority of thought is directed toward reducing the kill chain and the ability to more effectively strike an enemy. These battlefield operations are necessary but may not represent the primary needs of the nation. A larger force of intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance (ISR) and airlift assets, long credited as vital to the prosecution of small wars, may be the capability essential for the type of operations the Air Force will be conducting in the future. During the Cold War, there were numerous bomber and ICBM bases prepared to fight a nuclear war. Today, there are only three bomber bases and three ICBM bases. The U.S. chose to retain some nuclear capability as a hedge against a nuclear-armed opponent but the vast majority of its technology and organizational structure is focused on conventional warfare. Just as the Air Force balanced the nuclear and conventional force structure in favor of conventional forces, the Air Force must now think about tailoring its conventional forces between major combat operations capability and those needed for MOOTW.
For the USAF to stay relevant in the conflicts of this century, it must embrace the fact that the contribution of air and space power can be both flying and non-flying, combat and non-combat. In 1994, Carl Builder wrote, "air power must somehow be defined as more than force, airplanes or pilots" and "air power will require the projection of infrastructures such as security, medical care, 8 "US airmen have long been known for their fascination with technology and the mental toughness required to press home a bombing attack against fierce resistance or outduel an enemy fighter. In addition, US airmen have never been known for their academic inquisitiveness, their devotion to the study of the art of war, or to their contributions to the theory of airpower. Instead, American airmen have been "doers" rather than introspective "thinkers." Nowhere was that more evident than in the U.S. Air Force approach to the problem of protracted revolutionary warfare. Wedded to the concept of "atomic airpower" during the 1950s and early 1960s, American airmen virtually ignored the insurgent warfare problem until they were thrust into the Vietnam War. "After the American withdrawal from Vietnam, bitter memories, confusion about the impact of strategic bombing on the war's end, disagreement over the very nature of the conflict, and the continuing Soviet threat made it all too easy for US airmen to push the unsettled protracted warfare enigma into the background. It was much more comfortable to retreat to the familiar problems of strategic nuclear warfare and conventional warfare in Europe. The problem would not go away-Afghanistan, El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru, and other problem areas forced the subject to the surface in the 1980s, and some airmen began to investigate seriously the peculiarities of airpower application in insurgent warfare. 
The question of whether or not we should be involved in these operations is widely debated. When I sat down and counted up how many I have been involved with them in my career, I soon realized that this question has been overtaken by events. We are involved in them; and the question I want to answer is how to do them better.
-General Tony Zinni From 1850-1905, Japan transformed its military to compete better with Western power presence in Asia. At the beginning of this effort, Japan had to struggle with the fact that their Shogun way of war was not adequate to challenge Western military power. The struggle to develop a Western style army was resisted but eventually, the increasing threat drove the reason for change.
Once the concept of building a Western style army was adopted, the Japanese began to adapt their organizations and people to operate within the new paradigm. Western military capabilities such as artillery and rifles were easier to procure than the cultural change required accepting their use. Like the Japanese, the U.S. military resisted MOOTW missions by remaining completely committed to nuclear deterrence and theater conventional warfare through the 1990s. This commitment decreases the effectiveness of the USAF to combat the enemies of today.
In the 21 st Century, the contingency operation has become the USAF's primary means of protecting and projecting U.S. interests. 
1
Army was to combat Native American insurgencies, "the generals always viewed the Indian wars as a temporary diversion from their 'real job'-preparing to fight a conventional army." 
2
The main concept needed by the USAF in the 21 st Century is a theory of air and space power that is more inclusive of all USAF disciplines and embraces a range of military operations. The current theory based on strategic bombing gives the service no room to grow as it transitions from doing mostly combat operations to doing mostly MOOTW operations. Like other bureaucracies, "the most important institutional interest of air forces is the maintenance of institutional independence and autonomy. Of the three main air combat missions-air superiority, tactical bombing, and strategic bombing-strategic bombing serves this interest best because it is an inherently independent mission, requiring little coordination with other services." 3 The challenge for the USAF is to remake itself into a service that provides robust capabilities across the range of military operations. Such a theory should include Poyner's view of the USAF of the future that "provides service to the nation: the application of long-range, short notice, strategic influence.
Many of the non-traditional taskings the Air Force has been involved in recently (e.g. humanitarian relief, peacekeeping and peacemaking, counternarcotics, etc.) nestle quite well under the framework of projecting influence." [emphasis in original] 4
Projecting influence requires decisive operations across the entire spectrum of conflict. The use of precision guided munitions and stealth technology have revolutionized war fighting.
Unfortunately, non-state adversaries have very little infrastructure to attack. The U.S. currently enjoys air supremacy over Iraq and has the ability to employ ordnance from the air wherever and whenever it chooses. However, the application of combat air power has had little effect in stopping the attacks by insurgents. "Exclusive reliance on technology, at once naïve and arrogant, takes little account of local history, traditions, terrain, and other factors that are essential for making wise judgments." 
5
Through the mediums of air and space, the USAF "can apply many sophisticated tools of influence and utility-not just bombs and bullets and can do so not just for the AF, but for all the military services and indeed, the nation." 
6
"Delivering supplies is seen as a means to an end, not as an independent end in itself. So, even where logistical efforts are more substantial than the combat operations, it is the combat operations that will be most remembered for lessons learned." 7 This bias is one that must be eliminated through renewed educational efforts.
The goal of USAF professional military education (PME) should be to provide officers the foundation to make intelligent decisions across the entire spectrum of conflict. Given the direction U.S. foreign policy is heading, USAF PME institutions must more thoroughly examine the history of U.S. experiences with constabulary, nation building and counterinsurgency operations. Without emphasis on learning MOOTW, the USAF runs the risk of marginalizing its capabilities at best and becoming irrelevant at worst. By educating our officers, we plant the seeds that will one day provide a force that is organized, trained and equipped to be as decisive in MOOTW as it is in MCO.
The greatest challenge in the near-future will be to think more expansively and creatively about how to apply air and space power in future MOOTW.
Professional military education can play a central role in changing the military's cultural mindset and in developing the broad intellectual framework necessary for these demanding, complex, and multidisciplinary situations. The first step in achieving a change in culture is to demonstrate importance of S&R operations in American national security strategy through courses or lectures and by emphasizing these themes throughout the curricula. Because stabilization and reconstruction operations have often been viewed as separate and detracting from the military's primary warfighting mission, PME curricula have dedicated limited time to its study. 
8
Physical courage in battle is important in large and small wars. But, the moral courage to see a conflict through to the better state of peace when that condition may take a decade or more is the mark of an excellent "war" leader. We should create distinctions between war and battle. "Our opponents will not focus on swift battlefield victories. They will take the long view and focus on winning wars, not battles." 
10
11
The USAF is not currently optimized for the challenges inherent to operations other than war. The Nation's interests lie in deploying a force more like the Texas Rangers than the combat infantrymen of World War Two. "Rangers were good at tracking and apprehending fugitives. They were good at mediating between contending factions, such as family against family, political bloc against political bloc, labor against management, and mob against antimob. They were good at easing public excitement and heading off prospective riots. They were good at maintaining orderly courtrooms. And they were good at taming places where rowdies gathered." 
12 Thomas Barnett's
The Leviathan force moves in for the war portion and then transitions authority back to the system administrators to continue waging the peace. 
13
Without this focused study of these situations, our forces face in the field, our officers come prepared to fight a different war than the one actually occurring. Max Boot provides a good view of what the nation-building role would be like for our troops, No one expects a big city police department to win the "war on crime." The police are considered successful if they reduce disorder, keep the criminal element at bay, and allow decent people a chance to live their lives in peace. In the process, a few cops are likely to die, and while this is a tragedy to be mourned, no one suggests that as a result the police should go home and leave gangsters to run the streets. 
14
Defeating nation-state forces in conventional battle is not the task for the twenty-first century. Odd missions to defeat transnational threats or rebuild nations are the order of the day, but we haven't as yet adapted." 
15
State building rather than nation building must be the primary outcome of U.S. military intervention. "The apparatus of a functioning state can be developed much more quickly than a national consciousness. Successful state building starts by imposing the rule of law as a precondition for economic development and the eventual emergence of democracy." 
16
The literature suggests that airlift, intelligence/surveillance/reconnaissance (ISR) and close air support (CAS) capabilities are the most appropriate for fighting these types of conflicts yet the AF still places more emphasis on capabilities for major combat operations.
The Air Force should expect sustained heavy demands for the following sorts of capabilities: Surveillance platforms, operators and analysts; language-qualified personnel-to help train and advise host-country forces, interact with others incountry, and analyze the intelligence "take" from HUMINT and communications intelligence (COMINT) sources; security police and other force protection assets; base operating support personnel and equipment to provide vital functions, such as communications, housing, and transportation at a wide range of locations; heliborne insertion and extraction capabilities; humanitarian relief assets, including engineers, doctors and dentists, public health specialists, tactical airlift aircraft, and crews. From time to time, USAF units will be called upon to attack terrorist targets (to include stocks of CBRN weapons) directly. 17
To make a stronger contribution to the nation, the USAF must focus on the kind of capabilities needed to support special operations, military police forces and civil affairs forces. There is no doubt the USAF has the technological capability to fulfill these new missions, the biggest challenge will be to overcome the dominant service culture against employing these new capabilities as the primary contribution. The challenge for the USAF as a service is to acknowledge that airlift, special operations, unmanned vehicles, space platforms and information operations capabilities may become more critical to fighting terrorism than fighter or bomber platforms. Large standing conventional combat forces should be realigned. Swapping combat air forces with air mobility assets from the guard/reserve may be a viable course of action. Combat air forces should provide a hedge alongside nuclear forces against a future peer competitor. Just as nuclear forces are able to increase their capability in a crisis, conventional forces must be flexible enough to surge for the large conventional conflict. The USAF should be careful not to focus so much on a peer competitor that doesn't exist in a war they might fight in the future and focus more on the war they're fighting today.
To evaluate whether new capabilities are truly relevant to the conflicts of today, Carl Builder provides some good questions to ask. "First, what does the service treasure most that might be put at risk by new roles or missions? Second, who are the elite factions in the USAF; and how might a shift in roles/missions threaten them? Finally, which offspring might the USAF throw to the wolves to save themselves?" 18 At the moment, the perception is that the answers to these questions are: 1) F/A-22, 2) fighter pilots, and 3) airlift, CAS, and space. The USAF must change this perception in order to leverage all capabilities within the service. The Navy did not cease to exist as a service when the battleship lost prominence. It transformed into something else. When sea superiority (like air) was virtually a given, the Navy modified its mission to a "from the sea" perspective.
Submarines haven't shot a torpedo in anger since World War II but their capabilities as an ISR and TLAM platform have kept them relevant. The USAF must nurture the same flexible mindset and find platforms with the flexibility to carry out numerous roles. Failure to match the right means to the end invites failure of air and space power to support the Nation's strategy.
Machines don't fight wars. Terrain doesn't fight wars. Humans fight wars. You must get inside the minds of humans. That's where the battles are won. People, Ideas, Hardware-in that order.
-John Boyd "No nation goes to war to fight. It goes to war to attain its national purpose." 
1
GWOT. 3
We are going to find more and more that we have an entire region of the world-fromNorth Africa to the Philippines and from Central Asia to Central Africa-that is chaotic and in turmoil. For decades more, we are going to be dealing with this problem. You are going to be fighting terrorists. You are going to be fighting against failed or incapable states that are sanctuaries for problems. You are going to try to rebuild nations. You are going to deal with crises and threats that threaten our people and our property. And it is all going to be mixed into one big bag." 4 Fortunately, General Zinni's words seem to be indicative of policy being pursued by the Pentagon in preparation for the 2005 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR). Although major conventional war has been the focus of DoD strategy since the early 1990s, the anticipated defense strategy of the future will be one that downgrades this threat in the eyes of the Pentagon while elevating the importance of irregular threats. "DoD acknowledges it is shaping a new long-term strategy, one which observers say will shift resources away from forces needed for conventional wars-fighters, warships, tanks-toward smaller and more specialized forces optimized for guerilla war, counter terror operations and the like." 5 Such a shift in focus will not only redefine the priorities of the army and navy, but will threaten the usefulness of the USAF as an instrument of policy if a shift from its combat focus to one of MOOTW does not occur.
"We are very good at conventional warfare. Too bad that isn't enough any more." 
6
7
8
1
2
5
6
1
5
12 Michael Howard. "When Are Wars Decisive?" Survival (vol. 41, no. 1, Spring 1999)
12 Michael Howard. "When Are Wars Decisive?" Survival (vol. 41, no. 1, Spring 1999)
4  
4  
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
Howard, "When Are Wars Decisive?", 130 
12
13