# ID: d6ae1bddbd3449f480cbb6ad2e8af806
# Title: KEynoTE mESSAgE
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2006.0
# Fulltext:
When the United States invaded Afghanistan, al Qaeda found itself alone facing the brunt of the American armada.
Rather than welcoming a wave of seasoned jihadis and fresh volunteers to serve in the Afghan theater, they received only a modest trickle of recruits.
President Bush's invasion differed greatly from the Soviet campaign in the late 1980s.
When Russian troops descended upon Kabul, the call to war echoed from almost every corner and mosque in Arab and Muslim lands; tens of thousands of Muslim men flooded into Afghanistan to resist the occupation with the blessings of the religious and ruling establishment.
In contrast, there was deafening silence when the United States declared war on the Taliban and al Qaeda.
Although many Muslims criticized America's impulsiveness and reliance on force, they stopped short of calling for collective jihad; no religious authority lent its name to legitimize the repulsion of the foreign troops.
Al Qaeda's greatest failure was thus its inability to tap into the natural base of tens of thousands of like-minded jihadis-religious nationalists-who live throughout the Muslim landscape.
Since September 11, Western analysts and Western security services have focused on al Qaeda's sleeping cells and sympathizers, but little has been said about the other huge pool of religious nationalists who, if they had joined the al Qaeda network, could have qualitatively escalated and expanded the theater of military operations and increased the security risks manyfold.
Had bin Laden and Zawahiri succeeded in coopting and enticing the deactivated army of religious nationalists into the al Qaeda network, they could have replenished its depleted ranks and fielded lethal brigades in many parts of the world.
This failure goes to the heart of whether al Qaeda speaks for and represents the bulk of Islamists or is a fringe creature born out of the internal mutations and inner rivalries within the worldwide jihadist initiative.
Prior to the events of 2001, bin Laden and Zawahiri launched an ambitious campaign to control the movement and change its direction.
Unable to rally the disparate factions and put an end to internal bickering and entropy, they plunged into a confrontation with the United States, hoping that it would serve as a galvanizing and unifying experience.