# ID: d6ae1bddbd3449f480cbb6ad2e8af806
# Title: KEynoTE mESSAgE
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2006.0
# Fulltext:
You really have to look very much at the social structure of the prison, how people interact, to actually guess whether it is a problem or not.
On the East Coast, it is not a problem; on the West Coast, it might be.
And in New Mexico it probably is a worse problem. (
Laughter) Q: Eric Thorsos, Applied Physics Laboratory at the University of Washington -This question is also for Marc Sageman.
I am curious if you would be willing to comment more generally on your feelings about the network situation in the United States.
Can you expand on your comments about no more 9/11s?
Prof. Marc Sageman -It turns out that the United States has been protected in a sense against those violent born-again networks who are willing to go after the United States.
Let me underline those.
For instance, the Lackawanna, New York terrorist cell was willing to do things against Russia, not here.
They were Americans who were more than happy to go to Chechnya to kill 0 Unrestricted Warfare Symposium Proceedings 2006 some Russians, but they were not willing to go after the United States.
Now why is that?
Well, three things: First, the class of Moslems that we have here is very different from the European one.
We actually cherry picked.
We only allowed physicians, people with money, and so on.
If you look at the socioeconomic statistics of the Moslem population in the United States, it actually is better than the average in the United States.