# ID: d7c0f35004674e66b2c124561e81d5de
# Title: The Joint Operating Environment (JOE): Challenges and Implications for the Future Joint Force
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2008.0
# Fulltext:
The rim of the great Asian continent is already home to five nuclear powers: China, India, Pakistan, North Korea, and Russia.
Furthermore, there are three threshold nuclear states, South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan, which have the capacity to become nuclear powers quickly.
While the region appears stable on the surface, political clefts exist.
There are few signs that these divisions, which have deep historical, cultural, and religious roots, will be mitigated.
Geographically, there are a number of areas in dispute.
The continuing dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir is the most dangerous, in this case between two nuclear armed powers.
The Chinese have backed up their claims to the Spratleys, which Vietnam and the Philippines also claim, with force.
The Kurile Islands, occupied by the Soviets at the end of World War II, remain a contentious issue between Russia and Japan.
The uninhabited islands south of Okinawa are in dispute between Japan and China, both obviously drawn to the area by the possibility of oil.
Much of the Yellow Sea remains in dispute between the Koreas, Japan, and China, again because of its potential for oil.
The straits of Malacca represent the most important transit point for world commerce, the closure of which for even a relatively short period of time would have a devastating impact on the global economy.