# ID: d800974fbbd04cf4b816c007b798dfad
# Title: 4. Title and Subtitle
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
After the peace agreement of Tilsit in 1807 Prussia had to deal with the loss of almost half its territory, the French occupation, the reparations and the limitation of the Prussian Army. Despite these limiting factors within a few years Prussia succeeded to gain strength again, helped to defeat Napoleon Bonaparte, and became one of the strongest and most modern armies in Europe and beyond. Primarily a small group of military and state reformers was responsible for this positive development. They analyzed the military, social, and political weaknesses that had led to the defeat and implemented reforms regarding the political situation, the administration of the Prussian state, and the education and structure of the Prussian Army. Even though, the military reformers had strong opponents within the conservatives and the military nobility, between 1807 and 1812 they managed to conduct trend setting innovations in areas like organization, leadership, education, and jurisdiction which led to a fundamental modernization of the Prussian Army and contributed to the advancement of Prussia to a great European power.
14.
The reorganization of the Prussian Army after the defeat in 1806 has strongly influenced the development of the Prussian Army in the 19 th century and beyond. Driven by humanistic and liberal principles between 1807 and 1812 the reformers managed to establish trend-setting innovations in areas like organization, leadership, education, and jurisdiction of the Prussian Army and the Prussian state. These reforms contributed to the rise of the Prussian Army to become one of the most effective armies in the 19 th century and the combination of the successfully implemented military and state reforms build the basis for the modern Prussian state as a great European power. The reforms also still have great influence on modern armed forces today.
As a former student of Political Science and now a Civil Servant in the German Ministry of Defence with close ties to German Armed Forces, I find this militarily, governmental, and educational decisive part of the German history is very interesting. Through researching the topic and writing this paper I could increase the knowledge of my country's history and gain detailed knowledge about the origin of some military, governmental, and educational principles which are part of the foundation the Federal Republic of Germany is built on. 
After the peace agreement of Tilsit in 1807 Prussia had to deal with the loss of almost half its territory, the French occupation, the reparations and the limitation of the Prussian Army. Despite these limiting factors within a few years Prussia succeeded to gain strength again, helped to defeat Napoleon Bonaparte, and became one of the strongest and most modern armies in Europe and beyond. Primarily a small group of military and state reformers was responsible for this positive development. They analyzed the military, social, and political weaknesses that had led to the defeat and implemented reforms regarding the political situation, the administration of the Prussian state, and the education and structure of the Prussian Army. Even though, the military reformers had strong opponents within the conservatives and the military nobility, between 1807 and 1812 they managed to conduct trend setting innovations in areas like organization, leadership, education, and jurisdiction which led to a fundamental modernization of the Prussian Army and contributed to the advancement of Prussia to a great European power. 
This study focuses on the development of the Prussian Army after the peace agreement of Tilsit in 1807. After this great humiliation for the whole Prussian state and the French occupation, for a period of time it was not even clear if Prussia would continue to exist as an independent state.
The interferences of the victor, Napoleon Bonaparte, were heavy and parts of the Prussian population were all too willing to follow the new leader. Despite these oppressive conditions, the loss of almost half its territory, the reparations, and the limitations to the Prussian Army that came with the Peace Agreement of Tilsit, within a few years Prussia succeeded to gain strength again. It even became part of the European coalition that finally defeated Napoleon Bonaparte and his army. After this decisive success, the rise of the Prussian Army continued further and the Prussian Army became one of the strongest and most modern armies in Europe and beyond.
Primarily a small group of military reformers, like Gerhard von Scharnhorst and August Neidhardt von Gneisenau, and state reformers like Karl Freiherr vom Stein and later Karl August Fürst von Hardenberg, were responsible for this positive development. The Preußischen Reformer (Prussian reformers) clearly analyzed the military, social, and political weaknesses that had led to the defeat and managed to effectuate fundamental changes. They implemented reforms regarding the political situation and the administration of the Prussian state, the education and structure of the Prussian Army as well as the grounding of the army in the Prussian society. In addition, other developments, like the educational reform carried out by Wilhelm von Humboldt, contributed to the rise of the Prussian State and the rise of the Prussian Army.
Already before the defeat in 1806 progressive military officers had expressed critique regarding the old fashioned military system of the Prussian Army. Unfortunately, neither the political nor the military leaders paid attention. Only after the catastrophe in 1806 was the Prussian king, Friedrich Wilhelm III., willing to approve reforms and allowed to establish the Militär-Reorganisationsorganisation (Military Reorganization Commission) led by Gerhard von Scharnhorst who later also became the head of the Ministry of War and the head of the General Staff. The members of the Military Reorganization Commission tried to enforce their ideas of profound reforms like a new structure of the army, new provisions for the selection of officers, the foundation of new schools for cadets and officers, the reform of the military justice, the establishment of a Ministry of War including a modern general staff, or the implementation of the universal conscription. Even though the impact of the conservatives and the noble elite stayed strong and Scharnhorst and the other reformers were not able to implement all their target changes, they still managed to create a modern army with principles that still today are considered fundamental for modern armed forces. This study will elaborate on the changes that the military reformers successfully implemented. It will analyze the impact of the reforms on the Prussian Army in that period of time and also address the impact the reforms still have on modern armed forces today.
In the 18 th century Prussia was a typical state of the enlightened absolutism. Especially under the regency of Friedrich der Große (1712-1786), Prussia had developed to a modern and reform orientated state which had started to implement the ideas of the enlightenment. After his death, the Prussian state stopped developing further. Necessary social modernizations did not take place, and the feudal system survived and was the basis for the Prussian state system.
Several contemporary scholars had figured out, that the Prussian state was in the need of profound political, social, and military reforms. Among others, Karl Freiherr vom Stein and Karl August Fürst von Hardenberg had published according memoranda in which they claimed to start the necessary reforms. In the military field Gerhard von Scharnhorst was one of the modern thinkers who pointed out the urgent need of reform for the Prussian Army. He joined a military reform society in Berlin, the Militärische Gesellschaft, and became the president of this club.
Army. 
1
2
With this conviction Scharnhorst challenged the current command structure of the army as well as the social class system of the whole state. 
3
Scharnhorst, completely convinced of the need for profound changes, found an ally in Karl Freiherr vom Stein, who in October 1807 became the head of the government. He clearly saw the necessity for overall state reforms. His main claims were the abolition of serfdom and the establishment of a modern municipal system. He also was a strong defender of the idea to unify the German states under a single government. A unified, democratic Germany with a citizen army would even be able to contain France. Scharnhorst's convictions regarding the Prussian Army and von Stein's ideas regarding state reforms perfectly fit together. Nevertheless, the cooperation with von Stein also had negative outcomes for Scharnhorst, since "The association of military reform with political change brought Scharnhorst into even deeper confrontation with conservative royalists who began to view him as a French revolutionary." 
4
5
6
Despite the poor condition of the state the conservative parts of the high ranking civil servants and the nobility strongly opposed against any reforms and as well did the Prussian King, Friedrich Wilhelm III. William O. Shanahan clearly states that "Frederick William III was not inclined to assume responsibility and remained timid and hesitant. His esteem for the military technicians was unfortunate and none of his military aides could be called a radical reformer." 
8
Wanting to be loved by all, the king usually agreed with the last person he encountered. As all Europe looked to Prussia for action, the king hemmed and hawed, leaving his country in the most disadvantageous position imaginable. 
9
As a consequence of the retrogressive policy and the decision to go to war only after Russia and Austria were already beaten, the Prussian Army lost the war against France and was occupied by Napoleon Bonaparte. The defeat led to the Peace Agreement of Tilsit in July 1807, which was a heavy burden. The Prussian territory shrank from 5,570 square miles with 9,752,731 inhabitants to 2,877 square miles with 4,938,000 inhabitants. 
10
Even though this paper focuses on the military reforms in Prussia after 1807, it is also important to take a short look at the social and state reforms that took place in this period of time.
The military reforms cannot be profoundly analyzed without considering the other developments that promoted the transformation of the Prussian State. The work of state reformers like von Stein and von Hardenberg significantly influenced the military developments, since their understanding of a modern state led to a complete change of the social system in Prussia. After the defeat the state reformers finally convinced the king to establish significant social reforms that would enhance the Prussian State. Among others, the big land reform in 1807, the abolition of serfdom in 1807, the new municipal ordinance in 1808, and the emancipation edict for Jewish citizens in 1812 led to a significant modernization of the Prussian state system. These reforms initiated the transformation of the ancient Prussia into a modern state that respected the rights of all its members.
All these reforms required a new kind of civil society. The reformers wanted citizens that were able to act independently and as individuals. An indispensable precondition to achieve this was a better education for the Prussian people. Therefore, the educational reform carried out by
In July 1807, the King entrusted the reformation of the Prussian Army to the Militär-Reorganisationskommission (Military Reorganization Commission), whose first tasks were to supervise the demobilization of the army and negotiate the release of officers that were taken prisoner by the French forces. The Militär-Reorganisationskommission consisted of reform oriented officers like von Scharnhorst, von Boyen, Major von Grolman, and von Stein and conservative members like Major General von Massenbach, as well as the Lieutenant Colonels von Lottum, von Borstell, and von 
Bronikowski. 11
Grolman höherer Ansichten fähig sind. Der v.K. 
12
13
Regardless of this important appointment, the conservative generals still had a very strong influence on the king. Von Lottum had become his General Adjutant and for this reason he had strong opportunities to influence the king. 
14
Wirkungskreis nicht. 
15
Before the defeat in 1806, Scharnhorst wanted to establish army reforms within the existing state system. After the defeat, he was deeply convinced that the military reform had to be based upon a reformed and modernized political and social system. According to this understanding the reorganization of the Prussian Army took place.
The Kriegsartikel also clearly aimed for universal conscription, as the following passage reveals: "In the future every subject of the state, without regard for birth, will be obligated to perform military service under conditions of time and circumstances still to be determined, so that the army hereafter will consist almost entirely of natives." 
20
21
22
23
25
26
A claim to the position of officer shall from now on be warranted in peacetime by knowledge and education, in time of war by exceptional bravery and quickness of perception. From the whole nation, therefore, all individuals who possess these qualities can lay title to the highest positions of honor in the military establishment. All social preference which has hitherto existed is herewith terminated in the military establishment, and everyone, without regard for his background, has the same duties and the same rights. 
27
28
According to Scharnhorst, a precondition for a nation in arms and was to improve the standards of military education and the military schools. So far, the military education had been disorganized and uncoordinated, since there were no standards regarding the curricula for the different institutions. There were Cadet Institutes and Inspection Schools, but these did not provide a sufficient military education and the quality of the instructions was rather poor, but "Instead of narrow technical schools educating specialists, Scharnhorst wanted institutions giving a profound but general military education." 
29
Scharnhorst started to make the first proposals for a new educational system in 1808.
Finally, his plan got implemented in May 1810. The first level was the Cadet Schools, which prepared boys at the age of twelve in four years for their cornet examinations. Commissioned officers courses at three newly established War Schools in Berlin, Breslau, and Königsberg, lasting nine months, formed the second level. In addition, the school in Berlin had attached a special War School that offered a three years course in advanced military science for fifty selected officers. This War School was the third element of the new educational system.
According to Scharnhorst's understanding of organized and systematic education, all institutions of military education were put under one director, who coordinated the different bodies and syllabi. 
30
31
Another practical obstacle towards sufficient and modern armed forces was the disordered military administration in Prussia. Stein and Scharnhorst were aware of that and saw the creation of a single oversight body that coordinates all army affairs as a solution. In 1808, Stein went even further and proposed a plan to unify the Prussian state administration under only four coordinating ministries. The leaders of the ministries would have executive power and form a council to advise the king. 
32
In December 1808, the reformers finally managed to enforce the creation of such a ministry exactly according to their ideas. The War Ministry, existing of two main departments, began its work in March 1809. Scharnhorst was appointed to lead the War Department, which was made up of three divisions. The first division dealt with army personnel and the second division basically dealt with the training, conscription, education, mobilization, and supplies. The third division handled artillery, engineers, miners, pontoons, and the maintenance of the fortifications, as well as arms and ammunitions. 
33
34
35
Centralized and monitored processes contributed to the efficiency of the whole army. The creation of the War Ministry was one the most important steps of the Prussian Army reform, since it profoundly modernized the administrative procedures in the Prussian Army and by that eliminated the useless competitions between the former agencies.
The very first plans of the commission to form the army into six divisions corresponding to the provinces of Prussia could not be implemented, since the signing of the Treaty of Paris in September 1808 limited the strength of the army to 42,000 personnel and forced the disbandment of some regiments. 
36
37
Before the Prussian defeat in 1806, Scharnhorst did not have a complete change of the Prussian Army in his mind. He rather wanted to improve the capabilities of the army within the existing system. He was especially interested in improving the education system of the soldiers.
Early in his career he understood the importance of sound education. He started to publish military journals and used them as fora to discuss contemporary actions and the art of warfare. 
38
After the defeat his assessment changed completely. He no longer wanted improvements within the existing system, but he wanted a complete reformation of the whole Prussian Army.
He and the other reformers analyzed that Prussia had lost the war not only because of its indecisive leader and the stronger combat power of the French Army, but also because of the backwardness of the Prussian military and the Prussian state. They agreed in the belief that a holistic reform of the Prussian state was indispensable, and finally also the king understood the necessity of reforms. After the German defeat in 1806, Scharnhorst was deeply convinced that the military reform had to be based upon a reformed and modernized political and social system.
According to this understanding the reorganization of the Prussian Army took place.
Scharnhorst and the other reformers did not manage to establish reforms in all the areas they wanted to, since the king kept being inconsistent and did not approve all the reformers' suggestions. The noble elite still had a strong impact on Friedrich Wilhelm III and managed to prevent him from approving some of the reformers' ideas. For example, the universal conscription was only established in 1813, even though the reformers had suggested it long before. The aristocracy wanted to keep a knightly officer corps, in which their aristocratic exclusiveness was not threatened by a national army, any educational program, or from the educated sectors of the society. Despite this, a lot of the changes that were successfully implemented by the reformers, like the new tactics in warfighting, the ministry of war, the improved administration system, and the new structure of the army increased the capabilities of the Prussian Army significantly and therefore lasted. The Wars of Liberation starting in 1813 were the first chance for the Prussian Army to show its improved efficiency and combat power.
Driven by humanistic and liberal principles between 1807 and 1812, the reformers managed to establish trend-setting innovations in areas like organization, leadership, education, and jurisdiction of the army, which led to a fundamental modernization of the whole Prussian Army. The establishment of the Universal conscription and the abolishment of the terrible punishments brought the army and the citizens of the state closer together and helped to increase the respect for the military profession. The citizens started to consider the service in the military as an honorable time.
Overall, the social and state reforms pointed in the exact same directions as the military reforms. All reforms that took place in Prussia after the defeat of 1806 stimulated each other and aimed at a modern state with enlightened and educated citizens that are able to deal with their own issues. The successfully implemented military and state reforms were the foundation for a new kind of civil society and built the basis for the modern Prussian state as a great European power. Humboldt's educational reform and his idea, that education and performance should be decisive for promotion instead of rank and birth, strongly corresponded to Scharnhorst's ideas.
Humboldt's liberal notion of the unity of research and education which he utilized at the university in Berlin became a role model and still exists today.
A lot of procedures, tactics, elements, and manuals that Scharnhorst developed between 1807 and 1812 are still used in the German Armed Forces and other armed forces today. His ideas of practical and theoretical education of individuals as well as his ideas regarding the education of military units in the fields influence the curriculum of military schools around the 
educational system in which public state schools replaced all other bodies of education.
Compulsory education was introduced, and the state controlled the curricula for the Volksschule (board school), the Gymnasium (grammar school), and the University. Performance criteria recognized by the Prussian state were established as preconditions to join the public service.
Education and performance should be decisive criteria for promotion and no longer birth and status. In 1810 Humboldt founded the Berliner Humboldt Universität, which became a role model for the liberal idea of the unity of research and education.
The social and state reforms pointed in the exact same directions as the military reforms.
All the reforms that took place in Prussia after the defeat in 1806 stimulated each other and aimed at a modern state with enlightened and educated citizens that were able to deal with their own issues.
The idea of a nation that takes responsibility for itself also included the belief that the population and the different bodies of the state had to be brought closer together. The reformers agreed that the universal conscription was one driver to reach this aim. Military training should be considered as an honorable period in life that teaches the individuals the ideals of duty and prepares them for a later participation in public life. 
16
17
18
All strict punishments required the approval of military courts subject to the king's confirmation, and only the king could impose the death penalty. 
19
Scharnhorst was convinced that the new educational system and the establishment of intellectual qualifier as preconditions to start carrier as an officer, cleared the way for the education of autonomously thinking officers that were able to apply the Auftragstaktik.
The concept of the Auftragstaktik still plays a very important role in the educational and operational concept of the German Armed Forces. It is a fundamental part of the German military system which is still applied in all German deployments. As well, Scharnhorst's ideas regarding his understanding of profound education is a part of the curriculum of the School of Advanced Warfighting at the Marine Corps University. The according lesson card states that "Scharnhorst believed that the proper method for educating young officers is to impart "correct theory," followed by encouragement to think independently to clarify their own concepts. This creates a sound basis for analyzing experience. In doing so, he restated the conceptual framework of the Enlightenment; that is, war, like any other art, has two parts: the mechanical part, open to theoretical study, and the other part, dominated by creativity and experience." 
39