# ID: d84729e5c0df449f89a0fd3371e4f832
# Title: Master of Military Studies (MMS) Thesis
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching
I want to especially thank Dr. J. H. Joyner, the Security Studies Department Head, for his excellent mentorship serving as my advisor. Next, I would like to thank LTC David Preston, Military Faculty Advisor, for being my second reader for this report. The professional and constructive feedback received from Dr. Joyner and LTC Preston undoubtedly improved this report. Additionally, I want to thank Lt. Col. (Ret.) Wayne Floyd, MIT Lincoln Laboratory, for his time, expertise, and support throughout this project.
To the Rangers, Paratroopers, and Soldiers I have had the privilege of serving with in the 75 th Ranger Regiment, 10 th Special Forces Group, 82 nd Airborne Division, and 4 th Infantry Division thank you for your mentorship, example, and professionalism. My appreciation and understanding of the capabilities within infantry and airborne units is thanks in large part to serving with such incredible Soldiers, non-commissioned officers, and officers from these organizations. I am proud to have served with you.
Most importantly, thank you to my wife, Eliza. This year at Command and Staff College has been rewarding, but also difficult living apart while she served as a pediatrician at Womack Army Medical Center in Fort Bragg, N.C. Besides taking care of our three children, Clara, Brooke, and Jacob, she always found time to read and provide critical feedback to this report. Thank you for your unconditional love and support.
When [the] United States loses the ability to forcibly enter another's terrain, we have surrendered our influence in a world where that surrender will not play well. 
3
The Department of Defense's (DoD) Joint Publication 3-18 defines Joint Forcible Entry Operations (JFEO) as "forcible entry seizing and holding a military lodgment in the face of armed opposition or forcing access into a denied area to allow movement and maneuver to accomplish the mission."
4
military to successfully conduct a JFEO, the A2/AD threat must first be neutralized. Further, and perhaps more importantly, the U.S. Army's airborne capability to rapidly deploy infantry forces globally remains a strong deterrent against our adversaries.
While the risks associated with conducting a JFEO by way of airborne assault against a near-peer adversary are significant, the answer is not to eliminate airborne assault forces. The United States remains the only nation in the world with the capability to rapidly project and sustain combat power globally. The U.S. military should not concede this incredible strategic advantage over its adversaries. Rather, the solution must be for the U.S. Army and the joint community to employ innovative solutions to disrupt, degrade, and neutralize enemy A2/AD capabilities enabling a successful airborne assault. To maintain the United States' strategic JFEO deterrence, the U.S. military must develop advanced strategies through the combination of pre-assault fires, offensive cyber operations, electronic warfare (EW) assets, and deception operations to reduce the risk to force and support mission accomplishment.
In preparing this paper, I conducted extensive research on military defense, national power, JFEO, and airborne assault forces. These resources provided detail on the A2/AD threats facing airborne forces, as well as arguments both for and against maintaining airborne assault capability within the U.S. Army. Through this research, I found that some professionals argued against keeping airborne assault capability given the known threats and associated risks. I also discovered several scholars who advocated for the necessity of airborne forces as a critical component within the U.S. Army's tools to rapidly deploy combat forces worldwide to accomplish designated missions. I found fewer professionals who have written on how the U.S.
military would defeat our adversaries' A2/AD capability to set the necessary conditions to conduct an airborne assault into a contested environment. While I will highlight a RAND study covering survivability data for U.S. Air Force transport aircraft maneuvering into contested airspace, more research is needed on how the U.S. military plans to contend with the problem of conducting a JFEO by way of airborne assault.
Given the known threats to U.S. military transport aircraft and to airborne assault forces, this paper seeks to address the role of U.S. Army airborne forces in the 21 st century. To underscore the value of the airborne assault capability, I will provide a brief history of the formation of airborne units and significant operations utilizing airborne forces during World War II. Next, this essay will cover more recent combat airborne operations by the U.S. military in Panama (Operation Just Cause), Afghanistan (Objective Rhino), and Iraq (Operation Northern Delay) as case studies illustrating the unique expeditionary capabilities of airborne forces to rapidly deploy combat power in support of the mission. Further, this essay will discuss the opposing arguments against airborne assault operations. Last, I will close by offering a way ahead for airborne forces to remain a viable military option against the adversaries of the United States.
For the purposes of this essay, I will focus on airborne assault forces utilizing static-line parachute techniques from fixed-wing aircraft (Figure 
1
While the 75 th Ranger Regiment is a specialized infantry unit within USASOC, it is worth including this unit as they are also trained to conduct airborne assault operations anywhere in the world. Additionally, the 75 th Ranger Regiment employs the same static-line parachute deployment tactics from U.S. Air Force fixed-wing aircraft (e.g., C-17 and C-130) as the three conventional units listed above. Of note, this essay will not cover the deployment of small units, such as reconnaissance or special forces teams, who typically execute airborne deployment by way of high-altitude high-opening (HAHO) or high-altitude low-opening (HALO) military free fall (MFF) into contested battlespace (Figure 
2
Though U.S. adversaries have credible A2/AD capabilities, it is much easier for small teams to infiltrate contested airspace through HAHO or HALO tactics. However, these teams are limited by their numbers and firepower to the scope of their designated missions (e.g., raid, special reconnaissance, or hostage rescue). The more challenging problem for the U.S. military is to rapidly deploy larger formations of combat forces into enemy territory to accomplish the  (1950-1953), the Vietnam War (1965-1974), Grenada (1984), Panama (1989), Afghanistan (2001), and Iraq (2003).
In the next section of this essay, I will cover three U.S. military combat airborne operations in Panama, Afghanistan, and Iraq. These recent historical case studies provide important context to the value of airborne assaults to quickly project and sustain combat power.
It is worth noting that all three of these operations were conducted by the U.S. military against inferior enemies with limited air defense capability. The United States has not conducted an airborne assault against a great power threat since World War II. That is not to say that the U.S.
military could not execute a JFEO against a near-peer adversary, but the A2/AD threat would have to be neutralized prior to mitigate losses to aircraft and the force. Regardless, these three case studies help illustrate the enormous power and capability that airborne assault forces bring to the U.S. Army and joint military commanders.  After diplomatic efforts failed between the United States and Noriega, and PDF soldiers killed a Marine officer, Lieutenant Robert Paz, and captured a Navy Lieutenant, Adam Curtis, and his wife, Bonnie, on the evening of December 16, President George H.W. Bush made the decision to overthrow Noriega's authoritarian regime. In a speech to the American people on December 20, President Bush stated that military force in Panama was necessary to "restore democracy to the Panamanian people, safeguard the lives of Americans in Panama, protect the integrity of the Panama Canal, and bring Noriega to justice for violations with drug trafficking." 
14
15
In addition to the ZPU-4 weapon systems, the commander of JTF-South, Lieutenant General Carl Stiner, was concerned over the PDF companies near the airfields utilizing "small 14 Frederick Kempe, Divorcing the Dictator -America's Bungled Affair with Noriega. (New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1990), 6-7. 
15
16
17
The successful airborne assault by 3 rd Ranger Battalion was the first operation into Afghanistan and led to the eventual overthrow of the Taliban government in Afghanistan.
Northern Delay was the first strategic brigade airdrop using C-17 aircraft in formation, integrating a conventional Army airborne brigade within the 10 th Special Forces Group, and integrating an armored battalion into an airborne operation. 
25
27
Stratofortress strategic bomber and an AC-130 Spectre gunship. 
28
Though the 173 rd Airborne Brigade and the CJSOTF-N did not face a significant threat at Bashur airfield, the operation proved vital to the overall success of military operations throughout the northern front in Iraq. Due to extended ranges, an airborne assault JFEO into contested Iraqi airspace was the only effective option for military planners to deploy and mass combat power into enemy territory. The successful airfield seizure by the 173 rd Airborne Brigade set conditions for the rapid buildup of combat power including M-1 Abram tanks from 1-69
Armor Brigade deploying from Germany. Further, the airfield seizure provided a critical base of operations during the initial phases of Operation Iraqi Freedom, enabling special forces elements to conduct follow-on operations with Kurdish military in northern Iraq. 
29
One of the biggest mistakes militaries make is to assume that future wars will resemble wars of the past…Militaries are also more inherently conservative than other types of organizations, as they seek to control the tremendous uncertainties of warfare to the greatest degree possible, because the consequences of failure are so extraordinarily high. 
30
6
31
32
Airborne forces will likely be confronted with increasingly sophisticated anti-access threats, including evolving low, medium, and high-altitude air-defense systems; longerrange surface-to-surface fires threatening the lodgments that are critical to the success of airborne operations; and improved tactical combat capabilities in the hands of potential opponents. To overcome these new threats, the airborne force will need new capabilities. 
36
37
[capability] (e.g., aerial, naval, space, cyber, and land-based capabilities) cooperates" to defeat the enemy's A2/AD systems enabling sustained operations. 
38
39
Another advantage airborne assault provides over the other forms of infiltration is the ability to drop forces far deeper into enemy territory. Not only can airborne forces travel undetected much further than air-assaults or amphibious assaults, but these forces can penetrate contested regions well beyond the ranges of helicopters. 40 Further, the U.S. Army's airborne assault forces remain a strong deterrent against the adversaries of the United States. Colonel (Ret.) Mike Kazmierski underscores this point writing:
Within the defense structure, only the airborne forces are capable of strategic airlift and forced entry. By having this forced entry, force projection capability, the airborne forces also provide the nation with another form of deterrence, to be used as an element of national power. 
41
Much of the research on airborne assault forces and JFEO make the argument that while airborne infiltration remains a viable military option, the associated costs both to the mission and the force remain high. Those critical of airborne assault JFEO contend that these costs are far too great unless the United States is prepared for a significant escalation in combat power required to reduce the risks to an acceptable level. Those in favor of airborne forces conducting JFEO argue that despite the risks, the U.S. military must train and maintain the ability to rapidly deploy highly capable conventional and special operations forces. The capability and the will to project combat power remains a credible strategic deterrence against the enemies of the United States. Regarding the question of how the U.S. military would effectively conduct a JFEO against a peer or near-peer adversity, Thomas Rid argues for the use of cyber weapons stating, "the greatest benefit of cyber-weapons may be using them in conjunction with conventional or covert military strikes, as Israel did when it blinded the Syrian air defense in 2007" during Operation Orchard. 
42
The next major shift in the character of future war will likely occur when directed-energy weapons are perfected and incoming missiles can be 'burned' at an acceptable cost with sufficient volume and assurance to restore maneuver to large platforms and defend large infrastructure. 
43
In 2004, RAND conducted a study to quantify the risks and test the feasibility for the U.S. Air Force to conduct a JFEO into a notional near-peer A2/AD contested environment.
Notably, the research team sought to answer the question "can large aircraft survive against air defense capabilities?" 
44
Potential adversary capabilities are designed to create a nonpermissive environment, deny the U.S. military freedom of movement, and mitigate the effectiveness of U.S. combat power within an armed conflict. Both China and Russia have fielded advanced warfighting capabilities to include mobile ballistic missiles, mobile air and coastal defense weapon systems, cyber, stealth aircraft, remotely piloted aircraft, advanced ISR and electronic warfare capabilities. 
45
46
However, the research team cautioned that given the associated risks deploying these aircraft to conduct a vertical envelopment into contested environment should be done "judiciously." 
49
When Israel made the decision to conduct a unilateral preemptive strike against the Al-Kibar nuclear facility, the IDF and IAF employed cyber and EW capabilities to neutralize the Russian-made Syrian IADS. While the specific tactics employed remain classified, experts speculate that the IAF used an airborne cyber-attack targeting Syrian radar systems. In the essay, "Cyber Weapons," Thomas Rid and Peter McBurney contend that the goal for Israel was "to trick the active [radar] system to display no approaching airplanes to its operators for a limited time."
50
51
52
Follath and Stark offer further detail stating "seven F-15s flew at low altitude using precisionguided weapons to eliminate a radar station" enabling their uncontested entry into Syrian airspace to destroy the Al-Kibar nuclear facility. 
53
8
54
55
Acknowledging these challenges and the fact that the U.S. military executed all three of the modern airborne assaults against inferior enemies with limited A2/AD capability, this essay pointed to a RAND study which provided quantifiable data and solutions to contend near-pear capabilities. Further, I used the IDF's 2007 Operation Orchard as a recent example of solutions 56 Department of Defense, Joint Operational Access Concept, Version 1.0, (17 January 2012), 2.
i DISCLAIMER THE OPINIONS QUOTATION FROM, ABSTRACTION FROM, OR REPRODUCTION OF ALL OR ANY PART OF THIS DOCUMENT IS PERMITTED PROVIDED PROPER ACKNOWLEDGEMENT IS MADE.
Torch. Building on this achievement, the U.S. military conducted its first divisionsized combat airborne operation (Operation Husky) onto the island of Sicily on June 9, 1943 under the leadership of Major General Mathew Ridgeway. Despite adverse weather conditions, friendly fire leading to 33 of the 144 C-47 aircraft being shot down, and paratroopers from the 82 nd Ranger Regiment in 1984. Elements within these organizations participated in successful airborne operations throughout the Korean War
33
SA-17, ZPU-23-4, and SA-24] 
SA-17, ZPU-23-4, and SA-24] 
Joint Chief of Staff, Joint Concept for Entry Operations (JCEO), (Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, April 7,
2014), 34-35. 2 James King, "Yes, Mass Airborne Operations Are a Thing of the Past," Modern War Institute, Last modified October 12, 2016, https://mwi.usma.edu/yes-mass-airborne-operations-thing-past/.
Then-Central Command (CENTCOM) Commander, General James Mattis as quoted in "Joint Forcible Entry," LTG Frank G. Helmick, September 15, 2010, Infantry Warfighter Forum, Power Point briefing. www.benning.army.mil/iwc/2010/Downloads/LTGHelmick.ppt (accessed October 27, 2011).
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Forcible Entry Operations (JFEO), Joint Publication 3-18, (Washington, D.C., 27 June 2018), GL
An Infantry battalion consists of approximately 1,000 troops with a combination of rifle, special tactics, and support companies. For more information on Infantry battalions refer to ATP 3-21.20, Infantry Battalion.
Joint Chief of Staff, Joint Forcible Entry Operations (JFEO), Joint Publication 3-18, (Washington, D.C., June 27, 2018), I-10, A-1.
Roger E. Bilstein, "The U.S. Army Air Forces in World War II: Airlift and Airborne Operations in World War II," U.S. Department of Defense, 1998, https://media.defense.gov/2010/Sep/22/2001330050/-1/-1/0/AFD-100922-024.pdf, 12-13.
William Murray, "Airborne Operations During World War II," HistoryNet, last modified on June 12, 2006, https://www.historynet.com/airborne-operations-during-world-war-ii.htm.
"U.S. Army Rangers Jump into Afghanistan -Operation Rhino (2001)," YouTube, last modified September 16, 2009, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tFk6BmHEROE.
Ian Langford, "Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF), Afghanistan 2001," 2010 JSOU and NDIA SO/LIC Division Essays 10, no. 4 (May 2010),31-32.   
Art Corbett, "Joint Forcible Entry Operations" (lecture, Marine Corps University, Command and Staff College,  December 2, 2020).
John Gordon IV, Agnes Gereben Schaefer, David A. Shlapak, Caroline Baxter, Scott Boston, Michael  McGee, Todd Nichols, and Elizabeth Tencza, Enhanced Army Airborne Forces: A New Joint Operational Capability. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2014. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR309.htm, xiii.
Joint Chief of Staff, Joint Concept for Entry Operations (JCEO), (Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, April 7, 2014), 34-35.
Joint Chief of Staff, Joint Concept for Entry Operations (JCEO), (Washington D.C.: Joint Chiefs of Staff, April 7, 2014), 16.
Ibid.   
Thomas Rid and Peter McBurney, "Cyber-Weapons," The RUSI Journal, February 29, 2012. https://doi.org.10.1080/03071847.2012.664354.
Art Corbett, "Joint Forcible Entry Operations," Lecture, Marine Corps University, Command and Staff College, December 2, 2020.
John Matsumura, Randall Steeb, and Blake Crowe. Sollfrey, Survivability Options for Maneuver and Transport  Aircraft., XXI.   
Thomas Rid and Peter McBurney, "Cyber-Weapons," The RUSI Journal, February 29, 2012.  
John Matsumura, Randall Steeb, and Blake Crowe. Sollfrey, Survivability Options for Maneuver and Transport  Aircraft., XIX.   
I would like to use this opportunity to thank the faculty, staff, and fellow students at the 
United States Marine Corps Command and Staff College
Staff College
Staff 
College Marine Corps University 2076 South Street Marine Corps Combat Development Command Quantico
MASTER OF MILITARY STUDIES of the U.S. Military's Strategic Deterrence and Joint Forcible Entry Capability SUBMITTED IN the U.S. A. Toffler, United States Army
these technologies being employed as part of a three-tier survivability framework: preparation of the battlefield, team protection, and individual protection (Figure 
7
While the RAND study did conclude that no single technology eliminated the A2/AD threat, the research team did find that a combination of techniques and technologies did provide significant improvement to survivability of aircraft during insertion. The most effective solution included "the use of low-altitude ingress with an unmanned platform serving as escorts and hunters, armed with a high-speed anti-radiation missile (HARM)" which improved survivability by 70 percent. 
48
48
employed by U.S. allies to defeat an adversary's A2/AD systems. By combining conventional tactics and weapons with emerging technologies, the IDF defeated a highly capable Syrian IADS defense to destroy the covert Al-Kibar nuclear facility.
Moving forward, the solution for the U.S. military and its allies to devise innovative solutions to neutralize enemy A2/AD capabilities enabling JFEO by way of airborne assault.
Despite the A2/AD threats of U.S. adversaries, U.S. Army airborne forces remain an asset to military commanders as a rapid response contingency force to be employed against small-scale and near-peer conflicts. The former is an easier problem for U.S. forces to contend with due to the enemy having limited A2/AD capability. The three U.S. combat case studies highlighted in this report provide proof to the value of airborne forces to quickly project combat power and decisively accomplish the designated mission. In the future, it is more probable that U.S. airborne forces will be employed against an enemy with inferior A2/AD capability. That said, the U.S. Army and the joint force remains capable of conducting a JFEO by way of airborne assault against near-peer competitors once the A2/AD threat has been neutralized. The key to dealing with the A2/AD threat is for the joint force to continue to refine technologies with tactics to mitigate the enemies' defense. This paper has shown there are plausible means to first neutralize the A2/AD threat through a "layered system-of-systems survivability approach." 57