# ID: d911b02824f94c789e9a2815e0459b0b
# Title: Strategic Drift and US Army Operational Logic
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph examines US Army operational thought to identify how it has been shaped by the Army's underlying culture. It suggests that the Army has not undergone a paradigm shift in its view of war since at least World War II. Instead of reconceptualizing and transforming, the Army's fundamental beliefs, values, and assumptions have remained consistent over time, simply with new expressions and manifestations. This monograph argues that many of the problems the US Army faces, whether in theory, practice, or doctrine, are the result of strategic drift -the tension between its underlying perspectives and the emerging realities of conflict. The monograph suggests that if the US Army is to remain relevant, it will require escaping its current paradigm of conflict, warfare, and war.
monograph would not have been possible. Alice Butler-Smith's assistance was greatly influential in determining the line of research and the trust and latitude she provided in writing this work are greatly appreciated. The author must also thank Dr. Jim Greer for hours spent discussing this monograph and for his insights into learning. COL Andrew Dziengeleski and Lt Col David Lyle provided valuable feedback on drafts, to include additional sources and identifying enhancing connections in ideas. LTG Peter M. Vangjel provided a critique of the logic and arguments in the monograph, which were crucial to its final form. Lastly, the author must thank Joanne Vangjel for her countless hours of editing. Chapter I: Taking an Exterior View of the Self There are these two young fish swimming along, and they happen to meet an older fish swimming the other way, who nods at them and says, 'Morning, boys. How's the water?' And the two young fish swim on for a bit, and then eventually one of them looks over at the other and goes, 'What the hell is water?' -David Foster Wallace, commencement address at Kenyon College, 2005   This monograph examines US Army operational thought to identify how it has been shaped by the Army's underlying culture. It suggests that the Army has not undergone a paradigm shift in its view of war since at least World War II. Instead of reconceptualizing and transforming, the Army's fundamental beliefs, values, and assumptions have remained consistent over time, simply with new expressions and manifestations. This monograph argues that many of the problems the US Army faces, whether in theory, practice, or doctrine, are the result of the tension between its underlying perspectives and the emerging realities of conflict. If the US Army is to remain relevant, it will require escaping its current paradigm of conflict, warfare, and war.
Organizations form for a purpose. At birth, the composition, function and context of an organization determines how it operates and the beliefs, values, and perspectives of its members shape its initial outlook. The purpose for which the organization is formed dictates how it must operate and what it must accomplish. The context in which it is formed, the constraints and limitations upon an organization and the ecology in which it operates also shape its structure and processes. These factors coalesce into a distinct self-referencing systeman organizational culture centered on shared underlying assumptions, enduring beliefs and values, and artifacts and formation applying a battle drill against an enemy, or a unit conducting an After-Action Review, are examples of this type of learning. Measures of performance are an indicator of this level of learning and the question asked is, "How well are we doing what we said we wanted to do?" This level of learning in inherently tactical, it is self-referential, and critical. Single-loop learning is focused on internal coherence. Double-loop learning is a deeper-level of learning. This level is focused on "doing the right things." On this level, an organization questions how to apply its norms and rules toward a desired outcome as well as whether its procedures are appropriate for achieving the desired outcome. Activities on this level can range from changing the form and composition of a formation to changing an entire approach to problem-solving to redefining the organization's goal. Measures of effectiveness can be associated with this level of learning and the key question asked is, "To what extent are our actions bringing about our intended goals?" Because this level of learning inquires about the changing of rules and constraints, it is more strategic in nature. Double-loop learning is focused on external relevance; it is about how to achieve desired effects in an environment. But double-loop learning still fails to answer the question of "why" those effects are desired.
Others have expanded on the work of Argyris and Schön by describing an even deeper level of learning, triple-loop learning. 
5
6
7
Given that culture can become solidified around a certain context, even as the exterior world changes, the central challenge of an organization is to identify how to engage in triple-loop learning under such conditions. New members of the organization with differing perspectives offer a chance to question the ingrained practices and norms, but organizations often eliminate alternate perspectives in the process of assimilating new members. When new members are introduced to an organization, the process of secondary socialization occurs, whereby they embrace and assimilate the values of the institution as their own. 
8
Everything man is and does is modified by learning and is therefore malleable. But once learned, these behavior patterns, these habitual responses, these ways of interacting gradually sink below the surface of the mind and, like the admiral of a submerged submarine fleet, control from the depths. The hidden controls are usually experienced as though they were innate simply because they are not only ubiquitous but habitual as well… 
9
10
Stepping Outside of Systems -An External View is Necessary for Self-Understanding Theorist and strategist John Boyd had his own "Holy Trinity" to describe his understanding of the world. The second Law of Thermodynamics, Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle, and Gödel's Incompleteness Theorems were the backbone of his theory of learning. 
11
12
9
10
11 John R. Boyd, Destruction and Creation (1976).
12 Ibid., 4-6.
Edward T. Hall's discussion of culture places this same idea in a human context:
The only time one is aware of the control system is when things don't follow the hidden program. This is most frequent in intercultural encounters. Therefore, the great gift that the members of the human race have for each other is not exotic experiences but an opportunity to achieve awareness of the structure of their own system, which can be accomplished only by interacting with others who do not share that system… 
13
14
13
14 David Foster Wallace, This Is Water: Some Thoughts, Delivered on a Significant Occasion, About Living a Compassionate Life (New York, NY: Little, Brown and Company, 2009), 3-4.
In describing how scientific knowledge advances, scientist and philosopher Thomas Kuhn observed that, rather than evolving through the gradual accumulation of knowledge, advances instead come in revolutions where the old understanding of the world, referred to as a paradigm, is replaced by a model that is fundamentally different and irreconcilable with the previous understanding. 
15
The experience of a paradigm shift has resultant impacts on human and organizational psychology. The first period is one of comfort with the existing paradigm; the second period is one of frustration, as there is a growth in events that nullify conventional wisdom-anomalies; the third period, crisis, is one of disorientation where contradictions abound and existing mental models can no longer provide reliable explanations for events; the fourth period, the shift, is one of reconceptualization, where the critical variables are arranged into "a new ensemble with a new logic of its own." 
16
17
18
19
17 Gharajedaghi,
8. 18
19
-Gen Anthony C. Army and determined that it was "preparing vigorously for the wrong type of war to the near exclusion of the more probable form." 20 Just four years removed from a painful, decade-long experience in counter-insurgency, Vought saw an Army that viewed this form of conflict as illegitimate and, while rhetorically accepting American involvement in such conflicts in the future, doing nothing in the realm of implementation to prepare for them. 
21
22
23
24
25
26
In light of these similarities, it is imperative to ask the question, as Vought did, whether the United States is preparing for the wrong war. And even more importantly, if it is, why, and what can be done about it? US Military Thought -A 19 th Century Paradigm in a 21 st Century World
The US Army's history is one of adaptation to the conditions in which it finds itself. Often, these adaptations have been forced by initial failures and the accompanying blood toll. 
27
The first area of examination focuses on the deepest and broadest aspect of the Army's paradigmits underlying worldview. The most foundational aspects of a culture lie in its epistemological, ontological, and axiological assumptions. Epistemology-what counts as knowledge and how we know it, ontology-how reality is defined, and axiology-what is valued, each offer insight into the fundamental beliefs that pervade an organization. 
28
This perspective has an objectivist ontology that holds that there is an objective reality that exists independent of perception; a perspective which often undervalues subjective interpretation and social construction as part of reality. The modernist epistemology holds that reason and evidence are how we understand the world; the concept of logical positivism is the belief that "all causal relationships are knowable and become more context-free in application." 
29
30
31
Americans value "open,
dramatic,
precise and explicit communication." 32
33
34
35
36
37
30
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
Americans, and the US Army in particular, tend to be practically oriented. A learn-bydoing people that values practical application over conceptual abstraction, they value acquired skill over theory-construction. Entrepreneurial activity drives innovation and application is valued over creation. 
48
49
When examining organization's worldviews, epistemology and ontology are regularly discussed, but the key to understanding culture, axiology, questions of value, is rarely addressed. Such an examination is critical for true transformation as epistemology is about single-loop learning, ontology is double-loop learning, and axiology brings one to triple-loop learning. The axiological assumptions of the Army are informed by the Judeo-Christian ethics of the broader western society but within the profession these assumptions revolve around concepts of altruism, 
46
48
49
duty, and patriotism-as Carl Builder noted, "the object of worship is the country; and the means of worship are service." 
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
In summation, the cultural milieu resulting from these perspectives has a scientific worldview, is oriented toward practical considerations and problem-solving, and is biased toward action. The culture emphasizes seeking solutions/decisions and assumes that, with enough knowledge, any obstacle can be overcome. 
63
64
62
63
64
The fundamental aspects of worldview discussed in the last section create several emergent themes that define the Army's strategic mindset. This mindset, or culture, however, should not be confused with designing, having, or being cognizant of a preference for a particular military strategy; it is rather the fundamental patterns of preferences and assumptions that influence all US approaches to warfare. Because operational logic seeks to achieve strategic objectives, strategic culture is inherently interwoven with, and frames, operational practice and thus a discussion of these relevant patterns in American strategic thinking is necessary to set the context for American operational logic. Numerous scholars have attempted to identify, or debunk the idea of, an American approach to warfare. A summary of the relevant observations follows.
One of the most authoritative works of the field, Russel Weigley's study of American military history and strategy has come under criticism by later scholars for its simplistic dichotomy between wars of annihilation and wars of attrition. But Weigley's most valuable insight remains valid, that American military though, following Clausewitz's logic, views the application of military force as synonymous with the destruction of enemy field forces. 
65
66
68
69
70
72
69
70
74
75
77
Though commentators such as Max Boot point to America's historical success in irregular conflicts as evidence of "another" American way of war, recent history is 
74
75
78
A third trend, interlinked with the previous two, is the tactical bias of US military thought. As the military sees its role as winning battles and campaigns, the thinking typified by tactical actions tends to bleed realms where alternative mindsets are more appropriate. Echevarria asserts that the most consistent trend in US strategic thought is the belief that an additive series of tactical victories will incrementally produce strategic success. 
79
80
81
82
79
80
81
Colin Gray also reinforces the idea of tactical bias when he describes American military thinking as apolitical, "paying scant regard to the consequences of its course of operations for the character of the peace that will follow," and astrategic, waging war as a largely autonomous activity, leaving worry about peace and its politics to some later day." 
83
84
Technocentrism has been another consistent theme in discussion of American strategic thought. Technology has long offered the promise of mitigating risk to forces and, as such, has understandably been embraced. Unlike strategic concepts, technology can more easily be described with numbers, and thus tied to the budget shares that often serve as a proxy measure of how important one's own service or branch is seen to be in the eyes of others. Frederick Kagan notes this focus on the power of technology, but observes that it is often accompanied by unrealistic hopes for what technology can accomplish and unimaginative application of new technology onto existing concepts. 
85
83
84
85
Echevarria challenges the claims of technocentrism but his argument makes the faulty connection that a focus on technological solutions to problems equates to being a world leader in such innovations-an argument that ignores capacity for such innovations. He concedes technocentrism as a characteristic of US military theories in the latter half of the 20 th century, but argues that this is not uniquely American, pointing to the trend in NATO as well. 
87
88
89
90
91
92
86
87
88
92
93
94
95
97
93
94
95
42-43. 96
97
98
99
100
101
Vandergriff has demonstrated that increased information technology has led to a tendency for more centralized command and control, which is presumed to enable better synchronization of effects, ostensibly leading to tactical success. 
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
These trends in American military thought create a framework within which ideas for the application of military force are generated, solutions to military problems are formulated, and decisions about risk are assessed. What emerges from this framework is an approach to warfare 105 Brian McAllister Linn, The Echo of Battle: The Army's Way of War (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007), 5-9. 
106
107
108
that is expeditionary and offensive, focusing on regular/conventional warfare. It is capabilitiesbased, seeks technocentric solutions -but an orthodox application of new technologies, and displays a preference for firepower, especially for precision fires. It idealizes mass, or overwhelming forces/fires to create overmatch, in order to keep combat actions swift and casualties low. This form of warfare emphasizes combined arms and joint integration, which it synchronizes through exquisite command and control systems, and supports through comprehensive logistical systemsan approach that the military uses across the full range of military activities, beyond armed conflict. This framework of warfare envisions a rapid, decisive campaign of overwhelming force against a symmetrical peer adversary. This framework has driven institutional force development decisions, operational thinking, and even cultural customs and values.
The customs, traditions, and experiences emphasized by the Army offer the most palpable example of its beliefs and values. These values center around the conventional state-onstate large scale wars, of which World War II is the epitome. Carl Builder noted that, "something happened to the Army in its passage through World War II that it liked; and it has not been able to free itself from the sweet memories of the Army that liberated France and swept victoriously into Germany." 109 Nowhere is this more clearly suggested than in the Army's ongoing transition of its service uniform to "Army Greens," a replication of the World War II era "Pinks and Greens." The Sergeant Major of the Army stated that the uniform "represents our tradition and history." 
110
109 Builder,
38. 110
111
112
113
114
112 Dr. James Greer has observed that there is an interesting correlation in periods of strategic uncertainty and the fielding of a new uniform. James K. Greer, Phone Conversation with Author (March 28, 2020). 
113
114 US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017).
Shield and Desert Storm, and two to the 2003 invasion of Iraq. The 2019 version of the doctrine removed the explicit references, but the content of the doctrine remained the same, its only significant change being its modification to incorporate ideas and language from the Multi-Domain Operations concept, which shares a similar narrative and thematic thrust.
The emphasis on World War II is evidenced elsewhere. The Army recently published a seven-volume essay collection on large scale combat operations. The most referenced conflicts were World War II (24 vignettes), followed by WWI (13 vignettes), the Gulf War (seven vignettes), Operation Iraqi Freedom (seven vignettes) and the Korean War (six vignettes). The two world wars were referenced more heavily than every other conflict combined. In contrast, contemporary Russian operations were mentioned only in three instances, while the 1973 Arab-Israeli War was discussed four times. 
115
In his essay examining preparation for combat after Vietnam, Vought discussed the imbalance in professional military education in class hours spent on low-intensity conflict versus high-intensity conflict and concluded there was a neglect of the former. 
116
The emphasis on LSCO also holds true for the future operational planners attending the Advanced Military Studies Program at the School of Advanced Military Studies (SAMS). Brian Linn states that, at its inception, SAMS students' "entire education was directed at mastering modern warfare," clinging to this vision even in the face of evidence that the Army was "far more likely to encounter other ways of war." 117 He notes a student admitting fifteen years after SAMS' inception that, of 11 significant military operations since the course began, only Desert Storm resembled what was taught at the school. 
118
Policy Discourse -The War For Which The Army's Strategic Sponsor is Directing It To Prepare Army culture is not the only influence on its paradigm of conflict. As a subservient organization to the state and its political leaders, the Army is very much guided by the directions provided by its strategic sponsors. That guidance has been quite clear for the past decade: prepare for peer competition with great powers.
Despite the failure to achieve stated political aims in the current conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq, the application of lessons learned to better prepare for future conflicts of this nature has not been a focus. Instead, policymakers have been directing the Army's attention away from such conflicts since the Obama Administration. The 2012 Defense Strategic Guidance and the Army's response to it, the 2014 Strategic Planning Guidance, both emphasized that the Army will no longer be structured and sized for large-scale counterinsurgency operations. 
119
117 Linn,
212. 118
119
120
121
The Description of the National Military Strategy (NMS) follows suit, only mentioning two adversaries directly-China and Russia-but doing so twice in its six pages. 
122
123
124
125
The Army Vision then goes on to demonstrate its capabilities-based approach in stating that "The Army will do this through the employment of modern manned and unmanned ground combat vehicles, aircraft, sustainment systems, and weapons, coupled with robust combined arms formations and tactics based on a modern warfighting doctrine…" 
126
There are exceptions to this focus, the Security Force Assistance Brigades offer an example, but the existence of these brigades serves a two-fold purpose which supports the LSCO construct: first they free up Brigade Combat Teams to focus on training for LSCO and second they create a cadre force that can easily be filled with soldiers and become a combat brigade.
Another exception is the special operations enterprise, which continues to be funded well, has expanded significantly, and will continue to have roles across the spectrum of conflict. But these cases offer the exceptions that demonstrate the rule.
Thus, the discourse between policymakers and Army leadership and the Army's statements about itself clearly reflect a consensus. The strategic focus of the nation and the Army is shifting to peer/near-peer competitors and the expectations about the character of conflict are that it will revolve around large-scale, high-intensity, conventional combat operations. While declaratory policy is one form of evidence for the Army's understanding of conflict, it is also important to "follow the money" to see where real investments are being made.
What the military is being funded for and what it is requesting funds for offers a concrete insight into how it is expected and expects to operate. How the Army is organized and equipped indicates the character of the conflict it is preparing to fight-but in a certain amount of selffulfilling prophesy, how the Army is organized, equipped, and develops leaders provides the tools that frame its approach to solving problems and, to a degree, places constraints on what it can and cannot do. As the saying goes, when one only has a hammer, all one sees are nails.
The FY 2020 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) makes the policy discourse's focus on strategic competitors even more apparent. The document echoes the National Security Strategy (NSS) in identifying "long-term, strategic competition with China and Russia as the central challenge presently facing U.S. security and prosperity." 
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
The Army modernization priorities, published by the Chief of Staff of the Army and the Secretary of the Army in 2017, further emphasize the capabilities-based approach to warfare characterized in the NDAA and strategic guidance. 
134
135
136
132
137
The impetus for the focus on acquiring these systems is their existence in peer competitor inventories. 
138
139
140
143
Having assessed the Army's underlying assumptions about and responses to its view of war, warfare and competition in the previous sections, it must be asked whether the nature and character of contemporary conflict accord with these assumptions. As many have noted, defeating an attack by a peer adversary is not the most likely scenario the Army will encounter. 
144
145
146
147
148
149
One could argue that conventional war with a peer competitor presents the most dangerous threat that the US Army must face, the only true existential threat, short of nuclear conflict, and that it must prepare for these types of challenges and then can scale down from there. But even if this is so, such a singularly approach may be detrimental, especially considering Army statements that our capacity to fight unconventional wars must be maintained. 
150
151
So, what best explains the Army's fixation on preparing and structuring itself for highintensity conventional conflict? Justification and competition for budgets is always a consideration, but there is a historical aspect that is likely more significant. Carl Builder argued that the Army's concept of war is that which is least dissonant with its institutional view of itself. 
152
153
150
151
152
153
The US Army's Operational Paradigm -Tactics with Bigger Arrows With an understanding of the tensions between the Army's understanding of contemporary conflict and the trends of the current environment, it is now possible to discuss the Army's operational thought to see how this contradiction manifests. The Army's operational logic, its operational character, and its operational conceptspast, present, and futurepaint a clear picture of the Army's operational thinking and its increasing irrelevance.
The defining characteristic of the Army's operational thought is that it is not operational at all, but rather is characterized by tactical logic. As several theorists have noted, "This tactical inclination is so persistent as to constitute an institutional learning impediment or disability." 
154
155
156
Planning is inherently tactical in its logic; planning is about convergence and problem solving, it is the "how" that flows from the "why" of the operational function. In accordance with the Army's modernist outlook, Carl Builder noted its "implicit faith in analysis." 157 But as theorist John Boyd used to joke, to be an analyst was to be a half-wit, as analysis without synthesis was only half of the game. 
158
159
160
161
163
164
165
166
167
168
The current emphasis on practical, doctrinal planning skills in the Army's premier operational planning course, the Advanced Military Studies Program, only exacerbates the lack of proficiency in design thinking and the ability to see outside the prevailing system to generate creative and innovative ideas. Further, the utilization tours of the graduates of this program often offer very little operational experience and much of the limited operational education they do receive atrophies as they focus on tactical missions at the division echelon. The feedback fto the course from the Army organizations that receive these graduates is highly focused on tactical planning, further elucidating the mindset of the operational force, and reinforcing the current emphases of the course in positive feedback loop, offering little hope for rectification.
The problem of strategy becoming tactics writ large is also readily seen in the way the Army defines the very concept of strategy. The simplistic and formulaic Lykke model, first published in 1989, has become Joint and Army dogma. 
169
170
171
172
174
A second problem with the US military conception of strategy is its tactical language.
The words we use shape how we think. 175 "If you use 'victory' in any other context than that of battles and engagements, you are degrading a coherent understanding of the term." 176 Tactics seeks culmination, strategy seeks continuation. 
177
178
179
180
174
175
176 William F. Owen, "Victory Is Not Success," British Army Review, no. 176 (2019): 29. 
177
178 Simon Sinek, The Infinite Game (New York, NY: Portfolio, 2019), 1-27. 
179
180
which actions take place. 
181
Finally, it is also important to note not just what the Army discusses, but what it does not. Carl   Builder has observed that, unlike the Navy and the Air Force, the Army does not have a service strategy, in terms of a theory of land power; instead it has operational concepts. 
183
First, the idea that the cognitive processes of tactical, operational, and strategic thinking are analogous is deeply flawed. As demonstrated by the growing literature on the need for strategic thinking in the Army, the creation of a separate career field specifically for strategists, 
181
182 David Lyle, "Chessmasters and Game Designers, and Why Sound Strategy Requires Both," The Strategy Blog (blog), February 28, 2018, accessed April 27, 2020, https://community.apan.org/wg/aucoi/strategy/b/announcements/posts/chessmasters-and-game-designersand-why-sound-strategy-requires-both. 
183
185 Ibid., 2-2.
increasing Army efforts to identify, and quantify, field grade leaders' potential for strategic leadership, as well as the creation of schools to teach operational art, tactical, operational and strategic thinking all differ in context, structure, function and process [See Figure 
1
186
Figure 
1
Second, applying the technical rationality-based ends-ways-means formula beyond its appropriate jurisdiction (tactics) to operational art is misguided in the same manner as in applying it to strategy, which has already been addressed above. 
187
192
Operational art should instead be defined by what makes it distinct from tactics and from strategy, by what allows it to connect with and align to each, and by how it is able to reconcile the two. The Army's definitions, frameworks, and discussions fail to address these aspects to any significant degree. Instead, the Army's definition and descriptions have much less to do with connecting tactical aims to strategic ends and much more to do with the deployment and maneuver of large formations, which ultimately ends up being the practical understanding of operational art in the US Army. 
193
In his introduction to the writings of G.S. Isserson, one of the exponents of operational art, Dr. James Schnieder has highlighted four areas of cognition where tactical bias can be found.
First, he notes that the way we structure the world becomes the core of our thinking, leading often to the fallacy of genetic composition, "a false belief that what is true of our tactical past will hold true of our expanded operational and even strategic future." 
194
Schneider also notes that while the levels of war are "distinct and coherent" modes of thought and levels of abstraction, the Army trains almost exclusively to the tactical level of 
193
198
199
200
202
203
205
206
Unfortunately, the US Army culture and institutional practices particularly predispose the organization to the types of risks Hamley, Schneider, Vego, Matthews and Scales discuss. A recent examination of US Army three and four-star Generals highlights that these senior officers typically spent 70% of their careers in tactical assignments prior to promotion to General Officer and at, 23 years of service, 50% were serving in tactical assignments. 
207
Recently, a US Army General, evincing Brian Linn's Heroes school of military thought, pointed to the truth in a viral meme that asserted, "Majors talk about grand strategy, Generals talk about squads." The senior Army leader was making the valid point that ground combat is won at the squad and platoon echelons. The reality, however, is a bit more nuanced as battles may be won at the squad and platoon echelons…but wars are not. This has been amply demonstrated in the US experience in Vietnam, Afghanistan and Iraq, where the US military has been generally
superior at the tactical level. 
208
206 Schneider,
xii. 207
208
Without an adequate conception of strategy or operational art it is only natural that tactical perspective and thinking would come to dominate US military culture. Recent analyses have posed the question: If everyone is focusing on winning the battle, who is focusing on winning the war? 209
The operational paradigm that emerges from the Army's worldview, strategic culture, and tactical logic is best described by as "industrial maneuver," a term that captures the modernist perspectives and structures (thinking, Taylorism/scientific management, mass mobilization, etc.) of the industrial age. This paradigm displays several key characteristics: discourse banalization, strategic idealism, Newtonian ecology, geometric simplification, operational binary, autocratic command, technocratic direction, and engineer organization. 
210
211
Strategic idealism refers to the platonic idea that by looking at history we can create 
209
210
211
212
Newtonian ecology is about the embrace of simple physical concepts: the idealization of speed, the emphasis on mass as the main instrument of efficacy, and space and time as absolute arenas rather than part of the system. 
214
215
216
217
212
213
214
215
organizational construct or command and control are optimized for the current fight." 
218
219
The Army has attempted to transition toward a culture based more on mission command, but from a cultural still struggles to practice what it preaches. 
220
221
222
223
224
The form of maneuver this paradigm takes in its application has been called "Strategic Domination by Air-Mechanization" or "Aerospace Blitzkrieg." 
225
226
227
228
224
225
226 Justin Gronk, Russia's Military: Is It Really a Threat? (Roundtable, 2019). 
227
229
230
As the concept evolved over time, ALB maintained its focus on, "…rapid, decisive operations that would quickly collapse an opposing armed force at its center of gravity.
Information, superiority, speed, and guided munitions would enable smaller more high-tech forces to prevail against larger, less nimble enemy forces." 
231
The logic and character of the Army's operational paradigm drive its application. That application is described by doctrine. Doctrine is critical to understanding the underlying values and assumptions that determine an organization's actions. It is not only the language with which a military force describes itself, how it thinks, and how it expects to act but it is also an interpretation of what has occurred, why it has occurred, and how those who produce it see themselves and the world. As the Army's Operations manuals, FM 100-5 and FM 3-0, are the keystone documents around which the remainder of Army doctrine is produced, they and the future Operating Concepts that inform and precede them are important in understanding how the Army envisions itself acting.
In 2019, the US Army initiated a whole-scale revision of its doctrine along the same lines as it is revising its acquisitions, with a focus toward Large Scale Ground Combat Operations (LSGCO). This attempt at cultural shift is based on the understanding that many aspects of Army culture have been defined by "over 20 years of persistent limited contingency operations." 
232
233
234
240
Operations to Prevent remain focused on deterrence and are envisioned to set the conditions for execution of LSGCO. The Army sees sustainment preparation, activation of tactical headquarters, and theater setting and force projection options as its tools to conduct these operations. 
241
Large Scale Ground Combat Operations are the crux of the operational model and LSGCO defines success as the achievement of tactical and operational objectives through the destruction of enemy forces in the field. 
242
243
244
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
255
US Army Future Doctrine: Multi-Domain Operations -Old Wine in New Skins?
While doctrine is how the Army operates in the present, with its existing structure and capabilities, future concepts are how the Army desires to operate in the near future. Concepts are not possible in the present as they require organizational change to be feasible. Large Scale Ground Combat is the Army's current doctrinal lens but, for the past several years, the Army has been developing and advertising a future concept, Multi-Domain Operations, which was anticipated to be implemented between 2028 and 2035. While the concept is being subsumed/superseded by the Joint concept of All Domain Operations (ADO), it offers examples of continuities in Army thinking, even when looking into admittedly different future environments. 
256
257
258
259
MDO purported to provide additional options for the use of force to policymakers. The concept claimed that the current military options available to US policymakers in the face of aggression by a peer competitor were either to accept adversary actions by doing nothing, because of the accepted idea of challenged deterrence, or to engage in protracted war owing to an inability to prevent a fait accompli. 
261
262
The application of MDO was expressed via its five phases: Compete, Penetrate, Dis-Integrate, Exploit, Re-Compete. These phases map seamlessly onto the existing Army strategic roles, with Competition and Re-Compete associating with Operations to Prevent and Operations to Shape and Penetrate, Dis-Integrate, and Exploit associate with Prevail in Large Scale Ground Combat Operations. 
263
264
264
MDO. These phases are essentially the sequential neutralization and defeat of long, mid, and short-range A2/AD systems leading to the ultimate defeat of enemy land forces. 
265
Beyond the logic of current doctrine, MDO displays other aspects of the current Army paradigm. We see Brian Linn's Managers' desire for reorganization and restructuring in the Calibrated Force Posture and Multi-Domain Formation and we hear their echoes in MDOs emphasis on the Russian and Chinese threats. Linn's Guardians find embodiment in the concept of Convergence, the new intellectual tool that will enable victory, and in the emphasis on technological capabilities as solutions to operational problems. The Heroes too find representation in MDO's acknowledgement that war is a human endeavor and in themes such as "maximizing human potential."
The concept of integrating and synchronizing capabilities across domains is an expression of the same themes captured in the concept of Jointness that has been a consistent aspect of US operational practice. MDO's emphasis on more rapid and continuous synchronization should be seen as a continuing progression and, as such, it was less like the revolutionary impact of the introduction of the iPhone, as a senior Army leader has described, and much more like the evolution of the iPhone over its subsequent generations.
266
267
268
269
The elements of MDO that become part of the Joint ADO concept will likely be successful in addressing what inspired them-penetrating A2/AD systems at the operational and tactical environments. But the conceptual separation of competition below the threshold of conflict from conflict itself, as well as the division in responsibility between implements of national power in terms of those definitional boundaries, reaffirms the adherence to the Clausewitzian paradigm of war as a discrete military activity, even as the Army acknowledges its stated rivals' alternative perspectives. As much as MDO accurately described the future operating environment, it did not adequately describe a framework for how to address competition below the threshold of war, presumably leaving that to agencies and departments outside the military, reinforcing the traditional understanding of the military's role as armed conflict against the forces of the enemy state.
The consistency of the operational paradigm in current and future doctrine suggest that it has predated such concepts and should be present in history as well. Indeed, given the American disposition toward history as a source of lessons to be used in creating doctrine, it would be surprising if the current operational paradigm was a recent, or theoretical, development. The 1991 Persian Gulf war was tailor-made for the US operational paradigm. At the level of policy, the Weinberger-Powell criteria were met in every case. First, securing Middle Eastern oil reserves was a critical interest to the nation. Second, troops were committed with the intent of winning. As President Bush noted, "I instructed our military commanders to take every necessary step to prevail as quickly as possible…this will not be another Vietnam…our troops…will not be asked to fight with one hand tied behind their back."
270
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
273 Allison,
105. 274
275
276
Mahnken,
169. 277 Ibid.,
170. 278 Ibid.,
The Gulf War was the first "Space War" where space-based systems provided position/navigation, weather information, communications, imagery and tactical early missile attack warning. 
279
The most significant challenges and achievements of the Gulf war were strategic and operational. The building of a coalition of 35 nations to fight together to liberate Kuwait represents an unparalleled diplomatic and military accomplishment. Moreover, the Army ability to transition from preparing to fight in a woodland environment on the defense to fighting in a desert environment on the offense deserves significant credit. But the Persian Gulf War, more than any other demonstrated the incredible expeditionary capacity of the Joint forcemoving formations, equipment, logistics into theater and sustaining the coalition over the course of the campaign highlight the more significant achievements of the war. The Army's operational concept, AirLand Battle, was hailed as the "blueprint for victory in the Persian Gulf War."
280
281
The US Army had become unparalleled in its preferred method of warfare. The Gulf War served as a validation and reaffirmation of the American logic of war, as a powerful vindication of the US Army and its Cold War paradigm. But as is often the case, within victory lay the seeds of defeat. Iraqis learned two lessons that would change the game in their next conflict with the U.S. The first lesson (strategic) was that it is willpower, not tallying up destruction, that decides wars, and the second lesson (operational) was that propaganda trumps reality. 
282
283
284
285
286
287
The United States has not conducted counterinsurgency since the 19 th century, but rather every low-intensity conflict conducted since World War II has been large scale, violent, Foreign Internal Defense. This was evident in Afghanistan as the war progressed. Operationally, the U.S. found itself in a new environment where battlefields were fragmented, opposition was multi-polar and variable, tactical action was highly politicized, coercive options were much broader in scope than simply kinetic force, conflicts were more open-ended, and victory as a goal tended to be replaced by stability. 
288
The iconic imagery of the war in Afghanistan is of course the Predator feed-the black and white video transmitted by unmanned drones hovering over a target or area of interest. This feed is an inherently tactical product, but pumped into headquarters across the theater it provided the impression of consequential knowledge. 
289
Yet, US Army still approached problems by trying to do more of the same, "if a 'surge' seemed to work in Iraq in 2007, why not in Afghanistan in 2010," or so the thought process seemed to go. 
290
In 2003, the US Army invaded Iraq a second time. Just as before it faced, "an inferior opposing force established according to a modern, Western model; terrain that allowed for precise targeting; and incompetent enemy leadership." 291 And just as before, it proved unmatched in conventional conflict. Invasion forces in March 2003 were almost a third of the size of those in 1991, against an Iraqi Army with half as many tanks and armored vehicles, more artillery pieces, 
289
290
291
292
293
294
295
296
297
292
293
299
Commanders were encouraged to do what they did best, hunt down and kill or capture terrorists and insurgents, and unit after unit rotated through the theater fighting not a coherent sixteen-year war, but a series of separate, local one-year wars sixteen times. As an unstable Iraq currently demonstrates, the maligned claim by some Army leaders that stabilizing Iraq would require as many soldiers as invading it ultimately proved correct-the rapid, decisive military phase transitioning into the political phase simply did not materialize. In 1991 the policy, strategy, and operational approach pursued were relevant to reality; in Afghanistan and Iraq over the first two decades of the 21 st century, none of them were.
The ways in which the Army is envisioning warfare, equipping itself, educating and training itself, and the manner in which it has conducted itself in past conflicts elucidate its underlying preferences, assumptions, and views of war, warfare, and operational thought, which have remained generally consistent. The central problem that the Army faces is a culture that is focused on tactics over operational art and strategy, on a technical rationalist approach to addressing challenges, and on warfighting over war. It is worth revisiting Carl Builder's observation that, "…something happened to the Army in its passage through World War II that it liked; and it has not been able to free itself from the sweet memories of the Army that liberated 
298 Mahnken,
213. 299
France and swept victoriously into Germany." 300 An inadequate learning system has resulted in the US pursuing concepts that essentially offer few new insights about the strategic lessons we have failed to grasp. What is required is a comprehensive framework of learning that will address the organizational, strategic and operational domains. Only then, can the Army transform itself and its paradigm in the manner necessary to correct its strategic drift.
While there is no end to commentary on how the Army should change, is changing, and has changed to meet the demands of contemporary conflict, these changes are for the most part single and double-loop learning efforts at best because they all take place within the prevailing system, informed by the existing perspective and worldviews. Triple-loop learning requires an external perspective; it requires stepping outside of the culture, values, assumptions and core beliefs of the system in question. It requires asking questions like, "If we had to recreate the US military from scratch today, would it look at all like it does now?" 
301
Rather than a re-orientation or the establishment of a new paradigm of warfare, the US Army emphasis on Large Scale Ground Combat Operations represents a continuity. The mindset, ends, ways, and means of US combat forces have remained consistent. Instead of going through a number of Kuhnian paradigm shifts, Echevarria asserts that US operational thought better represents a "tiering," where, as with increasing layers of sediment, new ideas, terms, and metaphors are layered over the same underlying paradigm. 
302
303
The Army must not just learn but unlearn. And herein lies its primary challenge for, as Basil Liddell-Hart once wrote, "The only thing harder than getting a new idea into a military mind is to get an old one out." 304 Most organizations operate in the single-loop learning mode, struggle to achieve double-loop learning and far fewer are able to engage in triple-loop learning, especially systematically. Militaries are exceptionally prone to an inability to conduct double and triple-loop learning due to their rigid organizations and hierarchies, tradition-heavy culture, and to a value-system that prioritizes conformity, obedience, discipline, and standards. Further, militaries regularly demonstrate another characteristic that Chris Argyris points out as a hindrance to higher-level learning, the conflicting cultural norms which demand both uncovering and hiding errors. 
305
306
303 Kuhn, 12-22. 304 B.H. Liddell Hart, Thoughts on War (London, UK: Faber and Faber, 1943)
Chapter III: Toward A New Paradigm [The emerging paradigm of warfare] is not about decision, it is about pursuing potential…it is not about imposing plans on reality but about integrating into the ecology…it regards hybrid realities…breaks away from banal differentiation between war and peace; we will live in a perpetual gray ecology, in which peace and war are synthesized or integrated…the traditional definitions of start and termination are a bit irrelevant…action doesn't necessarily involve killing but can imply different modes of injecting energy: economical, human, etc…no border, no fronts, no rears…no beginning, no end…the military is becoming more civilian and civilian societies are becoming more militarized…the special forces will be conventionalized and the conventional force will be specialized…an army without soldiers…it will be an organ without a body and soldiers without uniforms.
-Dr. Shimon Naveh, Rhizomic Maneuver   To return to David Foster Wallace's analogy, this monograph has been about the waterit has been about the way the paradigm in which we swim shapes our language, doctrine, training, education, uniforms, procurement, and our operational thought. For the young fish to be able to understand the water, for the members of the Army organization to be able to understand the paradigm that characterizes their understanding of war and warfare, they must be able to learn differently than they are currently. They must be able to achieve triple-loop learning.
The U.S. has a very static paradigm of war, increasingly in sharp contrast with the nonstate and state actors with which it is engaged in competition. This paradigm of war, warfare, and competition is so ingrained that commentators regularly discuss the changing character of war but in operation they merely project modern terminology onto the same old way of thinking. This tendency has resulted more and more in a mismatch between what is expected and what is occurring, resulting in strategic drift.
The outcome of strategic drift is surprise, which is rarely beneficial for military organizations. Zvi Lanir describes two forms of surprise: situational surprise and fundamental surprise. Situational surprise occurs due to failures in "gathering, analyzing or distributing information," it is a failure of insufficient information. 307 Fundamental surprise occurs when there is a gap between one's mindset and reality, it is the result an irrelevant self and world view. 
308
309
310
The challenge is not to try to prevent the drift but to accept it -to be positioned for it in such a way we can explain what is happening and why (in relation to our working frame or governing paradigm of the hour) and to do it faster than our opponents. Only then could we appreciate potential of the new emergence and form a new, alternative coupling of strategy-operation. 
311
312
It is well beyond the scope of this work to attempt to define a new paradigm for understanding war. Such an effort will require a significantly more expansive treatment than possible here. This monograph's purpose has been to reveal that such an effort is necessary if the US Army to remain relevant. However, this monograph implies several requisite characteristics of future paradigm and several directions for further research.
As suggested by this work, the US Army's challenges revolve around understanding itself and its opponents, understanding change and moving time, and understanding a place we have not been before. Thus, any new paradigm must address these areas challenges.
First and foremost, the new paradigm must acknoweldge change as an inherent aspect of its nature, it must provide a view of moving time. To return to Francois Jullien's observation, "The defining characteristic of warfare is the inevitable distance that separates the reality of it from its model. In short, to think about warfare is to think about the extent to which it is bound to betray the ideal concept of it." 313 Any new paradigm that is not doomed to eventual irrelevance must accommodate this law. Our current perspectives see past, present, and future as snapshots rather than movement. 
314
Second, a new paradigm must help us contend with places we have not been before. Our current paradigm looks to history and by analogy conceptualizes the future. This has resulted in a 
313
315
316
318
Lastly, the new paradigm must enable the organization to step outside itself and take an exterior view; it must allow the organization to see the world through its rival's perception; it must allow the organization to see how it relates to its broader context and how the organization itself contributes to the problems it faces. Thus, the new paradigm must be built around a systemic view and incorporate systems thinking as a central methodology. It must be inherently self-referential and capable of meta-cognition. It must be self-skeptical and heretical in orientation in order to allow for transformation. 
319
A new paradigm along these lines should be the priority of US Army intellectual thought, as it will enable the US Army see movement and change and thus prevent ossified views and obsolete assumptions. It will allow the Army to see itself from the outside, see itself in terms of the broader system in which it lives, and see how it contributes to the problems it faces. Most importantly a paradigm along these lines will enable the Army to change itself in response to the movement and change it identifies as the environment changes.
The new paradigm must be focused on learning and developing cultural, institutional, and operational learning systems is the most critical effort the US Army currently faces. A cultural learning framework would perform the function attempted by this work, to examine the current culture from an exterior perspective and identify aspects that contribute to a mismatch with current realities. The institutional learning framework would examine the formal organizational, structural and policy systems for relevance and identify and enable transformation of these aspects. The operational learning framework would first acknowledge that unique learning mechanisms must be designed and implemented for every operation and its primary focus would educate to enable the designing of such approaches. The paradigm must be a self-innovating mechanism that disrupts modes of thinking, understandings, and organizations. 320 can be taken from efforts in the Israel Defense Forces in introducing operational design: I read a comment made by an analyst that it was very hard to learn. You know, wars are very hard to fight and yet we go and fight them. If indeed this is crucial and important, it is not an option. We should go and do it. I think, from what I've learned from both in my home country and here, is that you don't need to be a genius to be able to study. All you need is some intellectual stamina, some energy. If you're serious about your profession, then you'll go through it. 
323
324
Beyond the changes to broader PME, the identification and cultivation of leaders with operational and strategic potential must begin much earlier in career timelines and be supported by special developmental tracks. As has been noted, "The commander's ability to think operationally…is usually not an innate trait but is acquired and nurtured for many years prior to assuming a position of responsibility at the operational level."
325
A paradigm centered on change requires a fundamental shift in perspectives on warfare. This requires theorists; it requires an emphasis on intellectual and theoretical thinking to balance out the tactical, practical and operative thinking preferred and incentivized by the Army. In terms of doctrine, the outdated doctrinal principles, tenets, characteristics and elements upon which many assumptions are made must be revisited and revised. More importantly, mechanisms must be put in place to ensure this happens as needed based on changes to the operational environment, capabilities, threats and context. Structure, organization, roles and responsibilities should be reassessed. Examination of how the Army culture can be made more flexible and adaptable in virtually all respects would provide benefit.
In addition to the question of determining what changes need to be made, the more challenging question of how to implement these changes is also an area in need of examination.
Implementing such significant and wide-ranging changes in the DOTMLPF-P will be difficult politically, culturally, and fiscally. But ultimately, answering such questions will be necessary, if only because it is far less costly to transform now and be at the fore end of the emerging paradigm, than having it imposed upon us through failure. For this is the very mandate of a leader: "It is, after all, the responsibility of the expert to operate the familiar and that of the leader to transcend it." 
326
32 Dima Adamsky,
123 US Department of the Army, The Army Posture Statement (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), 1.
123 US Department of the Army, The Army Posture Statement (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019), 1.
128  
128  
143 17 Large Scale Combat Operations Gaps: Advanced Strategic Leadership Studies Program Address.
194 James J. Schneider, "Introductory Essay," in The Evolution of Operational Art (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2013), x-xi.
194 James J. Schneider, "Introductory Essay," in The Evolution of Operational Art (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2013), x-xi.
301
Ben Zweibelson, "An Application of Theory: Second Generation Military Design on the Horizon," Small Wars Journal (February 20, 2017), accessed February 4, 2020. https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/an-application-of-theory-second-generation-military-design-on-thehorizon.
7 Mark K. Smith, " Chris Argyris: Theories of Action, Double-Loop Learning and Organizational Learning," The Encyclopedia of Informal Education (2013), accessed February 4, 2020, http://infed.org/mobi/chris-argyris-theories-of-action-double-loop-learning-and-organizational-learning/
.8  Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann, The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise on the Sociology of Knowledge(New York, NY: Anchor Books, 1967), 138-40.   
Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago, IL: The Univeristy of Chicago Press, 1962), 43-90.
Jamshid Gharajedaghi, Systems Thinking: Managing Chaos and Complexity (Burlington, MA:  Elsevier, 2011), 8.   
John Shy, "First Battles in Retrospect," in America's First Battles: 1776-1965, ed. Charles E. Heller and William A. Stofft (Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 1986), 327-52.
Mary Jo Hatch, Organization Theory: Modern, Symbolic and Postmodern Perspectives (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2013), 11-15.
Chris Paparone, The Sociology of Military Science (New York, NY: Bloomsbury Academic, 2013), 2.
Echevarria, Reconsidering the American Way of War: US Military Practice from the Revolution to Afghanistan, 174-76.
Large Scale Combat Operations, 7 vols. (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Army University Press, 2019).
Vought,[29][30] 
US Department of the Army, The Army Vision (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2018), 1.
Ibid.   
John Vrolyk, "Inurgency, Not War, Is China's Most Likely Course of Action," (December 19, 2019), accessed December 19, 2019, https://warontherocks.com/2019/12/insurgency-not-war-is-chinasmost-likely-course-of-action/; Timothy L. Thomas, "Russian Forecasts of Future War," Military Review 99, no. 3 (2019): 86.
145 Will Koehrsen, "Has Global Violence Declined? A Look at the Data," (January 5, 2019), accessed Febraury 16, 2020, https://towardsdatascience.com/has-global-violence-declined-a-look-at-thedata-
5af708f47fba.146  Steven Pinker, "Graphic Evidence: Steven Pinker's Optimism on Trial," The Guardian, September 11, 2015, https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/ng-interactive/2015/sep/11/graphicevidence-steven-pinkers-optimism-on-trial.
Yotam Feldman, "Dr. Naveh, or, How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Walk through Walls," Haaretz, October 25, 2007, https://www.haaretz.com/1.4990742.
US Army, FM 3-0 (2019); US Department of the Army, Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-90, Offense and Defense (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2019).
 217  Naveh, "Rhizomic Maneuver."
Swain, in "Filling the Void: The Operational Art and the U.S. Army," 158-159 .
Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler, War and Anti-War:  Surivval at the Dawn of the 21st Century (New York, NY: Little, Brown and Company, 1993), 55.
Mansoor, 299.   
US Army, FM 3-0 (2019), 3-1.
Colin Clark, "Gen.  Hyten on the New American Way of War: All-Domain Operations," February 18, 2020, https://breakingdefense.com/2020/02/gen-hyten-on-the-new-american-way-of-war-alldomain-operations/.
257 US Army, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The U.S. Army inMulti-Domain Operations 2028, v-
vii.258  
Ibid.,[6][7][8] 
259  Ibid., iii. 260 US Army, The U.S. Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028 Base Brief V6 (May 2019), 5.
US Army, The U.S. Army inMulti-Domain Operations 2028, 24-26.    
Stephen Townsend, "Accelerating Multi-Domain Operations: Evolution of an Idea," July 23, 2018, accessed December 17, 2019, https://mwi.usma.edu/accelerating-multi-domain-operations-evolutionidea/.
267 US Army, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-1, The U.S. Army in Multi-Domain Operations 2028, B-1 -B-2.
US Army, The U.S. Army inMulti-Domain Operations 2028, 24-46.    
Greer, Phone Conversation with Author (March 28, 2020).
George H.W.
Bush, "January 16, 1991:
  271  The White House, National Security Directive 54 (Washingon, DC: National Security Council,
1991).272 WilliamThomas Allison, The Gulf War, 1990-1991 (New York, NY: Palgrave, 2012), 125.   
Sharon Watkins Lang, "SMDC History: 25 Years since First 'Space War'," Army.mil, January 20, 2016), https://www.army.mil/article/161173/SMDC_History__25_years_since_first__Space_War_/?from=RSS.
Summers, 157.    
Daniel P. Bolger, Why We Lost: A General's inside Account of the Iraq and Afghanistan Wars (New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcrourt, 2014), xviii-xix.
Bolger, xxxix-xli.    
Mansoor, 307.    
Summers, 7.   
Leonidas Musashi, "Snatching Defeat from the Jaws of Victory," The Agoge, February 15, 2014, accessed April 4, 2020, https://medium.com/the-agoge/snatching-defeat-from-the-jaws-of-victory-aea92b2effd6.
 286  Craig Whitlock, "At War with the Truth: U.S. Officials Constantly Said They Were Making Progress. They Were Not, and They Knew It, an Exclusive Post Investigation Found.," Washington Post, December 9, 2019, https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2019/investigations/afghanistanpapers/afghanistan-war-confidential-documents/?
itid=lk_inline_manual_3. 287 Charles H. Briscoe et al., Weapon of Choice: U.S. Army Special Operations Forces in Afghanistan (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies
Institute Press, 2003), 36-38. 288 Emile Simpson, War from the Ground Up: 21st Century Combat as Politics, International Institute For Counterterrorism 14th Annual International Conference (Herzliya, Israel: 2014), 54-89.
Bolger, 140.    
Mansoor, 310.    
Echevarria, Reconsidering the American Way of War: US Military Practice from the Revolution to Afghanistan, 155-56.
Echevarria, Reconsidering the American Way of War: US Military Practice from the Revolution to Afghanistan, 171-72.
Naveh, Operational Art, Operational Command, Systemic Operational Design: Transforming  the Triad, Extending the Potential, 5.    
Graicer, 32.   
Shimon Naveh, Interview with Bg(Ret.) Shimon Naveh (Fort Leavenworth, KS: US Army Combat Studies Institute, 2007), 4.
Naveh, "'Beware of the Power of the Dark Side' -the Inevitable Coupling of Doctrine and Design," 36.
Vego, "Systems Versus Classical Approach to Warfare," 44.   
Henry Kissinger, Years of Upheaval (Boston, MA: Little Brown, 1982), 445.
The author would like to acknoweldge the following people for the knowledge, mentorship, criticism, encouragement, and time they provided. Without their efforts this
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
Anti-Access/Area-Denial ADM conducted as a campaign aimed at achieving operational and strategic objectives." 
235
236
237
238
Shaping Operations are intended to maintain status quo and set conditions for future large-scale ground combat operations. These shaping operations include "military engagement, security cooperation, intelligence, Counter Weapons of Mass Destruction (CWMD), humanitarian 
235
236 Ibid., 1-5 -1-6. But in order to effect learning, there must be a proponent, with authority, to drive the learning process. This would be one of the primary functions of a true General Staff system, modeled on the original German conception, which is also worth investigating. "The General Staff's primary concern is to generate learning and constitute strategic inquiries." 321 Aside from acting as the central learning catalyst, such a system has other merits. First, such a system will create a proponent for operational and strategic theoretical development, an area with little current focus but of vital importance to the operation of the aforementioned learning systems.
Second, such an organization can act as a reservoir for operational and strategic expertise and serve as a developmental path to such expertise, providing the experience in operational and strategic environments that is necessary for future leaders in those echelons. Third, such an organization reduces vertical stovepipes and creates shared understanding across the broader organization through a body of officers at critical positions who understand how their subculture thinks and operates." 322 Fourth, it would reduce the fragility of the Army's command-centric system wherein the commander's vision and intent can become a single point of failure; it also provides an additive means, adjacent to command channels, for communication from the senior leadership to the force.
Likewise, research into how assessment, selection, training and education systems must be revised is a necessary area of focus. The Army must seek to abandon its anti-intellectual bias, and prioritize critical and creative thinking and intellectual rigor in greater proportion as the rank and scope of missions increase. The Army must develop and populate itself with "intellectual practitioners" instead of separating operators/doers and intellectuals/thinkers, as its cultural norms predispose it to doing. This will be difficult but that is not a reason to shy away from it. Example 321 Naveh, ""Beware of the Power of the Dark Side" -the Inevitable Coupling of Doctrine and Design," 34. 
322