# ID: d948f206d0624135bbf65d348227c641
# Title: Russian Military Deception Post-Soviet Union
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Deception has long been practiced by military leaders. The ability to disguise and deceive has been a vital portion of a campaign
Though fraud in other activities may be detestable, in the management of war it is laudable and glorious, and he who overcomes the enemy by fraud is as much to be praised as he who does by force.
-Niccolò Machiavelli, The Art of War On December 26, 1991, the world stood still as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) dissolved when the Supreme Soviet voted to abolish the union between the fifteen independent republics. As the post-Soviet world approaches the thirtieth anniversary of the fall, through the ashes a more modern federation has risen in its wake. During these years, Russia has modernized its military forces to re-emerge as a near-peer threat to the United States. The Russian Federation has upgraded its tank corps, air forces, and air defense assets that, in some cases, outperform the US equivalent. On February 20, 2014, Russian forces conducted joint military exercises in vicinity of the Crimean Peninsula of Ukraine, resulting in the annexation of this vital piece of terrain, and invaded the eastern portion of the country. The speed, tempo, and results shocked the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Western powers into wondering how the Russian military was able to pull off such a military operation so discretely and deceptively.
Thirty years of rebuilding and reconfiguring the Russian armed services has postured Russia once again, as a peer equivalent with the United States. The reemergence of the timeless practice of maskirovka has projected Russian influence in the region by exerting its diplomatic, economic, and informational dominance on neighboring countries. This monograph seeks to answer the question: "Since the fall of the USSR, how has Russia used deception as incorporated in their theory of maskirovka, and how can the United States counter this use of deception?" Russia has used maskirovka for hundreds of years. The most recent examples were in 2008 and in 2014, where Georgia and Ukraine were deceived into thinking Russia was conducting military exercises and succumbed to the deception. Russia geographically is the largest nation on earth. This fact allows the ground, air, and naval forces of the Federation to conduct Corps and higher exercises with little to no interference regarding terrain. This ability to train at that level gives a huge advantage to those forces involved in the exercise. It allows for commanders to better employ current doctrine and rehearse for future conflicts. The United States and NATO can counter Russian deception by building the proper force in Europe by implementing a multi-domain defense plan, intelligence sharing, and cyber operations.
With the understanding of history, theory, and doctrine, research focuses on maskirovka from a historical and theoretical perspective in order to assess how the United States can counter Russian deception. Using access to military journals, first-hand accounts from Ukrainian and Georgian soldiers, how Russia conducts training, and their ability to deceive again, this monograph can help planners understand the indicators of the Russian military deception operations.
Chapter One leads off with the history of maskirovka and how the Russians have leveraged this tactic in the past. Chapter One ends with understanding that maskirovka runs deep within the Russian tactical, operational, and strategic levels of war. Many Russian officials in multiple high-ranking positions across the Russian government leverage the theory. The military does not solely use this tactic; it is practiced and utilized in foreign policy decisions on the geopolitical level. Additionally, the chapter looks closely at how the Russian Armed Services revamped their forces and how they practice maskirovka inside the formations.
Chapter Two looks at the Russo-Georgian War of 2008. The history of the conflict dates back centuries and continues to be an extremely sensitive and hostile area to this day. The Russian military and diplomatic efforts in the South Ossetia and Abkhazia regions utilized deceptive tactics for the first time in decades and resulted in Russia ultimately seizing control of the two regions. These regions are geographically strategic due to the main economic routes that run north and south through the Caucasus.
Chapter Three presents the second case study, the Russo-Ukrainian War of 2014. Like the previous chapter, the study investigates the history of the conflict and how the Russians implemented maskirovka. The results of conflict were not at all surprising, however the conduct of the war was telling on how Russia can deceive other countries in all aspects of national power (diplomatic, information, military, economic). The unique approach to the conflict in which Russia maneuvered its ground forces, controlled the narrative, and established highly contested elections with such speed and precision are alarming.
Chapter Four presents a scenario that deep dives into how Russia would utilize its ground forces, sea assets, and capitalize on an already unstable Ukraine. In the end, utilizing maskirovka Russia would seize the Southern coast of Ukraine and control much of the Northern portion of the Black Sea. During the scenario, the United States and NATO would enact a joint multi-domain defense plan, intelligence sharing, and utilize cyber operations, to counter Russian deception operations.
The conclusion emphasizes the importance of evolving NATO and EU with modern multi-domain plans, intelligence sharing, and the utilization of cyber. Expanding on these three aspects of the alliances will assist in deterring and identifying when Russia is utilizing maskirovka. Understanding the identity of maskirovka will assist planners in assessing the current Russian threat and how to properly implement a response.
Based upon history, theory, and doctrine, Russian use of deception is an extremely complex problem. The unique problem set that Russia presents itself to the West cannot be fixed with just military power alone. It requires all four instruments of national power: diplomacy, information, military, and economics of not just the United States but all NATO allies and aspiring partners in peace. With all of NATO and its allies working in unison utilizing all four instruments of national power, Russian expansionism can be deterred, and the next humanitarian crisis potentially prevented.
It is difficult to find another nation in the late twentieth-century and early twenty-first century that has transformed its military might as much as the Russians have. From 1991 to present, just about every aspect of the Russian military was studied and reformed to better suit the Russian way of war. Many aspects of the Ministry of Defense appear unrecognizable to its Western counterparts.0 F
1
Russian doctrine calls this maskirovka. The word most closely translates to the English word, "disguise or conceal," and technically applies to everything including camouflage, but the West's use of the label does not truly get to the meaning or understanding of the usage of the word. As for Russia, this concept is much more than just a warfare tactic; it is an ideology utilized in every aspect of its government.1 F 2 Maskirovka is used to conceal true intentions from opponents whether it be in foreign policy, military operations, and even domestic policy, and to influence other countries' foreign and domestic policy to spread propaganda and promote Russian ideology or simply to create doubt and distrust of a country's intentions.2 F 3
The Soviet Union practiced maskirovka extensively throughout the Cold War. An example was the so-called "bomber gap." The Russians made numerous efforts to create the appearance they had built up a massive number of nuclear capable bombers. At a Soviet air show in 1955, Russia flew a few of its Bison bombers overhead. The same bombers quickly flew out of sight, looped around, and flew back over again, creating the appearance of dozens more bombers than they had.3 F 4 The Russians also packed all their Bison bombers in an airbase they knew the Americans would photograph, again giving the appearance of having many more bombers than they operated. Eventually NATO air reconnaissance showed the bomber gap was nonexistent, but not before the United States spent massive amounts of money building up its own bomber fleet of over two thousand aircraft.4 F
5
In 1983, the KGB conducted Operation Infection. The purpose of this campaign was to spread false information claiming that the United States had invented HIV and AIDS in a lab.
Pro-Soviet newspapers and media outlets across eighty different countries published that claim.5 F
6
During the Vietnam War, the Soviets spent more than one billion dollars on peace movements across the world with the goal of removing public support for the war. The KGB reportedly helped fund most antiwar movements during the Cold War.6 F 
7
8
9
The Russian government explained that these men were acting by themselves and not on behalf of Russia.1 0F 
11
12
Every nation has practiced some form of deception at some level, but the Russians have taken it to a higher level and have mastered the use of deception to conceal their true intentions.
Russia applied maskirovka at every level of policies, even down to the unit and tactical levels of war. In order to accomplish maskirovka in the twenty-first century, Russia needed to completely upgrade its armed services. The 2008 New Look Reforms ensured that the Russian military could compete with the United States if a conflict between the two countries occurred.
In order to achieve maskirovka in the new millennium, Russian leaders created the 2008 New Look Reforms. The reforms targeted key aspects of the Russian military and how the military conducts warfare. The first change was geared towards how Russia maintains its personnel. The Soviet and post-Soviet eras relied upon a mandatory two-year service obligation to fill their 
10
12 Ibid. ranks, after which the conscript returns back to civilian life. The state could always call that theoretically already trained individual back for further military service if required. The two-year service obligation has since changed to a one-year obligation with emphasis on one specific technical field expertise.1 2F 
13
However, similarities exist between militaries with emphasis on experience, training, qualifications, and testing. The Russian officer is tested holistically and then placed on a path of being a commander or staff for the remainder of their career. The current Chief of the General Staff, General Valery Gerasimov completed his platoon, company, and battalion commander time in his first eight years of service.1 3F 
14
16
14 Ibid., 13. 
15
16
Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) to determine their military aptitude and qualifications. The Russian means of distributing talent is far more extensive.1 6F 
17
18
19
The Russian Ministry of Defense went as far as completely reconfiguring their military districts. During Soviet times, Russia had sixteen military districts. Then in 2010, the Federation dissolved many of them and created four primary military districts. The four commands are Western, Southern, Central, and Eastern Strategic Commands.1 9F 20 Then in 2014, the Artic Strategic Command was added in part to the list but does not receive much in terms of ground forces.
The reforms did not really redesignate the distribution of the armies. The armies are still generally located along the borders with other nations, with most of the highly regarded and equipped armies in the Southern and Western Operational Commands. These commands border 17 Ibid., 6-9. 
18
War,
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[27]
[28]
NATO countries and the Caucasus regions. The commanders of these districts have complete operational control of their respective districts, minus nuclear capabilities.2 0F 
21
22
In Russia, all aspects of the military support the armor's ability to maneuver around the battle space. On the contrary, in the United States, all aspects of the military support the infantry and their ability to shoot, move, and communicate.2 2F 
23
24
22
War,
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
24
25
26
27
26
27
29
28
with the breakaway of the regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in a place called Transcaucasia, located within the sovereign nation of Georgia. The conflict formally lasted for six days resulting in a ceasefire; however, 850 lives were lost, 35,000 civilians were displaced, and Georgia lost hundreds of tanks, aircraft, and sustainment capabilities.2 9F 
30
31 "About Georgia, Government of Georgia -History," ITDC, Government of Georgia. 
32
33
from the collapsing union. President Zviad Gamsakhurdia, Georgia's first post-Soviet leader, stood on a platform of nationalism and Georgian independence from any other nation.3 3F 34 A part of the president's national independence was the reunification with South Ossetia and Abkhazia. The president never got the chance at reunification because like most satellite states around the Soviet Union, Georgia fell into disarray when the USSR collapsed.3 4F 
35
The regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia rebelled against Tbilisi and sought to become independent nations of their own. Under the control of the previous communist leader, Eduard Shevardnadze, Georgia maneuvered its military in both regions to regain power. Georgia succeeded in bringing Ossetia back to the negotiating table; however, mass human atrocities occurred in Abkhazia. The new leader of Georgia, President Mikhail Saakashvili, drastically changed the country's foreign policies. He went against the Russian-backed CIS and allowed pro-West 34 Ibid. 
35
36 "About Georgia, Government of Georgia -History," ITDC, Government of Georgia. 
37
38
42
President Dmitry Medvedev succeeded President Vladimir Putin in the 2008 presidential election. In one of his first major acts as president, Medvedev immediately mobilized Russia's Southern Military District forces in response to the growing number of Georgian troops along the border of the disputed regions.4 2F 43 On August 7, while most of the world prepared for the opening 
39
40
41
43
44
45
46
Further west in the Abkhazian region, under the direction of the Black Sea Fleet, Russian naval forces began bombarding the sea towns of Gagra, Gudauta, and Sukhumi.4 6F 
47
46
47
49
50
51
Russia's 2008 military engagement resulted in control of the South Ossetia and Abkhazia regions. These limited gains gave Russia added access to the Black Sea and a major road network through the Caucasus into Georgia.5 1F 
52
To the public, the five-day Russo-Georgian War of 2008 was very minor. However, on a much larger scale, this war meant something much greater. Russia had undisputedly reestablished its military dominance in the region. The implementation of maskirovka was apparent during multiple operations inside the campaign. The implementation of arraying ground forces under the false pretense that they are construction workers and engineers there to fix key infrastructure.
Additionally, the operation began while the world watched the opening of the Olympic Games.
There was little that NATO or the United Nations could do because of ongoing wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, which required additional surges during that year. The Russian timing of the incursion was immaculate and precise. President Medvedev understood that a timely war would be costly and deadly.5 2F 
53
50
51
52
53 Ibid. Ukraine is a historically divided nation that directly borders Russia and the Black Sea.
The geographic division has traditionally been the Dnieper River that runs north and south, which coincidentally divides the nation in half. Naturally, the western section of the country is more West European influenced, while the eastern portion is Russian influenced.5 4F 
55
56
57
Prior to the collapse of the USSR, there was rarely a time when Ukraine was truly independent since the 1600s. Ukraine gained its independence in 1918 during the period of World War I when the Russian Empire collapsed and the Russian or Bolshevik Revolution began.5 7F 58 54 John Cunningham, s.v. "Ukraine-History," Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., accessed December 22, 2020, accessed October 22, 2020, https://www.britannica.com/place/Ukraine/History. 
55
57
58
However, for nearly four hundred years, Ukraine was controlled and ruled by either the Czars or Soviet Premiers.
In the 1700s, Catherine the Great initiated the idea of "Russifying," Ukraine.5 8F 59 Russian influencers migrated to eastern Ukraine and capitalized on this historically Russian region.
Hundreds of thousands of people and money poured into the region to maximize its fertile land, copper, coal mines, and its ports along the north and northwestern sections of the Black Sea.5 9F 
60
During the interwar period, Josef Stalin ordered the displacement of many Ukrainians from their homes and forced to work in these fields, mines, and ports under excruciating work conditions.6 0F 
61
62
This tactic was successful in the east, due to the prosperity it brought to the region. In the west, it generated and fueled much hatred and animosity towards Russia and added to the divide in the nation. The people of the east began to identify more as Russians than Ukrainians, leaving their western brethren to fend for themselves. Over the next twenty years after World War Two, the crumbling Ukrainian economy and infrastructure exacerbated the divide. As the west attempted to become more industrial and agricultural, corruption in Kiev by Russian-backed 59 Cunningham, "Ukraine-History." 60 Ibid. 
61
62
63
64
67
68
64
65 "Ukraine Crisis: Timeline," British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), November 13, 2014, accessed December 14, 2020, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-26248275 66 Ibid. 
67
68
By March 1, the Crimean Peninsula installed a new pro-Russian Prime Minister, Sergei Aksenov. One of Aksenov's first acts as Prime Minister was to request support from Moscow to assist in keeping law and order. Immediately following the request, he surrendered the Ukrainian armed forces on the peninsula, thus denying any chance of a Ukrainian military defense.6 8F 
69
On March 16, officials reported that 95.5 percent of Crimean voters supported joining Russia in the referendum, but many residents abstained. With no international observation of the vote allowed, the Crimean parliament officially joined the Russian Federation.7 1F 
72
74
69 "Ukraine Crisis: Timeline," BBC. 
70
71
72
73 "Ukraine crisis: Timeline," BBC. 
74
On the eastern border with Russia, rebellions were fueled by pro-Russian separatists. In other parts of eastern Ukraine, rebels took control of government buildings in several eastern cities.7 4F 75 Meanwhile Ukrainian defense forces lost control and at least one thousand people died between mid-April and mid-July because of the conflict.7 5F 76 Many of them civilians and 298 more people died when Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was apparently mistakenly shot down by rebels.7 6F 77
This triggered more EU sanctions on Russia. Russia, for its part, repeatedly denied sending troops and weapons over the border despite Ukraine's claims. However, NATO photos and video footage proved Ukrainian claims.7 7F 78
Simultaneously during the two-front conflict, President Vladimir Putin ordered joint military exercises along the border of Ukraine. The military exercises consisted of over 150,000 troops from the Russian Southern Military District and the majority of the Black Sea Fleet.
President Putin claims that the military exercises were planned, however they have been used as previously as a deterrent against Western expansionism.7 8F 79
In February 2015, both sides settled on a peace agreement called Minsk Two. The deal detailed conditions for a ceasefire and security zone where heavy artillery, tanks, and mortars were banned. Foreign militaries, meaning Russia, had to leave Ukraine. It also recognized the two separatist areas, the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic, and outlined how they could be fully reunified back into Ukraine. But despite the agreement, none of that has happened.7 9F 80 75 "Ukraine crisis: Timeline," BBC. 
76
77
79
80 "Ukraine Crisis: Timeline," BBC.
President Putin was able to destabilize Ukraine and stop it from developing a stronger relationship with Western Europe. Russia continues to fuel the fighting by supporting the separatists and keeps its own military at the ready. Meanwhile Ukraine's government is forced to devote resources to its defense. Both sides have ignored the ceasefire so far and a closer look at the front lines reveals just how unstable the region is. The Russian military's tactic of sterilizing their uniforms prior to the engagement is profound. In the United States' doctrine and allied training programs, it is difficult to see the West ever deploying similar tactics against an adversary. The Ukrainian case study showed Russia not only will mask small units but mastered the capability for larger units as well.8 4F 85 This tactic makes it extremely difficult to decipher friend from foe or who is whom in an extremely complex and complicated battlefield.
The 2014 Russo-Ukrainian War was arguably very profitable for Russia. The result of that engagement granted Russia the economically rich Crimean Peninsula. With that piece of 
81
82
83
84
85
In the Luhansk and Donetsk regions, military factions are still engaging one another well after the official ceasefire that ended the 2014 Ukrainian Crisis. This civil unrest goes in favor of the Russians because it provides additional opportunities for Russian military intervention in the region and proves the Ukrainian government cannot protect its citizens.
The Russians maximized maskirovka in multiple instances during the campaign.
Historically, the Russians capitalized on the eastern region of Ukraine's demographics of pro-Russian sentiment. The military and diplomatic efforts appeared to be in sync and in unison during the multi front conflict. What the military was doing and what the Kremlin was saying never truly matched up. That was the emphasis of the maskirovka efforts in Ukraine. The government made false statements publicly while coordinating behind closed doors with the military, the use of unmarked soldiers who seized key terrain, and the massive military training exercise being conducted along the border created to many problems for Ukraine to try and solve.
The deception created confusion amongst international actors as well, resulting in mixed reporting that clouded what was really occurring in the region.
The previous two chapters covered the Russo-Georgian and the Russo-Ukrainian Wars.
The two conflicts offered a historical perspective on how Russia has implemented maskirovka in the twenty-first century. This chapter offers a scenario where Russia, having utilized maskirovka, As NATO and Ukraine become desensitized to the Russian military exercises, Russia would formally begin its incursion into the southern regions of Ukraine. Under the guise of joint military action, the Black Sea fleet would sail from Sevastopol and begin a blockade against the ports of Odessa, Bilhorod, and the mouth of the Dnieper River. These are the last remaining ports Ukrainians can operate from to stop or harass the Russian Black Sea fleet. Utilizing this blockade, 86 "Ukraine Crisis: Timeline," BBC. 
87
Simultaneously, Russian Special Purpose and Spetsnaz forces, unmarked by any Russian insignia, would gather with pro-Russian separatists in the region and begin civil unrest. These actions could include the control of key infrastructure, such as port access, port security, local police and fire emergency services, hospitals, schools, and all government buildings. These tactics of maskirovka mirror how operations took place in 2014.8 7F 88 This futuristic scenario could take place in less than a week based upon the speed at which Russians moved in 2008 and in
Russian media outlets could flood Western media using information warfare and counter narrative with propaganda that Russia is merely providing humanitarian aid. The Black Sea Fleet's naval vessels could be carrying aid that doubles as military sustainment; however, the Russian President will continue to issue statements that Russia is currently not involved with any ground-based forces. During these Russian deception tactics, the Ukrainian military will attempt to mobilize and begin its counteroffensive into the southern Odessa, Mykolaiv, and Kherson regions to end civil unrest.
As the Ukrainian military attempts a counter-offensive, continued Russian information warfare could be broadcasted from the Russian Federation claiming mass atrocities against civilian populations. The false information narrative campaign could cause mass confusion to not only those ground commanders, but international partners as well. This maskirovka technique was practiced during the Ukrainian war, which resulted in confusion and misunderstanding of what was happening in time and space. The results of the confusion could be that nobody understands who exactly is conducting these atrocities against the civilian population. The atrocities could be 
88
With the previous conditions met, the Russian Federation could begin its mirrored process of annexation at a rapid pace as it did in Crimea, Donetsk, and Luhansk.8 8F 
89
Immediately following the election, Russian-backed officials would be willing to break away from Ukraine and promote the idea of creating the Republics of Southern Odessa, Mykolaiv, and Kherson. With these three regions, Russia could dominate the northern part of the Black Sea and Ukraine will no longer have access to the sea.
Understanding that the conflict is escalating beyond a fast and timely conclusion, Russia could influence civil unrest in the region of Zaporizhia. This region is located on the coast of the Sea of Azov. If pro-Russian backed separatists can successfully conduct operations, Ukraine would be without access to any body of water.
As in 2014, video footage, real time interviews of Ukrainian citizens, and military personnel will quickly prove that Russia is lying about its involvement in the hostilities.8 9F 90
Ignoring the evidence, Russia could continue to flood Western media outlets with highly conflicting information that goes against what is actually happening on the ground. It would be expected that Russian military equipment will be offloaded by the Black Sea fleet and illegally smuggled through black market avenues into the region to be used against Ukrainian law enforcement, first responders, and the military. 
89
90
As civil unrest continues in Ukraine, the Black Sea fleet and the Southern Military District could conduct a joint exercise with 150,000 ground forces along the eastern border of Russia. Unfortunately, as this hypothetical situation takes place, there would be little that Ukraine could do to stop this Russian-backed military incursion and the annexation of multiple districts and municipalities. In these regions, the Ukrainian armed forces are not equipped with proper anti-tank armor, indirect fire weapons systems, intelligence, or air cover to match the Russian backed forces.9 0F 
91
These military actions could take place in a matter of weeks or months, just as the Russian Federation has previously done. The Russian military has vast overmatch as well as its previously established historical connections towards the region. NATO, the United States, and the European Union would be challenged unlike ever before. and Ukraine shows that Russia can capture, annex, and cause damage and then cease operations just prior to any major international intervention.
The other aspect of this scenario is the geography. Utilizing maskirovka, the Russian Federation will be in full control of the North Black Sea, threatening pro-West Romania and Moldova. Studying the Russian Federation's geography in 2021 and looking at the countries that it borders, another attack on Ukraine is the most likely. To the north of Ukraine is the Russian ally of Belarus. Further north are NATO and EU members Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia.
Continuing north is the EU member Finland. This pro-Western wall does not give Russia the military advantage nor political motivation to directly attack a NATO and or EU member nation.
The Russian Far East and the Central Military District border along North Korea, China, Mongolia, and Kazakhstan are currently either loosely allied or do not pose a viable threat to the Russian Federation at this time. The regions along the western border and the Southern Military District or the Caucasus region do not generate viable options for Russia as they seek expansion opportunities that are limited, attainable, and risk less international involvement.
As Russia conducts this attack, what could be the response from NATO and Western powers? The United States and NATO, though not specifically attacked, would feel pressured to respond to do something other than sanction specific oligarchs, businessmen, and businesses of the Russian Federation. At the end of this action, the Russians would have secured roughly seventy-five percent of everything east of the Dnieper River as well as the entire coast of Southern Ukraine, allowing the Federation multiple seaports that threaten the western coast of the Black Sea.
When dealing with a nation that is willing and able to conduct limited military incursions, the West must realize where and how Russia could make its next move. It is highly debated that actions by NATO and its allies after 2008 and 2014-or lack thereof-have emboldened Russia.9 2F 93 The United States and its allies have since taken multiple steps to reprimand Russia by way of sanctions on critical businesses and individuals, providing military equipment to Ukraine, and freezing economic assets of key Russian oligarchs.9 3F 94 Diplomats, scholars, and economists have debated whether this is sufficient to contain or deter Russia, was it too little, or is it justified despite the possibility of escalating the crisis further. Whichever direction the debate leans, Russia has not conducted similar attacks since 2014, which implies that the sanctions are working as a deterrent.
According to Juha Rainne's article regarding the topic, many economists believe these sanctions on businesses and key personnel within Putin's inner circle are highly effective and should continue.9 4F 95 The continuation of joint economic sanctions on Russia is vital in keeping the Russian economy below average. This strikes at the heart of Russia's number one export, which is oil, and keeping natural resource revenue flow in check.9 5 F 
96
94
96
97
98
According to Kramer and Binnendijk, the creation of the assistant secretary general for intelligence and security was the founding step in creating a better apparatus for intelligence sharing.1 00F 101 NATO and EU should take additional steps to create this new office to enable the establishment of country teams where experts in the assigned country or region can communicate directly with similar teams. It is likely that these teams exist, however, when dealing with intelligence, national caveats can be complicated. The intelligence community must ensure that the intelligence that is gathered can be directly sent to the Ukrainian recipient as early warning and action. This ability to directly share information with Ukrainians will counter the Russian information warfare dominance. NATO and EU can get information directly from the contested area instead of waiting on reports that cannot be verified.
The third approach is an emphasis on integrating US national level cyber capabilities into NATO's deterrence plans. The current focus of cyber is inherently defense and this will not change. The countries with highly capable cyber operations should work with those nations with diminished capabilities.1 01F 
102
Ukraine should request a full cyber defense assessment from NATO and EU to determine how vulnerable Ukraine is to adversarial cyber-attacks. The assessment should be completed, and 
100 Kramer and Binnendijk,
Meeting the Russian,
11. 101 Ibid.,
11. 102 Ibid.,
15.
Western planners must study and understand evolving Russian capabilities to combat the latest threats that Russia poses. Combining these three approaches will not guarantee deterrence, but it will help with improving NATO and EU defenses in countering future Russian maskirovka techniques that could be used.
This monograph set out to answer the question, "Since the fall of the USSR, how has Russia used deception as incorporated in their theory of maskirovka, and how can the United States counter this use of deception?" The analysis utilized an understanding of the theory and doctrine of maskirovka, the Russo-Georgian War, the Russo-Ukrainian War, and a possible future scenario with plausible NATO responses to answer the research question. This monograph's study of the Russian approach to maskirovka, the two conflicts, and the scenario has only scratched the surface of the topic. Additional research can expand upon research into maskirovka during the Soviet era or even the use of maskirovka during the Romanov Dynasty. Diving deeply into each part of maskirovka historically could broaden NATO's approach to counter Russia's military deception theory.
Understanding Russian maskirovka and its historical use is important for several reasons; one is geographic. The Russian Federation has a distinct advantage over the United States and NATO because of its capability to conduct military exercises at the highest echelons and carry 
103
104
With these case studies, the 2008 Russo-Georgian War and the 2014 Russo-Ukrainian War gives the West an idea of how Russia sees and will conduct future warfare in the twenty-first century. In 2008, Russia introduced a different style of hybrid warfare masked by military deception operations from the highest form of the Russian government. In 2014, a similar synchronization between the Kremlin and ground units took place. Two incursions in a span of six years gave Western planners a lot to understand and incorporate in current NATO strategies.
The monograph provides an approach to assist NATO and EU to deter and identify Russian maskirovka in three areas. The first is a multi-domain defense plan that shows an indepth, all-encompassing plan on how to deter Russia from future expansionism. The second approach is a more robust intelligence sharing process. The lack of the Ukrainian early warning capability can be mitigated by Western intelligence sharing. The third and final approach is Ukrainian assistance with cyber. Cyber is becoming more common in Russian information warfare and can be countered if properly monitored and tracked.
Constant reflection and evaluation from NATO and EU along with studying emerging tactics from Russia can be beneficial to the future of Western Europe. Upon completion of this reflection and evaluation, the alliances must evolve to remain dominant in the twenty-first century.
Tanner Holland, "Maskirovka and Predicting Kremlin Actions in the
21st Century," The World Mind, October 13, 2016, accessed October 12, 2020, https://edspace.american.edu/theworldmind/2016/10/ 13/maskirovka-and-predicting-kremlin-actions-in-the-21st-century/.2 Holland, "Maskirovka and Predicting Kremlin Actions."3 Ibid.
"The Bomber Gap," Global Security, accessed January 2, 2021, https://www.globalsecurity.org/ wmd/world/russia/bomber-gap.htm.
Ibid.
David Grimes, "Russian Fake News Is Not New: Soviet Aids Propaganda Cost Countless Lives," The Guardian, June 14, 2017, accessed September 11, 2020, https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/ 2017/jun/14/russian-fake-news-is-not-new-soviet-aids-propaganda-cost-countless-lives.
Sarah Pruitt, "How a Five-Day War with Georgia Allowed Russia to Reassert Its Military Might," History.com, last modified September 4, 2018, accessed September 15, 2020, https://www.history.com/news/russia-georgia-war-military-nato.
Dave Johnson, "VOSTOK 2018:  Ten years of Russian strategic exercises and warfare preparation," NATO Review, December 20, 2018, accessed December 15, 2020, https://www.nato.int/ docu/review/articles/2018/12/20vostok-2018-ten-years-of-russian-strategic-excercises-and-warfarepreparation/index.html.
I would like to thank 
Dr. Gorman
Ms. Bonnie Joranko
Russian Military Deception Post-Soviet Union Approved by: _______//signed/6 Apr 
21/GSG//_______
Monograph Director Gerald S. Gorman
07 APR 21/VRS// ___________
Seminar Leader Victor R. Satterlund
20 APR 21/BAP//
School of Advanced Military Studies Brian A. Payne, COL
Assistant Dean of Academics for Degree Programs Dale F. Spurlin