# ID: d948f206d0624135bbf65d348227c641
# Title: Russian Military Deception Post-Soviet Union
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
Thirty years of rebuilding and reconfiguring the Russian armed services has postured Russia once again, as a peer equivalent with the United States.
The reemergence of the timeless practice of maskirovka has projected Russian influence in the region by exerting its diplomatic, economic, and informational dominance on neighboring countries.
This monograph seeks to answer the question: "Since the fall of the USSR, how has Russia used deception as incorporated in their theory of maskirovka, and how can the United States counter this use of deception?"
Russia has used maskirovka for hundreds of years.
The most recent examples were in 2008 and in 2014, where Georgia and Ukraine were deceived into thinking Russia was conducting military exercises and succumbed to the deception.
Russia geographically is the largest nation on earth.
This fact allows the ground, air, and naval forces of the Federation to conduct Corps and higher exercises with little to no interference regarding terrain.
This ability to train at that level gives a huge advantage to those forces involved in the exercise.
It allows for commanders to better employ current doctrine and rehearse for future conflicts.
The United States and NATO can counter Russian deception by building the proper force in Europe by implementing a multi-domain defense plan, intelligence sharing, and cyber operations.