# ID: db597c3cfbd141ddb04e4602e896b8e2
# Title: Autonomous robotic weapons: Us army innovation for ground combat in the twenty-first century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
This monograph analyzes three case studies and compares them to determine some of the critical factors behind models of successful and unsuccessful innovation. These case studies include the German and French Armies and their mechanized doctrine development 1919-1939 and the U.S. Army's autonomous robotic doctrine development 2005 -2025. Contemporary operational planners, much like their predecessors in the inter-war period, must be attuned to the changing characteristics of warfare. These changes in the contemporary operational environment will likely incorporate autonomous robotic capabilities at an unprecedented pace. This project seeks to determine if maneuver officers in the US Army are fully anticipating the requirement to field and develop autonomous robotic ground weapon systems, and create a comprehensive doctrine to effectively integrate these systems with other emergent technologies. It further determines whether powerful institutional norms, rooted in decades of battlefield dominance throughout the twentieth century, have formed a cognitive resistance to such innovative doctrinal development or to paradigm shifts that may be required to prepare the US Army to dominate ground combat operations in the 21 st century.
Today the robot is an accepted fact, but the principle has not been pushed far enough. In the twenty-first century the robot will take the place which slave labor occupied in ancient civilization. There is no reason at all why most of this should not come to pass in less than a century, freeing mankind to pursue its higher aspirations. 
1
3
The twenty-first century provides a challenging, complex, and dynamic operational environment for US military planners to effectively link tactical ways and means to achieve strategic ends and to ultimately enforce US national policy. The US Army's current Unified Action doctrine states that Unified Land Operations must be executed through decisive action, and by means of the two core competencies of combined arms maneuver and wide area security. 
4
Based on these conditions, the contemporary operational environment contains significant parallels with the strategic environment of the early half of the interwar period 1919-1939, in three primary respects. These parallels include a general public sentiment and aversion to combat casualties, the rapid escalation of emergent technologies, and the uncertainty about the specific nature of armed conflict within the next decades. Military planners faced uncertainty about how to best integrate early model trucks, tanks, airplanes, and radio systems during the interwar period. Similarly, the United States Army may soon be challenged with refining its doctrine to best integrate the full capabilities of early model directed energy weapons, biometrics, supercomputing devices, autonomous robotic ground weapon systems, and UAS directly into ground combat operations.
Contemporary operational planners, much like their predecessors in the inter-war period, must be attuned to the changing characteristics of warfare. This shift will likely incorporate growing autonomous robot capabilities at an unprecedented pace. Are maneuver officers in the US Army fully anticipating the fielding and development of these systems, and are they envisioning a comprehensive doctrine that will effectively integrate these systems with other emergent technologies? Or, have powerful institutional norms developed from decades of battlefield dominance in the twentieth century, formed a resistance to such an innovative doctrinal approach? The hypothesis here is that maneuver officers are not fully anticipating the requirement to train, equip, and fully integrate the force with autonomous robotic ground weapon systems, nor the potential paradigm changes that may emerge.
Three case studies form the basis for analysis, providing for their comparison to determine some of the critical factors behind models of successful and unsuccessful innovation. Successful innovation is defined here as the effective integration of emergent technological capabilities to transcend both contemporary paradigms, and accepted institutional norms in order to generate a superior method or practice for obtaining a position of relative operational and tactical advantage over an adversarial force.
Thomas Kuhn's Theory of Scientific Revolutions provides criteria for contrasting the phenomena of innovation for each case study. Moore's Law and Kurzweil's Law of Accelerating Returns provide critical context for the phenomena of technological development for the third case study.
In his 1962 book, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, philosopher Thomas Kuhn published his theory on how a given collection of accepted practices and procedures ultimately accumulates into what becomes viewed as normal science or into "puzzle-solving" paradigms. 
5
6
5 "Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy," Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, last modified August 11, 2011, accessed March 31, 2015, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/thomas-kuhn/#6.1. 
6
7
In fact, he summarizes, "Failure of existing rules is the prelude to a search for new ones". 8 Thomas Kuhn's theory of scientific revolutions provides criteria through which to compare and contrast each case study to assess the relative perception of crisis and its impact on subsequent levels of successful innovation.
In his 1965 paper published in Electronics Magazine, Gordon Moore (cofounder of Intel) published his observation that the number of transistors on microchips doubled each year, (subsequently revised to every two years) which enables computer devices to become incrementally smaller while concurrently sustaining exponential increases in their processing speed and performance. 9 For example, in 1964 a standard chip contained about 30 transistors each and by 2012 the Core i7 chips inside many laptops contained over 1.4 billion transistors each. 10 Known as "Moore's Law", this trend has consistently held true over the last 5 decades and it is expected to continue for at least the next ten years. 
11
12
8 Kuhn,
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,
68.
13
Three case studies form the core of the analysis of the hypothesis within the organization of the monograph. The first case study (part I) examines the German army during the interwar period to determine: first, the specific conditions that existed in Germany after the conclusion of the First World War, second, the decisions and actions taken by the military leadership to innovative with emergent technological capabilities of the period, and third, the subsequent results of their doctrinal development and its subsequent impact on operational and tactical success during the early months of the Second World War. The evidence indicates that the German army applied combat experience with technological education during the interwar period to create its mechanized doctrine of combined arms maneuver or Bewegungskrieg ("war of movement"). 
14
15
Though combined arms doctrine of the Second World War relied heavily upon the developments of combat aircraft, FM radio, mobile artillery, motorized vehicles, dispersed Infantry formations, and tanks, the scope of this study will focus primarily on the tank and armor development as the primary catalyst for innovation. Additionally this study is strictly limited to unclassified robotic weapons systems research and development.
The greater the advance of technical science, the more effectively can it devote its inventions and instruments to the service of the army and the higher will be the demands it makes on the soldier who manipulates these technical aids. Anyone who has the smallest idea what technical knowledge, what numerous instruments…must admit that these essential qualities cannot be taken for granted with men whose training had been brief and superficial, and that such men, pitted against a small number of practiced technicians on the other side, are "cannon fodder" in the worst sense of the term. 
16
When the belligerent nations ceased hostilities after the First World War by signing the armistice in 1918, the German army was severely depleted and its national government quickly experienced a turbulent transition from a monarchy into a republic.
17
18
This case study focuses primarily on the German Army in the decade immediately following WWI and its methods of developing what would later become known as combined arms maneuver, often referred to by the subsequent colloquial term blitzkrieg ("lighting war"). 
19
For the purpose of analysis, the German Army's experience during the interwar years can be divided into two periods. The first period includes its years as the Reichswehr under the authority of the Republic from 1921-1933, and the second period includes it years as the Wehrmacht under the authority of the National Socialist regime, from 
1933-1945. 20
21
The conditions facing the German Army at the conclusion of the First World War were immensely challenging. Defeated on the Western front, it was drastically depleted from fighting four 19 Robert Citino, Blitzkrieg to Desert Storm: The Evolution of Operational Warfare (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2004), 18. 
20 Messerschmidt, "German Military Effectiveness between 1919 and
1939," 218. 21
22
23
24
25
26
As German professional officers analyzed their recent experiences in the First World War, many of the lessons were not yet apparent to them. 
27
26
27
Cambrai in 1917, and
Amiens in 1918. 28
29
30
31
32
33
28
29 Ibid. 
30
31 
Michael Howard, War in European History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 131. 32 Trevor Dupuy, Curt Johnson, and
David Bongard, eds., The Harper Encyclopedia of Military Biography (New York: Harper Collins, 1992)
the German Reichswehr during the early, formative years of its structural and doctrinal reform. 34 As Kuhn's theory of scientific revolutions suggests, the emergence of new theories from a crisis require large-scale paradigm shifts following distinct periods of professional insecurities. 
35
36
To identify how von Seeckt created this solution, it is useful to closely examine the significant decisions and actions taken by the German Army during the Reichswehr years. In this period they leveraged the capabilities of available emerging technology such as the automobile, airplane, tank, and radio, and took steps to develop what would later become its mechanized, combined arms doctrine.
Perhaps the paramount action taken by General von Seeckt was to deliberately foster a collaborative climate of technological innovation within the Reichswehr. Specifically, he recognized that the status quo of nineteenth-century style warfare, with its massed-wave Infantry assaults were unacceptable because the emergent technology of the era had already degraded this method's effectiveness and he believed it would soon render it obsolete entirely. 
37
34
35
36
37
39
40
41
General von Seeckt sharply raised the professional academic standards for Reichswehr officers and ensured official maneuver course curriculums directly addressed the latest advancements in emergent technology. 
42
43
38
39
40
41
42
43
weapon systems such as tanks, von Seeckt insisted his subordinate officers dedicate much of their personal time and attention to state-of-the-art advancements in both civilian and military technology, and embraced the notion die Gedanken sind frei ("thoughts are free"). 
44
Reichswehr officers were highly encouraged to volunteer for ninety-day assignments abroad to study armor development in foreign countries and to provide published reports upon their return to Germany. 
45
46
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
49
50
51
52
53
54
Reichswehr did not have an actual tank available for participation in its major field maneuver exercises until 1935, nearly fourteen years after Army Regulation 487 had been originally been published. 
55
56
57
58
59
60
June, 1940. 61
55
56
57
58
63
63
64
64
In the final analysis, the French High Command lacked a clear chain of authority and responsibility that could provide the army a firm sense of direction for developing its doctrine and designing its weapons. While over-centralization may stifle initiative, the fragmented organization of the French High Command also stifled creative solutions to doctrinal problems. 
65
After persevering through four intense years of devastating conflict on French soil, and after sustaining immense numbers of casualties the alliance finally defeated the juggernaut of the German Imperial Army.
Over the following two decades, the French Army anticipated the possibility of another war with Germany with considerable trepidation. 
67
68
69
65
66 Ibid., 1.
67 Ibid., 5.
68 Ibid.
69 Ibid., 3-4. Three essential components examined in this case study include: first, the specific conditions that existed relative to the French Army, second, the significant decisions and actions taken by the French Army to develop its methodical battle doctrine, and third, the consequences of these decisions and actions on tactical operations during the opening months of the Second World War.
The conditions facing the French Army at the conclusion of the First World War were not as dire as those facing the German Army, however there are distinct parallels between the two. The French sustained nearly 1.4 million killed or missing in action during the war which impacted its very identity, and shaped its paradigm about future operations. 
71
72
70
71 Ibid., 72. 
72
firepower was paramount in order to set the conditions for counter-attack maneuver. 
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
73
74 Ibid. 
75
, 1931 -1940. 82
83
84
85
84
85
86
87
An analysis of the specific conditions that existed relative to the French army immediately following WWI reveal that the army had sustained nearly 1.4 million casualties and it attributed the preponderance of these casualties to an over-reliance on the offensive. The army lost much of its combat experience as national policy makers chose to rapidly downsize the force. As with Germany, France also sharply reduced its defense budget, which inherently degraded force readiness. Emerging technology of the period such as the automobile, airplane, and radio continued to rapidly thrive and advance due to increased commercial applications and demand.
Many of the significant actions and decisions taken by the French Army during the interwar years are comparable and contrastable with those of the Reichswehr. Perhaps one of the most obvious distinctions between the French and German cases, is the French Army's lack of encouragement for collaboration and imaginative innovation among its junior officer corps. Professional recommendations for possible adaptations or evolutions of French doctrine were strongly discouraged and quickly dismissed. One historical account suggests that the French officer corps started exploring these avenues with vigor, but were gradually stifled by staunch institutional paradigms and ubiquitous force reduction initiatives:
The conference chambers of the Ecole de Guerre and the training grounds of Coetquidan Mailly, and Mourmelin were alive in the 1920s to the sound of the theory and practice of mobile experimentation. As the decade wore on, however, stultification replaced innovation. 
86
87
Experimentation diminished as technologically advanced and thus costly activities fell prey to the reductions in military budgets that went with the postwar climate of peace. 
88
Further, although the French Army continued to conduct research and development for more advanced tanks and weaponry, the senior leadership of the French Army did not seem to welcome debate amongst officers concerning their mechanized doctrine. 
89
90
91
92
93
88
89
90
91
94
95
96
98
Instead, its technological capabilities were used to augment a pre-existing paradigm. The preponderance of emergent technology available to develop mechanized warfare doctrine was already available due to progress in commercial industries during the interwar period. The French Army's reliance on methodical battle paradigm of 1918 proved to be a failed method because it facilitated a tremendous tactical and operational dis-advantage during the opening months of the Second World War. As a result, it inadvertently facilitated conditions for catastrophic strategic defeat for its civilian policy makers. 
94
95
96
97
98
And that's the edge we have to protect, especially in the face of declining budgets and increasing dynamism in the international security environment…And while we have achieved a degree of certainty in our budget for the next two years, we still don't yet have the full flexibility we need to rebalance the force for the challenges that we see ahead. We'll buy back some readiness in the near term and we'll overt a short-term crisis, but we still need to address the long term pressures. 
99
100
This third case study examines the US Army within the contemporary post-war environment, and its readiness initiatives toward Force 2025. Specifically, it examines the US Army's approach toward development and employment of autonomous ground robotic weapon systems in respect to doctrinal innovation. Further, it compares specific conditions, significant actions, and results.
In 2014, as a result of reductions to the defense budget, the US Army reduced its active force by five Brigade Combat Teams (BCTs), and is currently on track to eliminate another six BCTs during 2015. 
101
103
104
109
110
During the interwar period, commercial demand drove advancements in the airplane, radio, and automobile designs available to the French and German Armies. Similarly, in the post OEF/OIF environment, commercial demand has driven significant advancements in robotics and artificial intelligence technology available to the US Army. Ray Kurzweil's "Law of Accelerating Returns" explains the phenomenon by describing how the rate of progress of a given evolutionary process exponentially increases over time. 
111
Therefore, the US Army's approach with robotics mirrors the French Army's approach with armor during the interwar period because collective training events strictly adhere to the existing equipment already in the inventory.
As the German case study revealed, the Reichswehr insisted its officers closely follow the latest technological advancements and consider potential adaptations to battlefield use. There is currently no 110 CBO Costs of Military Pay and Benefits in the Defense Budget, 3.
111 Ray Kurzweil, "The Law of Accelerating Returns," Kurzweil Accelerating Intelligence, March 7, 2001, accessed March 29, 2015, http://www.kurzweilai.net/the-law-of-accelerating-returns. formal emphasis or expectation for US Army officers to remain closely attuned to emerging technology in the civilian sector. In this aspect, the US Army is presently more closely aligned with the interwar French Army.
The decreasing costs and commercial proliferation of these robotic systems has eliminated state government monopoly on the research and development of these semi-autonomous and autonomous robotic systems. They are widely available to the international community as well as to non-state actors, and at the time of this writing, there are 76 countries with known military robotic weapons programs. 
112
113
114
115
116
For instance, researchers at Harvard University have recently unveiled the first successful synchronization of a robotic swarm comprised of over 1,000 tiny robots. 
117
118
118 Ibid. systems via the paradigm of remote control. This is congruent with the aspect of interwar French Army doctrine that promoted strict adherence to top-down control over tactical maneuver.
In 1918, weapon systems such as machine gun, artillery, and poison gas contributed to escalated combat casualties at an unprecedented scale. Both the German and French Armies recognized the value of mechanized and armored technology to mitigate these hazards. Similarly, the confluence of DEWs advanced computer systems, electronic sensors, and have the potential to render the tactical environment increasingly hazardous for human combatants, particularly given the principals of Kurzweil's and Moore's law. The US Army has recognized the value of robotic technology to mitigate these hazards, but
has not yet clearly identified an innovative approach to fully harness autonomous capabilities. Again, the present approach is congruent with the French Army. The US DoD has made strides in the development of directed energy weapons technology, including the High Energy Liquid Laser Area Defense System (HELLADS). Similarly, in 2013 at the White Sands Missile Range, NM the US Army successfully tested Boeing's HEMTT mounted High Energy Laser Technology Demonstrator (HEL-TD) which utilized lasers to destroy sixty-nine inbound mortar rounds and three airborne UAV targets during its trials. 
119
120
121
122
123
124
126
During Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom, the US Army substantially increased the number of ground robotic platforms available for use at the tactical level. The majority of these ground robotic systems such as PackBot, MARCbot, TALON, MAARS and SWORDS were strictly operated by humans via remote control, and were primarily applied to directly counter the threat of improvised explosive devices (IEDs). 
127
were not authorized to engage their respective weapons in support of maneuver operations. 
128
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
139 Bond,
"Liddell Hart and De Gaulle,
" 610. 140
142
143
144
145
146
147
149
Further evidence that the US Army's approach currently resembles that of the interwar French Army can be found in the 2014 ARCIC white paper on the Army Vision -Force 2025, which clearly outlines the necessity of utilizing science and technology to create and sustain a leaner, expeditionary force capable of preserving overmatch against potential near-peer adversaries. 150 However, there is only a single sentence that explicitly references ground robotics, noting robots may "Enable and augment humans to accomplish ultra-hazardous tasks". 
151
153
154
155
The organization adheres to the paradigm that demands human combatants remain the exclusive autonomous shooters on the battlefield. Thomas Kuhn's observations on scientific revolutions suggest that innovation beyond this current paradigm is not likely to occur, without an increased perception of crisis by the institution. 
156
153
154 Dave Shunk, "The Rise of Robot Warfare Integrating Semi-Autonomous Combat Robots in Future Land Warfare: U.S. Army Planning Has Already Begun," Army Capabilities Integration Center, September 13, 2013, accessed March 30, 2015, http://www.arcic.army.mil/Articles/cdld-The-Rise-of-Robot-Warfare-US-Army-Planning-has-Already-Begun.aspx. autonomous robotic ground weapons systems. Both armies possessed a wealth of combat experience, and faced the challenges of fiscal constraints in the post war environment. Both armies considered themselves to be the premier land power in the world, and therefore neither generated sufficient incentive to risk transcending institutional paradigms concerning the application, integration, and employment of emergent technological capabilities on the battlefield. In sharp contrast, the German Reichswehr recognized that it could not succeed in supporting their national interests through another stagnated war of attrition.
Because of this sense of crisis, they were compelled to find ways to innovate with emergent technology in order to restore their offensive mobility. As Thomas Kuhn's theory describes, the US Army does not perceive itself to be facing a crisis in the decades ahead, and therefore (like the interwar French Army) will not likely be receptive to innovation beyond its current paradigm. urban areas daily. 
164
165
166
167
One final analogy that underscores this importance of the phenomenon of innovation is found by examining the recent tactics of violent extremist organizations during Operation Iraqi Freedom. By adapting readily available low-cost commercial electronic components such as timers, hand-held radios, electric switches, and cellular phones with home-made explosives materials these groups employed numerous varieties of Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs), in order to effectively disrupt the freedom of movement of coalition forces, and triggered the critical investment of nearly $18 billion worth of immediate Joint Improvised Device Defeat Organization (JIEDDO) funding 
2006 -2011. 168
Other emerging technologies may disrupt the global military balance as well, such as offensive cyber warfare tools; advanced computing; artificial intelligence; densely interconnected, multiphenomenology sensors; electric weapons such as directed energy, electromagnetic rail guns and high-powered microwave weapons; additive manufacturing and 3-D printing; synthetic biology; and even technologies to enhance human performance on the battlefield. All of these technologies -driven primarily by demand and advances in the commercial sector -are emerging today… 
169
170
171
172
As Carl von Clausewitz stated, "War is thus an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will." 173 Inherently, it is likely that human combatants will remain the most vital component of ground combat. Yet, as the evidence reveals, the pace of tactical operations is increasingly poised to exceed the 171 "Chappie 2015," IMDb, accessed April 15, 2015, http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1823672/. 
172 Citino,
Blitzkrieg to Desert Storm,
33. 173
76  
76  
Robert Citino, The German Way of War: From the Thirty Years' War to the Third Reich (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2005), 267.
Robert Doughty, The Seeds of Disaster: The Development of French Army Doctrine 1919
-1939
James Corum, The Roots of Blitzkrieg: Hans von Seeckt and German Military Reform (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1992), 33.
Manfred Messerschmidt, "German Military Effectiveness between 1919
and 1939
Allen Skinner, "Transformation of the German Reichsheer" (master's thesis, US Army Command and General Staff College,
1992), 5.
Robert Citino, The German Way of War: From the Thirty Years' War to the Third Reich (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2005), 242.
"Gen. Dempsey's Remarks at the National Defense University," Joint Chiefs of Staff -Media -Speeches, January 14, 2014, accessed March 26, 2015, http://www.jcs.mil/Media/Speeches/tabid/3890/ Article/571921/gen-dempseys-remarks-at-the-national-defense-university.aspx.
 100  Joseph L. Bower and Clayton M. Christensen, "Disruptive Technologies: Catching the Wave," Harvard Business Review (January 1, 1995): 1, accessed April 2, 2015, https://hbr.org/1995/01/disruptive-technologies-catching-the-wave.
John Cummings, "Directed Energy Symposium Focuses On Solutions to Threats," The Redstone Rocket, March 19, 2014, accessed March 29, 2015, http://www.theredstonerocket.com/tech_today/article_4d2d6e76-af6b-11e3-b695-001a4bcf887a.html.
"Active Denial System FAQs," Non Lethal Weapons Program U.S. Department of Defense, accessed March 29, 2015, http://jnlwp.defense.gov/About/FrequentlyAskedQuestions/ActiveDenialSystemFAQs.aspx.
"U.S. Department of Defense Directive Number 3000.09 Autonomy in Weapon Systems," Defense Technical Information Center, November 21, 2012, accessed March 30, 2015, http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/300009p.pdf.
Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 66.   
Knight, "How Humans Respond to Robots", 7.    
Dima Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation: The Impact of Cultural Factors On the Revolution in Military Affairs in Russia, the US, and Israel (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2010), 15.
Ibid., 20.   
William Mathews, "Megacity Warfare: Taking Urban Combat To a Whole New Level," ARMY Magazine,March, 2015, 31.    
David Shunk, "Mega Cities, Ungoverned Areas, and the Challenge of Army Urban Combat Operations in 2030-2040," Small Wars Journal (January, 23 2014): 1, accessed April 2, 2015, http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CB8QFjAA&url=http% 3A%2F%2Fsmallwarsjournal.com%2Fprintpdf%2F15177&ei=13odVYqlHISggwSitoCwCQ&usg=AFQj CNFg7crVMwD-I2Do8Jc99dxfPJZXCA&bvm=bv.89744112,d.eXY.
Megacities Concept Team, Megacities and the United States Army: Preparing for a Complex and Uncertain Future (Arlington, VA: Chief of Staff of the Army, Strategic Studies Group, 2014), 8-9, accessed April 2, 2015, http://usarmy.vo.llnwd.net/e2/c/downloads/351235.pdf.
Ibid., 21.   
The Strategic Direction for Army Science and Technology (Washington DC: Department of the Army; Army Science Board, 2013), 2, accessed April 15, 2015, https://fas.org/irp/doddir/army/asbstrat.pdf.
I would like to thank 
Dr. G. Stephen Lauer
COL Craig Berryman and COL Andrew Morgado
School of Military Studies
Combined Arms Research Library
-SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
The only thing harder than getting a new idea into the military mind is to get an old one out. 
157
The art of progress is to preserve order amid change and to preserve change amid order. 158 -Alfred N. Whitehead Every so often in history, you get a technology that comes along that's a game changer. They're things like gunpowder, they're things like the machine gun, the atomic bomb, the computer… and robotics is one of those. 159 -Peter W. Singer
The evidence indicates that rapid advancements technological capabilities, combined with ongoing changes in the global operational environment are increasingly rendering many of the paradigms of warfare in the twentieth century obsolete. This seems to be particularly true regarding autonomous ground robotic weapon systems. In 2014, a paper published by the Brookings Center for Technological Innovation identified the increasing considerations and US societal concerns regarding contemporary social-robotics integration and it revealed that "Human cultural response to robots has policy implications. Policy affects what we will and will not let robots do. It affects where we insist on human primacy and what sort of decisions we will delegate to machines." 
160
161
In his book, The Culture of Military Innovation, Dr. Dima Adamsky (Lauder School of Government, Diplomacy, and Strategy) elaborates on the impact of cultural and institutional norms on doctrine and military technology and he explains, "A national cognitive style is one element in the cultural mosaic that shapes a state's strategic behavior and constitutes the ideational foundation of its military innovation". 
162
163
Such cognitive barriers are particularly relevant when considered in the context of the accelerating proliferation of autonomous robotic technology (to both state and non-state actors) and the active global trends toward urbanization into megacities. Presently, over fifty percent of the global population lives inside urban areas, and an estimated 180,000 people continue to migrate from rural to