# ID: db71aae6b8304afba49becda5ed28fa5
# Title: China's Air Defense Identification Zone: Concept, Issues at Stake and Regional Impact
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
Introduction. News in the Indian-Pacific Ocean Region have been dominated in the past couple of weeks by Beijing's 23 November announcement of an Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ) in the East-China Sea. 1 Four aspects are particularly relevant. First, it covers Japan's Senkaku Islands, 2 which China claims under the name Diaoyu. Second, it includes the waters between Japan and Taiwan. Third, it requires aircraft flying through it to provide information, regardless of whether they are China-bound. Fourth, it has been accompanied by renewed speculation about a similar move in the South China Sea.
The official announcement required all "Aircraft flying in the East China Sea Air Defense Identification Zone" to provide "flight plans … maintain the two-way radio communications, and respond in a timely and accurate manner to the identification inquiries", maintain "transponder identification" and "clearly mark their nationalities and the logo of their registration identification", following Chinese instructions. The text also warned that "China's armed forces will adopt defensive emergency measures to respond to aircraft that do not cooperate in the identification or refuse to follow the instructions." and stated that the ADIZ would come into force that same day. 3    Commenting on Beijing's move two days later, Andrew S. Erickson (US Naval War College) explained that the Chinese Air Force "soon conducted its first patrol in the zone, with two large reconnaissance aircraft monitoring the area, early warning aircraft supporting and fighters providing cover", adding that "despite boilerplate disclaimers to the contrary, Beijing's action appears targeted precisely at stoking tension between China and Japan, and putting pressure on the U.S.-Japan alliance". Erickson believes that "particularly problematic is the fact that official Chinese statements imply that Beijing intends to use military force if necessary to ensure that all aircraft comply with Beijing's instructions within its declared ADIZ", stressing that "this is an unrealistic expectation, as an ADIZ is not synonymous with national airspace". 4  Professor Tomohiko Taniguchi, senior adviser to Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, considered Beijing's move to lead to "a whole new game", and stressed an aspect of China's ADIZ which has attracted much criticism, namely that in contrast with other such zones planes traversing them but not heading to
the country in question are nevertheless required to identify themselves. Taniguchi noted that "no nation has ever attempted" to do so. 
5
While reaction to the ADIZ by China's neighbors has generally been negative, no clear consensus has emerged on how to respond. Once again, we have been witness to the very different ways in which China and other countries see developments in the region. What for the Chinese is essentially a defensive measure, not directed against anyone in particular, and covering territories under Chinese sovereignty since times immemorial, is perceived by others as yet another small step in a relentless expansion which may end up unleashing a conflict of incalculable consequences. These very different perceptions are one of the factors that may make it difficult to reach some sort of 5 Interview with Professor Taniguchi. "China Air Zone Move a `Serious Challenge'", Bloomberg TV, 28 November 2013, available at http://www.bloomberg.com/video/china-air-zone-move-a-serious-challenge-Q7TeaXd3SM2vXKKN8H4eOA.html 6 Map taken from "Announcement of the Aircraft Identification Rules for the East China Sea Air Defense Identification Zone of the P.R.C.", Xinhua, , 23 November 2013, available from http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/china/2013-11/23/c_132911634.htm diplomatic settlement, although there are other forces pushing in the opposite direction. The purpose of this paper is to describe China's ADIZ, summarize the role and characteristics of Air Defense Identification Zones, examine the response by some the main actors involved (Russia, often forgotten, and Taiwan, strangely left out of many reports, included), the opinions of some experts, and place this development in a wider context, looking at the future courses of action that the main powers in the Indian-Pacific Region may follow.
Map of the overlapping Chinese and Japanese air identification zones, containing also the location of the disputed undersea gas fields.
7
What is an ADIZ? A brief overview of civil aviation law. Air Defense Identification Zones (ADIZ) are not a Chinese invention. Before considering Beijing's move it is necessary to examine in some detail their characteristics and place within public international law, as well as some of the existing such zones. This must be preceded by a brief introduction to civil aviation law and public international law concerning airspace.
After the invention of aircraft and the initial development of air travel, an attempt was made to regulate the phenomenon by means of treaties, meaning that this is an area of the law where this is the most significant source of rules. The most important treaty is the 1944 Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation, which not only provided the "essential framework" but "established the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)", a UN-specialized agency headquartered in Montreal. 
8
9
10
11
12
Concerning the tension between national sovereignty and the demands of widespread air travel, the Convention requires authorization by the concerned state before regular scheduled flights can take place. It also allows parties "for reasons of military necessity or public safety" to "restrict or prohibit uniformly the aircraft of other States from flying over certain areas of its territory" (Article 9-a), an important proviso being that such exclusions must affect all countries equally. Also, the resulting excluded areas must be of a "reasonable extent and location as not to interfere unnecessarily with air navigation". 
13
Without going into further details concerning the above, we can note that when not over any country's territory or territorial sea, aircraft are thus free to fly wherever they want as a general rule. This does not mean that there are no international regulations, with Article 12 of the Convention and its annexes containing detailed provisions designed to promote safety. We will not go into them, but we do need to note that for these same safety reasons international airspace, that is those portions of the atmosphere not above any state's territory or territorial sea, are divided into flight information regions (FIRs), "for which a state is responsible and with whose aeronautical authorities all foreign civil aircraft are required to co-operate". 
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Beijing. 22
24
1
25
26
27
28
29
30
First day cover commemorating the 50 th anniversary of the 1919 Paris Convention, the first international treaty to regulate civil aviation.
The Chicago Convention prohibits the use of force when it comes to pushing an aircraft to land, however this ban is qualified, the text (Article 3 bis a)) saying that "this provision shall not be interpreted as modifying in any way the rights and obligations of States set forth in the Charter of the United Nations". 
32
33
3536
37
40
41
42
44
45
46
48
50
52
Viewed in this light, Chinese claims that international protestations over the zone are hypocritical do have a ring of truth to them". 
53
54
55
58
With regards to the possible evolution of airspace law, it has been noted that "Like the Paris Convention, the Chicago Convention was drafted while the oceans (hence the airspaces) were divided only between territorial waters and high seas". 
59
63
65
66
Peter A. Dutton "Caelum Liberum: Air Defense Identification Zones outside Sovereign Airspace", The American Journal of International Law, Vol. 103, No. 4 (Oct., 2009) China's views, motivations, and strategy. Let us now examine the reasons which may have prompted Beijing to declare its East China Sea ADIZ. We may at least cite the following, on the understanding that they are not completely separate goals but that they may overlap to some extent: gaining strategic depth at sea (pushing out potentially hostile military forces from her EEZ), acting in accordance with her territorial claim on the Senkaku Islands, seeking to master the airspace between Taiwan and Japan (and putting a dent on the "strategic quadrangle"), taking another small step forward in her incremental strategy of territorial expansion ("cabbage strategy"), and reacting to domestic pressure (popular and/or military). We will later deal with another possible angle, better protection for her strategic nuclear submarine fleet.
Concerning coastal defense, 67 one of the drivers behind different interpretations of coastal state rights' under UNCLOS is precisely the Chinese perception that military activities near her coast pose a vital threat, even in peace time. In 2010, at an online chat with citizens, Major General Luo Yuan (deputy secretary general with the PLA Academy of Military Sciences) explained why China opposed U.S.-South Korean joint drills in the Yellow Sea, reminding his audience that "in terms of security, Chairman Mao Zedong once said, 'We will never allow others to keep snoring beside our beds'". 
68
69
71
To gain a historical perspective on this issue a visit to Hong Kong's Museum of Coastal Defense is useful. Website available at http://hk.coastaldefence.museum/en/section1-1.php "Why China opposes US-South Korean military exercises in the Yellow Sea", People's Daily, 16 July 2010, available at http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/90001/90780/91342/7069743.html "The greatest military threat to China comes from the U.S. Navy. The Chinese have become highly dependent on seaborne trade and the U.S. Navy is in a position to blockade China's ports if it wished. Should the United States do that, it would cripple China. Therefore, China's primary military interest is to make such a blockade impossible." George Friedman, The Geopolitics of China: a Great Power Enclosed, Austin, Stratfor Global Intelligence, 2008, p. 8, available at http://www.stratfor.com/analysis/geopolitics_china "China's most vulnerable point, since the arrival of Europeans in the western Pacific in the mid-19th century, has been its coast. Apart from European encroachments in which commercial interests were backed up by limited force, China suffered its most significant military encounter --and long and miserable war --after the Japanese invaded and occupied large parts of eastern China along with Manchuria in the 1930s." George Friedman, The Geopolitics of China: a Great Power Enclosed, Austin, Stratfor Global Intelligence, 2008, p. 5, available at http://www.stratfor.com/analysis/geopolitics_china The tension between the coast and the inland regions is one of the cleavages in Chinese history. The post-Mao economic reforms have led to a widening gap, which the authorities may now be seeking to narrow down by promoting the (re)industrialization of some areas of the interior, in a policy which may also be driven by rising labor costs in the coastal regions. Before that, Mao had sought to shift part of industry to more secure, inland regions. Although the reversion to a coastal-oriented economic development policy does not begin until his death and defeat of the Gang of Four, it is Mao's rapproachment with the United States which gives China the room for manouvre to go back to a coastal-oriented development policy without undue danger to her national security. Thus, while ideology may have prevented Mao from moving away from central planning, his pragmatic foreign policy opened the door to it. "Mao's goal was threefold, Marxism aside. First, he wanted to recentralize Chinare-establishing Beijing as China's capital and political center. Second, he wanted to end the massive inequality between the coastal region and the rest of China. Third, he wanted to expel the foreigners from China. In short, he wanted to recreate a united Han China." George Friedman, The Geopolitics of China: a Great Power Enclosed, Austin, Stratfor Global Intelligence, 2008, available at http://www.stratfor.com/analysis/geopolitics_china George Friedman, The Geopolitics of China: a Great Power Enclosed, Austin, Stratfor Global Intelligence, 2008, available at http://www.stratfor.com/analysis/geopolitics_china 73 And China's integration into the world economy has reinforced Beijing's acute awareness to master the maritime approaches to the country "There is a clear strategic shift under way in China on force planning. Historically a vulnerability, 
74
77
78
79
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
The great distances involved in operating over this huge area means that "Clearly, air and naval forces face significant challenges in providing presence and operational effectiveness", and "This is Nicholas Szechenyi, Victor Cha, Bonnie S. Glaser, Michael J. Green, and Christopher K. Johnson, China's Air Defense Identification Zone: Impact on Regional Security, Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), , 26 November 2013, available at http://csis.org/publication/chinas-air-defense-identification-zone-impact-regional-security Zachary Keck "Forget Japan: China's ADIZ Threatens Taiwan", The Diplomat, 5 December 2013, available at http://thediplomat.com/2013/12/forget-japan-chinas-adiz-threatens-taiwan/ Robbin Laird and Ed Timperlake "The PRC Declares an Air Defense Identification Zone: Challenging the Pacific Defense Quadrangle", Second Line of Defense, 2 December 2013, available at http://www.sldinfo.com/the-prc-declaresan-air-defense-identification-zone-challenging-the-pacific-defense-quadrangle/ Interview with Professor Taniguchi. "China Air Zone Move a `Serious Challenge'", Bloomberg TV, 28 November 2013, available at http://www.bloomberg.com/video/china-air-zone-move-a-serious-challenge-Q7TeaXd3SM2vXKKN8H4eOA.html why a key element of shaping an effective U.S. strategy in the Pacific will rest on much greater ability for the allies to work together and much greater capability for U.S. forces to work effectively with those allied forces", something that any restriction on movement may make more difficult to achieve 
90
91
92
95
97
99
100
102
103
104
105
106
107
The degree to which the military may be lobbying for a forceful approach to territorial disputes may also be difficult to judge accurately. Although this has been said by some observers, and there are certainly some public figures who would confirm the view, such as the above quoted General Zhang Zhaozhong, we once more face the dilemma whether they represent the silent majority or are the exception. 
108
109
110
111
113
114
115
Experts react to the news. The announcement of the ADIZ led many observers to comment on the move and other countries' reactions. As is often the case, some of the most critical views came from India. Professor Chellaney explained on his Facebook page that this was "China's territorial creep in action: After claiming 80% of South China Sea, it sets up air defense identification zone encompassing Senkakus". 117 These words do not only reflect the strong suspicions that Chinese actions prompt in India, but also the connection between events in the East China and the South China Seas felt by many in Asia. Chellaney went even further, drawing a parallel between Chinese actions in the Himalayas and at sea, saying that "What China has done to Japan through its provocative new aerial zone is the equivalent of what it did to India by intruding 19km into Ladakh". 118 King College's Alessio Patalano explained in a video blog entry that, while ADIZs "are not illegal, are not against international law", and indeed some of China's neighbors had already declared them, "the main issue, the main problem" was that in Beijing's case all planes crossing it were required to provide flight plans, even if not bound for China, something "beyond the borders of international standard practice". Describing the situation as a "political game" in which the East China Sea had become "an arena where the balance between the two most important regional actors, Japan and China, are redefining their relationship", Patalano then proceeded to explain some of the ways in which regional actors may manage and contain tensions "in the meantime", before a "political solution" to the conflict could be found. Among the "practical steps that should be taken" by Japan and China "in order to avoid inadvertent escalation", he listed "high-level meetings" and "hot lines". Patalano also recommended Tokyo and Beijing to "start thinking of the elements that bring them together", such as the need to enjoy the safe use of "the maritime and air spaces". With this goal in mind, the two countries may take steps to "make it safer to do so", like engaging in joint "search and rescue operations" and the "coordination of flight paths". 119 Japan's Response. On the other hand, from a Japanese perspective, the ADIZ increases the pressure on the country's outposts and the vital sea lines of communication connecting it to the rest of the world. It threatens to open a rift with Washington, while at the same time offering the potential for deeper defense relations with the fellow maritime democracies and Vietnam, although this is not something to be taken for granted. Beyond national security and the economy, important enough in and by themselves, the ADIZ's position between Japan and Taiwan highlights the contested identity of the latter and its connection to Japanese identity itself. An independent Taiwan is not only beneficial for Japan when it comes to guarding its southern flank but it is also a bridge with its past and the chance to highlight some positive aspects of its colonial experience. President Ma's accommodating attitude has been criticized by the opposition and for all these reasons is seen with concern by Japanese authorities.
With regard to the Japanese Government's response to the ADIZ announcement, according to a 24 November communique by Tokyo's Foreign Affairs Ministry, "Mr. Junichi Ihara, Director-General of the Asian and Oceanian Affairs Bureau of MOFA lodged Japan's strong protest to Mr. Han Zhigiang, Minister of the Chinese Embassy in Japan concerning the establishment of an Air Defense Identification Zone in the East China Sea that the Ministry of National Defense of China had announced on the same day". In the protest it was said that the ADIZ was "totally unacceptable as it included the Japanese territorial airspace over the Senkaku Islands, which is an inherent territory of Japan", adding that China's "unilateral" move was "extremely dangerous as it could unilaterally escalate the situation surrounding the Senkaku Islands and lead to an unexpected occurrence of accidents in the airspace". 
120
121
Ideally, Japan would like to have seen the United States confirm in no uncertain terms that it was not recognizing China's ADIZ, and see this followed by military flights into it and orders to its airlines not to comply with Beijing's instructions and abstain from reporting flight plans. The result was a draw, with America sending two B-52s into the ADIZ in defiance of Chinese regulations, but shying away from instructing its civil airlines to take the same stance. It thus seems that America is following what we could call a partial appeasement policy, consisting in de facto accepting the ADIZ with the purported goal of avoiding risking the life of civilian passengers, while refusing to "Dr Alessio Patalano on China's new air defence identification zone (ADIZ)", War Studies KCL, Youtube, 9 December 2013, available at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VG2okbTBSJU&feature=youtu.be "Assistant Press Secretary(International Press Division), MOFA Japan", website of the Japanese Foreign Affairs Ministry, 24 November 2013, available at http://www.mofa.go.jp/press/release/press4e_000100.html Mark Schreiber "Impending Japan-China war has the makings of a Clancy classic", The Japan Times, 7 December 2013, available at http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2013/12/07/national/impending-japan-china-war-has-the-makingsof-a-clancy-classic/#.UqSDmfTuITU diplomatically acknowledge it and continuing to fly military planes regardless of Beijing's regulations. As always happens with compromise policies, some people may see it as an attempt to strike a balance, supporting regional allies and sending a message to Beijing, while seeking not to escalate tensions and minimizing the chances of an incident resulting in the downing of an airliner. Others may see it as a sign of weakness, increasing the chances of a Chinese miscalculation, giving the impression that in the event of hostilities, particularly if limited in scope, Washington would not dare to send her Navy in harm's way.
The possibility that Beijing may have such a scenario in mind was stressed by Professor Tomohiko Taniguchi, senior adviser to the Japanese prime minister, who said that "For China, to send official vessels almost every day to Japan's waters and to up the ante by establishing its own air defense identification zone over the Senkakus both serve the same purpose, which is to dilute Japan's administrative control over the islands so that one day, applying the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty to the protection of the islands might invite some serious second thoughts". He added that this was "another attempt by Beijing to establish a fait accompli about its territorial claims by forcefully changing the status quo", stressing that "No responsible member of the rules-based international order should pursue such an exhibit of force" 122 Concerning the US-Japan Security Treaty, we should remember that the US takes no official position on the ultimate sovereignty over the islands, while pledging to defend Japan, understanding "Japan" as comprising all territories under administration by Tokyo. The window is thus clearly open to a miscalculation since, once could argue that, once a territory ceased to be under Japanese administration, it would no longer be covered by the US-Japan Security Treaty. Of course, one could also argue that the offensive operations leading to that loss of control may trigger American intervention, but here we should remember that there are many ways in which Tokyo may lose control over one or more of the Senkaku Islands. Setting aside traditional amphibious operations, where Chinese capabilities are still modest and which furthermore are very "noisy", there are there other ways to establish a presence, including an aerial assault for example. 
123
The response by Taiwan. Let us now turn our attention to Taiwan, whose reaction to the ADIZ is evidence of its divided identity and Taipei's difficult balancing act in trying to survive as a de facto independent while not overly challenging Chinese claims to the Island. We have earlier explained the potential significance of the ADIZ in the event of a major crisis. Although Taipei protested the setting up of China's ADIZ, the response was relatively low-key, as noted by a number of observers. The Asahi Shimbun described Taipei as "noticeably quiet on the matter, despite the fact some of its Facebook page of Tomohiko Taniguchi, 23 November 2013, available at https://www.facebook.com/tomohiko.taniguchi.12?fref=ts. The full comments were posted by Professor Taniguchi on his Facebook page, indicating that they had been made to journalist Ken Moritsugu, who partly reflected them in Ken Moritsugu "China sets air defense zone over East China Sea", AP News, 23 November, available at http://m.apnews.com/ap/db_268780/contentdetail.htm?contentguid=aRKTguV3 Alex Calvo "The third dimension of warfare and tactical stability in the Senkaku Islands", Birmingham "'on War": The blog of the postgraduate students at the Centre for War Studies, University of Birmingham, 09 January 2013, Birmingham University, available at http://warstudies.wordpress.com/2013/01/09/the-third-dimension-of-warfare-andtactical-stability-in-the-senkaku-islands/ Demetri Sevastopulo "Q&A: What is an air defence identification zone?", Financial Times, 29 November 2013, own airspace falls under Beijing's ADIZ", adding that "analysts" saw it as reflecting "President Ma Ying-jeou's emphasis on improving ties with China". This emphasis has led to better relations on the surface, while a lack of transparency in dealing with Beijing has helped feed fears that Ma had not always placed the Island's interest at the forefront, which seems to have contributed to his low approval ratings. 
125
Second, the public acknowledgment that Taipei is providing flight plans to Tokyo concerning airliners flying through the area where both countries' air identification zones is significant on two counts. It constitutes evidence that overlapping ADIZs do not necessarily translate into conflict, if a "A third area of dissatisfaction is with the KMT's cross-Strait policies. Clearly some voters are disappointed that the advent of normal cross-Strait trade and transport has not led to the promised economic boom. Others complain that trade liberalization has undermined certain Taiwanese industries, such as the towel producers. The government also took criticism as a result of the scandal over melamine contaminated milk powder imports from China in 2008. Ma's government is commonly attacked for being non transparent in its policy making over China. For instance, despite its parliamentary majorities, recent cross-Strait agreements have not been subjected to parliamentary scrutiny or ratification. Such concerns explain why there appears to be limited public understanding of what the proposed Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA) with China will actually contain and limited trust in the government's ability to put Taiwan's interest first in such an agreement. The first three variables mainly apply to voters that may have actually supported Ma in 2008. However, for those on the anti Chinese side of Taiwanese politics, Ma's two years prove that Ma is hell bent on sacrificing Taiwan's sovereignty and conspiring to cooperate with the People's Republic of China (PRC) towards the goal of unification. Such accusations abound in the anti-KMT media and blogosphere." Dafydd Fell, Prospects for Taiwan and Cross-Strait Relations: 20  10-2016, (London: School of Oriental and African Studies, 2009), p. 3, available at http://eprints.soas.ac.uk/12053/1/Taiwan_China_Relations_New_Ash_volume_paper.pdf Satoshi Ukai and Akihiko Kaise "Taiwan shows restrained reaction to China's ADIZ", The Asahi Shimbun, 30 measure of pragmatism can be found on both sides. In addition, acting in this way with regard to Japan may allow Ma to claim that he is not bending to Beijing's will and that he is no Chinese puppet, 128 but that instead he is simply following the same moderate, pragmatic, policy that has been in place towards another major neighboring country. Only time will tell whether Taipei can persist in this complex balancing act, 129 but at least in the short term this may among others provide additional momentum to successfully conclude the current round of fisheries negotiations with Tokyo. 
130
In the past he has sometimes been accused of being hostile to Japan "Earlier this month, Masaki Saito, Japan's top envoy to Taiwan, resigned as director of the Interchange Association, Tokyo's de facto embassy in Taipei. Saito stepped down after he angered the Ma administration in May by referring to Taiwan's international status as 'unresolved.' Ma blocked Saito from contacting him, the prime minister or the foreign minister, effectively making his job in Taiwan impossible. 'The way President Ma treated Ambassador Saito in such an unfriendly manner will definitely reinforce the image that he is a Chinese nationalist,' Jaushieh Joseph Wu, research fellow at the Institute of International Relations in the National Chengchi University in Taipei, said earlier this month. Wu used to serve in the previous Democratic Progressive Party government. Kuo Chen-lung, former deputy editor-in-chief of the China Times, a national daily in Taiwan, agreed that the government's response to Saito was 'disproportional.' 128 'It was very rude for a foreign representative to comment or even take a stand on domestic issues,' he said, but added that Saito had only taken the same stance as the proindependence opposition party. Saito's resignation is the latest incident that has threatened to sour Japan-Taiwan relations. Shortly after Ma took office last year, Taiwan's then prime minister, Liu Chao-shiuan, threatened war with Japan over a collision between Taiwanese and Japanese vessels in disputed waters. Meanwhile, territorial rights over the Senkaku Islands in the East China Sea continue to be claimed by Taiwan, Japan and China. According to Wu, Ma displays a streak of anti-Japan nationalism that runs counter to the feelings of many Taiwanese, who see Japan as an ally against China. 'When the DPP was in power, Taiwan was described by some Japanese politicians as the only Japan-friendly country in East Asia,' Wu said." Mariko Kato, "Will Warmer Ties Burn Taiwan?", The Japan Times, 30 December 2009, available at httpp://search.japantimes.co.jp/mail/nn20091230f1.html Which seems to be the most likely course of action in the immediate future "A range of domestic and international factors will determine which direction China Taiwan relations move towards over the next six years. My analysis suggests that the most likely scenario by 2016 will be a continuation of the status quo, in other words maintaining Taiwan's de facto political independence. It is also possible that by 2016 the first steps towards a compromise formula will have been taken, though this will require a new level of flexibility from political elites on both sides of the Taiwan Strait. The hopes of Chinese and Taiwanese nationalists for more drastic solutions of reunification or independence are likely to be dashed in the foreseeable future" Dafydd Fell, Prospects for Taiwan and Cross-Strait Relations: 2010-2016,  (London: School of Oriental and African Studies, 2009), p. 11, available at http://eprints.soas.ac.uk/12053/1/Taiwan_China_Relations_New_Ash_volume_paper.pdf More generally, the Japanese leg is necessary for Taipei to gain some room to maneuvre when seeking to launch diplomatic initiatives and secure some sort of accomodation in the region. Alex Calvo, "President Ma's Peace Initiative and the Strategic Triangle Beijing-Taipei-Tokyo", TESS Working Papers, 31 August 2012, The Eurasia Studies Society (TESS), available at eurasiasociety.files.wordpress.com/2011/11/mas-peace-initiative-and-the-strategictriangle-calvo.doc with Taiwan". 
131
The main Taiwanese opposition party, the DPP, did not just protest against the administration's policy but conducted an opinion poll on 3-4 December, showing, out of 1,338 valid responses, 75.2% against the Civil Aeronautics Administration complying with the Chinese request for flight plans, with 15.4% for. 64.6% considered President Ma's response to have been "too soft", with 23% judging it "fine" and 2% "too strong" (10.4% did not express an opinion). Taiwan's leader said that the ADIZ was "not connected to sovereignty", a statement 75.2% said they disagreed with, with 52% registering a "strong objection". 
132
133
138
The communique from the State Department also said that the United States were "deeply concerned" and called the action "unilateral" and "escalatory", describing it as "an attempt to change the status quo" and adding that it would "create risks of an incident". After stressing the importance of "freedom of overflight and other internationally lawful uses of sea and airspace" to "prosperity, stability, and security in the Pacific" it explained that Washington did not "support efforts" by any country to apply "ADIZ procedures to foreign aircraft not intending to enter its national airspace". The text also reminded readers of the United States' commitment "to our allies and partners" and expressed a wish to "see a more collaborative and less confrontational future in the Pacific". 139 also noted that "Japan has shown great restraint this past year, and we urge them to continue to do so". After describing his late father's admiration for Japan and desire to visit the country as president, as well as the tight nature of joint US-Japan defense arrangements, Kennedy quoted Winston Churchill 141 , saying "At the same time, as Winston Churchill said, 'We arm to parley'". 142 US Ambassador Caroline Kennedy delivering a statement shortly after her arrival in Japan.
The idea was clear: diplomacy can only succeed if supported by military might, which is not an end in itself but indispensable for a country's or an alliance's credibility. Quoting from the leader of an island which refused to surrender reinforced the message, made more personal on account of the strong connection between her late father and that island. Caroline Kennedy's grandfather was US Ambassador to the United Kingdom in her darkest hour, where he became associated with a wellmeaning but ultimately self-defeating attempt to preserve peace at all costs, 144 whereas his father Granted honorary American citizenship by the US Congress, bestowed by President Kennedy at a White House ceremony on 9 April 1963. John Plumpton "A Son of America Though a Subject of Britain", Finest Hour, No 60, Summer 1988, Churchill Center, available at http://www.winstonchurchill.org/learn/biography/redux/churchillhonored-with-us-citizenship "Ambassador Caroline Kennedy Addresses ACCJ and the America-Japan Society", website of the US Embassy to Tokyo, 27 November, available at http://japan.usembassy.gov/e/p/tp-20131127-01.html Picture taken from Howard LaFranchi "Ambassador Caroline Kennedy lands in Japan. Could the timing be more perfect?", Cristian Science Monitor, 15 November 2013, available at http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Foreign-Policy/2013/1115/Ambassador-Caroline-Kennedy-lands-in-Japan.-Could-the-timing-be-more-perfect "Kennedy, a former Wall Street speculator and ex-chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, had closely aligned himself with the appeasement policies of the previous prime minister, Neville Chamberlain. During his three years in London, he had made no secret of his belief that 'wars were bad for business, and what was worse, for his business,' as journalist James 'Scotty' Reston put it. The U.S. ambassador believed this so firmly that he even used his official position to commandeer scarce cargo space on transatlantic ships for his own licour export business. After Chamberlain and the French prime minister handed over much of Czechoslovaquia to Adolf Hitler at Munich in September 1938, Kennedy remarked happily to Jan Masaryk, the Czechoslovak minister to Britain: 'Isn't it wonderful [that the crisis is over]? Now I can get to Palm Beach after all!'" Lynne Olson, Citizens of London: The Americans Who Stood with Britain in Its Darkest, Finest Hour, (London: Random House, 2011), p. 4. For a more sympathetic view of reporting flight plans to Beijing, Washington took the opposite decision. As noted by the Wall Street Journal, "Japanese officials on Sunday played down publicly-but complained privatelythat the U.S. isn't following Tokyo in rebuffing Beijing's demands for foreign airlines to file flight plans when navigating through China's new air-defense zone. The developments came as Japan openly questioned the Chinese military's ability to police the zone". 
149
150
151
153
The view from Seoul: South Korea extends her own ADIZ. Seoul's position is particularly relevant both because China's ADIZ covers some waters claimed by South Korea and because, following Beijing's move the ROK took a similar step on 8 December, extending her own air defense zone, effective 15 December. This followed an earlier South Korean request to China to withdraw her ADIZ since it overlapped with Seoul's, a request which Beijing turned down. Both Tokyo and Washington appeared to be comfortable with the Korean move, and publicly made it clear that they saw it in a very different light from Beijing's, stressing that they had been consulted and the Seoul had followed international rules.
Apart from extending to "parts of airspace also included in the Chinese zone", the Korean zone is significant since it "covers a submerged reef that South Korea controls but that China also claims". In addition, we should note that it "also overlaps with parts of the Japanese air defense zone". Concerning these different overlaps, Defense Ministry Spokesman Kim Min-seok told the media that Seoul would "discuss with neighboring countries steps to prevent accidental clashes within the South Korean zone", adding that it did "not infringe upon any country's airspace" and that Seoul had sufficiently explained the move to neighboring countries before announcing it. The American reaction was supportive, with the State Department saying that the Korean decision "avoids confusion for, or threats to, civilian airlines". In the words of State Department Spokeswoman Jen Psaki "The United States has been and will remain in close consultation with our allies and partners in the region to ensure their actions contribute to greater stability, predictability, and consistency with international practices". 
155
157
158
Talking to the Financial Times, Mike Green (Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington) explained that the intention behind the South Korean move was to "pushback against Beijing", adding that Seoul had asked Washington to urge Tokyo to "take a muted response". Green also said that, following a "honeymoon period with Beijing" by the new South Korean leader, "some of the more conservative and traditional foreign policy elites are worried she has gone too far" and that in declaring a new ADIZ "Beijing gave them an opportunity to correct course somewhat". 
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168 Therefore, we cannot really point out at anything specific on open sources from the Russian administration, although there is certainly some interesting commentary on the situation in East Asia. Furthermore, we may ask ourselves why Russia has issued no official statement. It may be tempting to see it as evidence that this is no vital matter for Moscow, but the fact that statements are regularly issued on matters which objectively speaking are of minor importance to Russia would militate against this explanation. Another possibility is that Russia is playing a subtle long-term game, observing developments in the Pacific, taking discrete yet significant steps such as deeper relations with Tokyo and weapons sales to Vietnam, while keeping a low profile. Russia is clearly not interested in a stronger China, but at the same time has no interest to see the country destabilize. We often ask ourselves who lost China, without realizing that the Soviet Union also lost China, a divided, weak China fitting with Moscow's interests, as Russian pre-war policy towards the country shows. An ideal end game for Russia may be a China strong enough to resist pressure from her maritime facade but not strong enough to turn that strength inwards, towards Central Asia and Siberia. A China too distracted to be a cause of concern for Russia. In addition, a North Korea less dependent on China, with a more multi-vectorial foreign policy and range of economic relations, would fit with Russia's need to diversify her energy exports and maximize her influence in North-
The author would like to thank Russian researcher Maria Kuchma for her assistance in checking the Russian-language version of the Foreign Ministry's website and confirming that no statement had been issued on China's ADIZ as of 7 December 2013. Source pointed out by Maria Kuchma "США и их союзники вступили в "войну нервов" с КНР, считает Пушков", Ria Novosti, 8 December 2013, available at http://ria.ru/world/20131208/982757837.html Picture taken from "США и их союзники вступили в "войну нервов" с КНР, считает Пушков", Ria Novosti, 8 December 2013, available at http://ria.ru/world/20131208/982757837.html East Asia, playing off one side against the other, and providing strategic cover for the much needed development of her Far East. Thus, Moscow may simply have no incentive to enter the debate on China's ADIZ, at least publicly, at this stage. It is clear, though, that where Russian and Chinese interests have clashed directly, namely in the Arctic, Moscow has drawn a line in the sand. It is also significant that, while Russian leader Putin may not have publicly addressed the ADIZ controversy, he happened to travel to Vietnam, where he "pledged to expand military supplies to Vietnam, a move that looks set to raise concerns from Beijing as tensions over the South China Sea linger". According to Zhang Mingliang (an expert on China's relations with South-East Asia from Guangzhou's Jinan University), Beijing probably watched closely any talks on future military cooperation during Putin's visit. He noted that "Russia has been the biggest supporter of Vietnam in the South China Sea", citing submarine sales and oil development cooperation in waters claimed by China. 
169
170
171
173
China's next step: an ADIZ on the South China Sea? With regard to a possible second Chinese ADIZ, over the South China Sea or part of it, a number of observers have warned about this possibility. Professor Taniguchi posted a comment on his Facebook page on 27 November saying that if Beijing "in the future extended also to cover the South China Sea, the so-called ADIZ and the surface line Beijing is drawing in the sea both will constitute a three dimensional 'no-entry' space". 
174
175
176
177
178
179
The nuclear strategic calculus: is Beijing trying to better protect her submarine fleet? In addition to furthering her territorial demands and turn it into what some observers mockingly call "Lake Beijing", a South China Sea ADIZ may also be designed to enhance the security of China's nuclear strategic submarine fleet. This was pointed out by Termsak Chalermpalanupap (Institute of Southeast Asian Studies; ISEAS, in Singapore), who believes that "China wants safe passage for its submarines based in Hainan to the South China Sea and to the Pacific passing through the waters between southern Taiwan and northern Philippines", adding that "China sees its ADIZ as part of its strategic military posture". Chalermpalanupap sees it as "a serious possibility that soon China will also declare its ADIZ over the South China Sea". 
182
183
184
185
Appeasement would basically mean accepting the ADIZ and its different regulations, including the demand that all planes, civilian and military, submit flight plans in advance. As is traditional in such situations, two views could emerge. On the one hand some voices may expect this to put an end to the tensions resulting from this development, and even pave the way to preventing conflicts emerging from the escalation of the different existing disputes. On the other hand, others may believe that this would only lead to further Chinese demands and end up leading to a conflict of even greater dimensions. Another aspect of the debate on the ultimate impact of such a policy is its potential influence on existing alliances. Some observers fear that, should the United States fail to appear as strong and resolute in the eyes of her regional allies they may conclude that they need to rearm and seek alternative alliances in order to guarantee their security. This could finally lead to a breakdown of the non-proliferation regime, should countries like Japan conclude that, deprived of support from Washington and unable to balance Chinese conventional capabilities, only nuclear weapons could deter an attack on their territory. This may, however, be too simplistic a view, at least on two counts (leaving aside the costs of exiting the current international legal regime on nuclear weapons). First of all, while nuclear weapons can lead to an strategic equilibrium, as seen during the cold war and at a regional scale in South Asia, this is no absolute guarantee against limited conventional attacks and asymmetrical force in the form of, for example, state-sponsored terrorism. In theory, a state could mainly rely on nuclear weapons to defend its territory and population, by threatening an aggressor to respond to any attack, whatever its nature, by resort to them ("tripwire" approach). However, in actual practice this would be very difficult to implement, even more so when the other side also had nuclear weapons and therefore their employment would result in the mutual destruction of the two countries. A weaker country can indeed rely on nuclear weapons to prevent a massive conventional attack and to keep defense spending at a reasonable level while deterring a larger adversary. However, this reliance cannot be absolute, and will not allow that country to dispense with the need to develop conventional and counterinsurgency capabilities. Second, when unable to match a rival conventional force, resort to weapons of mass destruction is not the only alternative. It may also be possible to rely on asymmetrical doctrines and equipment, as has been urged on Taipei by some distinguished voices such as the US Naval War October 2013, available at http://m.washingtontimes.com/news/2013/oct/31/inside-china-nuclear-submarines-capableof-widespr/ 185 Private communication to the author, 14 December 2013.
College's William S. Murray. 
186
Another possible approach would be to launch a diplomatic offensive to try to, at least, reach some sort of agreement on the ADIZ (or failing that, limit the disagreements to aspects considered manageable), and ideally laying down a framework for the gradual settlement of the different territorial disputes and other differences in the region. As with any such ambitious undertaking, a number of obstacles could be expected. Among them, the large number of countries involved, the different nature and degree of intensity of some of the territorial disputes, and the difficulty of dealing with territorial disputes without at the same time tackling deeper differences. We must remember that some of these disputes do not just concern a given maritime border which different countries may draw through different lines, but significant aspects of the law of the sea such as the rights of coastal estates in their EEZ. The issue whether the Taiwanese can decide their own future and that of their children is also a major bone of contention, made all the more pressing by the feeling in some quarters that time may be running out for policies that seek to set aside the issue and keep the Island under an ambiguous legal status. In other cases, history is very much an issue, not only in terms of past events but also concerning current attitudes towards them and the way they are portrayed in the media and taught in schools. If we add to that the mistrust prompting some arms races, plus potential domestic pressure against concessions in more than a few countries, the picture that emerges is a complex one. This does not mean that it should be impossible to take diplomacy to a higher plane, although perhaps it would not be as quickly as we would wish. Some voices may prefer to try to first reach some basic confidence-building measures, to prevent an escalation of tensions, in line with Dr Patalano's suggestions. Next this could perhaps be followed by some partial agreements and maybe the setting up of some institutional architecture. China usually insists on bilateral dealings, rather than multilateral fora, which could be a problem. While some commentators present this position as resulting from Beijing's greater weight to most of her neighbors and mistrust of international institutions, the reasons may be more complex. Among them the cost in terms of image of seeing the long line of countries having territorial disputes with Beijing. A way to soften up this impression may perhaps be including all other territorial disputes in the region, in order to avoid portraying China as the only actor present in all of them. Another difference could appear between those observers who believe that negotiations on China's ADIZ could begin straight away, and those who fear that this could be taken to be a sign of weakness, thereby preferring to first defy Beijing's regulations in order to later negotiate from a position of greater strength.
A third potential approach may be international arbitration. 
187
With regards to the first issue, if all the parties involved wished to move forward with arbitration a number of possibilities would be open, including resort to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) or an ad-hoc court. On the other hand, the Chicago Convention devotes Articles 84-86 to dispute 186 William S. Murray, "Revisiting Taiwan's Defense Strategy", Naval War College Review, Summer 2008, Volume 61 No 3, p. 12-36, available at http://www.usnwc.edu/getattachment/ae650b06-a5e4-4b64-b4fd-2bcc8665c399/Revisiting-Taiwan-s-Defense-Strategy---William-S--.aspx 187 Which involves determinations of fact and of law, binding on participants, on not just a search for a solution to a single, isolated dispute. Antonio Cassese, International Law, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), p. 281. resolution, allowing parties to take a matter to the Council and, if unsatisfied with the decision, "appeal from the decision of the Council to an ad hoc arbitral tribunal agreed upon with the other parties to the dispute or to the Permanent Court of International Justice", 188 which nowadays would mean the ICJ. 
189
192
193
194
195
Finally, it could be argued that it may not be the best approach to try to tackle the ADIZ dispute without looking at the underlying disagreements, such as sovereignty over the Senkaku/Diaoyu/Diaoyutai Islands, or the legal status of Taiwan. All these issues are inextricably linked and it could be difficult to reach an agreement on one without closely examining the rest. On the other hand one could also defend the view that peacefully solving one of them may help build trust and set up a precedent, on which others may be approached, leaving the most intractable ones to some distant future. The cases of Russia and Japan, and Taiwan and Japan 196 , show that it is indeed possible to set aside territorial disputes and reach agreements in areas such as economic and energy cooperation 197 and fisheries, respectively.
A fourth policy could be to combine appeasement in the civilian aviation industry, ordering carriers to provide flight plans to Beijing, with defiance in the military sphere, ignoring this request when it came to state aircraft and stepping up their presence in the ADIZ. We have already noted the two very different ways in which it could be seen, from a balanced middle-of the road approach designed to minimize the danger to civilians while preventing the emergence of a legal or diplomatic precedent, to a sign of weakness that may invite further unilateral action by Beijing. This fourth option seems to be the one chosen by both Washington and Taipei, with Tokyo ordering her carriers instead not to provide flight plans. These different postures have caused a rift among allies, whose longer-term impact is still unclear.
Finally, countries may choose to ignore the ADIZ, flying both private and state aircraft through it. This would send the strongest possible message to Beijing, while on the other hand it could lead to incidents endangering the life if civilians if China chose to try to effectively enforce her rules. As seen earlier, international law seeks to restrict the degree of force that may be used against civilian aircraft, but a fact remains: it is very difficult to stop one without physically endangering it. Additionally, some voices may see this as further fanning tensions, rather than working towards a solution. Others, however, may see a weak response as leading to further moves, as discussed earlier when dealing with appeasement.
For the time being, the US and Taiwan seem to be leaning toward a mixture of appeasement in the civilian arena with defiance in the military. Whether this is a carefully-considered policy choice or an option by default in the face of a lack of a clear strategy is open to question. In the case of Taiwan, the country still has not decided what she wants to be when she grows up, or indeed whether she is free to decide what to be, and this complicates the Island's foreign and defense policies. In the case of Washington, Professor Andrew S. Erickson (US Naval War College) believes that "The U.S. has an implicit collection of approaches that together constitute a strategy ... but they would be more effective if they were brought together". He is not alone in thinking along these lines, with some voices being even more blunt. Naval analyst Ronald O'Rourke (Congressional Research Service) believes that, while one could examine "the classified war plans and decide if they reflect a strategy for conducting an upper-level war ...for situations short of war, it is not clear to me we have a strategy for that". He added that to develop such an strategy, the US "needs to involve our allies -it's not something we can do ourselves". O'Rourke's words are significant in that they point at a key conundrum facing China's neighbors: the fact that in today's world there is no clear cut dividing line between war and piece, with countries often moving uneasily in some sort of grey zone, where a limited degree of force may well coexist with otherwise normal political and economic relations. Jim Thomas (Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments) considers that "We don't have that strategy today", and using similar words, Seth Cropsey (a Navy official during the Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations) holds the view that "No such strategy exists", adding that "forming one is difficult 
". 198
Overall, there is still room for diplomacy, and ideally some sort of grand bargain providing an institutional framework to start solving the different territorial disputes and finding a way to accommodate China's desire to return to a great power status with her neighbors concerns. However, policymakers and observers are also considering other possible scenarios, however dreadful. Something they will be keenly watching is whether Moscow declares another ADIZ in the South China Sea, something which would widen the scope of countries directly involved in this controversy, including India and Russia, both of which have significant strategic stakes in Vietnam.
Alex Calvo is a Professor of International Relations and International Law, European University in Barcelona, and Guest Professor at Nagoya University
Map taken from "Viewpoints: China air zone tensions", BBC, 28 November 2013, available at http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-25116119
available at http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/26cf55ce-58da-11e3-a7cb-00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=intl#axzz2n8TGD3xK
November 2013, available at http://ajw.asahi.com/article/special/isles_dispute/AJ201311300046 Lee Shu-hua and Y.L. Kao "President Ma to urge China not to designate ADIZ in South China Sea", Focus Taiwan, , 6 December 2013, available at http://focustaiwan.tw/news/acs/201312060021.aspx
December 2013, available at http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/148dbc1e-5fc6-11e3-a4cd-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2myoZTqrS Demetri Sevastopulo "Q&A: What is an air defence identification zone?", Financial Times, 29 November 2013, available at http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/26cf55ce-58da-11e3-a7cb-00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=intl#axzz2n8TGD3xK
"The observations came at a hearing late Wednesday called by Rep. Randy Forbes, R-Va., chairman of the House Seapower subcommittee, to discuss China's growing naval power" Christopher P. Cavas "No Clear Strategy On China, Experts Say", Defense News, 11 December 2013, available at http://www.defensenews.com/article/20131211/DEFREG02/312110030/No-Clear-Strategy-China-Experts-Say
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or