# ID: db97971f8e724ce8a6401756b7e329a3
# Title: Russian Operational Art in the Russo-georgian War of 2008
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information.
This paper is about the Russian military's use of operational art to achieve its strategic objectives during the Russo-Georgian War of August 2008. In this brief war, the Russian military in a quick and decisive campaign overwhelmed Georgian forces to gain control of two breakaway republics, destroyed much of Georgia's armed forces on land and sea, and caused NATO to reconsider its offer of membership to Georgia. This study focuses on the Russian military's present conception of operational art, the relationship between operational art and strategy, and the ability of the Russian armed forces to apply it in a war, a matter of strategic importance to Russia. To accomplish this, this study examines the roots of Soviet thought and practice on operational art and points out the significant changes over time which have affected current thought and practice. The paper analyzes significant aspects of the campaign in Georgia that reflect not only Russia's rich tradition of operational art, but also reflect Western thinking and new, Russian thinking. Next, the study examines the future of Russian operational art based on recently announced military reforms and the implications of those reforms on Russian strategy.
For over a century, Russian and Soviet military thinkers have developed the operational art and have produced quality works on the subject. They have prepared for and practiced operational art in a series of wars under widely varying conditions over the last 80 years. These wars are rich in lessons of success and failure in operational art. 
1
In the 1920s and 1930s, Soviet thinkers developed the theory of operational art through an in depth analysis of the lessons of World War I and the Russian Civil War.
They discovered that the then extant theory of war that divided war into strategy and tactics no longer accurately reflected the conditions of war. The industrial and French revolutions had fundamentally changed how wars were fought. Countries now fielded massive, mobilized armies equipped with large quantities of high quality weapons that increased the lethality and range of battle. New machines and weapons such as the railroad, trucks, airplanes, and tanks provided new capabilities as well as extended the reach of forces engaged in operations. These Soviet thinkers posited that a new domain of warfare existed between strategy and tactics and they named it "operational art". 
2
3
4
Tukhachevsky won this contest and then championed the second debate, the "mechanization of a mass army as the means to conduct decisive operations in a total war." 
5
New concepts were needed to not only explain war, but also to enable the Soviets to win with their limited resources. To these thinkers, the fundamental operational challenge seemed to be how to build success off of tactical victories. Recent wars indicated that a force could defeat the enemy in a battle, but could not exploit success before enemy reserves arrived, leaving the offensive to whither and stall at the tactical level short of decisive victory. The key problem to be solved was how to sustain the offensive until strategic objectives were achieved. 
6
7
The experience of World War II codified these ideas into a cogent operational concept that dexterously wove together simultaneous and sequential front and multifront operations to drive the German Army out of the depths of the Soviet Union and back to Berlin, leading to the defeat of Germany. The Second World War also had another significant impact on Soviet thought on operational art. The disastrous experience of the first two years of the war burned into the Soviet military culture the necessity of being prepared for theater war in Europe. The Soviet Union geared their military theory, organization, and training towards a large-scale, high-intensity war in Europe. Other types of more limited or unconventional wars were largely ignored in terms of theory, doctrine, and the institutionalization of specialized organizations. This overbearing focus on theater war in Europe would severely impede the development of appropriate concepts for operational art as well as appropriate force structure after the fall of the Soviet Union.
After the development of nuclear weapons, the Soviets briefly modified their theory of operational art to fit their view of the chaos of the nuclear battlefield. However, the desire to be capable of fighting without nuclear weapons was strong and from the 1960s through the 1980s the military sought ways to fight on a modern battlefield conventionally. The focus in conventional war centered on the initial period of war when Soviet theorists thought it was necessary to execute those missions that would decisively influence the course or outcome of the war. 
8
9
Ideas focused on tailoring forces to achieve maximum flexibility for specific missions, changing land only actions into air-land operations, establishing unified commands on a geographic basis, creating rapid deployment forces, and developing concepts for fighting on non-linear, non-contiguous battlefields. 
10
After the breakup of the Soviet Union, several attempts were made at military reform, each ending in failure. Under Yeltsin, weak attempts were announced, but each failed due to a lack of political will and the poor economic condition of the country. With Putin's rise to power, small steps were attempted initially with little meaningful progress, especially after the military's performance in Chechnya. Yet the military remained wedded to its concepts of large-scale, high-intensity conflict. The war in Georgia would help change that focus because it would give the Russian military a vision and an experience of what future war would look like.
Russia's strategic objectives in the war with Georgia can be divided into two categories. The first category includes those objectives that do not relate directly to planning a military campaign. With these objectives, Russia was signaling interests and intentions to other players in the international arena. Clearly, Russia wanted to send a strong signal to the West that Russia has returned to the world as powerful player, is "capable of effectively acting in its periphery," and is willing and able to use military force to protect its interests. 
11
12
13
14
Last, one could argue that Russia wanted to punish Georgia for its overall Western orientation. 
15
16
17
The military planners probably thought that the following problems were key to achieve the strategic objectives. Gaining control of the two breakaway republics was a straightforward military task, if not without its challenges. To decisively influence the Georgian economy, military force would need to be applied along the coast of Abkhazia to control the ports and isolate the country. Additionally, key communications and transportation infrastructure would need to be cut to fracture the country, and the two pipelines threatened. Transit fees from this pipeline are a considerable portion of Georgia's economy. 
18
The Russian military campaign in Georgia was a skillful blend of classical Russian operational art melded with new Russian ideas and lessons learned from observing Western armies at war. The sequencing of multiple operations to achieve strategic objectives by keeping the enemy off balance and preventing his concentration is wholly within the classical concepts of Russian operational art. 
19
20
21
The rapidity of advance to objectives beyond the two breakaway regions, level of combined arms activities, accuracy of targeting, and scale of operational and logistical preparations strongly point to detailed preparation for the war. One author suggests that the decision to initiate the war was made in April of 2008 during a crisis in Abkhazia when the Russian air force shot down two Georgian drones that were monitoring Russian peacekeeping forces. 
22
In addition to the preparations, the Russians leveraged other historical factors to their advantage. Soon after the Soviet Union broke apart in 1991, separatists wars broke out in various locations in the former Soviet states, Abkhazia and South Ossetia included. Russian forces participated in peacekeeping in those areas and ultimately ended up as members of the peacekeeping forces in both regions. Through these forces, Russia worked with local ethnic Russians to influence the region against Georgia and to build irregular security forces loyal to Russia. During the late Spring and Summer months probably after the decision to go to war, the Russians were able to add approximately an additional thousand troops to the peacekeeping forces in Abkhazia in April and May of 2008, obviously providing them with more forces already within their future area of operations who would know the area. These additional thousand were paratroopers -some of the best trained and prepared forces within the Russian military. 
23
24
25
26
27
Another key factor in preparing the battlefield was the introduction or hiring of spies within South Ossetia and the Georgian government. It appears that this individual or group were able to determine that President Saakashvili intended to send the Georgian Army to seize Tskhanvali as well as all of South Ossetia. The time of the Georgian attack was probably also passed on. These key pieces of information gave the Russian military several opportunities. First, they were able to conduct final preparations and marshal their forces for movement. Secondly, the Russians probably alerted the South Ossetian irregular forces, enabling them to not only bolster their defense of Tskhinvali but also to secure the vital Roki Tunnel. Thirdly, it allowed the Russian 58 th Army to move into Georgia and through the Roki Tunnel while the Georgian army was occupied in Tskhinvali, gaining operational momentum and allowing additional echelons to being moving. The 58 th Army was able to generate approximately 70,000 troops into the operation in South Ossetia, roughly twice the size of Georgia's entire armed forces. 
28
29
30
The Russians achieved surprise at all levels with this conventional operation, a goal that they had long desired in operational and strategic planning but had been unable to reach in previous conventional wars, most notably, in Afghanistan. 
31
The Russians used strategic communications in an attempt to further the lifespan of their strategic surprise and create more time for operational maneuver before other countries, especially the United States and European countries could respond. Amidst the confusion of which country started the war, the Russian governments continued accusations in the international press about Georgian acts of genocide in South Ossetia and the Russian response to safeguard the population assisted in providing time for Russian ground units to attack deeper into South Ossetia.
Worth noting is that the Russians probably intentionally inflated the size of the Georgian attack on Tskhinvali on the 7 th of August, providing a rationale to the world for entering South Ossetia with a larger invasion force than necessary to secure the breakaway region. The larger force allowed Russia to move deeper into Georgia 
32
To achieve strategic and operational surprise in their attack in South Ossetia, the Russians solved three problems in operational art. The first was the movement through the Roki Tunnel that connects South Ossetia with Russia. This critical transportation link was a single point of failure for Russian operations in South Ossetia since it sits on the only viable road between the two countries. If the Georgians could have blocked movement through it, the Russians formations would have faced enormous difficulties.
Although the Russians have the largest amount of airborne forces in the world, to have staged an airborne assault deep to overcome this barrier may have proved too difficult logistically. Although there are airfields of sufficient size and capacity near Tbilisi, there are none in South Ossetia. Even if the airborne assault would have occurred, Russians typically want to open a ground line of communication to those forces as soon as possible for logistics reasons. The second problem solved was the throughput of forces from Vladikavkaz, the capital of North Ossetia in Russia, where operations began to Tskhinvali, the capital of South Ossetia and the site of the first major battle. The Russians were able to double the size of their force in Tskhinvali in 24 hours along this 167 kms of mountainous road. The third problem solved was the deployment of a large number of forces, mostly paratroopers, from throughout Russia in order to achieve sufficient force ratios for offensive operations without creating a large mobilization signature prior to initiating the war. 
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
On August 10 th Russian forces moved from Southern Russia into Abkhazia opening a second front along the coast of the Black Sea. 
40
41
42
Moving the equipment down by rail at night further inhibited reporting. Lastly, the use of paratroopers instead of marines had one distinct advantage when it comes to remaining unobserved. The paratroopers that were part of the peacekeeping force wore the same uniforms as the paratroopers that were landed, making it extremely difficult for the UN Peacekeepers to differentiate between the two groups. 
43
On August 11 th , the Russians attacked along two axes into Georgia proper (beyond the two dispute regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia). Russian forces attacked out of South Ossetia towards the town of Gori with three operational goals.
The first goal was to move towards Tbilisi to threaten the capital and the government. This operation directly supported the strategic goal of overthrowing Saakashvili. The second goal was to cut the East-West running highway and railway, denying the Georgian military forces in the East and West from supporting one another and also cutting the Western regions of Georgia off from the capital, Tbilisi. By cutting these means of communication and trade, Russia gained a strong position to affect Georgia's economy. The third goal was to create operational depth around Tskhinvali in order to protect that city from indirect fire attacks and the threat of ground attack by Georgian forces, allowing more effective control not only in the capital of South Ossetia, but the entire breakaway region.
In the West, Russian forces executed a simultaneous operation along the Black Sea coast. Armored forces moved from Abkhazia into Georgia proper towards Senaki with related operational objectives, meeting little resistance. 
44
45
Combined arms operations, a classical Russian concept of operational art, were very evident in the campaign. The campaign included armored forces, airborne forces, attack, bomber, and reconnaissance aircraft, irregular forces, and the Navy. Each played a role that, when combined, helped achieve the operational endstate necessary for the strategic goals. One may even be able to add cyber warfare to this concept.
The Russian Air Force was an integral part of the campaign plan. Aircraft conducted reconnaissance, close air support, air superiority missions, and interdiction missions to spoil Georgia's ability to respond militarily. With the initial phase of operations in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, Russian aircraft attacked airfields east and south of Tbilisi, command and control facilities, and military bases to achieve depth to the operation, attack follow-on echelons, and assist in isolating the battlefield. 
46
47
48
52
53
The newest Russian innovation in operational art demonstrated in this campaign was the inclusion of cyber attack. Indeed, one can argue that this began not on the ground with armored formations or in the air with bombers, but rather, in cyberspace with distributed denial of service attacks. Although cyber attacks are difficult to attribute and the Russian government denied involvement in the attacks, the crescendo of attacks that began on August 7 th against the Georgian government leaves little doubt to some experts that the cyber attacks were of Russian origin. 
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
During the campaign, all of Russian forces involved in operations within Georgia were under the command of a single headquarters, the North-Caucasus Military District, located in Vladikavkaz, Russia. 
64
A unified command is a major step in Russian operational thought that was discussed in the 1980s in the waning years of the Soviet Union, but only recently experimented with and put into effect. The Soviet command structure that the Russian Federation inherited focused on massive, combined arms formations optimized for large-scale, prolonged wars. Such organizations not only did not meet the demands of the new geopolitical environment Russia found itself in, but they also did not reflect the extant capabilities of the Russian army after 1991, which was largely incapable to fighting such operations. In recent years, a requirement for a more localized, tailored command and control system maintained in peacetime as well as wartime emerged.
This system also included troops from other ministries or government agencies, so as to better defend Russian interests, especially against terrorist attacks. 
65
66
On August 12, 2008, President Dmitry Medvedev accepted a peace plan brokered by French President, Nicolas Sarkozy and announced a halt to the fighting in Georgia. 
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
Having experienced such a war in Chechnya, the Russians did not want to face one here. 
80
81
Noteworthy in both the Russian as well as foreign press were the problems with soldier discipline during the war. Soldiers rode exposed on top of armored vehicles instead of protected within. Soldiers looted and terrorized the local Georgian population. And there were reports of public drunkenness. 
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
One could also note that despite the participation of air assault 93 , airmobile, and airborne units, the 58 th Army did not attempt a vertical envelopment to gain operational depth, seize key transportation nodes in advance of attacking forces, or to dislocate Georgian forces. One wonders if these forces were not employed in this manner due to the challenges of the terrain, inadequacies in command, control and communication systems, readiness levels of the airmobile and air assault units, the requirements for close and detailed coordination between services, or a matter of training proficiency.
The Russian military emerged from the conflict with a much clearer view of future war. Traditional thought about operational art was reinforced by the success of the war; conventional wars of maneuver in the style of the 20 th century are still possible and can still achieve desired strategic objectives. Surprise and speed still matter in overcoming an opponent. A combined arms approach with overwhelming force is very effective.
New and recent ideas also were more plainly visible. A different kind of army was needed to fight wars with limited aims in the periphery. Information operations need to be more subtle and credible to both domestic and international audiences. Emerging ideas in warfare also seemed evident, especially the value of cyber attack in a campaign plan to reinforce maneuver and fires. Most importantly, the Russians gained a view of future war as it applied to their preparation of their own forces and how it ought to be employed to defend and gain Russia's strategic interests in the near abroad.
In some ways, the results of this war may help put an end to a series of arguments ongoing within the Russian military since the fall of the Soviet Union. The arguments are an echo of the former debates in the 1920s and 1930s between Tukhachevsky and Svechin over which strategy was appropriate for the Soviet Union, annihilation verses attrition. Tukhachevsky argued that the Soviets needed an army that could wage with an annihilation strategy to effectively deal with an external threat. Since the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia has been engaged in a similar debate as it has tried to grasp the nature of the threats they face, both internal and external, and how best to prepare for them. It appears that the large, mass, mechanized army advocates are losing to those that favor a more professional, competent joint force. 
94
President Dmitry Medvedev signed a major reform plan for the Russian military on September 15, 2008, roughly a month after the five-day war with Georgia. Initially, the plans for reform were kept secret; however, in October Defense Minister Anatoly Serdyukov announced five initiatives. The first was converting all units in the armed forces to a permanent readiness category. The second initiative was to improve the effectiveness of the command and control system of the armed forces. Third, military education and science needed improvement to meet Russia's strategic needs. Fourth, the armed forces needed reequipping with new, high tech weapons. Lastly, the military needed to improve the well-being of the service members in order to facilitate a professional army. 
95
96
In order to improve readiness, several major steps are planned. First, the military will be downsized to roughly one million soldiers and 150,000 officers organized into 70 brigade-sized units, abandoning the division and regimental structure. The General Staff would be cut from nearly 22,000 to 8,500. 
97
98
99
100
When analyzing the campaign in Georgia, it is important not to walk away from this study thinking that the Russian military is now a dominant, conventional, military power. Such an assertion belies the facts of the campaign. To be straightforward, the Russian military overwhelmed a third-rate power by placing roughly four times as many soldiers in the combat zone than in the entire Georgian army. 
102
Many analysts who focus on Russia have commented on the strategic implications of the Russo-Georgian War of August 2008. Most Western analysts see the war as a breakdown of Russian policy or a harbinger of Russia's further withdrawal from accepted norms of international behavior. The strategic costs of the war far outweigh the gains that were achieved. 
103
104
The Russian military appears to be on a path to becoming even more operationally viable as a means of national power. It is taking valuable lessons learned in operational art from its Soviet past and slowly sloughing off the entrenched beliefs that hinder optimization for its present geopolitical situation. It is observing other militaries and trying to blend its operational thought and capability into an emerging, Russian way of waging war that is effective in achieving tasks proportionate with its geostrategic aims. And it is experimenting with new capabilities in operational art, mainly cyberwar, to grow its capacity and capability. This emerging combination of cyber and conventional war could be something for which most countries of the world are unprepared. As Moscow continues to aspire to the role of a great power, it will be interesting to observe how Russia further develops its version of operational art.
This SRP is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the Master of 
Strategic Studies Degree. The U.S. Army War College
Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools
Market Street
215
662-5606
U.S. Secretary of Education
Council for Higher Education Accreditation
Department of the Army, Department of Defense
U.S. Government
The Russians did not achieve success in their information campaign, although the operations in Georgia reflect some new aspects of Russian thinking. Strategically, Russia was unable to convince the world, mainly the West, that its operations were justified and purely within the realm of peacekeeping. Russia was pilloried by the international community for its actions as well as its recognition of the two breakaway republics. At home, the Russian government was very successful in convincing its population of the rightfulness of the war, gaining large amounts of approval and little dissent.
Operationally the Russian military attempted a few new steps in support of an information campaign. Russian journalists were brought along to share with domestic and international audiences the progress of Russian troops in protecting Russian citizens and of propagandizing Georgian atrocities. The Russians were able to use television footage to achieve some psychological affect as well with the local population in the breakaway regions. The Russians were able to show on local television footage of their advancing forces liberating the local ethnic Russian population. Georgia, on the other hand, was unable to show any footage of its troops in action. 
62
63