# ID: dbd34c6633454620921b05d0afe3a977
# Title: An Examination of the United States Navy's Ability to Conduct Operational Fires
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1992.0
# Fulltext:
The end of the Cold Var has removed the challenge to the United States Navy's preeminence in maritime affairs. In wake of this development, how can the Navy best participate in coordinated joint and combined warfare against a land power? The operational level of war links strategy to tactics and represents a framework for the conduct of modern warfare.
To determine if sufficient Navy fire support assets exist to support this concept of modern warfare, this monograph examines the fire support means and doctrines to determine the validity of operational fires as a possible Navy mission area.
This work initially examines the historical, strategic, and operational background of the issue. It then establishes the utility of fires using evidence and principles espoused by the classical military, naval, maritime, and air theorists. Next, a historical example is examined to demonstrate the importance of and past problems associated with operational fires. Current doctrine is examined to demonstrate the paucity of naval thought on this subject when compared with the other services. Present and future means of naval operational fire support are examined to determine whether sufficient assets exist to conduct operational fires.
Finally, an analysis of the Navy's participation in the recent Gulf Var is conducted to determine if the Navy performed fires at the operational-level, and if so. to what level of proficiency. This analysis is conducted using the criteria of "necessary and sufficient," "suitable, feasible, and acceptable," and "affordable."
Based on the analysis conducted, current naval assets are capable of conducting operational fires if sufficient planning time is provided to adequately develop and refine the individual cruise missile missions. This planning system, as currently configured, is awkward and not capable of responding to emergent battlefield requirements and extenuating circumstances.
This planning system requires an or upgrade to reduce the required planning time to construct and implement fire support and make fires more responsive in the 0 support of the operational commander. the tremendous effectiveness of this approach to war. 
2
To correct this situation, Ramsdell believes the longrange solution involves changing the attitudes and increasing the knowledge of the Navy's officers. He judged that officers must come ashore and become educated in the art of war above the technical and material level .3
In light of this indictment, the purpose of this monograph is not to debate the existence of the operational level of warfare, but rather to assume it does, and examine the conduct of fires at this level, and assess their viability as a mission for the United States (U.S.) Navy.
The research question addressed is: Are naval forces capable of delivering operational-level fires in a theater of war 7
The methodology used to answer this question involves an examination of the historical, strategic, and operational backgrounds of the U.S. Navy to set the stage for the remainder of the paper. Additionally, the theoretical foundations of warfare and naval fires will be laid. A historical operation will be reviewed to shed light on the importance of naval fires in a past campaign. The evolution of current and future naval warfare and its associated naval fires doctrine will be considered. The capability to support land warfare in a maritime theater of war will be scrutinized. These examinations will be conducted using the criteria of "necessary and sufficient," "suitable, feasible, and acceptable," and "affordable." Finally, conclusions will be drawn and the monograph will close with a discussion of implications for the future application of opcrational-level fires.
In a recent essay, Philip Crowl interpreted the nineteenth century naval historian Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan's concept of "sea power." Crowl defined it as both "command of the sea through naval superiority," and "that combinatLon of maritime commerce, overseas possessions, and privileged access to foreign markets that produces national wealth and greatness.- 
4
5
6
Thereafter, with the exception of that period between the Civil War and the resurgence of American sea power sparked by the writings of Mahan, 7 the U.S. ensured it possessed a sufficiently powerful Navy to deter invasion.
This fleet, however, has not always remained adequate to deter all forms of aggression against U.S. national interests. Pearl Harbor and the Korean Conflict are evidence that the existence of a strong American naval force is insufficient to deter threats globally. The American people, however, do not desire that their country want for sufficient naval power to protect their nation's interests. Why is this so?
One explanation is the fact that the very existence of the U.S. depends upon the sea. As illustrated by a former Chief of Naval Operations, the majority of our international ties are oceanic. Additionally, over 70%. of our total trade and 99.7% of our overseas trade moves by sea.$ The U.S. is not alone in this orientation. An examin-,tion of this planet reveals that, with a few exceptions such as the United States [and the ex-Soviet Union], the bulk of capital wealth, technological fabric, and urban population centers are located within 50 miles of seas and oceans. In fact, nearly half of the world's mannade assets are found within 20 miles of its beaches.9
Because of this global arrangement, the Secretary of the Navy declared that "our naval power-projection capabilities will remain particularly useful in applying U.S. military might at appropriate places and times.- 
1 0
This rationalization arose from and was based on the U.S.
.national strategy.* which was defined as the plan or expres sion of the coordinated use of national power which includes political, economic, psychological. and military power plus national will during peace, crisis, or war to secure national objectives.' 1
The general nature of U.S. national strategy during the Cold
War was translated into a policy of "containment."z U.S.
naval forces represented one of the national military means available to "contain" the perceived aggressive ambitions of the Soviet Union and the related spread of communism. 
13
5
Logic dictated, therefore, that the U.S. "shift the objective of [its] national security strategy from containing the Soviet Union to [that of) maintaining global stability." 
16
to ensure strategic deterrence, to exercise forward presence in key areas, to respond effectively to crises and to retain the national capacity to reconstitute forces should this ever be needed. 
17
represents the instrument with which to pursue deterrence.
Military strategy is "the art and science of employing the armed forces of a nation or alliance to secure policy objectives by the application or threat of force.-19
The U.S. intends to remain engaged in forward areas by maintaining a positive influence in regions vital to national interests.
Through military presence in these areas, U.S. military forces "can deter aggression, preserve regional balances, deflect arms races, and prevent the power vacuums that invite conflict." 
21
These challenges, however, are most likely not represented by the possibility of global war, but rather, are manifested in the form of regional crises.3 In addition to those identified in the natio-ual military strategy.
classified documents leaked to the media indicate regional security concerns that represent possible threats to U.S.
interests. These threats include regional conflicts involving Iraq, North Korea, Iran, and possibly a resurgent and expansionistic Russian Republic, as the aggressors.
Additionally, a military coup in the Philippines that endangers U.S. citizens, and threatened access to the Panama Canal represent further concerns .2 hether or not these scenarios are predictive or represent "real" threats, the relevant question becomes not where, but how to respond to these crises in defense of U.S. interests?
The President declares that, in order to effectively apply military means, the U.S. must "be able to move men and material to the scene of a crisis at a pace and in numbers sufficient to field an overwhelming force. " s In order to get this "overwhelming force" to the required location, 'we must ensure unimpeded transit of the air and sea lanes and access to space through maritime and aerospace superiority.* " 6
The U.S. military strategy supports these concepts and further declares that this country retain the ability to quickly establish control of the air, sea. and space both enroute and in the theater of operations.
[These "superiorities] provide for increased combat effectiveness, fever losses, and efficient employment of combat power where it is needed most.27
Army doctrine defines a "theater" as "a geographical area within which land, sea, and air operations are directed toward a common strategic aim."3 Vithin this theater, current military strategy endorses *the concept of applying decisive force to overwhelm our adversaries and thereby terminate conflicts swiftly with a minimum loss of life. 
" 2 9
31
Navy poses to the U .S. Navy, how can sea power be brought to bear upon a land force? Present military thought offers a framework for the integration of all combat power upon an enemy. The framework is called "operational art" and is "the if he prepares to the front his rear will be weak, and if to the rear, his front will be fragile. If he prepares to the left, his right will be vulnerable and if to the right, there will be few on his left. And when he prepares everywhere he will be weak everywhere.42
Deficiencies, however, cannot be exploited without the assistance of information and intelligence.
Knowledge is critical to the execution of operations. Napoleon's premise that "fire is everything, the rest does not matter."50 Jomini also understood the effects of naval fires, albeit on the conduct of amphibious and not naval operations. 
51
5 2
Therefore, Clausewitz felt that it was imperative to analyze this theater at the strategic level to determine the location and "sphere of effectiveness" of that center of gravity.5
Jomini differed from Clausewitz. Although Jomini also believed that mass was the most paramount principle in war, he went further than Clausewitz and categorically stated that the principle fundamental to all operations of war was to throw the mass of an army and its fires on the "decisive points" in a theater. 
57
Therefore, the correct choice of location to focus attack depended on choosing a position that gave one advantage over a decisive point or a line that linked decisive points. Jomini, however, determined that this choice was not sufficient to ensure victory. He felt that "if the art of war consists in throwing the masses upon the decisive points, it is necessary to take the initiative.*"
He believed maintenance of the initiative was important to retain the morale of the armies and nations, because morale was that ingredient which made victories decisive. In this era artillery fires, cavalry charges, and maneuver to the rear of the enemy represented the greatest moral effects.
Thus, Jomini concluded with the belief that it was the attacker who possessed the advantage over the defender. 
61
These theorists, however, failed to link land and naval warfare theory. This shortfall became evident when the nineteenth century American historian Alfred Thayer Mahan wrote of war at sea. Mahan's theories represented a separate thought pattern, because he viewed naval and land warfares as unrelated and separate disciplines of war. 
6
There were, though, parallels between Mahan's view of war at sea and the early theorists' views of land warfare.
Mahan fully endorsed the principle of mass. He termed it "concentration" and declared it "the predominant principle of naval warfare. "command of the sea* and defined it as nothing but the control of maritime communications whether for commercial or military purposes. The object of naval warfare is the control of communications, and not, as in land warfare, the conquest of territory."
He also proposed that no separation be drawn between army and naval operations. He regarded them as one force, the action of which should exist to achieve a united goal. The mid-twentieth century theorist Herbert Rosinski reexamined naval theory. He defined the limit of sea power's capacity to support land struggles in terms of fires, as the maximum range of naval gunnery.1 5
After World War  Under modern analysis, this operation may have been FEASIBLK The endstate was clearly defined.
A center of gravity at the strategic level was identified, and operational decisive points were recognized and their attack planned. The campaign devised a line of operations and delineated the ways to attack these points. However, the force structure assigned possibly lacked the means to defeat these decisive points. Additionally, suprise was violated and the attack was piecemeal rather than massed. While possibly sufficient combat power remained following the main attack, the Allied command lost the will to continue.
The really decisive successes have come to those who adopted a new doctrinal concept to which their enemies were unable to respond. Therefore, operational fires are identified, planned.
and executed from the "top down," not from the "bottom up,"
as is the case with tactical fires. Operational commanders "establish objectives, designate targets, and integrate them into plans.
[and] then pass them to subordinates for execution." 
13
Targets for operational fires include: those the attack of which would prove so decisive as to force an enemy to alter his course of action. 
13
13 7
13
The attack of these targets, although individually indecisive, collectively may prove decisive in that their destruction may establish conditions that deny the enemy freedom of action or initiative. Although the enemy's center of gravity may remain unassailable, target groups may represent decisive points the seizure, control, or destruction of which causes the center of gravity to collapse.
140
A modern navy possesses universality and mobility and is capable of concentrating strike power which may be used not only for fighting a foe at sea but also in the sphere of operations of other branches of the armed forces. 141 Admiral of the Fleet, Sergei G. Gorshkov, Soviet Navy Present naval fires capabilities nay be broken down into: attack resources; command, control, and conmunications systems; and target acquisition and battlefield surveillance assets. 
142
Navy lethal operational fire systems can be categorized by firing platforns. These classifications are: (1) surface ships, submarines, and ground-launch platforms; (2) aircraft;
and
(3) Special Operating Forces (SOF). Since all SOF assets are under direction of the Special Operations Command (SOCOM)
and not subject to immediate Navy control, their employment
will not be discussed.
The Tomahawk missile system is available in the Navy s inventories to provide naval operational fires. 143 This missile is available in two variants, the U/R/BGK-109C and the U/R/BGM-109D. 
1 44
The ground-launched variant was not produced, but the capacity to field it remains possible.
Tomahawk is a "fire and forget" precision weapon which uses Suitable targets include revetted aircraft, fixed missile launchers, and air defense sites. Several are not immediately available. As noted earlier, the four lore-Class Battleships are decommissioned.
Whether their 16-inch/50calMk7 and S-inch/38calMk28 systems will remain in the inactive fleet for future reactivation is a matter of debate. The HARM is an anti-radiation homing missile designed to attack broad-band signatures of radars. It has a range of 10 nas and possesses a 130 pound high-explosive warhead. 161
Another ordnance system is under development for A-6
employment. The AGM-136 Tacit Rainbow is an anti-radar missile. Believed to possess a 40+ ni range, this missile is designed to passively loiter in the vicinity of a target radar. Upon target radar activation, Tacit Rainbow acquires the signature and attacks the site. 
16 2
The EA-6B possesses the AN/A]LQ-99 jamming system. This jammer has the ability to launch HARMs against radars, unlike its unarmed Air Force counterpart, the EF-lil. thus combining the mission of two aircraft and conserving airframes. 
1 63
Of great concern to commanders and mission planners are the command and control aspects of employing these assets.
Although individual aircraft carrier airwing strike planning cells are relatively responsive, multiple carrier airving coordination is problematic. 
165
1
Phase one consists of launch and over-water flight planning and is done on the firing platform, requiring minutes to several hours to perform. Phase two planning generates overland routes to the target and includes terrain and target defenses avoidance. This function is done ashore at a theater mission planning center. 
1 61
-Digital scenes and maps available -48 hours.
-Maps availablk but no digital scenes -10-14 days.
-No maps available = 30 days.169
The long lead-time issue, then, becomes the extremely detailed maps required to program the flight data of these weapons' over-land flight profiles. To improve the timeliness of map production and ease of mission planning, the Navy is procuring the NAVSTAR satellite system, producing the Tomahawk Block III vapon, and fielding the Afloat Planning System (APS). The NAVSTAR system has an estimated in-service date of 1993. The amount of planning time NAVSTAR will save remains classified. 
170
171
Currently, the Cruise Missile Support Activity maintains the Tomahawk mission repository. 
17 2
1
1 7 4
175
To meet future Navy Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4) challenges, the Copernicus system is in development. 
176
The second pillar will be a Commander-in-Chief (CINC) Command Complex (CCC). This system will link GLOBIXS to shore-based command centers via a Local Area Network (LAN). The CCCs will then be linked to the third pillar, the afloat Tactical Data Information Exchange System (TADIXS). TADIXS is designed to support the Battle Group Commander. Finally, TADIXS will be integrated with Tactical Command Centers Israel and were utilized for reconnaissance and naval surface fire support spotting. 
1 1
1 2
1 6 3
1
The advantage of the Pioneer RPV system was its video data link8 
6
Assuming that attack of these operational decisive points was NECESSARY these attack needs were fulfilled by both the Tomahawk and SLAM missiles initially, and with follow-on carrier-based aviation strike assets thereafter.
These missiles and aircraft were SUFFICIENT to meet the requirement in terms of their SUFFICIENT range (up to 700 nas), firepower (i000 pound warheads), and delivery accuracy (circular errors of probability between one and ten feet).
Of these systems, the Tomahawk missile was perhaps the most SUFFICIENTas demonstrated by the increased number of enemy facilities that Tomahawk brought under fire with less risk as when compared with conventional gunfire or manned systems. 
196
Due to the austere nature of these countries' infrastructures, the number of critical nodes and the availability of alternative facilities is limited. Although Iraq possessed many hardened sites, this is an anomaly in the third-world, where few facilities are hardened, and the capacity to repair damage is limited. In terms of dollars, then, missiles are a bargain.
Just like any expensive asset, however, these missiles should be reserved for those targets worth the cost. The Tomahawk is capable of penetrating sophisticated target defenses and delivering its warhead with precise accuracy.
If the "cost" of the mission is driven by expected aircraft attrition rates, or if the airwing is otherwise engaged, then the Tomahawk is an appropriate choice of strike weapon. Additionally, the Copernicus command and control system represents an excellent means to conduct operational-level direction, but this system must be fully integrated with theaterand national-level systems. Once integrated, naval operational fires system will become very responsive to higher direction. The positive steps currently underway to improve the responsiveness of the Navy's Tomahawk missile planning system represent vast improvements. They serve to make this extremely accurate asset responsive to operationallevel commanders. 
forces. The force which confronts the enemy is normal; that which goes to his flanks the extraordinary.-47 Sun Tzu also recognized that maneuver is not the commander's panacea. He forewarned that "nothing is more difficult than the art of maneuver both advantage and danger are inherent.0
forces. The force which confronts the enemy is normal; that which goes to his flanks the extraordinary.-47 Sun Tzu also recognized that maneuver is not the commander's panacea. He forewarned that "nothing is more difficult than the art of maneuver both advantage and danger are inherent.0
112 Colonel John A. Warden, USAF Current "strategy' of the U.S. Navy supports the conduct of fires in support of land operations. However, no doctrine exists within the Navy which discusses the operational level of war. For guidance on the conduct of operational fires, naval officers must glean direction from joint publications and the doctrines of the other military branches. simultaneous control of all the earths' ocean area, but it is a selective function exercised only when and where needed .
112 Colonel John A. Warden, USAF Current "strategy' of the U.S. Navy supports the conduct of fires in support of land operations. However, no doctrine exists within the Navy which discusses the operational level of war. For guidance on the conduct of operational fires, naval officers must glean direction from joint publications and the doctrines of the other military branches. simultaneous control of all the earths' ocean area, but it is a selective function exercised only when and where needed .
1 4 6   
1 4 6   
3
Ibid., p. 108.
Stephen Howarth, To Shining Sea: A History of the United States Navy, 1775-1991, (New York, N.Y.: Random House), 1991, pp. 233-237.
President of the United States, National Security Strateav of the United States, p. 29.
General Dynamics. "Sea Launched Cruise Missile." (Unclassified), (San Diego. CA: Convair Division). Information Packet Number 06036164. p. 4.
Procedings, August 1984, p. 41.
Ibid., p. 41. IS Ibid., p. 41.
The only naval aircraft capable of performing photoreconnaissance and BDA is the Tactical Air Reconnaissance Pods System (TARPS)-configured F-14. TARPS is comprised of a KS-87B frame camera, a KA-99 low altitude panoramic camwra, and a AN/AAN-5 infra-red system. TARPS configured F-14s have a 1735 na range. 
1
Thus, the Navy is limited in its ability to conduct reconnaissance and BDA on operational targets ashore.
The conflict resulted from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait Perhaps his drive further south into Saudi Arabia was halted by the rapid response of the U.S. Navy. 