# ID: dcd9afef16ce4d94b7176c2af932fa70
# Title: Stuck in the Middle Without a Coherent Strategy: An Allusion to Future War
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including
The compounding effect is a lack of overall strategy and the view that aspiring to technological dominance has supplanted the traditional logic of strategy for development. This creates military subservience to only the driving forces of the day without a clear understanding for the future. Analyzing trends in the future security environment demonstrates that a lack of change may not spell the end for wider US hegemony and military dominance. However, the relative nature of comparative advantage suggests that this is downhill slope. This does not ignore the view that technological dominance has enabled the Western Way of War, mitigating a perceived lack of mass with quality. However, recognizing current fiscal and resource constraints the previous planning assumptions do not apply when emerging from a decade of conflict. Returning to a theoretical base of first principles offers a way to adapt in the face of institutional bias, recognizing the lessons from history. This is not an easy task and there remain no clear answers for dealing with an uncertain future. A phenomenological approach tackles this to understand this environment from the perspective of the technological, cognitive, and organizational domains. Synthesis of these driving factors sets the conditions for developing greater coherence to strategic thought and the ability to translate potential into strategic advantage. Only by reevaluating can Western forces escape current dissonance between strategy and the application of military power.
iii INTRODUCTION "Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?" (Alice) "That depends a good deal on where you want to get to," said the Cat. "I don't much care where -" said Alice. "Then it doesn't matter which way you go," said the Cat. "-so long as I get somewhere," Alice added as an explanation. "Oh, you're sure to do that," said the Cat, "if you only walk long enough." 
1
2
Overall, Western powers have not yet truly linked technological response to threats and therefore attempts to achieve military technological dominance have supplanted the traditional logic of strategy acting as the driver for development. 
3
Highly flexible and adaptive forces can make this approach effective in supporting policies that often change by administration, but are unlikely to be sustainable beyond the medium term. Retaining qualitative superiority in the current approach means staying at the cutting edge of technology in every area, compounded by increasing fiscal costs in a world of rapid technological advancement. Advanced technologies do make military forces more effective, however in an era of reducing or flat budgets this can only come at the cost of personnel. 
4
For the purposes of this monograph, technology is broadly defined as a collection of pieces of knowledge, of which some are physically embodied in devices and equipment.
Due to the rate of technological change the cost of military technology rises above the rate of inflation, ignores the relatively flat nature of defense budgets. For evidence that this is not a new phenomenon localized to the twenty-first century see Norman Augustine, Augustine's Laws and Major System Development Programs (New York: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1983), 44,  53-55; Philip Pugh, The Cost of Seapower (London: Conway Maritime Press, 1986), 31, 143-144, 258.  Yet, the Technological War is infinite between competing states seeking military strength. Technological breakthroughs often provide decisive advantage to the side best able to exploit them in a short time frame, compounding this competition. Therefore, for deterrence, military technology ranges persuasion through coercion. Advantage is achieved through the application of military power achieving strategic objectives, theoretically delivering dominance through technological superiority. Force multipliers are idiomatic as the language by which to judge technological advances, with the asymmetric application of force the assumed norm. This reinforces the continuing assumption of a favorable imbalance should conflict occur, with war seen as a pre-condition for peace. Strengthening this approach, the litany of military history exhibits the reoccurring evidence of this revolutionary nature to technology's narrative. To ignore its impact is a fallacy.
Here, advancing technology causes the conduct of war to change and change again. 
5
6
7
Strategies of technological superiority sit central to the Western approach to war. Breaking out 5 Martin van Creveld, Technology and War: From 2000 B.C. to the Present (New York: The Free Press, 1989), 297.   6   It is recognized that this sits counter to Stephen Van Evera's view that there is not necessarily a causal link between military technology and strategy. See Stephen Van Evera, Causes of War: Power and The Roots of Conflict (New York: Cornell University Press, 1999), 162.  of this quagmire of the middle means selecting a more coherent strategy. This must truly balance the risks of maintaining relative advantage through technology against the threat space. Without this, strategic advantage is a misnomer for Western forces in the future, with a continued confluence of operational effectiveness and policy more likely.
Therefore, the extreme differences between Western, and explicitly US, military strengths to others directly affect the strategic calculus determining military and grand strategy. 
8
More than technology alone determines the high degree of technological asymmetry that Western strategies seek to leverage. The current privileged position of US pre-eminence in terms of military technology is not an inherent right. The 'other' in the future views technology and action very differently; therefore, symmetric constants of planning are invalid. This lack of symmetry sits unpalatably with current Defense planning. Current approaches seek to achieve longevity in strategy through the use of symmetric planning constants in determining the ratio of military advantage. The humility to accept the need for change is made even more difficult without an existential threat to US and Western primacy in the immediate term. As such, the nature of discussion in this monograph will likely have a polarizing effect in readers, especially in the military community to which it is aimed. This is expected.
Strategy is as much about finding problems as it is finding solutions, framing strategic choices. Therefore, this is not an exposé on a hidden truth. To do so equals a grandiose simplification of war. In this, nothing said here is inherently new, but it cannot sit in the background during a 8 This difference in the understanding of the military calculus sees military technology made the independent variable, with strategy subsumed to the position of dependent variable. This may be realistic during enduring conflicts, such as World War I, where innovative technology was needed to change the offense-defense balance to the Allies favor. However, this view of the strategic calculus is only relevant during these times. period of change. It is continued discourse that drives the evolution of military thought and provides the rationale for this monograph, analyzing the effects for the future.
For the reader, a descriptive theoretical narrative throughout the monograph assists in understanding the contextual variations that can exist for a continued utilization of current thinking. From the reader's perspective, the explicit outcomes are interwoven into the framework of dialectic discussion. This is a deliberate mechanism to enable abstraction and understanding of the inherent bias that exists within a potentially incoherent reality, that technological superiority delivers strategic superiority for the future. As such, it is a macro level analysis that can easily be rebutted by individual micro level examples, but not as a coherent whole. Bias towards this approach needs understanding, as while it is unlikely to be removed, it is important to align cause and effect. Greater understanding can only enhance the ability to leverage the greatest opportunities while mitigating the risks.
Section One, Star Gazing into a near future of cognitive warfare, examines the emerging trends in the future security environment. It questions the positioning of Western states in meeting the changes to this environment and the emergent strategic vulnerabilities that come from retaining the current approach. Building from this, Section Two discusses the relative nature of comparative advantage, critically in relation to strategic surprise. It contextualizes the importance for change and the difficulties that inherently exist between strategic thought and positive self-deception. This creates trending effects with reacting to strategic surprise as the driver for militaries, rather than shaping strategy against emerging trends. As illustration, three short historical case studies are included to aid the reader in understanding the difficulties in developing coherent and consistent strategies and the implications for the future.
Further examination of the determining factors in the contemporary environment is made in Section Three, Technological Superiority -The Current Determinant. This examines the manifestation in Iraq and Afghanistan of the post-Cold War security decisions, outlining invalid assumptions of relative advantage as a driving factor. As synthesis for the reader, return is made to a theoretical base in Section Four, Strategic Scope versus Strategic Strength, providing a way of viewing strategic choice for the future. These choices are aimed at maximizing military advantage within the security environment and while there is no single solution, a theoretical framework is presented to understand the competing forces within an environmental frame of war. The final chapter is one of reflection, looking to a possible way ahead for Western militaries, cognizant of the need to understand oneself, the environment, and the 'other.' Methodology -A Route from Technological to Strategic Superiority This subject does not suit a more traditional approach. It is therefore deliberately designed as an exploratory piece, requiring a qualitative approach and theoretical abstraction to provide reasoned judgment for the future. This requires understanding of the possible contexts of future operating environments through historic analysis, military reflection, while developing on existing theory. A methodology of grounded qualitative analysis developed an understanding of the meta-theoretical variables, against a three-perspective approach of people, processes and technology. 
9
10
It is a supremely dangerous error to assume that technology is a solution for the problems of war. A Strategy devised by technocrats, based solely on the superiority of weaponry is no strategy at all. Machines do not win wars. 
11
12
Social electronic interdependence and the net reduction in nation-state boundaries mean that electronic attack, CBRN, and space have all become viable domains for contest. 
13
11
12 From a security standpoint Anders Fogh Rasmussen, the Secretary General of NATO confirms the norm with a decline in Western influence and the creation of a power vacuum filled by others with differing interests. Reported by Mark Urban, "NATO's Anders Fogh Rasmussen sees power slipping away," BBC News World, 3 February 2014, (accessed 4 February 2014). 
13
14
Currently tackling the future with technology is based on equipment programs such as the Joint Strike Fighter (F-35), built on principles of advanced weaponry for a visualized World War III. Ironically, this pushes the technological boundaries in areas where the United States is already overwhelming superior, reinforcing an outmoded style of warfare. 
15
However, in the long term this trends towards disruptive innovation, as threats seek to mitigate these technological strengths. The Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) 2014 provides some impetus towards challenging this view of technological dominance. 
16
14
The era of infinite resourcing is diminishing, compounded by exponential technology costs, and a lack of fiscal fortitude. Ends are remaining fixed and the means available reducing. The result is disruptive and potentially revolutionary change to the military business. Absence of the understanding of risk or providing the necessary guidance illustrates the lack of coherent strategy 17 Reported by Julian Borger, "Wake-up Call," The Guardian (5 September 2002): 5. 
18
19
Addressing strategic risk, the lack of planning constants, and the need for innovation, he identifies it will be necessary to challenge the current ways of warfare. 
20
21
The future security environment will be dominated by the transition towards multipolarity by 2040. 
22
23
24
Report,
[63]
[64]
22
23
precedence suggests that periods of power transition create periods of instability, due to competition between states and alliances readjusting their relative global positions. This is a return to great power politics, often executed through great power conflict. 
25
26
The radicalizing and uniting effect of continued military intervention will likely see a rise in non-state actor threat groupings. 
27
28
25
26
27
29
30
31
32
29
30
National Intelligence Council, Global Trends 2025
: A Transformed World (US Government Printing Office, 2008), x. 31
_______________________________________________________________________________ __ actions will therefore be aimed at undermining the ability to threaten and use forces.
The inability to anticipate these threats will shape the force structure needed and operations conducted. It will be necessary to conduct either preventative missions or pre-position reactive capabilities, requiring the ability to leverage the full spectrum of technology now.
Increased global instability necessitates greater indicators and warnings and the potential for short-term interventions. Therefore against this global context, the real time fusion of effective intelligence at all levels is a necessity, rather than a 'nice to have.' In this view, effectiveness is determined by the efficacy of the analysis to enable functioning more akin to Boyd's OODA loop. 
33
Where does this leave us now? Conflicts will be defined by the ability to control the information domain. Precision engagement, while not a new concept, is likely to define the application of force, guaranteeing effect at operational and strategic levels. However, the political appetite for risk at all levels of military operations is reducing in Western powers. 34 33 John Boyd's Observe-Orient-Decide-Act loop is but a small part of his theoretical approach to understanding the complexities of strategy, distilled into a simple and universally applicable mechanism. While Boyd's original presentations and essays have extensive value, the best discussion is made in Frans Osinga, Science, Strategy and War -The Strategic Theory of John Boyd (New York: Routledge, 2007), 2. 
34
35
35
_______________________________________________________________________________ __ may see a reduction in the role of heavy ground forces, as agile, quickly deployable, and rapidly maneuverable sit as the tenets to leverage capabilities in delivering lethality to the battlefield. Therefore, the overall logic of current domain classification will see even greater duplication of capabilities and the requirement to think multi-dimensionally in each, increasing the requirement for capabilities with a wider scope. This transference may in itself dictate a redefinition of war's current grammar.
Exemplified in the strategic guidance generated in Western nations, this ability to decisively leverage technology for operational advantage defines the military thought of the US and its allies. 
36
37
38
36
37
military technology now increasingly has a limited life cycle before replacement, now measured in around five years as opposed to decades, driving complexity into capability planning discussions. 
39
40
41
42
39
Satchell, "Emerging Trends," ET Tips No. 83 (Farnborough, UK: QinetiQ Ltd, 2009): 5. 40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
43
44
45
46
_______________________________________________________________________________ __ on ensuring that Western militaries are organizationally flexible enough to deal with global technological advances. However, the ability to create mentally agile forces, capable of exploiting rapid technological advances to deliver strategic flexibility, is an issue of generational cultural change. 
48
49
50
48
49
(Summer 1989): 288. 50
51
53
54
55
56
52
53
54
55
85-88, 107-110. 56
In this situation, plan B ends up looking like a lot more of plan A, determined against a narrow vision of the future. Generally, US defense budgets reflect historic strategic choices in this regard and often end up as self-referential supporting this strategy. More frequently, policy and strategy become subservient to this logic, with military strategy determined through modernistic objectivism. This lacks the analytical reasoning necessary to interpret the potential for change, which may see the likelihood of Van Creveld's vision of the military technological machine grinding to a halt. 57 This is enabled by the greater accessibility of traditionally perceived 'big science' and the diffusion of technology through a contagion effect in the current interconnected world. Overall, this undermines the constant by which strategies of technological superiority are successful through controlling access to military technology. Even where technology is assumed to sit within the controlled environment of existing alliances, recent reporting on the sale of US technology from Israel to China demonstrates the inconsistency of this premise. 
58
57
58
Every age has its own kind of war, its own limiting conditions, and its own peculiar preconceptions. 
60
The advent of modern technology has in no way lessoned the strategist's need to adapt his military plan to social and political realities. The second half of the twentieth century has seen a series of startling defeats handed to great powers by warriors whose strategic insight made up for their inferior weapons. Algeria, Vietnam, and Afghanistan are cases in point. Evidently, technology has not replaced strategy as the determining factor of military success. 
61
It is easy to dismiss any critique of a strategy of technological superiority as simplistic, lacking context, and misrepresenting the utility of force. 
62
63
64
Equally, policy makers can spin the perception of strength and strategic success, therefore 61 Barry Strauss and Josiah Ober, The Anatomy of Error (New York: St Martins Press, 1992), 9-10.
62 This is expected. The rationality of choice versus intuition as a decision framework presents a difficulty when attempting to break poor inductive reasoning. So much of military action is dependent on various heuristics and deductive logic enabling the collective whole. The challenging of these operating assumptions is likely to potentially paralyze what is conventionally deemed as functional. Even individual recognition of the fallibility of inductive military logic will struggle against institutional bias; the ingrained nature of this bias sees others often not able to articulate the reasons behind why they think a particular way. 64 It is recognized that this currently sits front and center of the US Army's approach to change for the future. This is representative of many Western militaries attempting to rethink approaches to warfare emerging from the past decade but this still does not return to first principles for the development of a coherent force. See Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0. Unified Land Operations (Washington, DC: Government printing office, 2011), i. continued adherence might not spell defeat against emerging threats. History has likewise demonstrated the effectiveness of executing a 'technological war' against the Soviet Union, enabling success without conflict, reconfirming this as strategic culture.
Yet, this still sits within a view that strategic horizons are being determined by technological choices, with operational effectiveness the defining characteristic not strategic positioning. Military comparative advantage using the logic of operational effectiveness means that a force only has to be perceived as performing better than its rival, relating back to a dyadic theoretical base. 
65
Even when recognizing the need for change, explicit focus on either the near or the far term can equally ignore the reality of causal change. Much conjecture is made of the future challenges of multi-polarity, deluding decision makers on the inherent near to medium term issues. The greatest threat to the security environment exists during a period of transition. The interconnectedness of a truly globalized world means one cannot assume away threats or the second or third effects of one's own action as sitting in the 'all too difficult category.' Future structures shaped only for multi-polarity ignore the potential to fight for survival to get there. This forms the essence of why a coherent strategy encompassing multiple time horizons is needed. In the near term, while entering Afghanistan and Iraq with an expeditionary mindset, the micro-level technological development demonstrates the blurring of the boundaries of asymmetric advantage. 66 While tactically successful, these developments have created strategic impotence. Rapid iterative technological development, reacting to immediate changes has shaped Western militaries for a single paradigm of warfare. The 'magpie effect' of these conflicts in face of complexity transitioned the traditional procurement industry to a reactive manner, avoiding testing and evolving for the future. Returning to an expeditionary capability is necessary for the future, but this requires a more agile approach to technology. Therefore, the current environment sees the emergence of a possibility space for Western militaries, with the potential of moving the military paradigm to where it has never been before.
In an era where traditional strategic planning becomes obsolete or inherently difficult, Henry Mintzberg's view that scenario planning is the essence of future planning comes to the fore as a means to inform strategic thought. 
67
68
67
68 Ibid, 248. necessary to change a technological deterministic view this then raises a security dilemma, in that one must think to act and act to think. 
69
These technology and capability dilemmas create a conundrum for the Western strategy of technological superiority. The optimization of capabilities to meet the full spectrum of threats, both defensive and offensively, represents the panacea sought by global powers. Yet, despite increased global instability, defense budgets continue to reduce in proportional terms, particularly evidenced in the technology generating countries. 
70
As a strategic power broker it is able to manipulate global decision-making to support its own agenda and that of its allies. Global change is executed through multi-lateralism with regional partners, extending the influence of US hegemonic power.
71
72
74
Technology and the Expansion of European Colonial Empires in the Nineteenth Century," Journal of Modern History 51, no.2 (1979): 231-63. 
72
73
74 Richard Haass, "The Age of Nonpolarity -What will follow U.S. dominance", Foreign Affairs (May/June 2008).
There is a real danger for Western states in that rigid adherence of current approaches may lead to cumulative failure against these more agile opponents, or an unpalatable cost to its human component of fighting power. 
75
Clausewitz this enabled the retention of a broad theory of war upon which to build, recognizing that analytical certitude is impossible and therefore that there is never a fully justified solution to every problem. 
79
Holistically, this must encompass oneself, the environment, and the perspective of the 'other.' Symmetric Mirror Imaging -Navel Gazing for the Other All the people like us are We, And everyone else is They. 
80
Regularly, Western militaries apply an ethnocentric approach when undertaking or considering intervention strategies within other cultures. 
81
82
79
Clausewitz,
On War,
[156]
[157]
[158]
[159]
[160]
[161]
[162]
[163]
[164]
[165]
[166]
[167]
[168]
[169]
81 For an outstanding discussion on the effect of this lack of understanding in Afghanistan see Mike Martin, An Intimate War -An Oral History of the Helmand Conflict (London: Hurst & Co, 2014), 233-249. Equally, for discussion on the folly of overrating oneself and underrating the foe see Boyd Tonkin, "Afghanistan and other victory myths enlisted by the Army," Independent Newspaper (11 April 2014): 7. 
82
extrapolate phenomena exhibited at the micro level to make incorrect assumptions of the strategic culture across the macro. When taking an externally functional assessment to access the strategic culture of another, it is equally easy to mirror image one's own view of military power, and thereby still act ethnocentrically. From a military perspective, this emerges as the 'checklist mentality' to cultural analysis. Yet, there is no easy approach to something in which the Heisenberg uncertainty principle reigns supreme. The manifestation of these problems is evident in current rhetoric on the rationality of international actors.
From a Western perspective, the West is rational and all those not agreeing with these intrinsic ideas are deemed acting irrationally. 
83
85
83
84
85
86
87
Western concepts of the relative nature of power are equally challenged by the Quranic concept of power, seeing power as immutable and resolute. 
88
Alternative views on the merging of domains, as an effect of technology diffusion, means that warfare is no longer bounded by Western logic. 
89
598-623. 86
87
89
or the Israeli position towards other Arab nations. Despite moderation and reconciliation attempts, shared worldviews undermine these, as it is difficult to break away from reinforced messages. The centrality of this confluence has a direct effect in shaping the strategic culture to support a strategy of technological superiority. It is this that shapes environmental frames of warfare that overlap to create competitive rivalry. Ignoring it cedes advantage before setting foot on the battlefield.
To attain 'victory' in the future security environment requires overcoming this inherent tendency towards ethnocentrism and strategic mirror imaging. Without change Western militaries will collectively fail to think in any degree above the operational level of war, ignoring the strategic context of other states. The centrality of the philosophy of decisive success almost assumes away the view of the other in conflict. 
90
The illustrative logic of these competing imperatives to strategic choices for military capabilities is outlined in three short examples. The importance of each is that they evidence the case in point of short-lived relative advantage, whether dictated by internal policy, threat, or an inability to translate the technology into truly effective capability. Equally, philosophies of strategic mirror imaging or ignoring trends compounds this inability. Critically, decisions based on an incomplete or ignorant understanding of the environmental frame of war will have longterm implications that may be irrecoverable. Processes to maximize the effect of technology are likely to reinforce the overriding of military strategy by operational effectiveness. Importantly, in some cases, it is still possible to achieve success through rapid adaptation by reframing the problem space. 
91
The end of World War II redefined the geo-political landscape with the demonstration of a weapon of the magnitude to ensure decisive victory, questioning traditional understanding of the Clausewitzian trinity. 
92
92
93
94
_______________________________________________________________________________ __ the US civil-military interface. 
95
Alliances for collective defense consolidated the view that nuclear weapons were strategic levers, leading to a clear review of the expectation for conventional forces.
In the period after Korea, President Eisenhower's 'New Look' led to a nuclear arms race based on massive retaliation. This was built on a simple cost benefit analysis that it was cheaper to invest in nuclear technology than conventional force structure. 
96
97
98
99
The reflective nature of history makes it easy to lambast the Vietnam War with the benefit of hindsight. Yet, this precludes the assumption of context as the determining factor for strategic decision-making. The likelihood is that decisions would be no different by anyone else stepping into the shoes of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon at the height of the Cold War. This is especially relevant when considering that Presidents Kennedy and Johnson inherited policies of containment for Vietnam from Truman and Eisenhower. The real area of criticism is how to tackle the emerging problem space in a manner that re-affords advantage. Sheer firepower and numbers was the solution developed to an enemy that would not be defeated. 
100
101
102
99
103
Ignoring this Clausewitzian mandate, three important lessons were learned and then artificially lost in the post-Vietnam era. The first is that military power is not an abstract entity that can be bent to the will of policy makers to guarantee victory, especially relevant in the over emphasis on air power. 
104
105
106
107
108
109
111
112
113
A Case for Blitzkrieg -Short Lived Advantages and Fundamental Surprise …the dazzling victory in the '67 war...contributed to building of a myth around the IDF and its personnel. The common expectations from the IDF were that any future war would be short with few casualties. 
114
The 
_______________________________________________________________________________ __ offensive effectiveness through highly emphasized defensive capabilities. Jonathan House provides a cogent argument relating to the effect this had on the blitzkrieg warfare originally envisaged by J.F.  The Israeli experiences of both the 1967 and 1973 wars support the view that the effects of blitzkrieg are now only possible through massing significant combat power. Technological advances made to the battlefield place a much less reliance on psychological confusion without numerical superiority. This correlates with Stephen Biddle's view of numerical preponderance as a determinant of capability and the representative place for mass on the battlefield. 
118
119
The similarities of this dynamic of battlefield symmetry to be considered today are threefold. First, doctrinal or technological advantages are short lived. The Israelis structured to fight a single form of battle, heavily dependent on their perceived 1967 technological advantages.
As such, their enemy analyzed this and mitigated the strengths of this form of warfare. Secondly, to remain adaptable on the battlefield it is necessary to retain complementary capabilities that can adapt to the changing environment. This may mean duplicating capabilities in different platforms that will appear counter-intuitive to the taxpayer. 
120
121
122
123
As the Arab use of anti-aircraft missiles in the 1973 war against Israel demonstrates once again, the distinction between "offensive" and "defensive" weapons is largely spurious.
- There are clear parallels to the US and UK militaries of today in that it is not possible to give primacy in a single area. It is the complementary effect of the human, technical and information dimensions that deliver tactical advantage and operational success.  For an examination of American intervention since World War, see the complete book of Gideon Rose, How Wars End (New York: Simon and Shuster, 2010). Throughout, he discusses the inherent difficulties in preparing for future conflicts. The requirement exists not to sit on past glories but to plan more carefully, especially at the military-civilian interface.
the approach. The focus of Israel was to exploit the perceived weaknesses of Hezbollah, through a predominance of air power. 
124
125
126
127
Equally apparent within this is the ability for Hezbollah to withstand strategic surprise. 
128
129
130
131
132
The irony embodied in the lack of Israeli military forethought against a changing security environment reinforces the need to maintain a full spectrum war fighting capability. Or does it?
For Israel, the overemphasis on technology over technique negated the strengths inherent within their military forces. Constantly committed against a posture designed to maintain Israel's position in the Middle East, they had lost the flexibility that allowed the operational reorientation while in contact evidenced in 1973. In this, a more agile and flexible opponent denied Israel its traditional maneuverability, while maintaining pressure, forcing a reactive posture to Hezbollah efforts. The net effect saw an increase in action by Israel that eroded its perceived legitimacy in reacting to a terrorist incident. Continually acting as a 'localized experimentation center' for the United States, the lessons are clear. However, the true importance of new approaches is evidenced in the application of cyber as a fully effective and complementary mode of warfare. The potential efficacies of the cyber domain to deliver military advantage feature extensively in futurist discussions. The fear of an electronic 'Pearl Harbor' creates a causal logic for discussion. 
133
134
135
136
137
133 While now a little dated, for a discussion of the early attempts to define an electronic 'Pearl Harbor' see Bruce Berkowitz, The New Face of War -How War will be Fought in the 21 st Century (New York: Free Press, 2003), 135-154. The Russian-Georgian conflict demonstrates the synchronized effect of conventional and cyber action. Russian cyber shaping operations directly affected the Georgian command and control architecture both internally and externally. 
138
139
While this had a relative lack of success in shaping global opinion, it does not degrade from the effectiveness of this type of approach to control the narrative. Overall, the effect in degrading Georgia's military capability was limited, mainly due to its level of technology adoption. As a low technology force, it was still able to function. For the high technology forces of the West, if defensive means are insufficient, this equals strategic paralysis. 
140
Plausible deniability exists at its best.
141
142
143
The servers used to attack Georgia were traced back to the crime syndicate Russian Business Network. 
144
145
The relatively simple nature of the Georgian cyber attack is demonstrable of the wariness that needs to be applied by US to the cyber domain. Conflation of threats, or ignorance of perceived lesser imperatives clouds the issue. The combination of cyber and kinetic capabilities by Russia illustrates the folly of elevating China as a principal threat. There is no principal threat.
Strategic cyber capabilities are accessible to all. Measures of success are determined by deniability; not getting caught is the norm for cyber conflict. Russia is indicative of a country Zeroes -How I became a soldier in the Georgia-Russia Cyberwar," Slate (14 August 2008): 1-3.
Equally challenging is the position of international neutrality by a country's citizens that assist in the attack. Similarly, it is possible for services to be relocated to a country without their permission. This occurred in this case with Georgia's national websites re-hosted by servers within the continental US. While a solution is yet to be found within international norms, the implications of the Georgian conflict are discussed extensively in Stephen Korns  The ease by which this process can occur in cyber's virtual space is outlined in Clay Shirky, Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing with Organizations (New York: Penguin Press, 2008), 155.
_______________________________________________________________________________ __ that takes a different view of information warfare to the United States. 
146
No matter how advanced military technology becomes, it cannot replace the need for operational art in the linking of strategy to effect. 
147
148
The critics of this last comment will clearly state that this is normal jogging. This is what the US and its allies do already. However, the counter to this is that if the base assumptions on which military forces are developed are inaccurate, then the maintenance of any form of 'full spectrum capability' is likely to force a reactive posture from the start. Without overarching strategic vision, this leads to the confluence of operational effectiveness as the determinant for success, but more of this to follow. To bypass this reticence for change requires a thorough rethink of the environmental frame of war and how it interfaces with the 'other.' The relative nature of comparative advantage demands that choices in military capabilities are made against a more coherent plan than a best guess for an unknowable future. We cannot expect that emergent threats and own known enemies will not challenge the status quo.
It is now time to recognize that a paradigm shift in war has undoubtedly occurred: from armies of comparable forces doing battle on a field to strategic confrontation between a range of combatants, not all of which are armies, and using different types of weapons, often improvised. 
149
The idea of the future being different from the present is so repugnant to our conventional modes of thought and behavior that we, most of us, offer a great resistance to acting on it in practice. 
150
History's irony is that the lessons for future war in a post-World War I era were learned almost exclusively by a defeated Germany and an internationally isolated Soviet Union. 
151
152
155
Since the end of the Cold War, arguments have persisted that the world is at a similar inflexion point, with advocates reengaging the RMA concept, with evidence demonstrated by the decisive victory against Iraq in 1991. 
156
157
158
159
160
So what? Reflectively, this period transitioned the view of military capabilities towards building from a foundation of quality over quantity for operational effectiveness. While not nullifying the effect of mass on the battlefield, this provided a perspective favoring the perceived advantages that technology provides. This confers that the superior quality of military technology will be capable of mitigating quantitative advantage, ensuring decisive victory against a short time imperative. 
161
162
Strategic culture is on the battlefield inalienably because it pervades the combatants and their military organizations.
-Colin S. 
Gray,
Modern Strategy 163
164
165
166
167
This approach requires a prevalence of information by which to undertake the necessary decisions. The inherent issue is that the hyper reality determined through deconstruction of observed phenomena forms the central underpinning philosophy driving action. Observation and analysis using this view fix the perspective in a single moment, ignoring where the system will evolve over time. Subconsciously, this creates an inability to distinguish between reality and the constructed simulation, with emergent trends explained away as insignificant. Dietrich Dörner labeled this problem of framing in a way that obscures the information necessary to resolve the situation as one of "intrasparence." He observed that planners "...may have to look, as it were, through frosted glass. They must make decisions….whose momentary features they can see only partially, unclearly, in blurred or shadowy outline -or possibly not at all." This uncertainty recognizes the view that once you act on the environment you change the logic of the paradigm. Action in itself thereby provides the stepping-stone to the next version of reality rather than fixing a singular view that is inherent in the modernistic and reductionist mindset. For further explanation see Dietrich Dörner, The Logic of Failure (New York: Metropolitan Books, 1996), 40.   166   For understanding of systemic thinking and the philosophical approach to reframing see Zvi Lanir and Gad Sneh, The New Agenda of Praxis (Tel Aviv, Israel: PRAXIS, 2000).
167
Hal Brand provides an up to date analysis on the nature of this strategic dissonance, recognizing the traditional universalistic tendencies that Washington decision makers often apply to foreign policy. See Hal Brand, What Good is Grand Strategy? (Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 2014), 157-177. Also see commentary on the 2014 Afghanistan Elections and whether Western intervention achieved its 52 _______________________________________________________________________________ __ expected. The 'Technological War' that existed during the Cold War informed this endemic culture and is a generational issue for adaptation. Success in this adaptation necessitates changes in the philosophies, approaches, and meta-theoretical underpinnings of Western militaries. This is no easy task, requiring institutional reinforcement to create the mechanisms necessary for organizational shifts in support of a state's strategic goals and the confluence of threat. There will always remain the question as to why change could, should, or would be necessary.
Inherently, positive self-deception is an entirely normal process and, according to Taylor and Brown's view, an essential part of a functioning individual, applicable equally to the military apparatus as a comparable whole. 
168
169
170
the classic Weberian rigidly top-down hierarchy of the past. 
171
172
171 From an organizational standpoint, it is important to acknowledge the business space in regard to this change from classic hierarchies towards flatter structures. As expected within an institutional bureaucracy such as the military change is inherently slower, potentially by a decade or more in organizational reform. However, the business space has been trending towards globalization, diversification, and flexibility to copy with the changes to its environment. Organizational structures have migrated towards Drucker's vision of the 21 st Century whereby flatter structures are necessary to meet information driven domains. This does not suggest that a hierarchy is irrelevant but that within them elements of flatness are more effective. Three references provide an excellent overview to enable the military professional to understand business organizational theory.  This sits closer to Yaneer Bar-Yam's view of complex organizations and the emergence of networks over traditional hierarchy. See Yaneer Bar-Yam, Making Things Work: Solving Problems in a  Complex World (Massachusetts: NESCI Knowledge Press, 2004), 104; also see John P. Kotter, Power and  Influence (New York: The Free Press, 1985), 38.  solution to this problem -the continual application of resources and capability-based discussions, ignores its real issue. 
176
177
178
179
176
The lessons of history demonstrate that the maintenance of the status quo may cede advantage to enemies willing to capitalize on the problems associated with a military force uncertain of its future. From a US perspective, sailing with the prevailing wind may create the type of military force that entered the past decade are essential, however inherent fallacies exist in viewing it as the recipe for success. 
180
Retrospectively judged by historians, it is likely that frozen decision-making and the manifestation of disconnected strategy and the application of force will define the decade since 9/11. 
181
Good tactics implementing technology have compensated for poor strategy. 
182
183
Reflectively evident in the 2003 Iraq conflict, the competing egos on the global stage, ignorance of established institutional norms, and lack of coherent strategy echo more of a Greek tragedy than modern warfare. The retention and execution of unilateral power easily undermines regional policies as empty rhetoric, with long-term fratricide to these partner nations. 182 For instance, the political rhetoric from decision makers talks of achieving strategic aims but suffers from impotence in clearly articulating them. The changing nature of the Afghanistan goals to a 'basic level of security' highlight the lack of coherence its second longest occupation in history. Critically, discussion of its inability to act as a haven for terror ignores the fact that this objective was broadly achieved in 2002. Afghanistan itself never represented the geo-strategic risk portrayed. See David Cameron, "Afghan Mission Accomplished," BBC News Reporting (16 Dec 2013).
The Clausewitzian view is that war is not incompatible with intellect, yet at the macro scale Western militaries no longer fight with intellect but as bureaucratic machines. Intellect is reduced to the lowest common denominator. This creates an inherent reliance on experienced tradition rather than vision 57 _______________________________________________________________________________ __ force in contact, 'fire-fighting' solutions deliver best practice without their codification as institutional knowledge. The continuing effect is likely to be a lost flexibility in the cognitive core of how to apply resources to solve a problem, and a reinforcement of the centralized nature of decision-making.
Enabling New Ways of Warfare -Technology Equals Enhanced Capability While the cynic is often validated retrospectively, trends equally demonstrate that technology has conferred military advantage to the United States since the end of the Cold War.
It sits in a pre-eminent position as the most technologically powerful military force on the globe, outspending its nearest rival by a ratio of six to one. 
184
185
engagement. 186
187
188
189
Matched against this political appetite for risk, this period has seen a dramatic reduction in friendly force casualty numbers, in comparison to previous conflicts. 
190
' of the 1990s. 191
192
However, remaining in the same place is likely to see a Georgian sunset rather than a Victorian transition in terms of Western, and explicitly US, global influence. Technological superiority has been allowed to supplant the logic of traditional strategy, inherently due to US positioning as number one. Paradoxically, this creates strategic vulnerability with a reinforcing effect that supplants strategy to the employment of systems. A capability based approach to the strategic environment this sits ignorant of the concept of relative advantage, with additional resourcing the mitigating factor for a lack of planning. The confluence of emerging threats act as disruptive agents, compounding this logic of continued strength. Attempting too broad a technological strategy to meet this problem may see a failure to adapt, or worse, the 'other' negating the strength of this technological might. Trying to remain in a position of complete technological superiority can lead to inferiority everywhere. "Well, in our country," said Alice, still panting a little, "you'd generally get to go somewhere else -if you run very fast for a long time, as we've been doing." "A slow sort of country!" said the Queen. "Now, here, you see, it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!" 
193
The only defense against weapons of the future is to prevent them ever being used. In other words, the problem is political and not military at all. A country's armed forces can no longer defend it; the most they can promise is the destruction of the attacker. 
194
The application of technology to warfare is not an exact science. The successful outcome of future conflicts sits centrally to all preparations for war, in which military capability is a critical tenet. Explicitly, this represents the decisions on force structure and force posture to deliver capabilities to the battlefield. Yet, philosophies of deterrence and 'winning the war' diverge in terms of application and prioritization. 
195
dissuasion. Yet, Napoleon demonstrated that without any form of technological revolution, the possibility exists to fight wars differently. 
196
202
203
Why is this important? The illustrative logic of three competing imperatives can be deduced. First, one can be misled by the illusion of overwhelming victory. Once an enemy starts adapting, decisive victory may not be achievable. Therefore, the position of relative advantage becomes a subjective and moveable constant within the overall global construct. This construct is defined by more than just normative understanding; emergence can develop and trigger cataclysmic changes ignorant of the status quo. Second, as an example to demonstrate the adaptive character of warfare, technology is not necessarily a key determinant for change.
Reflection of the Napoleonic era suggests that at times of transformational change the balance may shift in favor of the cognitive application of capabilities, vice technology as the primary driver. 
204
The role of Liddell-Hart, Fuller, Douhet, and others during the inter-war years allowed the reshaping of forces. Even if it wasn't always applied correctly it created the seeds for rapid innovation in the face of conflict. The inherent complexity exhibited by the future environment does not preclude the need for constant revisiting of theories of warfare. Without it, compounded failure is more likely.
From a reflective standpoint, the Napoleonic era can be seen as a confluence of the previous hundred years, explicitly the advances made by Frederick the Great. Frederick's military genius gave decisive victories over armies twice the size, assuring Prussian dominance in Europe. The changes brought about by Frederick, principally bringing discipline and tactics to what were still limited wars, are arguably a revolution in their own right, shifting away from the disorganized forces of the Middle Ages. battlefield, they cannot be contained. Prussia improved its ability to fight through realigning its forces structure and developing a professional and educated force. It took the most effective aspects of Napoleonic strategy and warfare, and applied them in a manner to defeat Napoleon.
However, this still sees strategy as responsive to crisis, although an overarching grand strategy may offer the solution for pro-active future proofing.
The first, the supreme, the most far reaching act of judgment that the statesman and commander have to make is to establish the kind of war on which they are embarking, neither mistaking it for, nor trying to turn it into something that is alien to its nature. This is the first of all strategic questions and the most comprehensive. 
205
Suggesting that this is a new phenomenon for the United States is equally wrong. In the latter stages of the Cold War, the Reagan administration sought to change the offense-defense balance of investment for deterrence. Counter-intuitively to many, yet wholly cognizant of wider grand strategy, a first or second-strike capability ignored the requirement to actually defeat or deter the incoming threat. The necessity for an effective defense in the Strategic Defense Initiative represented a radical departure in US strategic policy, yet it matched the environmental context. 
208
209
Therefore, critical within this is a strategic choice model for identifying the strategic challenge, prioritizing the strategic effort, and concurrently assessing strategic risk. This is directly informed by, and concurrently informs military capability development through an iterative basis designed to support the creation of strategy. As a framework this defines the environmental frame of war upon which the military balance of power is executed.
Yet, in order to achieve their vision of the world, since the end of the Cold War Western powers believe that this requires a predominant position to enable influence, balance of power, and control. 
210
211
212
213
Theory as a Solution -Wrestling for an Answer Focusing on the future is difficult without an existential or quantifiable threat to Western security, and a lack of continual predictability makes it problematic at best. Theoretical predictability in warfare is only achievable for a limited time before battlefield advantage is undone through a myriad of external factors. However, a lack of predictability does not preclude militaries from re-shaping for the future. Thomas Kuhn reinforces this Clausewitzian view of a general lack of analytical certitude in defining a theory of war on which to develop a strategy for action in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 
214
Competing theories remain validated against the sub-cultural understanding of the overarching paradigm of the inherent 'Western way of war.' From this, they will consistently reinforce this approach until a true crisis emerges that challenges this fundamental argument. 
215
216
218
219
This does not invalidate Clausewitz's view on the unchanging nature of war. The nature of war is violence through an act of force to achieve one's will and this is unchanging. Carl von Clausewitz, On  War, 170-174.   218   Attempts to explain conflict types such as insurgency, counter-insurgency, terrorism and others has led to the rise of military theories of war bespoke to a specific environmental context. Some, for example Galula and Trinquier, have bridged the boundary between a theory of war and one of warfare and the lack of a general theory of war for the time allows for an abstraction far beyond their intended purpose. logic. In this, learning false lessons for the future has potentially ignored warfare's evolutionary shift for new expeditionary applications of military power.
Recognition that full understanding will only come retrospectively, based on reflective analysis, allows the military professional to progress beyond the status quo of an unknowable future, frozen by the fear of the wrong decision. It thereby allows the necessary assumptions by which to develop a framework theory of warfare. At times of change such as this, emerging from a decade representative of a singular style of conflict, a unified way of thinking for the future is essential. Comparable to the inter-war period of 1918-1939, theories of war and warfare must fundamentally provide this unification of how to act in the face of complexity. 
220
The challenge inherent to this is that most military professionals are more concerned with technology than the understanding of military theory. 
221
The difficulty in training a force for multiple approaches to warfare is echoed in the contemporary debate between Colonel Gian G. 
Gentile and John Nagl. 222
221 Milan Vego. "On Military Theory," Joint Force Quarterly 62 (Autumn 2011): 59-67.   222   For a summary of their contemporary debate, see the video of their debate at Grinnell College, Counterinsurgency and the Future of Afghanistan (22 April 2013), available online at problem and is endemic to all military forces, outlined most clearly in Frank Kitson's Low Intensity Operations and more recently in Brian Linn's The Echo of Battle. 
223
This ability to afford strategic strength while concurrently mitigating the strengths of the threat features centrally to military capabilities. During emergent change the ability to balance capability choice, in advance of trending tendencies, is increasingly difficult. What is the best technology to invest in? Is it best to invest now or allow the market to mature? Are offensive or defensive capabilities waxing or waning in pre-eminence? The list of competing questions is endless. Related to technological uncertainty but on a broader scale, strategic uncertainty sits at the nexus of policy and military strategy. No single strategy is capable of guaranteeing future success in warfare, each hamstrung by Jervis' logic that war becomes more likely with waxing http://smallwarsjournal.com/blog/debate-on-counterinsurgency-gentile-vs-nagl (accessed 23 February 2014). While fairly one dimensional and decidedly repetitive in its analysis, Gian Gentile's recent book offers a current perspective on the divergent nature that the US military has taken to counter-insurgency. See Gian P. Gentile, Wrong Turn: America's Deadly Embrace of Counterinsurgency (New York: The New Press, 2013). intensity of the rivalry to dominate technology, this creates problems for a US strategy of technological superiority in its ability for prohibiting access and retaining the competitive edge. 
228
Time itself is therefore a factor contributing to this strategic uncertainty in military technological development. Supposed 'game-changing' technologies can take time to deliver effectiveness to any battlefield. The congruence of the technology itself, the concept of employment, and the problem set it is designed to overcome, all contribute to the definition of effectiveness. 
229
231
The current effectiveness of Remote Piloted Vehicles provides an enhanced capability to global counter-terrorist operations, enabling real-time responsive precision strike through a persistent intelligence and weapons platform. However, the Predator platforms were introduced in the mid-1990s, yet truly became 'game-changing' in the post-9/11 era.
This reinforced the view that technological dominance was both possible and a necessity to gain the edge over an adversary. As such, during the 1990s this became a matter of presumption. See Andrew Feickert and Stephen Daggett, "A Historical Perspective on Hollow Forces," R42334 (Congressional Research Service, 31 January 2012), 5.
Commercial Innovations of the 19 th Century such as the railroad and telegraph directly reshaped the context of warfare at the time, enabling enhanced command and control and the ability to concentrate forces rapidly to the battlefield through exterior lines. See Shawn Brimley, Ben Fitzgerald, and Kelley Saylor, "Game Changers", Disruptive Innovation Papers (Center for New American Security, 2013), 9.
interface between the military and commercial environment to translate these advances into military advantage in the operational space. Difficulties are compounded in a fiscally constrained environment when the power to influence this complex wanes. Business is not incentivized to research and retain development into new or enhancing existing capabilities when the fiscal growth of this capability driven environment is on an ill-determined timeframe. This sits agnostic to the pre-eminence of the threat as a driving force for any technology strategy.
Multiple competing forces therefore bound strategic choice and the ability to maintain a position of technological superiority. These are all bracketed against the fact that military superiority does not equal military omnipotence. Offensive or defensive actions within the environment create the conditions for the maintenance of a defendable position. This defendable position is one that solidifies the Western view of continued technological superiority. A generic approach to assist in understanding the competing nuances of technological strategies is illustrated in Figure 
1
The competing logic of strategic choice is in meeting a range of threats with sufficient capability to initially deter and, if necessary, defeat in an offensive manner, without appearing aggressive. This forms the essence of preferred Western defensive strategies. The maintenance of enhanced offensive capabilities rationally deters actors from using military force against them.
The underpinning logic is that capabilities meeting the broad threat streams are inherently adaptable enough to meet the scope of narrow or niche requirements. Yet, this assumes risk in understanding the nature of high tempo operations and adaptive changes necessary to afford real time advantage in contact. Each of these generic strategies can offer an approach to technology through which to achieve strategic advantage in the security environment. The point is to pick one and stick with it. Akin to the Cold War, these represent consistent logic upon which to base a capability development strategy to negate, and if required, defeat threats over the long term. Cost Defense and Differentiation offer alternatives to attempting to achieve military advantage against a broad base of national security requirements. Cost Defense provides advantage through aiming to have defense aggressively enabled by a rationally efficient strategy designed to maximize the internal strengths of nation. This seeks to maintain the status quo in terms of military advantage by ensuring that it remains ahead of the average threat. Through this approach it is possible to thereby develop a lower cost security model, potentially with greater mass on the battlefield.
Technological update and integration is achieved in a broad manner through an environmentally Taking a more technologically deterministic approach, a Differentiation strategy qualifies the military capabilities so that they are unique against the security environment. Exclusivity of access to military technology is a defining tenet in controlling the driving forces that seek to negate advantage. However, this approach is multi-faceted, equally enabled through soft power to ensure the perception of superiority, even if the technology is broadly the same. Requiring a strong military industrial base, an unlimited resources model, developing military capabilities at the forefront of technology, can yield continuing military advantage in the long term. 
234
233
234
These three strategies represent viable approaches for Defense capability development aimed at maximizing military advantage in the security environment. However, there are inherent risks associated with each. Yet, the biggest problem is for a military force to be 'stuck in the middle' in its understanding of how to achieve strategic advantage against its strategic scope. 
235
236
237
241
Emphasized by the attempts to use process and technology together in Vietnam, coupled with the application of quantifiable metrics to stability operations, this can give rise to paradigmatic crisis.
Worse, the increasingly complex and interconnected nature of the world means that in the absence of grand strategy, technology continues to provide the crutch for decision makers.
Changing this logic in a resource-constrained environment is equally problematic. Single service and agency parochialism are likely to erode any gains made in an effort to maintain influence over policy makers. Arguably, reacting too fast in executing any change will undermine the overall effectiveness and likely present opportunities to threats. For the US, transformation in the 1990s came with the tenets of full spectrum dominance, reinforcing this logic. 
242
Agnostic to domain, Figure 
2
243
In countering this, from the perspective of the human domain, this creates the organizational structure to support technological advantage, but cannot be defined by it. This is the space current strategies place forces now, with new specializations emerging for each new thread of technology or capability. This sits ignorant to the effectiveness that comes from understanding technology, applying and re-applying it in innovative ways, acting as the cognitive wrapper for modern warfare. Ultimately, as a form of risk aversion, this can act as significant friction to warfare, with increased probability of information overload at the multiple barriers between specializations. Equally, the power of industry can have either a strengthening or destabilizing effect in supporting strategies to deal with technological rivalry. However, this requires an industrial base flexible enough to respond to the changing environment, without it seeking its own advantage through high costs to government. Recognizing this, industry must sit at the boundary to our understanding of the frame of war and warfare for the future. The past decade has blurred the traditional procurement boundaries, leaving industry producing cutting edge capabilities that sit agnostic to wider strategy and threat, defeating the need for coherence in developing against prioritized threats. Overall, when looking to the future it is the interplay of all these that can sit as limiting or enabling, noting that unpredictable technology can bring down the house of cards through revolutionary redefinition of the environment.
Cracking Open the Champagne -Has Theory Solved It?
Has anything new been written thus far? Frankly, no. Tackling the inherent status quo of strategic vulnerability recognizes the benefit of utilizing thinking that has gone before.
Organizational structure, enhanced cognition, and flexible systems are likely to be the future weapons of war. Recognizing inherent problems, thus enabling dealing with threats and enemies means creating agility within one's own system. Realizing that theories of what we currently call war were put forward by people with no more intelligence than anyone else challenges the constant, empowering the individual innovator. However, this requires rethinking theories of war and warfare for the future manifesting itself in the doctrine that defines military application, continually reflective of policy and strategy.
Only here will forces position themselves to bridge the gap against the more agile enemy whose modus operandi is to engage only weaknesses and vulnerabilities through an indirect approach. Inherent complexity exists in challenging conventional theory of strategies of technological superiority, especially now with previous core competencies confused and entangled. Inherent uncertainty means that a prescriptive methodology is less appropriate as any theory is likely to be ill conceived to meet all future threats. However, Rome was not built in a day.
The primary purpose of any theory is to clarify concepts and ideas that have become, as it were, confused and entangled. Not until terms and concepts have been defined can one hope to make any progress in examining the question clearly and simply and expect the reader to share one's views. 
244
It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity…. we had everything before us, we had nothing before us….in short, the period was so far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for good or evil, in the superlative of comparison only. 
245
Concluding Reflections towards a New Future Akin to the epigraph above, it remains easy to describe the current period in terms of superlatives, either for success or failure. However, abject failure is not inherently apparent or imminent. In this case, it is rare to examine a force when it is at its strongest, seemingly without a viable competitor. Against this perceived strength, time for pro-active action is the strategic variable that cannot be replaced. Therefore, doing nothing should not be seen as an option, despite reluctance to see past the current technology of military might and qualitative superiority.
Assumptions of near certainty to planning must equally be removed, as they defer change until newer 'cutting edge' capabilities become available. Visions of future warfare are simply thatpredictions against a multi-variable environment. However, these cannot sit continuously aspirational without being grounded in reality.
This paradoxical strain is not new and represents the tension between developing a force based on quality or quantity, reality dictating that both determine military power. At present, the United States, and by proxy its allies, are vulnerable to overstretch through any sustained operation. It is this inherent potential to overstretch through any activity that compounds the ability to get out of the middle, especially when increasing force size is not an option. Cries of 'et tu Brute' by US policy makers may become more familiar as traditional planning assumptions for allies are invalidated by this logic, abandoning the US at the point they are needed most.
Clearly, the 1990s view of RMAs is not the answer, although current Western forces sit in the legacy of this era conflated with the past decade of pre-dominantly counter-insurgency conflict. Inefficiencies of this thinking are recognized, however it remains a simple solution to the complex space of upcoming warfare and its logic informs institutional reinforcing thought. 
246
Without these conditions, technological asymmetric advantage is unachievable in supporting a defense informed foreign policy agenda. At worst, the logical assumption of symmetric containment is invalidated before the military instrument is sought to influence the situation.
In tackling this future, no state can ever eliminate all vulnerabilities. To do so sits counter to the Western construct of liberal institutionalism as a global model, ignoring the traditional arc of the waning historical influence of hegemonies over time. The development of military capabilities means making choices. Unconstrained planning is non-existent outside of a global existential conflict. Accepting risk comes from understanding and prioritizing threats.
Often, many defense planners associate US vulnerabilities with ill-defined nebulous threats, or the strategies of unidentified enemies. This restrains our ability to meet future challenges credibly, ignoring the need to narrow focus and prioritize against the intentions most explicitly focused against those targeting vulnerabilities.
This lack of easy advantage does not invalidate all logic of current Western strategies of technological superiority. It fundamentally remains the right consideration to maintain overwhelming military dominance in support of deterrence effect in an unstable world. It is this that provides the wrapper of security that supports democratic peace theory. Theoretically, this will equally maintain the military instrument as an easy choice for policy makers, while mitigating the risk of casualties in use, but only if delivered with strategy informing military use.
However, ignoring or disaggregating responsibility for strategic vulnerabilities negates any advantages offered through military dominance. It is likely that, while not guaranteeing victory, an increased assessment of the vulnerability space is the key to unlock future warfare, informing the master narrative of western logic.
This assessment can and must drive a more holistic approach to warfare. Investing in certain areas of military capability will see trade offs in others but must be unified to avoid being out-maneuvered by new and emerging modes of warfare. This will need the military instrument to shift its approach from a reactive manner to pro-active strategy driven solutions in achieving national policy objectives. Sycophantic obedience may suggest that this is how we do things now. It is not. The ability to disengage from the last decade of conflict has been marred by the confluence of operational effectiveness and the disregard for coherence at the military-political interface. To allow this to continue while tackling new threats does a disservice to the sacrifice in blood of the soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines that have fought in conflicts that suffered a dissonance in coherent strategy. This dissonance ignored the theoretical underpinnings that support the application of military power, making operational effectiveness the determinant of success.
It is in this threat space we must collectively strive for caution. Traditional large-scale, high intensity, conventional warfare akin to Operations Desert Storm and Iraqi Freedom still remains wholly viable. In this, high technology forces developed through strategies of technological superiority maintain dominance; next generation weaponry is likely to provide parity at best in the near term. However, the net effect of the past decade has created forces lazy in the first principles that make a force 'great.' The luxuries afforded by a singular focus to enemies in the past are most probably gone, despite increased tensions with Russia. Detailed surveillance and intelligence, coupled with near real time reporting to the lowest tactical level, cannot be generated overnight for future conflicts. This requires a refocus of current forces and commanders to avoid risk adverse strategies to the overriding need to close and engage with the enemy. Enemies, especially those building forces around the principle of mass, will remain willing to take large risks to achieve decisive action. Lethargy to the understanding of how to apply combat power effectively, in spite of risk, is critical to achieving the decisive outcomes current strategies of technological superiority dictate.
When intervening in smaller conflicts, likely driven by humanitarian or right to protect agendas, security problems will see a lack of overmatch by competing factions, with porous borders allowing the influence of numerous external actors. Struggles may more often be amongst elite power brokers, yet manifest as local security dilemmas conflating along various sub-national lines. Escalatory violence will see the emergence of threats that cannot be contained at source compounding traditional peace enforcement activity, potentially seeing the need for more imperialistic peacemaking. While more decisive, this sits counter to Western liberalism and balancing military advice to policy makers becomes inherently critical. This advice and military strategic thought must consider preventing military options running counter to long term policy objectives through mission creep and protracted entanglement. This is not an insurmountable problem, but requires early engagement across all instruments of national power and is something that still sits alien to militaries that are focused on decisive victory.
Even here in reflection, contradictory themes emerge on how to provide policy makers the inherent flexibility and adaptability they demand from the military instrument. Reactive subservience, ignorant of strategy, is not the answer. Only coherence in developing military forces capable of executing the full range of tasks, from forward engagement to large-scale conventional war fighting can achieve this. However, mutual exclusivity in mission roles and structures is not the solution for this development, especially within expeditionary forces at very high readiness. While it will seem antithetical in a world of disruptive technologies, increasing specialization in US military forces ignores the position its policy makers are asking for, reinforcing boundary difficulties between specialties. Technological uncertainty cannot be allowed to continue to create strategic uncertainty. Over-specialization against a narrow strategic scope creates dissonance to wider action and ignores the relative position of the US as number one.
Against this, the spread, complexity, and diffusion of technology are compounded by the short life cycle to military technology. The balance between training the human component, thus equipping them with the skills to do their job, versus specializing the military is difficult. The need is for mentally agile professionals with expert knowledge. Therefore, forces will require the ability to exploit and integrate rapid technology advances outside of traditional procurement
cycles. Yet, this must be in a manner that is 'good enough.' It is recognized that anything less than 'cutting edge' will inflame US military culture. However, continual over-estimation of the requirement drives the overreach that creates the military budget deficits; attempting to keep pace in a fiscally constrained environment equals strategic vulnerability. This will need agreater understanding of risk, especially when integrating into the complex battlefield. The key is to maximize the leveraging of technology rather than continuing to see the military as the driver for it. That situation has changed. Creating areas of critical idea density will provide returns exponential to the effort put in and it is this that will ensure effective vertical and horizontal management in achieving objectives.
It is this intellectual capital that is needed to provide flexible management of the flat and fast information domain. Without it, victory will suffer an unpalatable price. Military personnel represent the center of gravity of any military. They provide the interface that understands intent, responds to change, and executes military orders to meet the strategic imperative. Thus, they cannot be allowed to lose their way in the era of the complex opponent. A disenfranchised military force that is afraid to innovate in warfare will hemorrhage its talented people to employment where a pioneering and expeditionary mindset is truly valued. Innovation must therefore be seen as a positive action for the future in tackling the emergent change that is congruent with technology and threat. As an overall driver, this balance of the human and moral components of warfare against the technological provides the way to create the inherent flexibility needed.
For the remaining cynic to a need for change, while this author does not profess to have all the answers, there should not be a lamenting for a loss of the current but an enthusiasm for reshaping the military instrument. Revolutionary change is sometimes necessary to enrich and develop a profession, yet pro-active anticipation can make change evolutionary and therefore more effective in the long-term maintenance of military power with little drop in capability.
Technological superiority remains a strategic choice. The current US military technological dominance is a privileged position. There is no inherent right to maintaining the status quo; an inadequate attention to the strategic implications of emerging technologies is likely to create strategic impotence. Yet, technology is but a single part of the environmental frame of war and should always sit subservient to wider logic. Continuing with it as the driving factor is equal to laziness. Failing to appreciate these implications means that decision makers cannot decide on the correct strategy. The military instrument cannot allow itself to ignore its place in informing the need for strategic adjustment.
Yet, this Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) was still incapable of providing strategic victory for Germany.
Yet, this Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) was still incapable of providing strategic victory for Germany.
157
In examining today's emergence of hybrid warfare, Colin Gray argues that while it may be an amalgam of differing approaches, the essence of the surrounding context is nothing new and has been evidenced previously. See Colin S. Gray, "Categorical Confusion? The Strategic Implications of Recognizing Challenges either as Irregular or Traditional" (Monograph: Strategic Studies Institute, Carlisle, PA, 2012): vii.
Colin Gray discusses this view of technology, providing the view that war and warfare must be seen in context. Critically, this contextualization of technology a better way of understanding its place as supporting element to strategic effectiveness, not the central pillar. See ColinGray, Another Bloody  Century -Future Warfare (London: Phoenix, 2005), 121-128.
From a research standpoint, this consisted of developing a theoretical framework from an inductive foundation, subsequently utilizing a convergent methodology to achieve theoretical saturation. Validity of sources in such an exploratory and subjective study is acknowledged as a point of contention, therefore all sources for understanding, however fringe or esoteric were considered. This is not intended to necessarily provide a fully accurate picture of tomorrow but enhance the development of coherent strategy.
The preliminary hypothesis focused on the fact that change from a strategy of technological superiority was needed, allowing consideration to be made of all congruent and incongruent factors. This shaped research against: In preparing for future conflicts, what underpinning strategy is needed to develop and subsequently shape the future use of force? What will define the character of future conflict in an age of flat and fast information exchange and global technological proliferation? What are the imperatives to change the current military paradigm juxtaposed to the implications of maintaining the status quo?
This recognizes that technology in itself does not equal new tactics but that emergent tactics often seek to maximize currently available technologies. This, in turn drives technological development, creating a fulcrum upon which the evolution of military use shifts.
'The Clash of Civilizations?' Foreign Affairs (Summer 1993): 22-49; The Clash of Civilizations and the
This is closer to Thomas Hammes' view of fourth generation warfare. Technology has enabled significant changes to the landscape of conflict, yet the possession of greater technology does not immediately translate into military advantage. See Thomas Hammes, The Sling and The Stone -On War in the 21 stCentury (Minneapolis: Zenith Press, 2006), 190-206.   
For a discussion on the role of meta-theory and the development of transformative ideas through which understanding is developed and thereby a theory of action see Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012). From a military perspective this scientific logic provides a useful mechanism for understanding the problems endemic to institutions when adapting to change. For explicit discussion on paradigmatic crises see 77-93.
See StephenBiddle, Military Power,[16][17] 
The role of technology in enabling this hegemonic growth should not be understated, as it is central to the 'attractive' soft power of the United States. For an excellent comparative example of role of technology in the expansion of European empires see Daniel Headrick, "The Tools of Imperialism:
There is no single 'magic bullet' to achieving success, yet our approach to strategic mirror imaging assumes away this risk. Frederick W. Kagan, "High-Tech: The Future Face of War? A Debate" Commentary CV, no.1 (Jan 1998): 31-32.
The Executive Secretary, A Report to the National Security Council -NSC 86, 7 April 1950. For discussion on Soviet Conduct prior to the successful nuclear test see George F. Kennan, "The Sources of Soviet Conduct" by X, Foreign Affairs 25 (July 1947): 566-82.
For further explanation see Michael Carver's essay in Peter Paret (ed). Makers of Modern Strategy -from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986), 779-789. Spencer Tucker's excellent discussion illustrates the problems inherent to this environment. Spencer Tucker, "The Korean War: 1950-53: from maneuver to stalemate," The Korean Journal of Defense Analysts22, no.4 (December 2010): 421-433. For wider reading see ClayBrian, The Forgotten War:  America in Korea, 1950-53 (New York: Times Books, 1987).
The policy of containment and the need for a deft touch in the use of military force saw greater reliance on political strategy to determine operations. Policy disconnects and the subsequent removal of General Douglas MacArthur by President Truman reaffirmed this civilian control of the military.
This 'New Look' period from 1952 to 1962 saw nuclear strategy examine the concepts of brinkmanship, second-strike capability and the real possibility of mutual assured destruction. It was only the Cuban Missile Crisis and the change of focus by President Kennedy's administration that prevent this escalating further. This saw the shift to a flexible response option and a return to symmetric containment. For an excellent analysis of US national security policy during the early Cold War see John Lewis Gaddis, Strategies of Containment (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 87-197.
The Eisenhower administration deployed nuclear weapons to South Korea in 1958 as an economical alternative to increasing the already significant troop presence. As a strategy this enabled a significant reduction in post-Korean War stability troops but further shifted the balance of effort in favor of nuclear deterrence. Overall, defense budgets fell by a quarter under President Eisenhower after the Korean War. However, despite this budgets each of the services sought to develop their own unique nuclear capabilities. See Thomas G. Mahnken, Technology and the American Way of War (New York, Columbia University Press, 2010), 27-50.
For a short discussion on strategic choice and building the wrong army, embodied in the Pentomic Division see David F. Melcher and John C. Seimer, "How to Build the Wrong Army," Military Review 9 (September 1992): 66-76.
Carl vonClausewitz, On War, 89.    
Thomas G. Mahnken, Technology and the American Way of War, 65-72.
For additional reading on how the US military reached this position, see the excellent analysis in Russell F. Weigley, The American Way of War: A History of U.S. MilitaryStrategy and Policy  (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1973), 475.   
David Makovsky and Jeffrey White, Lessons and Implications of the Israeli-Hizbollah War (Washington, DC: Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2006), 35.
Joseph S. Nye, The Future ofPower,[122][123][124][125][126][127][128][129][130][131][132] 
  Jeffrey Carr, Inside Cyber Warfare, 119.    
In addition toJeffrey Carr, Inside Cyber Warfare, 2010, 15, see the article by a journalist on how they were able to easily become part of distributed attack. Evgeny Morozov, "An Army of Ones and
Peter Paret (ed). Makers of Modern Strategy -from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, 640.
Rupert Smith, The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World (New York: Random House, 2007), 5.
The bumper sticker for this approach is solidified in, 'war cannot be won with inferior weapons.' Thus, technology is able to reduce the uncertainty existing in the chaos and complexity of war.
James Hackett, ed., The Military Balance 2010 (London: Routledge, 2010), 5.
Hew Strachan, The Direction of War -Contemporary Strategy in Historical Perspective(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013),189-190.   
Michael Howard, The Causes of War (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1984), 101-114.   
Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and Through the 220.   
For Napoleon this required a high degree of situational awareness. For discussion on his cartographers and detailed reports and returns to enable command and control see David Chandler, The Campaigns ofNapoleon (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1966), 367-378.   
See BasilLiddell-Hart, Strategy (New York: Meridian Books, 1991), 122-123.   
For Strachan's views on the subject see Hew Strachan, The Changing Character of War, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011).
Williamson Murray, Richard Sinnreich, and James Lacey, The Shaping of Grand Strategy (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 4-5.
SeeThomas Kuhn. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 84.    
Theories provide the wrapper enabling military action in a manner that does not require constant analysis. Yet, through incorrect assumptions militaries accept these theories as laws and therefore immutable logic.
Antoine Bousquet. Scientific Way of Warfare: Order and Chaos On the Battlefields of Modernity (New York: Columbia University Press, USA, 2010), 196.
See Melian dialogue in Thucydides, Robert Strassler (ed). History of the Peloponnesian War(New York: Free Press, 2008), 351-357.   
See CJCS, Joint Vision 2020 (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 2000), 6-11.
Porter's competitive logic seeks to define a framework by which to analyze, understand, and develop business strategy within a competitive marketplace. For further discussion see Michael E.Porter.  Competitive Strategy, 
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 132.   
Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities (Oxford: Harper Collins, 2010), 1.
Deborah A. Stone, "Causal Stories and the Formation of Policy Agendas," Political Science Quarterly (Summer 1989): 288.
A SAMS' monograph is a labor of love, written for the satisfaction of only oneself. The oxymoronic nature of this comment speaks volumes to the frustrations of all students embattled in
ATZL-SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
The campaigns of Iraq and Afghanistan evidence this constraining effect of information overload and reductionist planning, manifesting in a lack of campaign coherence. 
173
174
175
For Napoleon, the technology of the battlefield was largely unchanged from Austerlitz to 
Waterloo. 198
200
Napoleon did not adapt his approach as his enemy regained the advantage. 
201
Stick with it, providing responses tailored to the range of enemies. Develop coherence across inter-governmental agendas ensuring military vulnerabilities are not the root cause for wider security dilemmas. Continuing to remain 'stuck in the middle' ignorant to the need for military strategy is tantamount to failure.