# ID: de2bcde9229a4f7ba0756bb08f84a12f
# Title: Deception: Theory and practice
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
This thesis explores the history of U.S. Army deception and doctrine, and combines the insights gained with the various works on deception, cognitive psychology, communications, and decision-making in order to distill a concise handbook for deception practitioners. A longitudinal review of U.S. Army doctrine reveals a wide variation in the treatment of deception, from emphasized to ignored. This variation can be primarily explained by the U.S. preference for the cumulative destruction style of war and the perceived balance of power between the U.S. and its adversaries. This thesis strives to fill the current doctrinal gap by distilling the existing body of work to create a theory of deception in the military context. The theory presented provides a cogent structure, taxonomy, and lexicon; as well as, emphasis on how deception functions within the frameworks of communications and decision-making. Next, a synthesis of the practice of deception is presented, with a focus on deception planning and the essential elements of deception practice. Examples of U.S. use of deception from the Revolutionary War to Operation DESERT STORM are presented to provide illumination on the utility and use of deception. Finally, the thesis provides recommendations on how to organize for deception operations.  
For where the lion's skin will not reach, you must patch it out with the fox's.
-Lysander the Spartan 1
During the opening phases of the 2006 Israeli-Hezbollah War, Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) hammered the network of Hezbollah bunkers along the Lebanese border.
Hezbollah had been building the bunker network for years, under the watchful eyes of IDF surveillance, Lebanese spies working for Israel, and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), patrolled the southern Lebanese border. What the IDF did not realize until far too late was the network of bunkers so diligently-and visiblyemplaced by Hezbollah were decoys; Hezbollah's true bunkers were scattered across the countryside and covered by layers of security and camouflage. The bunker deception was but one of several cunning stratagems used by Hezbollah to blunt the IDF's technological and information advantages, allowing Hezbollah to maintain combat effectiveness in the face of the Israeli assault. Deception had once more proven its worth. 2
Stratagems are essential in war, as commanders seek to hide their real intentions, capabilities, and actions from the enemy, while cunningly showing false intentions capabilities and actions to lure the enemy into defeat. From the earliest battles of antiquity, commanders have used guile and misdirection for tactical, operational, and …no major operations should be undertaken without planning and executing appropriate deception measures. As time goes on… there is a danger that these two means [psychological warfare and cover and deception] may in the future not be considered adequately in our planning. I consider it essential that the War Department should continue to take those steps that are necessary to keep alive the arts of… cover and deception and that there should continue in being a nucleus of personnel capable in handling these arts in case an emergency arises. I desire therefore that the Director of Plans and Operations maintain the potential effectiveness of these arts in order that their benefits may become immediately available, as and when desired, in furtherance of national security. 
4
Observation Group [MACVSOG] made extensive use of deception in its operations against 3 Richard Baker, "The Lost and found Art of Deception" (Paper presented at the Conference of Army Historians, Arlington, Virginia, 25 -28 July 2011). 
4
In spite of the demonstrated utility of deception in support U.S. military operations, the U.S. Army currently falls short on the requirement to provide practitioners of deception with a solid doctrinal foundation in the theory and practice of deception.
Instead, the U.S. Army has for the most part of two decades done little more than pay lip service to the importance of deception, or in the case of camouflage and concealment, stripped the concepts of their deception lineage. The last dedicated deception manual was published in 1988, and is no longer available through official channels. Furthermore, the 1957 and 1967 editions of the deception field manual have effectively disappeared. 
5
The degree of emphasis of deception in U.S. Army doctrine is primarily related to the perceived balance of power between the United States and potential adversaries.
There are essential tenets of the theory and practice of deception that can be drawn from the existing bodies of work.
What the literature review shows is there is a definite lack of guidance on the theory and practice of deception within current U.S. Army doctrine, despite a continuing theme in the doctrine that deception is of utility to operations. On the civilian side, there is a diversity of ideas on the theory and practice of deception; however, these ideas are 
5
The purpose of this thesis is to explore the breadth of U.S. Army military deception history and doctrine, and combine the insights gained with the various works on deception theory and practice, cognitive psychology, communications, and decisionmaking in order to distill the theory and practice of deception into a concise handbook for deception practitioners. Rather than attempting to cover the entirety of deceptive practices, the scope of this thesis is deception as employed in support of military objectives.
In order to achieve this goal, the thesis first constructs a longitudinal review of U.S. Army doctrine focusing on the capstone operations manual series and deception related manuals in order to discern whether there is a pattern to U.S. Army doctrine's treatment of deception. The scope of this survey is from the 1905 Field Service
Regualtions through the 2012 ADP 3-0. Next the thesis examines the reasons commonly given for why deception is marginalized within military affairs. This examination is conducted through the lenses of doctrine and practice.
Then the thesis shifts to a distillation of the existing body work on deception to create a theory of deception in the military context. Within the theory of deception chapter the focus will be on providing a cogent structure, taxonomy, and lexicon for deception with an emphasis on how deception works. The structure provided by Bell and Whaley's general theory of deception will be used as the initial framework. To the framework is added an understanding of the role of perceptional and cognitive biases in deception; a fleshed out lexicon of deception related terms; and a broad set of categories for deception techniques. This requires taking the mélange of existing works on deception and rendering the concepts down to a cohesive synthesis.
After deception theory, the thesis presents a synthesis of the practice of deception.
The practice of deception chapter first presents a planning process that builds upon the planning process presented in JP 3-13.4: Military Deception. Next, the chapter reviews the various maxims, principles, and considerations presented by deception theorists and practitioners to draw out the essential elements of deception practice. Additionally, the chapter examines the uses of deception in war illuminated with examples from history.
The practice chapter ends with a discussion of deception failures in order to reinforce the necessity of proper planning and execution.
A chapter surveying U.S. military use of deception from the Revolutionary War to Operation DESERT STORM follows the practice chapter in order to provide additional illumination in the context of historic U.S. operations. This chapter serves a secondary purpose of priming the mind of the reader by demonstrating the U.S. military has a long and storied history of using deception. Finally, a conclusions chapter provides recommendations on how to organize for deception operations, with ideas on manning, training, integration in the staff, and special resource requirements.
Deception is common sense soldiering.
-General Carl E. Vuono 6
According to FM 1, The Army, "Doctrine is the concise expression of how Army forces contribute to campaigns, major operations, battles, and engagements." 
7
8
The U.S. Army has two capstone manuals that serve as the doctrinal foundations of the force; currently, these manuals are: FM 1: the Army and APD 3-0: Unified Land Operations. 9 FM 1 serves as a broad overview of the U.S. Army's "fundamental purpose, roles, responsibilities, and functions, as established by the Constitution, Congress, and the Department of Defense." 10 APD 3-0 serves as the "overarching doctrinal guidance and direction for conducting operations." 
11
The adjectives best describing the U.S. Army's historical and present guidance on deception are haphazard and shallow. Within the operations field manuals are statements to "use deception" sprinkled about almost as an afterthought. Only rarely are any statements approaching the strength of General Eisenhower's about the essential 
6
7
8
9
10
,
v
11
Discussion of the concept of deception in U.S. military doctrine prior to the World War II era was minimal, and when present often negative. The 1905 edition of the War Department's Field Service Regulations admonishes there will be no quarter 
12
13
14
However, discussion of deceiving the enemy is limited to cryptic comments like: "If it is desirable to annoy or deceive the enemy, the supreme commander gives the necessary orders." 
15
16
18
13
14 War Department, Field Service 
Regulations.1905, 102. 15
16
17
19
20
21
The intriguing anomaly in U.S. military doctrine prior to and during the World War II era is the presence of the concept of deception. Though cursory, the inclusion of both the covering and deceiving aspects of deception within U.S. doctrine runs counter to the prevailing conventional wisdom that the U.S. military was a deception neophyte until the capability was nurtured under the tutelage of its British counterparts. Building on the 1923 Field Service Regulations, the 1939 operations manual, now FM 100-5: Tentative Field Service Regulations: Operations, establishes deception's role in support of surprise, stating: "The effect of surprise is dependent on… the effectiveness of the means employed to deceive the enemy of our own dispositions and intentions." 
23
19 War Department, Field Service Regulations, United States Army. 1923 (Washington, DC:  Government Printing Office, 1924). 
20 War Department, Field Service Regulations. 1923
, 77. 21 War Department, Field Service Regulations. 1923, 118. 22
23 War Department, Field Manual 100-5: Tentative Field Service Regulations of 
Operations, 1939
(Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1939), 28 -29. 24
half, the "postive measures" are not described in any detail. 
25
The attack [emphasis in original] on the enemy is made by surprise obtained by deception and ambush…. By feint and demonstration… by spreading false information, the attacker attempts to mislead the enemy…. 
26
27
30
25
26 War Department, Field Manual 100-5: Tentative Field Service 
Regulations, 1939
, 228 -229. 27 War Department, Field Manual 100-5: Field Service Regulations of Operations, 1941
(Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1941
), 57. 28 War Department, Field Manual 100-5: Field Service Regulations, 1941
, 58. 29 War Department, Field Manual 100-5: Field Service Regulations, 1941, 58. 30
inconsistencies. First in a curious change from the 1939 manual, the section on partisan warfare, which replaces the 1939 section on guerrilla warfare, is devoid of deception.
Second, in opposition to the overall tenor of deception as a useful tool, the manual seems to undercut the utility of deception in the offense stating:
The degree of surprise attained is dependent in a large measure on the coordination and timing of the measures taken to deceive the enemy. Ruses, demonstrations, feints, and other measures for deception executed at the wrong time and place will be obvious to an alert enemy and will warn him of the impending attack. Superior mobility and speed of execution may be determining factors in achieving surprise. 
31
Units, published in 1942, provides further guidance on concealment at the Soldier and unit levels; as well as, reinforcement of the vital necessity to protect military information.
Notably, FM 21-45 sets more stringent guidance for protecting information than current doctrine; for example, the manual states:
Prior to going into combat, all distinguishing marks and insignia on vehicles, equipment, or persons will be removed or obliterated under an officer's supervision. You must be careful to remove divisional, regimental, or company insignia from your clothes and equipment. Search your pockets for letters, memoranda, orders, souvenirs, or keepsakes which might disclose your organization. 
32
33
34
Camouflage uses concealment and deception to promote our offensive action, to surprise, to mislead the enemy, and to prevent him from inflicting damage upon us. Concealment includes hiding from view, making hard to see clearly, arranging obstructions to vision, deceiving and disguising, and deception involving sound. 35
While the 1944 edition of FM 100-5 is essentially the same as the 1941 edition, the 1949 edition of FM 100-5 differs in two critical ways with regards to deception. First, this edition of the operations manual introduces a distinct set of principles of war, with surprise being one. 
36
37
33 War Department, Field Manual 5-20: Engineer Field Manual of Camouflage, 1940
(Washington, DC: War Department, 1940
), 3. 34 War Department, Field Manual 5-20: Camouflage Basic Principles, 1944
(Washington, DC: War Department, 1944)
35 War Department, Field Manual 5-20, 1944, 4.
39
40
Headquarters Special Troops in World War II. 
41
The 1954 edition of FM 100-5 represents another fundamental revision of the manual; as well as, both the apex of discussion of deception activities within the capstone document and the beginnings of deception's dismemberment. This iteration of FM 100-5
separates active deception from counterintelligence into a distinct three page section on "combat deception" that includes subsections on the importance of military deception;
the fundamentals of military deception; security considerations; planning; and means.
The manual advises: "It is imperative that commanders constantly realize the importance of combat deception and that they train their troops and staff in the techniques and planning for combat deception." 42 Though the split of deception from counterintelligence elevates the status of deception within the manual, the split has the negative effect of separating deception from the security aspects of cover. Furthermore, while deception is still considered a tool of surprise, a new principle of war, economy of force, admonishes that deception-along with limited attacks, retrogrades, and the defense-is only to be used in non-critical areas in support of the concentration of forces at the decisive point. 
43
In 1955, the Ground General School was discontinued and deception proponency was transferred along with the aggressor cadre to the Command and General Staff
College. 
44
truncates the section on military deception to two paragraphs on the utility of deception that close with a reference to FM 31-40. At the same time, the cover aspects of counterintelligence and camouflage remain intact. Despite the removal of deception guidance to FM 31-40, this FM 100-5 continues the trend of deception being an important part of operations: "Tactical cover and deception plans are an integral part of 
42
43
44
46
47
Army Combat Developments Command. 48 FM 31-40 was updated with changes in 1960
and 1963
, and a still classified update to FM 31-40 was published in 1967. 49
50
51
Looking at the camouflage aspect of deception, the 1959 edition of FM 5-20 represented the pinnacle of the linkage between camouflage and cover and deception. In the manual's discussion of the nuclear battlefield, the manual explicitly states the role of camouflage in both denying information and deceiving:
The best means of reducing the chance of a unit becoming the target of nuclear attack is to deny the enemy information as to the unit location and strength, or to fool the enemy by deception. Habitual use of proper camouflage will greatly assist in denying this information to the enemy. 52 51 Headquarters, Department of the Army, Training Circular No. 30-1, 15.   52 Headquarters, Department of the Army, Field Manual 5-20: Camouflage Basic Principles and Field  Camouflage, 1959 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1959), 3.
Additionally, FM 5-20 emphatically bound camouflage to deception via the very definition of camouflage: "Camouflage is a French word meaning disguise and is used to describe actions taken to mislead the enemy by misrepresenting the true identity of an installation, an activity, or an item of equipment." 53 Finally, the manual reinforced camouflage's linkage to cover and deception to the point of subordinating camouflage to deception: "Camouflage, as an element of military deception, permits us to approach unseen and to remain hidden within striking distance of the enemy." 
54
The 1976 edition of FM 100-5 is an anomaly within the operations series as the manual is fixated squarely on the operations of a numerically smaller force against numerically superior Soviet forces in Western Europe. Though the distinct section on deception present in previous editions is absent, deception remains thoroughly integrated in the manual. For example, the following guidance is given for the offense: "If a smaller force is to concentrate superior combat power at the point of decision… commanders must employ surprise and deception as well as the full mobility of the force." 56 Furthermore, one of the basic tasks of the covering force in the defense is to deceive the 
53
Army, Field Manual 5-20: 1959, 3. 54
55
56
enemy, and deny information on friendly force dispositions. 
57
59
60
61
63
64
57
58
Army, Field Manual 100-5: 1976, 14-10 59
60
61
Army, 1986), 40. 62
63
64
65
In 1978, the U.S. Army retrieved the dedicated military deception manual from classified purgatory and published the unclassified FM 90-2: Tactical Deception. As the title implies, the focus of FM 90-2 is with only the tactical fight: "…tactical deception here refers to short-term actions of corps or lower units within the battle area." 67 Though this "How to Fight" manual is rather simplistic, its release marked the beginning of a military deception renaissance within the U.S. Army. Of note however, the 1978 field manual severs the connection between deception and the term cover, though it maintains camouflage and concealment as aspects of visual deception. Despite these limitations, FM 90-2 provides a workable foundation of deception practice, principles, and planning considerations.
In 1986 proponency for deception was transferred to the U.S. Army Intelligence
Center and School at Fort Huachuca. Shortly afterwards, FM 90-2 was updated as FM 90-2: Battlefield Deception. The 1988 iteration of FM 90-2 is an intellectually weighty tome, delving into the cognitive underpinnings of deception as well as providing detailed guidance on the planning and execution of deception at both the tactical and operational levels of war. This manual was designed to address what the U.S. Army considered to be a shortfall in deception integration: Today, commanders use little deception in planning, directing, and conducting combat operations. As a result, many deception-related skills that have served our Army well in the past have been forgotten, and where remembered, have not been made part of our war-fighting capabilities Armywide. 68 65 Headquarters, Department of the Army, Field Manual 100-5: 1982, 7-19. 
66
67
68
Without having access to the editions of FM 31-40 for comparison, the 1988 edition of FM 90-2 represents the strongest presentation of deception theory and practice within U.S. Army doctrine. Shortly after the publication of this edition, deception proponency was shifted once more, to the U.S. Combined Arms Center, where it remains.
Despite the successful use of deception in Operation DESERT STORM, the 1993 edition of FM 100-5 almost appears to be a repudiation of the prior editions with regards to deception, and marks the beginning of deception's descent into a doctrinal abyss.
Among the principles of war, deception is absent from security, and relegated to a mere factor of surprise; furthermore, economy of force demands force allocations for tasks such as deception be measures so as to not detract from the ability to mass at the decisive point. 
69
70
A possible explanation for the marginalization of deception lies in the shift of the strategic equation with the fall of the Soviet Union. The collapse of the Soviet Union left the United States without a peer competitor, and thus without the need for indirect approaches to compensate for numerical inferiority and vulnerable lines of communication. 
71
69
70
Army, Field Manual 100-5, 1993, 2-14. 71
The stated reason was that the manual "no longer represents valid Army doctrine." 
72
In the 2001 iteration of the operations manual, now FM 3-0, Operations, deception continues its path into doctrinal oblivion. In keeping with the model of FM 100-6, deception is relegated to being an element of information operations, and an aspect of information superiority. While deception returns to the discussion of the principle of security, deception is absent from the principle of surprise. 
73
The 2008 edition of FM 3-0 sees deception, now categorized as an information task, again limited to a single paragraph with a reference to FM 3-13: Information Operations and the joint forces publication on military deception, JP 3-13.4: Military 72 Memorandum signed by Colonel Clinton J. Ancker III, Director, Corps and Division Doctrine, dated 30 September 1996 as cited in Bradley K. Nelson, "Battlefield Deception: Abandoned Imperative of the 21st Century" (Monograph, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1997), 28, accessed 2 January 2012, http://handle.dtic.mil/100.2/ADA339425. 
73
Deception. For the first time since 1914, the concepts of feints and demonstrations-in fact, the very words-do not appear within the operations manual. The early 2011 change to FM 3-0 gives deception three paragraphs as an element of inform and influence activities, though there is a note stating: "military deception will migrate to another functional area in future editions of FM 3-0." 74 Interestingly, this edition does not reference the still current FM 3-13 for deception guidance, rather it points to JP 3-13.4, the joint force publication. ADP 3-0: Unified Land Operations superseded FM 3-0 as part of the Army's "Doctrine 2015" program. APD 3-0, weighing in at a concise 32 pages, does not mention deception at all, and relegates all inform and influence operations to three uses of the term without elaboration or mention of external references. The 1990 edition of FM 5-20, renamed FM 20-3: Camouflage, further  While essentially ignoring the connection between deception and camouflage, FM 20-3 does ironically state in a standalone paragraph in its introduction: Deception helps mask the real intent of primary combat operations and aids in achieving surprise. Deception countermeasures can delay effective enemy reaction by disguising information about friendly intentions, capabilities, objectives, and locations of vulnerable units and facilities. 76 74 Headquarters, Department of the Army, Field Manual 3-0: Operations, Change 1 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 2011), 6-19. 
75
76
The 2010 iteration of the Army's camouflage doctrine, ATTP 3-34.39: Camouflage, Concealment, and Decoys represents a complete reversal of earliest editions of camouflage field manuals, calling deception a component of CCD. However, the publication offers no discussion or guidance on deception. 77
A review of the U.S. Army capstone document for operations from 1905 to present shows the emergence and growth of deception as an operational concept.
However, the level of emphasis is cyclic, with peaks occurring during and immediately after World War II, and during the late 1970s through 1980s. Conversely deception integration is at its weakest prior to World War I, and since the end of the Cold War.
Furthermore, the only time all the aspects of deception were unified under one concept was during the World War II era when the aspects were bundled under the aegis of counterintelligence. Since that time, deception was slowly and methodically dismembered and marginalized to the point that camouflage is no longer considered a form of deception and the term "cover" has completely lost its connection to deception within U.S. Army doctrine. 78 77 Headquarters, Department of the Army, Army Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures 3-34.39: Camouflage, Concealment, and Decoys/Marine Corps Reference Publication 3-17.6A (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 2010), iv. 
78
As can be seen from the longitudinal survey of deception within U.S. Army doctrine, deception is consistently mentioned; however, the degree of emphasis and level of guidance varies significantly over time. The variance in deception emphasis has driven deception authors to propose numerous explanations as to why the U.S. Army does not treat deception with a greater level of emphasis given deception's demonstrated utility.
The reason given the most weight is the idea that America's desired style of warfare, firmly grounded in cumulative destruction and influenced heavily by Clausewitz, leaves little consideration for indirect methods like deception. 
79
The most frequent explanation of why the U.S. War I, especially the German strategy at the Battle of Verdun. Because successful application of the cumulative destruction approach is rooted in the ability of a force to effectively inflict greater net damage on the enemy force, the approach is dependent on an overall force superiority. Even if an inferior force can achieve a series of tactical victories, the additive effect of the losses results in strategic defeat. 
83
Systemic disruption seeks to achieve victory through attacks against the enemy's weaknesses, (e.g., popular will, production capacity, communications, and command and 81 Author's note: the discussion of styles of war within this thesis is solely in the context of emphasis on deception; any evaluation of the superiority of one style of war over the other is beyond the scope of this work. 
82
83 Edward Luttwak and Steven Canby, MINDSET: National Styles in Warfare and the Operational Level of Planning, Conduct and Analysis (Pontiac, MA: C&L Associates, 1980). control) which leave the enemy paralyzed and unable to react effectively. The exemplars for systemic disruption are the German blitzkrieg, most forms of guerrilla warfare, and the AirLand Battle concept. Because the systemic disruption approach places strength against weakness, the potential effect is not dependent on overall force superiority. An inferior force has the potential for strategic victory over a superior force; therefore inferior forces must lean towards a systemic disruption approach in order to have a chance at prevailing. 
84
87
Because of this inward perspective, there is less effort given to understanding the enemy to the degree needed for effective deception. Conversely, systemic disruption oriented forces are more focused on the external since victory is achieved through the identification and exploitation of enemy weaknesses. 
88
89
As Lysander suggested, when the skin of the lion-force-will not suffice, then the skin of the fox-guile-must be used to cover the gap. The inherent implication to this advice is when the skin of the lion is sufficient, the fox is not needed. Several authors mention the evolution of Napoleon's warfighting as the exemplar for this relationship. As
Napoleon's armies grew in power and capability, Napoleon transitioned from a reliance on cunning and misdirection to a reliance on force. 
91
92
93
Adams' desires are frequently reflected in U.S. Army doctrine. For example, FM 100-5
(1939) states:
The ultimate objective [emphasis in original] of all military operations is the destruction of the enemy's armed forces in battle…. Concentration of superior forces [emphasis in original], both on the ground and in the air, at the decisive place and time, creates the conditions most essential to decisive victory and constitutes the best evidence of superior leadership. 
94
The American people expect decisive victory and abhor unnecessary casualties. They prefer quick resolution of conflicts and reserve the right to reconsider their support should any of these conditions not be met. 
95
Army's preference for that style of war.
Since the United States tends towards the cumulative destruction side of the spectrum, U.S. Army doctrine tends to embrace Clausewitz's positions on the execution of war. As a result, Clausewitz's disdain may have an impact on deception's place in doctrine. Clausewitz writing about craft and cunning stated: "The fact remains that those qualities do not figure prominently in the history of war. Rarely do they stand out amid the welter of events and circumstances." 
96
To prepare a sham action with sufficient thoroughness to impress an enemy requires a considerable expenditure of time and effort, and the costs increase with scale of the deception. Normally, they call for more than can be spared, and consequently so-called strategic feints rarely have the desired effect. 
97
98
99
95
Army, Field Manual 100-5, 1993, 1-3. 96
97
98
If one accepts that the U.S. Army tends to favor a cumulative destruction style, why has U.S. Army doctrine on occasion increased its emphasis on deception? The answer may lay in the comments of Weigley and others: perceived and actual balances of power influence the proportions of cumulative destruction and systemic disruption within a force's particular warfighting style. If there is a significant imbalance between opponents, the stronger force can rely on its strength to overcome the opposition. J.
Power and capacity, as in real life, can make deception unnecessary. Napoleon, as the power of his armies increased, relied more on force and less on cunning and misdirection. In an invasion of a small country, the larger aggressor need only dispatch overwhelming power: how could Grenada repulse the forces of the United States…. American military strategy has often been based on deploying maximum power and technological capability without recourse to duplicity-"more" is more and force needs no enhancing…" 101
Because a superior force does not need to rely as heavily on aspects of systemic disruption like deception, while conversely an inferior force must shift weight towards a systemic disruption approach, there is a trend whereby the level of emphasize on deception within U.S. Army doctrine waxes and wanes as the perceived and actual balance of power shifts (Figure 
2
100
101
104
With the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the United States was left without a peer competitor. As a result, the balance of power shifted decisively in the favor of the United States, alleviating the perceived need to emphasize systemic disruption. In the absence of an overpowering threat, U.S. military doctrine returned to the comforts of the cumulative destruction style of war, and deception emphasis ebbed to the point that the current capstone operations manual, APD 3-0, does not mention deception at all.
Goldhamer suggests an interesting alternate hypothesis: the rise of the professional officer class led to the marginalization of deception in war. The professional officer class became specialists in the art of the direct approach as described by Clausewitz, and developed a professional pride in using physical force to overcome an adversary. The sense of worth as a professional officer was based in the ability to defeat the enemy in a stand up fight. 
105
Not all soldiers are fond of practicing deception. Some American combat commanders in World War II instinctively resisted using deception, preferring to charge straight ahead like the old-style cavalrymen they were…. Others… simply preferred conventional battle as a route to honor and glory. 
106
107
…those manipulative and deceptive measures that might strengthen in peacetime the nation's position vis-a-vis a potential enemy by misleading him and weakening his present and future powers of resistance. Such measures require close coordination of military and political leadership, a cooperation less likely to occur given the professional soldier's distance from the foreign office and for the most part, the political leader's and parliamentarian's divorce from strategic and grand strategic concerns." 
108
105
106 Gerald, Secret Soldiers, 7 
107
108
A third potential explanation for the dearth of deception in U.S. 110 National Army Security Agency Association, "The 23rd Headquarters Special Troops (World War II)" accessed 1 January 2012, http://www.nasaa-home.org/23rdhqs.htm. 
111
classification of both deception doctrine and historic examples of deception placed an extremely high barrier against access of deception resources by junior leaders, inhibiting the development of new institutional memories on the use of deception. The lack of exposure at the junior levels translating into a feeling at higher levels of command that deception is unnecessary-after all, it was not needed at the lower levels.
A fourth potential explanation touched on by Jon Latimer, John Bell, and Barton
Whaley is that deception is immoral. Honesty has long been considered a virtue within American life as expressed by maxims such as "Honesty is the best policy," and the apocryphal tale of George Washington and the cherry tree. The idea of the American military as moral paragons is also frequently present in official and unofficial military guidance and writings. For example, General Dempsey [in his paper "America's
Military-a Profession of Arms"] recently stated:
The Profession of Arms demands its members live by the values described in the "City on the Hill" metaphor. We must provide an example to the world that cannot be diminished by hardships and challenges. This example is based upon the words and intent of the US Constitution that each of us takes a personal oath to support and defend. Our oath demands each of us display moral courage and always do what is right, regardless of the cost. We are all volunteers in our willingness to serve and to place others' needs above our own. As shared values, our calling cards are Duty, Honor, Courage, Integrity, and Selfless Service. Commitment to the rule of law is integral to our values which provide the moral and ethical fabric of our profession.
112
Deception in particular has been viewed as dishonorable, an idea exemplified by the some of the responses over Colonel Funston's use of deception to achieve victory over the insurgents during the Philippine Insurrection; rather than lauded, Funston was vilified for winning by deceit. 
113
Regulations stands almost alone in its level of condemnation of illegal acts of deception. 
116
The primary explanation for the undervaluing of deception in U.S. Army doctrine is the emphasis on the cumulative destruction style of war; however, the other explanations play their part in further reducing the level of emphasis. Taken together, the composite effect of the explanations leads to the creation of an organizational bias against deception. Daniel and Herbig state that organizational bias presents itself in two ways.
First, there is a "bureaucratic imperative that organizations trained for particular tasks will seek to perform them." Second, due to availability bias, people will think and act in ways familiar to them. 
118
115 "Funston Subject of Sermon," New York Times (1857 -1922) April 15, 1901, ProQuest  (96118056). 
116
Department, Field Service Regulations, 1905, 214. 117
119
Another area where the organizational bias has impacted deception is the lack of a stable proponency. Since 1923, deception has shifted proponency numerous times, and has never been in the position of being the primary focus of whatever command held purview. Additionally, some aspects of deception have been separated under difference proponents, such as camouflage under the U.S. Army Engineer School. The lack of a stable proponency with deception as its central focus further undermines the integration of deception into U.S. Army doctrine three important ways. First, the frequent changes of deception proponency impede continuity of knowledge. Second, since deception is never the primary focus for a proponent, deception is always at risk of marginalization in favor of the primary focus. Third, some efforts implemented are abandoned when the proponency changes. For example, while deception was under the U.S. Army Intelligence Center and School, the tables of organization for corps and divisions were modified to add deception cells. After deception proponency shifted to the U.S. Army Combined Arms Center, the deception cells were dropped in order to support the emerging requirement for unmanned aerial vehicles. 120 119 Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis, 2nd ed. (New York: Addison Wesley Longman, Inc, 1999), 143 -145. 
120
Every means is permitted which deceives the enemy and induces him to take wrong steps. The lion's bravery and the fox's cleverness must combine to wrest victory from the enemy.
-General Waldemar Erfurth particular note are his comments on the prevalence of preconceived ideas on the battlefield, and the role of doctrinal and technical innovation in achieving surprise.
124
According to Random House Webster's, deception is "something that deceives or is intended to deceive; fraud; artifice." 
125
Daniel and Herbig in their work "Propositions on Military Deception" define deception as: "the deliberate misrepresentation of reality done to gain a competitive advantage." 
126
While biological deceptions exhibited in the plant and animal kingdoms can be unintentional, human deception requires intent. 
128
Deception is the deliberate misleading of a target into taking actions prejudicial to the target's interests by manipulating the target's decisionmaking processes through the communication of true, manipulated, distorted, and/or falsified information.
This revised definition of deception requires some elaboration. Deliberate misleading does not obligate the practitioner to a formal planning process; while formal planning is preferable, rapid ad-hoc planning by a nimble practitioner can in extremis achieve the objective in time constrained or fluid situations, though with increased risk of failure. Successful deception is more than creating a perception; successful deception is about the target taking action. Furthermore, the goal of a deception can be the target taking no action at all, e.g., the failure of a regime's security apparatus to breach a special reconnaissance element's cover or the German armored divisions remaining in place at Pas de Calais during the opening phases of Operation OVERLORD. The interaction between the practitioner and the target occurs in the framework of communication.
Finally, the perceptions used by the target in its decision-making process rely heavily on the indicators created by the practitioner.
Many definitions of deception conflate deception with lies; however, this conflation is incorrect as deceptions and lies are not synonymous. In order to discuss the difference between a lie and deception it is first necessary to establish an adequate 
128
129
130
3
4
130
131
Taxonomies are systems of categorizing items in a set into subordinate sets based on a defined system of characteristics. The most recognizable example for taxonomies is the system of classifying living things into kingdoms, phyla, classes, orders, families, genera, and species. Within the field of deception, there are several suggested taxonomies for deception, four of which are: method, sophistication, effect, and commissionomission. Taxonomy by method focuses the mode of the deception, such as a display.
Taxonomy by sophistication categorizes deceptions by the degree to which the deception adapts or does not adapt to changing circumstances. Taxonomy by effect focuses on what the deception does, e.g., dazzling. Finally, taxonomy by commission-omission breaks down deceptions based on whether the deception causes the target to acquire a false belief or contributes to the target continuing a false belief. For this purposes of this work, taxonomy by method is used as it closely matches existing U.S. Army doctrinal concepts of deception (Figure 
5
Active deception is comprised of actions which convey deceptive information to the target, also referred to as simulation or showing the false. The set of active deception includes those modified versions of the actions traditionally associated with military deception. Active deception is divided into four broad categories: displays, feints, demonstrations, and disinformation.
Displays are static depictions of activities, forces, or equipment for the purpose of deceiving the target's collection apparatus. 
134
Cynthia Grabo provides an alternative definition for cover which is more constrained: "Cover (here meaning the "cover plan'' or "cover story'') is a form of military deception which should be distinguished from active military deception, although it may often be used in conjunction with it. Cover will be used when it may be presumed that the military buildup itself cannot be concealed from the adversary, and its purpose therefore is to offer some seemingly plausible explanation (other than planned aggression) for the observable military activity." Cynthia Grabo, Anticipating Surprise: Analysis for Strategic Warning, ed. Jan Goldman (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic Intelligence Research, Joint Military Intelligence College, 2002), accessed 14 May 2012, www.ni-u.edu/ni_press/pdf/Anticipating_Surprise_Analysis.pdf, 125. 
133
134
to create a dummy force or capability. Decoys are models or dummies used to replicate actual equipment, buildings, and personnel. 
135
136
137
138
139
140
135
Army,
5. 136
137
Army,
10. 138
139
140
141 A honeypot is an enticing computer or server designed to draw attacks by adversarial forces. Honeypots may also be classified as a form of feint here since they must survive contact with the target without revealing their true nature. The purpose of the honeypot is typically to gain intelligence about the adversarial forces' capabilities, identities, and location.
Feints are operations designed to deceive the target into reacting as if the feint is an actual decisive operation. 
142
Feints are used for several purposes; for example, to distract the target from the actual decisive action, facilitating relative superiority at the point of decision; luring the target into exposing artillery positions; or to trick the target into prematurely committing the reserve. Field Service Regulations (1914) describes a stronger variant of the feint:
holding attack. In addition to distracting the enemy from the main effort, the holding attack seeks to fix the enemy in time and space. 143 Also, the covering force concept in FM 100-5 (1976) has an element of feint, though its primary mission is not deception. 
144
Demonstrations are deceptive shows of force where actual engagement with the target is not sought. 
145
143
144
145 Adapted from the DOD, NATO, and Army definitions of demonstration: "An attack or show of force on a front where a decision is not sought, made with the aim of deceiving the enemy. 2. (DOD only) In military deception, a show of force in an area where a decision is not sought; made to deceive an adversary. It is similar to a feint but no actual contact with the adversary is intended. (Army) 1. A form of attack designed to deceive the enemy as to the location or time of the decisive operation by a display of force. Forces conducting a demonstration do not seek contact with the enemy." Headquarters, Department of the Army, Field Manual 1-02: Operational Terms and Graphics, p1-57 to 1-58. not the case. Demonstrations include training events and exercises well away from the target. For example, a demonstration of increased airborne training in the United States can be used to create the perception of a pending airborne assault.
Disinformation is the exposure to target collection assets of false, modified, or selectively true information with the intent to deceive. 
147
148
149
146 Disinformation is used here because most deception literature uses the term "ruse" to mean any manner of deception. Disinformation differs from misinformation in that disinformation requires intent to deceive; whereas, misinformation does not require intent to deceive, though the intent may be present.
147 Adapted from the DOD definition; Headquarters, Department of the Army, Field Manual 1-02, 1-82. Also see Barton  
Cover is the set of actions taken to protect the actual mission by preventing the deception target from receiving the indicators of real actions, capabilities, or intentions. 
150
Camouflage seeks to prevent indicators from being detected by the target's collection assets. Within camouflage, there are four broad methods: hiding, blending, disguising, and securing. In hiding the item is concealed by a physical barrier; such as, a bunker, cave, forest canopy, or netting. The physical barrier itself may be visible, blended into the background, or disguised. In blending, the item is concealed by means that merge the item with the background. This can be accomplished in the field through the application of camouflage paint or natural materials. In disguising, the item is concealed by making it look like something innocuous, such as a bunker disguised as a farmhouse. 
151
A special operations team operating out of a safe house is hidden within the safe house, which in turn is blended into the surrounding neighborhood. A HUMINT team attached to a maneuver element is blended in with the element. An intelligence officer conducting special reconnaissance while posing as a tourist is disguised. Through proper document disposal procedures, information is secured.
Whereas camouflage focuses on masking indicators, denial attacks the channels indictors travel on to the target. Denial seeks to degrade target collection channels so that the adversary is either not able to receive indicators, or is herded onto a smaller set of channels. Forcing the target to depend on a smaller set of channels reduces the ability of the target to validate intelligence using multiple sources, reducing the effort necessary in telling the deception story. Additionally, if the target can be herded onto channels controlled by friendly forces, deception indicators can be fed directly into the target's intelligence cycle, as was the case with the British DOUBLE CROSS operation in WWII. Denial methods include counterreconnaissance, jamming, counterintelligence, and physical destruction of collection tools. While these methods are not normally considered aspects of deception by U.S. Army doctrine, they are forms of cover to be considered during any deception planning and execution.
In addition to the method-based taxonomy of deception, there are other taxonomies for deception. Three alternate taxonomies are: commission and omission; level of sophistication; and effect-based. These taxonomies are useful for expanding the ways to think of deception.
Chisholm and Feehan in "Intent to Deceive" delineate eight types of deception divided into two categories. Deceptions by commission are typified by the deceiver contributing causally to the belief of the target. Deceptions by omission are typified by the deceiver facilitating the target's maintenance of an existing belief.
1-Deceiver contributes causally to target acquiring belief in the proposition 2-Deceiver contributes causally to target continuing to believe in the proposition 3-Deceiver contributes causally to target stopping belief in the negation of the proposition 4-Deceiver contributes causally to target not acquiring belief in the negation of the proposition 153 Gerwehr and Glenn, Unweaving the Web, 33. 
154
155
Uncertainty is an unavoidable aspect of military operations. Despite the desires of every commander, a perfect understanding of the situation is impossible. 158 Among the 
156
157
158 Indeed, the belief that a perfect understanding is even possible sets the stage for deception, whether self-inflicted or enemy induced. phenomena creating uncertainty are inadequacy of collection channels, infiltration of noise corruption, and the fundamental inability to read the opponent's mind. The compounded result of these phenomena is an obscuration of the situation, as if a metaphorical fog had settled over the field. As Whaley states:
It ["the fog of war"] refers to the chaos of information inherent in the fastbreaking crisis of battle--the confusing muddle of delayed and mislaid messages, garbled and misunderstood orders, fragmentary and misinformed intelligence, pridefully exaggerated claims of successes and cringingly suppressed reports of blunders. In other words, "the fog of war" is the state of uncertainty resulting from the inability of a military information system to either accurately or speedily monitor the events of battle 
A-type deceptions seek to increase the ambiguity of a situation so that the target becomes "…unsure as to what to believe." 161 Ambiguity can be increased through the use of covering deception to obscure the real situation, through the use of active 
159 Whaley, Stratagem (1969)
160
161
deception to present a number of reasonable alternatives to the real, or a mixture of both aspects. A-type deceptions can be attempted solely through the use of covering aspects, such as a unit camouflaging itself in a wood line. One of the goals of A-type deceptions is to cause the target to delay decision-making in the hopes of further information, thereby allowing the deceiver to seize or retain initiative. Another goal is to cause the target to spread their forces in an effort to cover every potential outcome, thus affording the deceiver the opportunity to achieve relative superiority at the point of decision. 162
M-type deceptions "…reduce ambiguity by building up the attractiveness of one wrong alternative." 163 All M-type deceptions utilize covering deception to obscure the true situation, while using active deception to present the false situation. One goal of Mtype deceptions is for the target to concentrate resources against the deception, allowing the deceiver opportunity to successfully conduct the true plan. 
164
As discussed previously, deception is not undertaken for the sake of deception;
deception is conducted to drive the behavior of the target to achieve some benefit for the practitioner or some deleterious effect for the target. Four reasons are typically given for the use of deception: to achieve surprise, to gain freedom of action, to save lives, and to 
162
163
164
165 Katherine Herbig, "American Strategic Deception in the Pacific: 1942-44," Strategic and Operational Deception in the Second World War, ed. Michael Handel (New York, Routledge,1987), 262 -263.
Deception can be used to save lives and resources in three ways. First, through the achievement of surprise, gaining of freedom of action, and securing of relative superiority, deception can reduce the amount of fighting necessary to reach a decision, thus reducing casualties and material costs. Second, deception can be used to elicit surrender, thereby avoiding conflict all together. Nathan Bedford Forrest used a ruse involving a notional secret weapon to successfully elicit the surrender of four Union blockhouses during the Civil War. 
171
"Deception is by itself an asymmetric approach to warfighting: tricking the opponent into misapplying strengths and revealing weaknesses.  
3
How deception can be used to mislead the target into not exploiting a weakness is illustrated by an example from the Vietnam War. A brigade commander was ordered to detach two battalions to support another operation, and the brigade commander realized that to do so would offer the Viet Cong an opportunity to exploit the reduction in forces 
171
1-Movement of reserves and their premature commitment to erroneous positions 2-Engagement by enemy in activities which exhaust his resources and/or prohibits their use elsewhere (i.e., extensive defensive preparations) 3-Dispersal or over-extension of enemy forces 4-Diversion of enemy thrusts 5-Disclosure of enemy positions
1-Failure to move reserves to meet intended offensives 2-Failure to exploit our weaknesses 3-Failure of counterattack 4-Failure to disengage 5-Failure to locate and act against true positions of artillery, reserves, dumps, etc. Table 
3
Examples of Target Responses to Deception. 175
Relative superiority is the "condition that exists when an attacking force… gains a decisive advantage over a larger or well-defended force." 176 Deception, along with surprise and maneuver is an essential tool for gaining relative superiority. 
177
Deception can be a vital asset for maintenance of security. "Real secrecy can only be achieved if, in addition to the correct information which the enemy receives, he is also provided with incorrect information. Confusion is the only effective method of maintaining secrecy."
178
MACVSOG utilized a set of cover stories for the overall organization, subordinate elements, and even missions in an effort to obscure its activities. 
179
180
Subversion is defined as: "Action designed to undermine the military, economic, psychological, or political strength or morale" of a targeted organization. 
181
182
MACVSOG's use of poison pen letters to increase distrust within the North Vietnamese leadership is an example of deception to achieve subversion. 183
Deception Mental isolation occurs when the target is unable to perceive or make sense of the situation. 
184
185
186
187
1.
In order to understand deception, it is necessary to look at the context in which deception is practiced. Of importance to the understanding of deception are the communications environment and the target's decision-making process. Roberta  
Indicators are individual snippets of information about the capabilities, intentions, and actions of an actor created through the actor's interaction with the environment.
Indicators can take myriad forms and include exercises and training events; personnel and equipment movements; updates on social network sites and other communications activity; and solicitations for contracts. 
191
Indicators, whether real or notional, are subject to errors in encoding, 
Channels are "the specific ways in which information about a given subject reaches an audience." 
193
War II as part of the Double Cross system to notional radio traffic. 
194
191
192
4
In addition to deception operating within the communications framework, deception affects the communications process itself on a number of levels. Indicators can be camouflaged to prevent the target from recognizing the indicators. Alternatively, indicators can be reduced through various security measures. Channels can be closed off via denial capabilities. For indicators that cannot be hidden from the target by cover tools, simulations and portrayals can be used to drown the indicator in a sea of noise.
To understand how deception affects the target, it is imperative to understand how decisions are made. Decision-making is not a rigid process of whereby two individuals can see the same indicator, reach the same conclusion, and act the same way; rather, decision-making is subject to numerous schemata-cultural, personal, and cognitive-the composite of which is unique to every individual. Colonel John Boyd's "Organic Design for Command and Control" introduces a framework for the decision-making process, the Observe-Orient-Decide-Act (OODA) loop. 
195
200
In order to explore how deception affects the target, an expanded version of the OODA process is used to represent the target's decision-making process. The OODA process consists of four interconnected phases: observe, orient, decide, and act (Figure 
7
Figure 
7
During the observe phase, the target interacts with the environment, actively and passively collecting indicators in an effort to gain an understanding of the situation.
Despite the wishes of every actor, it is impossible to collect a perfect picture of the situation as some indicators are missed and others corrupted by transmission and coding 
199
200
After the observe phase, the target transitions to the orient phase. During the orient phase, the target processes the collected indicators through a series of schemata and synthesizes the result with the target's existing perceptions to create revised perceptions of the environment and situation. Schemata are defined as: "…the dynamic, cognitive knowledge structures regarding specific concepts, entities, and events used by 
202
203 Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 3 rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 113; This is an important point; an engineer, infantryman, and helicopter pilot looking at a wooded glen will see different things. The engineer may see the glen in terms of soil substrate suitability for a road; the infantryman may see the glen in terms of cover, concealment, and avenues of approach; while the pilot sees in terms of potential landing zones.
individuals to encode and represent incoming information efficiently." 204 These schemata create biases in the way the target perceives and processes information. Schemata can be categorized as cultural, personal, and genetic. Cultural schemata include the collective experiences, legacies, biases, and heuristics developed by organized groups. Personal schemata include personal experiences and the resultant biases and heuristics. Genetic schemata include the cognitive biases and heuristics developed through conflict based natural selection. Schemata and the resultant biases can both aid and hinder deception efforts.
Cultural schemata are the collective set of knowledge, beliefs, experiences, values, and norms for a distinct aggregate of people with similar characteristics, e.g., state, ethnic group, region, religion, and organization. A target can be influenced by several different sets of cultural schemata, for example, a Sunni Muslim Iraqi Kurd is influenced by the schemata for his Sunni Islam, Iraqi, and Kurdish aspects.
While members of a particular culture are not perfectly uniform in their cultural schemata, understanding the culture of the target is vital to the success of deception.
Culture can be a source of trappings for a deception to increase its legitimacy, for example, the Sacred Sword Patriots League deception in Vietnam was based in a
Vietnamese legend of a divine sword given to a prince to drive out the occupying Chinese. 
205
204 Hazel Markus, "Self-Schemata and Processing Information about the Self," Journal of Personality  and Social Psychology 35, no. 2 (1977), 63 -78. as cited in Stanley G. Harris, "Organizational Culture and Individual Sensemaking: A Schema-Based Perspective," Organization Science 5, no. 3 (August, 1994), 310. 
205
Much like the social groups, organizations possess a distinct set of schemata that influence information processing. These schemata in turn generate organizational biases. An example of an organizational bias with applicability to deception operations occurred in the Burma Campaign of World War II. The Japanese command in Burma did not trust its intelligence analysts. British efforts to deceive the Japanese commander failed because of this bias against the intelligence analysts, the deception indictors presented by the British never impacted the Japanese commander's decisions. 
206
Abyssinia [Ethiopia]. The British plan called for an attack into northern Ethiopia, and a deception to make it appear the attack would come from the south. The British successfully deceived the Italians into believing the attack would come from the South; however, the British failed to account for the Italian Army's desire to avoid combat.
Rather than reinforcing the southern approaches to repulse the perceived British offensive, the Italians withdrew northward, towards the actual British offensive. Within the context of deception, personal create exploitable vulnerabilities. For example, the paranoia of Stalin about internal security threats created a vulnerability which German intelligence exploited by creating a set of notional dossiers detailing Soviet officers' interactions with German intelligence officers. In a brilliant move, the dossiers were not created from scratch; rather Abwher used dossiers from an actual episode of German-Soviet military cooperation in 1927 as the basis for the notional dossiers. By modifying existing documents, Abwher managed to expediently create dossiers with an air of believability-the best deceptions are built on truth. While it cannot be proven the deception led to the subsequent purge by Stalin of not only the officers in the dossiers, but over 20,000 personnel, including a majority of senior leaders, Small numbers bias, also known as representativeness, is the tendency to overestimate the reliability of a small sample to be representative of the total set.
Furthermore, this bias creates overconfidence in observed patterns and early trends.
Taken together, this means that the perceptions of individuals are created by a smaller set of information than is thought. 210 Deception benefits from the small number bias by lessening the number of indicators needed to generate the required perception. However, the small numbers bias also increases the difficulty of shifting initial perceptions.
209 Edward Epstein, Deception: The Invisible War between the KGB and the CIA (New York, NY: Random House Value Publishing, 1991), 140 -143.
210 Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, "Belief in the Law of Small Numbers," Psychology Bulletin 76, no. 2 (1971), 105 -110.
Anchoring heuristic also impacts how an individual adjusts an existing perception based on new information. There is a tendency for the starting perception to act as friction on any adjustments so that the adjusted perception may be closer to the starting position than appropriate. 
211
However, once a decision is made, the individual tends to view that decision as being the best possible decision. 
213
The availability heuristic expresses itself in the tendency of a person to evaluate the likelihood of an event based on "…the ease with which they can imagine 
211
The results of the orient phase are revised perceptions of the situation and environment that are fed into the decide phase. Gaps in information identified during the analysis and synthesis can result in new requirements for the observe phase. Additionally, the revised perceptions impact how the expectancy bias affects the collection of new information. Successful deception corrupts the outputs of the orientation phase causing the target to perceive the situation as the deceiver intends.
Once the indicators are synthesized and analyzed, and the target's revised perception of the situation is created, the process transitions to the decide phase. During the decide phase, the target uses his perception to develop his courses of action. This phase marks the transition of the target from a deliberative mind-set to an implementation mind-set. 
215
214
215
Finally, the chosen courses of action are implemented. 
Bell and Whaley present the deception process as a deception planning loop that begins with the development of a desired deception goal in support of the strategic goal.
The first half of the loop is the decision sector where the potential stratagem, illusion, channel, ruse, and characteristics are considered. The second half of the loop, the perception sector, executes the characteristics to drive the ruse through the selected channel in order to generate the intended illusion to activate the chosen stratagem to achieve the deception goal
216
8
I feel that deception and cover plans or operations are fully justified and that the employment of cover and deception should . . . be an accepted and organized procedure for any campaign.
-General George S. Patton
220
Step one-situation analysis-focuses on friendly and enemy situations, target analysis, and a stated desired situation.
Step two-deception objective formulation-consists of determining the five w's of the deception objective: what action/inaction is necessary to achieve the desired situation; who must perform the action/inaction; when and where must they act; and who must be affected.
Step three-desired perception-develops an idea of what the enemy must think to make him act in the desired manner, and what perceptions must be created in order to persuade the enemy to think in the desired way.
Step four-deception story-generates the information that when conveyed to the target paints the perception picture for the target.
Step five-deception plan-focuses on producing the overall plan for how to convey the necessary information to the enemy, as well as the recommending the intelligence requirements to look for indicators that the plan is working or not. 
221
Interestingly, the initial iteration of the information operations field manual, FM 100-6, published in 1996, did not contain a discrete deception planning process. 
The 2012 edition of JP 3-13.4 utilizes a six-step process for planning deception: deception mission analysis, deception planning guidance, staff deception estimate, commander's deception estimate, deception plan development, and deception plan review and approval. 
223
224
The current U.S. military guidance on planning military deception has the military deception process overlaid on either MDMP or JOPES planning processes. This is not sufficient. Aspects of military deception planning must occur before the beginning of formal planning, and ideally the introspective analysis of friendly forces should be a continuous process even prior to receipt of a mission. For example, development of profiles of potential target leaders must be integrated with ongoing intelligence preparations, so that when the planning process begins this vital groundwork is already in Success of cover and deception is dependent on the ability of the deceiver to predict the probable enemy reaction. The staff charged with the deception planning must be able to think as the enemy does and not react as a friendly commander transplanted into the enemy situation. This is possible only as a result of a thorough understanding of the enemy, his culture, and military system. The enemy intelligence system must be evaluated because this system is the vehicle that carries the deception story to the enemy commander. Determination must be made regarding the enemy's characteristics, his habits that make him vulnerable to deception, and those aspects that present the least likely deception target. …if possible, we should know the characteristics of the enemy commander, to include the degree of freedom allowed subordinates, his reaction time to new situations, and how this fear of the unknown influences his actions. A single known characteristic of a commander is more important than the entire statistical record of his military career. 
226
As stated previously, enemies, adversaries, neutral parties, and even friendly parties are viable targets of deception, though the risk versus benefit calculations when looking to deceive neutral and friendly parties must be examined closely.
The practitioner must also have knowledge of the channels available for both real and deceptive indicators to reach the target; as well as, what channels are available for the collection of feedback in order to assess the deception operation's effectiveness. The deception practitioner should take every effort reasonable within the constraints of time and resources to develop a full understanding to the target. Fortunately, there are several products generated by others which are useful in the practitioner's analysis ( Instructions], and radio peculiarities." Likewise, the 603rd Combat Engineers studied unit "atmospherics" and collected samples of unit patches, command post signs, and bumper markings to facilitate the impersonation of any unit in the 12th Army Group. 
227
Waiting until the beginning of the formal planning process to start will result in delays that could allow the indicators of the real plan to be received by the target before the military deception plan is even implemented. 
Deception planning guidance from the commander should focus on the deception goal: what the commander wants the target to do, or not to do. Identification of the deception goal must be accomplished as early as possible in the planning process so that the deception plan has sufficient preparation and execution time to allow the target opportunity to take the desired action prior to the execution of the actual plan. 
229
With the deception objective identified, the next step is the development of the deception story. The story should be developed using the SEE-THINK-DO methodology. 
232
This step takes the deception objective and couples it with a specific target. target needs to be reassessed. For example, the target of the deception may not have to authority to order the desired action; in this case, the target should be shifted to the individual with the appropriate authority.
The next step of planning the deception story is THINK. During this step, the deception practitioner must determine what perception the target needs to develop in order to cause the desired action. THINK encompasses the orient and decide phases of the OODA decision-making process. A firm understanding of the target's existing perceptions, organizational decision-making processes, and schemata is vital to the success of this phase of planning, as each of these influence the target's decision-making process (Figure 
7
The The deception story is the: "scenario that outlines the friendly actions that will be portrayed to cause the deception target to adopt the desired perception." 233
From the list of desired indicators developed during the SEE phase, a series of deception events is developed. Deception events are "deception means executed at a specific time and location in support of a deception operation." 
234
235
Physical means are those which activate the senses, principally the senses of hearing, vision, and smell. A static display of decoy tanks is an example of a physical deception means, as are smoke screens. Physical deception means include morphological deceptions that alter the physical characteristics of an object; such as, camouflage paint schemes or the frames used to disguise tanks as trucks during World War II. 
236
237
234
235
236
Physical means also include sonic deceptions, as in artillery simulators and loudspeaker systems. It is important to note that not all sonic deceptions need to employ mimicry. One method of sonic deception employed by the 4th Infantry Division in Vietnam was the use of artillery fires to mask the sounds associated with infantry units occupying night positions. 
238
Cyber electromagnetic means utilize cyberspace and the electromagnetic spectrum [other than visual] in order to communicate deceptive indicators. 
239
Deceptions within the electromagnetic spectrum are categorized into three types: manipulative, simulative, and imitative. Manipulative electromagnetic deceptions eliminate existing or convey misleading indicators, as in transmitting misleading information on a network known to be compromised. Simulative electromagnetic 
238
239
deceptions replicate existing or create notional capabilities, such as using radio operators to create the emissions of a notional unit. Imitative electromagnetic deceptions introduce emissions into the target's own systems; for example, transmitting false GPS coordinates to the target's navigation system. 
240
Administrative means include organizational methods to convey misleading or hide real indicators. Examples of administrative means include operations security and information security to deny indicators; as well as, Human Intelligence officers' use of agents as channels in support of a ruse. Administrative means also include the creation of misleading documents; such as, doctored photographs, notional orders, or fake identification.
One method for developing notional documents is to use existing documents as the base. This expedites the work, and helps to ensure that the notional document looks like a real document. The exemplar for use of existing documents is the German use of decade-old dossiers on Soviet officers as the basis for deceptive dossiers implicating these officers in anti-Stalin activities. 241 240 For the types of electromagnetic deceptions see: Headquarters, Department of the Army, Field Manual 3-13: Information Operations: Doctrine, Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures, 4-7; For spoofing GPS transponders see: Erica Noane, "Hijacking Satellite Navigation," Massachusetts Institute of Technology, http://www.technologyreview.com/computing/21452/ (accessed February 25, 2012). 
241
The deception events needed to generate the desired indicators are incorporated into a time-phased execution matrix in order to create and maintain the desired perception (Table 
6
243
One problem with accessing deception effectiveness is that some assessments would have to rely on counterfactual information. A comment from Secret Soldiers sums up this dilemma: "How many American and British fighting men didn't die because, instead of striking the Allied line at a vulnerable point, the Germans discovered a regiment of dummy tanks concealed-but not too well-in the Normandy woods and pulled back instead? How many Old Hickories survived the push across the Rhine because the Germans were preparing to meet the attack thirty miles away, where the Special Troops were sending up their racket on heaters [loud speakers] and radios and massing their decoys with the help of stagecraft and impersonation?"
244
Collecting for deception requires a witting actor on the unit's intelligence staff. This actor serves several functions. First, the individual helps to ensure any information requirements for the deception plan are included in the unit's overall collection plan. Second, as information comes into the intelligence section for processing, the witting actor looks for indicators that show the target is accepting or rejecting the deception. Care must be exercised when looking for indicators that the deception is working as this can activate the confirmation bias, causing indicators to the negative to be overlooked and ambiguous indicators to be interpreted as positive. Finally, the actor must work to ensure the deception indicators do not corrupt the friendly force's understanding of the situation.
At some point a deception operation will lose its utility; therefore, deception operations need to have a plan for the termination of the deception. JP 3-13.4 provides a list of possible termination triggers (Table 
7
Group being "transferred" to France in order to maintain pressure on German forces; the last parts of FORTITUDE SOUTH were not terminated until early September 1944. 
245
8
Knowing the target is essential to successful deception as every target is unique. British deception efforts in the Pacific during World War II had to be significantly modified from the model of deception operations in North Africa and Europe; the Japanese commanders did not trust their intelligence staff like the German commanders did. 
249
Deception can be used to both reinforce the target's existing perceptions and to change the perceptions. Whenever possible, deceptions should seek to leverage existing perceptions as is the far easier of the two endeavors. The anchoring bias discussed in Chapter IV works against changing perception, as do several other cognitive biases. The idea of using the target's existing perceptions and beliefs is a common admonishment in deception writings, as shown in Table 
8
War II is an exemplar of using deception to reinforce the target's existing perceptions. In this case, the German command expected the inevitable invasion of Europe would come at the Pas de Calais.
This principle is not a hard and fast rule; operational necessity may require changing the target's existing perceptions, as was the case with General Pershing and the 249 Clarke, "Some Personal Reflections," 273 -274. 
While the deception practitioner wants the target to receive the deception indicators, care must be taken that the deception indicators are not too easily presented to the target. Given how difficult intelligence collection can be, there is a natural tendency to be suspicious of information too freely gained. FM 3-13 offers two methods to reduce target suspicion of windfalls. "The first is the unintentional mistake, designed to make the target believe that he obtained the indicator due to a friendly error or oversight." 252 An example of an unintentional mistake ruse occurred during deception operations in support of the American Expeditionary Force's assault on the Saint Mihiel salient during World War I; General Pershing's chief of staff left a crumpled sheet of carbon paper with the imprint of a disinformation laden memo in the wastebasket of his hotel room, knowing the German agents on the hotel staff would find the carbon paper. 
253
255
252
253
254
255 Meinertzhagen has been accused of fraudulently taking credit for both the idea and execution of the haversack ruse. See: Brian Garfield, The Meinertzhagen Mystery: The Life and Legend of a Colossal Fraud British efforts was the capture of Gaza, not Beershaba. Next, Meinertzhagen rode toward Turkish lines until he made contact with a Turkish patrol. Once the Turkish patrol began pursuit, Meinertzhagen fled, and in his haste lost his haversack containing the notional documents. Meinertzhagen took pains to increase the legitimacy of the lost haversack.
First, Meinertzhagen spattered his haversack with blood so it appeared he had been wounded during the encounter. Second, in the days after the encounter, numerous British patrols were observed scouring the site of the encounter as if searching for the missing haversack. 256
Maintenance of security is vital to a successful deception operation. Failure to properly secure the deception plan can result in leaked indicators that tip the hand to the target. If this occurs, there is a significant risk that the target will in turn deceive the practitioner, turning the tables. Hesketh states in the conclusion of his work that one of the cases against physical deception is the necessity to let too many people in on the secret, increasing security risks. 
257
However, security must be balanced with the need for coordination, as too much security can undermine the coordination necessary for the deception to succeed. This is exemplified by British raid at Saint-Nazaire. The British Air Force was tasked with conducting a bombing mission on Saint-Nazaire as a feint to distract the German forces from the raiding force; however, the bomber crews were not told of the reason for their mission, so when low clouds obscured the target, the mission was called off with minimal bombing conducted. The short bombing mission put German forces on alert, rather than the intended effect of providing cover for the raid force. In the after action review, the bombing crews were adamant that had they known the true purpose of the bombing mission, they would have not have cut the mission short.
259
Utilize Flexibility, Variety, and Conditioning
Deceptions must be flexible and the practitioner ready to revise and adapt the plan based on feedback from the target. For example, Operation FORTITUDE SOUTH was expected to be terminated shortly after the Normandy landings as the landings would betray the Allies true intentions. However, in order to keep the German Fifteenth Army several agents of the DOUBLE CROSS system, decoys and dummies to simulate units, radio teams to portray units, and disinformation.
Conditioning, also referred to in literature as "crying wolf," is a deception technique that relies on desensitizing the target to friendly actions. Conditioning seeks to create three misconceptions in the target's mind. First, friendly activities are following a routine. Second, the routine is set, with deviation unlikely. Third, because the friendly activities are following a set routine, the risk to the target is reduced. 
261
Coordination for a deception plan must be made with adjacent units and higher headquarters so that deceptive indictors do not contaminate the other units' intelligence collection efforts. Additionally, coordination helps to ensure the deception plan nests with and compliments higher and adjacent unit plans, and does not conflict or degrade these plans. An example of poor coordinate occurred during the assault on the German garrison at Brest during the summer of 1944; the 23rd Headquarters Special
Troops executed a sonic simulation of tank activity to distract the Germans from the main effort. Through a lapse of coordination, Company D, 709th Tank Battalion assaulted through the area the 23rd had been conducting its simulation; as a result, the German line, alert and reinforced thanks to the deception, decimated the company. 265
263 Von Greiffenberg, Deception and Cover Plans, 80. 
264
For deception to succeed, the target must execute the desired action or inaction; to merely change the target's perception is to waste time and resources. This requirement demands the deception practitioner never lose sight of the deception goal. As Dudley Clarke declares:
It is important to appreciate from the start that the only purpose of Deception is to make one's opponent ACT in a manner calculated to assist one's own plans and to prejudice the success of his. In other words, to make him do something. Too often in the past we have set out to make him THINK something, without realizing that this was no more than a means to an end. 
As German General Hans von Greiffenberg states in his survey of German deception during World War II: "Deception requires detailed preparation, in which details and seeming trifles cannot be overlooked. Only seldom will results be produced through improvisation." 
267
268
269
A critical concern for unconventional warfare operations is security, especially during the nascent phases of the campaign when the state holds a distinct force advantage over the movement. Deception is a vital tool for maintaining the security of both the forces working with the guerrilla force and for the guerrilla force as well. Otto Heilbrunn in his work Partisan Warfare quotes extensively from an unnamed Vietminh manual on the utility of deception in support of guerrilla operations:
We must act above all when the enemy, full of self-confidence, is underestimating us. We then order our men to disguise themselves as coolies, as enemy soldiers, as hawkers on their way to the market place.
Our disguised fighters must exploit the element of surprise in order to wipe out the enemy in his fort or garrison. This technique requires constant and detailed information; one must be fully informed about the enemy's situation, from the first preparations to the time of execution. 276 274 Breitenbach, "Operation Desert Deception," 22 -24.
275 While cyber warfare and humanitarian assistance are not normally included in the set of irregular warfare, they are included here since they are not conventional operations.
276 "Guerilla selon l'ecole communiste," Bulletin Militaire (Leopoldville: Etat-Major de la Force Publique, 1955) as quoted in Otto Heilbrunn, Partisan Warfare (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1962), 95. This is perhaps from Vo Nguyen Giap's People's War, People's Army.
The camouflaging aspects of deception would seem to be of particular importance to an unconventional warfare campaign in order to allow the special operations force and the guerrilla force to move amongst the population like Mao's fish.
The adoption of Afghan sartorial and grooming standards by special operations forces elements during the opening phase of Operation ENDURING FREEDOM served two purposes. First, the standards were adopted for the purposes of bridging the cultural divide between the SOF elements and the Northern Alliance forces, reducing the "outgroupness" of the SOF elements and leveraging the influence principle of liking. Second, the sartorial and grooming standards increased security for the SOF elements by serving as a form of blending cover, decreasing the visual signature of the SOF elements by merging them visually with the Northern Alliance forces.
FM 31-21: Guerrilla Warfare and Special Forces Operations suggests another method of deception in support of security:
False rumors and false information concerning guerilla strength, location, operations, training, and equipment can be disseminated by counterintelligence through clandestine nets. Facts may be distorted intentionally to minimize or exaggerate guerilla' capabilities at any given time. Although such activities are handled within the intelligence section, they must be coordinated with the security section in order to prevent inadvertent violations of security. 
277
Finally, deception in support of subversion can be used to introduce friction to the regime's decision-making process through the use of ambiguity increasing measures.
Slowing down the adversary's OODA process is as effective as increasing the speed of one's own. Sufficient ambiguity increasing active deceptions coupled strong cover deceptions increase friction to the point of inducing mental isolation, with the regime's leadership unable to act. 278
Counterinsurgency/Foreign Internal Defense Pseudo-operations like those employed by the British in Kenya during the Mau-Mau uprising may be of use in overcoming the information advantage enjoyed by the insurgency through intelligence gathering. 
279
280
281
278
279 See: Kitson, Gangs and Counter-gangs. Deception for the purpose of subversion could be used to sow discord amongst the insurgent network. This tactic could be particularly disruptive if the practitioner has a firm understanding of the network and is able to target the individuals serving as links between cells. The British used deception in support of subversion against the Irish Republican Army by creating the perception the IRA was riddled with British agents. The IRA acted on the perception by conducting an internal witch hunt. The resultant purge of misidentified "agents" greatly weakened the organization and allowed the British to reach favorable terms for a ceasefire. 
282
283
One note of caution, as tempting as the idea might seem, false flag attacks on the populace for the purposes of discrediting the insurgent group are a fundamentally bad idea. The effects on popular support for the host nation government and the U.S. mission would be catastrophic if the true nature of the operation were revealed.
Deception operations in support of stability operations and humanitarian assistance operations are probably most appropriate when in support of force protection or operations security. For example, in areas where banditry is a problem, a demonstration convoy might be useful to draw attention away from an actual relief convoy. Blending and disguising aspects of deception may be appropriate if a lower signature is desired. Rules of engagement and political sensitivities may significantly constrain the palette of deception techniques available.
Benjamin Higginbotham, in his thesis "On Deceiving Terrorists," presents three compelling methods where deception can be used against terrorists and terrorist organizations:  Create and exploit inefficiencies and weaknesses in the terrorist organization  Facilitate counter-terrorist operations  Conceal counter-terrorist capabilities and intentions 284
Deception in support of subversion as discussed in the previous section on counterinsurgency is equally applicable against terrorist groups, and could prove quite useful at creating and exploiting internal inefficiencies and weaknesses of terrorist groups. For example, disinformation spread via rumors that there is an informant within the terrorist group could be spread in areas where the terrorist are suspected of operating in order to sow dissension. Alternatively, if previous purges have occurred, a disinformation program that suggests the group leadership is planning another purge could be used to increase distrust of the leadership, and perhaps an internal preemptive strike against the leaders.
Deception can facilitate counter-terrorist operations by creating surprise. In the Israeli raid on Entebbe, deception in the forms of portrayal and masking played a critical role in achieving surprise and retaining initiative. First, the Israeli aircraft masked their approach behind the signature of a regularly scheduled aircraft. Additionally, the Israeli commando force portrayed Ugandan military forces through the use of Ugandan uniforms and a Mercedes disguised to look like a Ugandan staff car. These techniques sowed confusion amongst the terrorists and their Ugandan guards, with the terrorists initially believing the Ugandans had turned on them. 285 284 Higginbotham, "On Deceiving Terrorists," 25 -26. 
285
Cyberspace as an emerging arena for military operations presents as many opportunities for deception as the physical world. For example, honeypots can be used to mislead the target for the purpose of intelligence gathering. Disinformation in the form of spoofed emails could be used to prompt any manner of actions by the target. Pseudooperations in the form of websites portraying adversary websites can be used for disinformation, intelligence gathering, or influence operations. On the defense, ambiguity increasing deception can be used to protect sensitive information-e.g., operations plans, personnel rosters, or technical data-through the use of multiple files where only one is the true information
Finally, no discussion of the practice of deception is complete without addressing deception failures. Somewhat optimistically, the CIA report, Deception Failures, Non-Failures, and Why, states the following with regard to deception failures: "It can accurately be stated that deception nearly always succeeds, at least to some degree.
Indeed it should be emphasized that deception may succeed even when one or more … causes for failure is present."
286
Likewise, "inadequate or improper channels or vehicles to convey the deception story" represents a failure to either assess the channels available the target, or a failure to revise the plan after discovering the channels were insufficient. While no deception plan is perfect, proper adherence to the information requirements and principles laid out in this chapter can reduce the risk of deception failures.
Always mystify, mislead, and surprise the enemy.
-General Thomas "Stonewall" Jackson
288
This chapter surveys the use of deception by the U.S. military from the Revolutionary War to Operation DESERT STORM. The purpose of this chapter is twofold;
first to present additional examples of deception in action as prompts for the deception practitioner's creative processes, and second to reinforce the idea that deception has been of great utility for the U.S. military throughout its history.
January 2, 1777 saw George Washington trapped against the banks of the Delaware River outside Trenton, New Jersey by a superior British force under General
Cornwallis. Despite suggestions to attack straight away, Cornwallis was sufficiently satisfied that Washington was trapped and so waited to attack the next day. The British set camp inside Trenton. During the night, the American force built large bonfires of cedar rails along their lines and continued through the night working to reinforce the earthworks. British sentries could see movement and hear the sounds of the digging.
Sporadic cannon fire from the American lines kept the British in Trenton jumpy. When
Cornwallis and his men arose the next morning to quash the rebellion all they found was an abandoned camp with piles of fresh dirt and smoldering fires.
The fires and work crews served as demonstrations; and the cannon fire as a feint in order to reinforce Cornwallis's perception that Washington was trapped, and to mask the noise of the American army quietly marching away to attack Princeton. Wagon and cannon wheels were wrapped in cloth to deaden the noise of movement over the frozen ground. A group of 500 stayed behind to work the deception.   information, he knew there was no way for a large American force to reach Aguinaldo's lair without providing enough forewarning to give Aguinaldo opportunity to escape.
Funston, not willing to let the opportunity to strike a hard blow to the insurrection, turned to deception. 
300
So the only recourse was to work a stratagem, that is, to get to [Aguinaldo] under false colors. It would be so impossible to disguise our own troops that they were not even considered, and dependence would have to be placed on the Macabebes… As it would be absolutely essential to have along some American officers to direct matters and deal with such emergencies as might arise, they were to accompany the expedition as supposed prisoners who had been captured on the march, and were not to throw off that disguise until there was no longer necessity for concealment. 
301
303
Shortly after Aguinaldo's capture, he ordered the end of the insurrection. Of the operation, Aguinaldo opined: "It was a bold plan, executed with skill and cleverness, in the face of difficulties which to most men would have seemed insurmountable." 305 
300
301 Funston, Memories of Two Wars, 393. 
302
303
304
305
It's interesting to note that while Funston's deception was a tactical and strategic victory, breaking the back of the insurgency; Funston was pilloried in American press, and even on the Senate floor for committing a war crime. Indeed, but current international law, Funston would be accused of perfidy for allowing the Macabebes to attack while wearing the enemy's uniforms. 
306
Aguinaldo and rebel forces enroute to camp Deception Story (THINK)
Funston's force is the requested reinforcements with prisoners Deception Events (SEE)
Portrayal -Macabebe troops dressed as rebel troops Portrayal -Funston and other Americans as captured privates Disinformation -forged messages Termination Trigger
On order after arrival into camp Table 
13
While a deception practitioner should seek to leverage existing target perceptions, there are times when this is impossible. For example, when the true objective is already perceived by the adversary to be the objective, reinforcing this perception would be-to say the least-counterproductive. In these cases, deception can be used to change the target's perception. General Pershing's use of deception in support of the assault on the Saint Mihiel salient during World War I demonstrates a successful execution of this scenario.
Pershing saw the reduction of the salient as a necessary step to winning the war; however, the German High Command fully expected an attack by American forces at Saint Mihiel. To increase the prospects of success, Pershing undertook a deception to make the German High Command believe the true focus of the American attack would be the Belfort Gap, 125 miles southeast of Saint Mihiel, with the deception goal of the German High Command shifting resources from Saint Mihiel. On 25 August, 1917, a French liaison officer informed the American press corps-off the record-that the American objective might be further to the South, perhaps the German town of Mulhouse that located on the other side of the Belfort Gap. Not surprisingly, this leak made it by military censors. On 27 
306
August 1917, General Pershing sent Major General Bundy, Commander VI Corps, to the town of Belfort on secret orders to plan for an offensive through the gap. Major General Bundy was an unwitting actor and took to his mission with alacrity. Soon American reconnaissance parties were seen around Belfort marking out locations for supply depots, field hospitals, and artillery positions. To create the impression of troop movements, radio sets from the 91st Infantry Division were used to mimic the transmissions of the VI Corps.
The military preparations were reinforced with civil-military operations as pained efforts were made to ensure the local populace had evacuation plans.  [FUSAG] was a real headquarters without forces. General Patton was assigned as the FUSAG commander as part of the deception plan. FUSAG simulated and portrayed an army group through the use of decoys, dummies, and tasked units. 
309
Army. 310
308
309 Whaley, Stratagem (2007), 376 -377. 
310
311
The 23rd Headquarters Special Troops was a purpose built unit specifically intended to conduct deception operations at the tactical level. The techniques implemented by the 23rd played a vital role in operations throughout the campaign in Western Europe by depriving German intelligence of the true picture of Allied force dispositions. In particular, the 23rd played a critical role in the relief of Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge. The objective of Operation KODAK was:
To confuse German radio intelligence as to the real location of the 80th Infantry Division and the 4th Armored Division, both of which were committed to action in a counterattack against the south flank of the St.
Vith-Bastogne salient, by giving radio indication of those Divs in an area to the southeast of that in which they were employed. The area chosen for the radio deception was such as to indicate their presence as a reserve in case of extention [sic] of the German counterattack through Echternacht. 
319
328
329
330
334
The SSPL deception was supported by a number of operations. First, North
Vietnamese fishermen captured as part of MACVSOG's maritime operations were taken to the Paradise Island facility that portrayed an active SSPL camp. 
335
The primary objective of capturing prisoners and leading them to believe that they were captives of the SSPL was to establish credibility for the organization and convince elements of the populace of Additionally, the end to all covert activities in North Vietnam was included in the initial 'price for peace' demands by the North Vietnamese contingent at the Paris peace talks. 
339
Studies and Observations Group (SOG): "Studies and Observations Group is a special staff section of Headquarters, United States Military Assistanct [sic] Command, Vietnam (USMACV) under the supervision of the Chief of Staff, USMACV. It is responsible for the study an observation of joint or combined counterinsurgency operations of a comprehensive nature. The studies and observations include intelligence and psychological activities as well as combat actions that may involve any forces or resources of any service of the Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF) and USMACV. SOG is not an implementing agency, the operations it studies and observes are conducted by the RVNAF commands which have responsibility for the areas of observations.
341
In addition to the overarching cover stories, individual missions were given cover stories. For example, if an aircraft conveying agent teams or equipment between South Vietnam and Thailand had an incident necessitating an explanation for the mission, the explanation was that the aircraft was diverted from routine operations in South Vietnam in order to respond to a distress call.  In analyzing this deception, it is interesting to note that the deception was not the force, rather the purpose of the force. As the report noted, had the NVA not acted on the
Operation DESERT STORM provides an exemplar of how the concepts of deception work together to achieve the desired effect. According to General Schwartzkopf, Coalition forces implemented the "Hail Mary" plan because unfavorable force ratiosthe Iraqi forces in Kuwait had numerical superiority and were in the defensiveprecluded a frontal assault. Therefore, the flanking maneuver was essential for countering the Iraqi force advantage. 
346
Mary" preparations:
The goal of the deception was to convince the Iraqis that the main attack would come up Wadi Al Batin along the Kuwaiti-Iraqi western border. This attack would be supported by an amphibious attack from the northern Gulf and attacks directly into the defenses along the southern Kuwaiti border. The desired effect was to hold the RGFC and the professional army, the regular armor and mechanized divisions, oriented upon the Wadi and coast. This disposition would expose them to the VII and XVIII Airborne Corps enveloping maneuver and facilitate their destruction. 
347
348
349
347
348
349
352
353
354
355
Cavalry Division launched its feint on 24 February through Wadi Al Batin, it met little resistance. The Joint Forces Command East and I Marine Expeditionary Force similarly met little resistance along the coast. The Iraqi forces were so concerned with being flanked by an amphibious landing they had withdrawn forty kilometers north. The quick advance of these forces necessitated the launch of the Hail Mary eighteen hours early.
As a nation we are bred up to feel it a disgrace even to succeed by falsehood… we will keep hammering along with the conviction that 'honesty is the best policy,' and that truth always wins in the long run. These pretty little sentences do well for a child's copy-book, but the man who acts upon them in war had better sheathe his sword forever.
-Colonel Sir Garnet Wolseley  To achieve full integration of deception within Army doctrine, an office dedicated to the proponency of military deception must be created at either the Mission Command Center of Excellence or the Special Warfare Center and School. The office must have the single mission of proponency for deception, because prior history indicates that deception suffers when it is a secondary task. This office must have the mandate for active military deception and coordination authority with the proponents for the cover aspects of deception, e.g., camouflage, OPSEC, and counterintelligence. In addition to coordination authority, the deception office must be incorporated into the approval process for doctrine related to the covering aspects of deception so as to ensure unity of effort in the presentation of deception doctrine. Finally, all formal education on active deception must be either consolidated under the auspices of, or the programs of instruction approved by, the deception office; again to ensure unity of effort and message.
In the development of deception doctrine, the focus should be on theory with illustrative examples illuminating the theory in an operational context. The purpose of the doctrine should be to spark creative thought on how deception might be practiced, not to dictate how deception is practiced. Additional emphasis should be given to the 
360
361
information requirements needed to develop a full understanding of the target. Particular care must be taken to ensure that doctrine does no prescribe particular techniques or template approaches; a doctrinaire or dogmatic approach would create the potential disastrous situation of predictable deception.
Integration of deception into U.S. Army operations demands that leaders embrace the potential of deception as part every operation. There are two ways to inculcate a respect for the utility of deception in leaders. First is for senior leaders at the upper echelons of the U.S. Army to direct deception integration into all training operations as a forcing function, especially at the combined arms training centers. Commanders who are accustomed to integrating deception into field training exercises beginning during the formative stages of their careers will be more apt to integrate deception into actual operations. Care must be exercised to ensure that the integration of deception into training does not degenerate into a templated, predictable process, as the use of variety is an essential factor in deception success.
Second is for leaders at the lowest echelon practical to receive formal education in deception (Table 
24
The personnel holding the positions in Table 
24
24
363
A commander may feel the need to reach outside his staff for the best candidate; much like General Wavell requested Dudley Clarke by name to head up British deception efforts in North Africa during World War II. 
364
363 Gerard, Secret Soldiers, 85. 
364
Deception planning requires a segregated facility in order to control access to the deception plan. The segregated facility can be as simple as a lockable room to secure compartmentalized information. The critical requirement is that the facility is commensurate with the level of classification of the plan and supporting resources. At the same time, the deception planner cannot work in complete isolation from the rest of plans and operations. In order to ensure the deception plan is fully nested in the supported plan, the deception planner must also be physically integrated into overall operations planning, and therefore also needs to have a space that is connected to the plans space.
As a final word of caution, the deception practitioner must remember that the past is a guide not a blueprint. As Roger Hesketh notes in his report on Operation FORTITUDE:
"It is always unsafe to apply too literally the experiences of one war to the changed circumstances of another." 365 A good example of a historic technique which may no longer be appropriate is the use of troops to convey disinformation as prisoners.
Magruder used troops portraying deserters to convey disinformation to McClellan; this tactic would be rightfully unacceptable today for U.S. planners-though interrogators must still watch for this deception in use by our adversaries. 
366
365
366
367
Deception Analysis of Operation WEDLOCK .................................................122 Table 18. Deception Analysis of Operation CHROMITE .................................................123 Table 19. Deception Analysis of SSPL ...........................................................................126 Table 20. Deception Analysis of MACVSOG Security ....................................................127 Table 21. Deception Analysis of DIAMOND I .................................................................128 Table 22. Deception Analysis of Ranger Assault ..........................................................128 Table 23. Deception Analysis of Operation DESERT STORM .........................................131 Table 24. Recommended Personnel for Formal Deception Education ..........................137
unconventional warfare; however, when the Office of the Chief of Psychological Warfare was established in 1951, cover and deception were not included in the scope of the office's operations.
89  
89  
118 Donald C. Daniel and Katherine L. Herbig, "Propositions on Military Deception," in Strategic Military Deception, eds. Donald C. Daniel and Katherine L. Herbig (New York: Pergamon Press, 1982), 14.
149  
149  
173  
173  
176 William H. McRaven, Spec Ops: Case Studies in Special Operations Warfare Theory & Practice (Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1995), 4.
176 William H. McRaven, Spec Ops: Case Studies in Special Operations Warfare Theory & Practice (Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1995), 4.
187 Basil Henry Liddell Hart Sir, Strategy, 2d rev ed. (New York: Meridian, 1991)
187 Basil Henry Liddell Hart Sir, Strategy, 2d rev ed. (New York: Meridian, 1991)
Richard Heuer's Psychology of Intelligence Analysis, though intended as a tool for intelligence analysts contains a trove of information for the deception practitioner. Of particular use is Heuer's discussion of cognitive biases. Cognitive biases are defined by Heuer as "mental errors caused by our simplified information processing strategies… a cognitive bias does not result from any emotional or intellectual disposition towards a certain judgment, but rather from subconscious mental procedures for processing information."
Richard Heuer's Psychology of Intelligence Analysis, though intended as a tool for intelligence analysts contains a trove of information for the deception practitioner. Of particular use is Heuer's discussion of cognitive biases. Cognitive biases are defined by Heuer as "mental errors caused by our simplified information processing strategies… a cognitive bias does not result from any emotional or intellectual disposition towards a certain judgment, but rather from subconscious mental procedures for processing information."
213 Dominic Johnson and Dominic Tierney, "Crossing the Rubicon: The Perils of Committing to a Decision" (Cambridge, MA: Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, 2011).
Not only must the practitioner understand multiple targets' personal characteristics, organization, and culture, the practitioner must also know his own organization in order to have a firm grasp of the indicators the organization generates, specifically the indicators comprising critical information. Critical information is the set of indicators that if pieced together could reveal the friendly force plans, capabilities, and intentions. The list of critical information should normally be produced by the OPSEC officer. A thorough knowledge of friendly forces is required as well for effective portrayals and simulations. One of the critical tasks for the 23rd Headquarters Special Troops was the reconnaissance of friendly formations. The signals units collected "…an unequalled library of combat [Standard Operating Procedures], [Signal Operating
231 U.S.
231 U.S.
319  
319  
329 330  
329 330  
War Department, Field Service Regulations.
1914, 168.   
War Department, Field Manual 100-5: Field Service Regulations, 1941, 109.   
Headquarters, Department of the Army, Field Manual 100-5: Field Service Regulations-Operations, 1949 (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1949), 21 -23.
 37  Headquarters, Department of theArmy, Field Manual 100-5, 1949, 43 -46.   
Office of the Chief of Army Field Forces, Strategic and Tactical Cover and Deception Training (Fort Monroe, VA: Department of the Army, 1948).
The emergence of the Special Forces and the rest of the special operations community can be viewed as the U.S. attempt to keep the conventional forces focused on cumulative destruction while still leveraging the value of systemic disruption.
Martin Dempsey, "America's Military-a Profession of Arm" (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2012), accessed 24 February 2012, http://www.jcs.mil/content/files/2012-02/022312120752_Americas_Military_POA.pdf, 3.
113 J. BowyerBell and Barton Whaley, Cheating and Deception (New Brunswick, NJ Transaction  Publishers, 1991), 45.   
Michael Dewar, The Art of Military Deception in Warfare, 1st ed. (Newton Abbot, UK: David & Charles, 1989), 9 -20.
Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 2nd ed., revised and updated ed. (New York: Random House Reference, 2001), 516.
Daniel and Herbig, Propositions on Military Deception, 3.    
Headquarters, Department of the Army, Training Circular no. 30-1: Tactical Cover and Deception, 5; An almost identical definition is given in the 1957 Special National Security Estimate: Soviet Capabilities for Deception by the Central Intelligence Agency: Director of Central Intelligence, Soviet Capabilities for Deception (Washington, DC: Central Intelligence Agency, 1957), accessed 30 January 2012. http://gateway.proquest.com/openurl?url_ver=Z39.88-2004&res_dat=xri:dnsa&rft_dat=xri:dnsa:article:CSE00201
This usage of cover is consistent with historic Army and DOD usage, and in numerous civilian works. See: Headquarters, Department of the Army, Field Manual 1-02, 1-48 to 1-49; Concepts and Force Design Group, Tactical Cover and Deception: Final Report, 1-4;Daniel and Herbig, Propositions on  Military Deception, 4; Robert Goldsmith and Ralph Gerenz, Techniques for Detecting Cover and  Deception, (Billerica, MA: Betac Corporation, 1983), accessed 16 May 2012, http://handle.dtic.mil/100.2/ADP002896, 145.
Headquarters, Department of the Army, 5;  see Note 130 for more information on this definition of cover versus the competing definition.
Headquarters, Department of theArmy, Field Manual 5-20, 1968, 17 -20.   
General Alfred Krauss as quoted in: Erfurth, Surprise, 6.
Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs (SACSA), Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Appendix H Security, Cover & Deception (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1970), accessed 2 September 2011. http://www.dod.gov/pubs/foi/International_security_affairs/vietnam_and_southeast_asiaDocuments/520-18.pdf.
180 Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs (SACSA), Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Appendix H Security, Cover & Deception, H-
10.  181  This definition is modified from the official definition by substituting targeted organization for regime in order to allow for targeting of non-state actors. Headquarters, Department of the Army, Field Manual 1-02, 1-178.
Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision (Stanford, CA: Stanford University  Press, 1962), 3.   
William Reese, "Deception within a Communications Theory Framework," in Strategic Military Deception, eds. Donald C. Daniel and Katherine L.Herbig (Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press Inc, 1982), 99  -114.   
Michael Bennett and Edward Waltz, Counterdeception  Principles and Applications for National Security(Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 2007), 73.   
Bell and Whaley, Cheating and Deception, 71.   
Bell and Whaley, Cheating and Deception, 71.    
Bell and Whaley, Cheating and Deception,[70][71][72] 
Joint Staff, JP 3-13.4: Military Deception, (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2006), pIV-1 to IV-2.
Quoted in Center for Army Lessons Learned, CALL Bulletin 3-88, 7.
Headquarters, Department of the Army, 
Joint Staff, 
This discussion is not meant to prescribe the way to plan and execute deception operations; rather, this section is meant as a discussion of the broad concepts associated with planning and execution.
Headquarters, Department of the Army, FM 100-5: 1962, 50.   
Headquarters, Department of theArmy, 15   
Official History of the 23rd Headquarters Special Troops (Photocopy from National Archives), 9.
Headquarters, Department of the Army, Joint Staff,; Official History of the 23rd Headquarters Special Troops.
Headquarters, Department of theArmy, 13.   
Gerwehr and Glenn, Unweaving the Web,
[39]
[40]
Daniel Breitenbach, "Operation Desert Deception: Operational Deception in the Ground  Campaign," (Paper, Naval War College, 1991), accessed 24 May 2012, http://handle.dtic.mil/100.2/ADA253245. The date-time information in the table is notional for the purposes of presenting a complete matrix.
Gerard, Secret Soldiers,[153][154][155][156] 
Gerard, Secret Soldiers, 334.   
Roger Hesketh, Fortitude: The D-Day Deception Campaign, (Woodstock and New York, NY: The  Overlook Press, 2000), 289 -302.
McRaven, Spec Ops, 131 and 154.    
Hesketh, Fortitude, 241.   
Gerwehr and Glenn, The Art of Darkness: Deception and Urban Operations, 21.
G. F. R.Henderson, and Garnet Wolseley, Stonewall Jackson and the American Civil War  (London, New York [etc.]: Longmans, Green and Co., 1936), 1:121 -122.
Dudley Clarke as quoted in Michael Howard, British Intelligence in the Second World War: Strategic Deception, vol. 5 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 41.
Von Greiffenberg, Deception and Cover Plans, 80.   
Headquarters, Department of the Army, FM 31-21: Guerrilla Warfare and Special Forces Operations (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1958), 106.
Benjamin Higginbotham, "On Deceiving Terrorists" (Master's thesis: Naval Postgraduate School), accessed 4 January 2010, http://handle.dtic.mil/100.2/ADA401353, 3 -5.
J. Bowyer Bell, "Aspects of the Dragonworld: Covert Communications and the Rebel Ecosystem," International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence 3, no. 1 (1989): 17.
Deception Research Program, Deception Failures, and Why,[45]
[46]
Deception Research Program, Deception Failures,[3][4] 
General Jackson in a letter to Brigadier John Imboden, as quoted by Imboden, as quoted in: Henderson, Stonewall Jackson, 1:420.
Richard M.Ketchum, The Winter Soldiers, 1st ed. (Garden City, N.Y: Doubleday, 1973), 344 - 351.  
 290 Ketchum, The Winter Soldiers, 348   
The Editors of the Army Times, The Tangled Web, 4 -13.
The Editors of the Army Times, The Tangled Web, 15 -17.
Liddell Hart, Sherman, 298.    
The Editors of the Army Times, The Tangled Web, 21 -22.
The Editors of the Army Times, The Tangled Web, 61 -75.
Hesketh, Fortitude, 302.   
Gerard, Secret Soldiers,[232][233] 
Katherine Herbig, "American Strategic Deception in the Pacific," in Strategic and Operational Deception in the Second World War, edited byMichael Handel, 260 -300, (London: Frank Cass, 1987), 266.
Herbig, "American Strategic Deception,[266][267] 
Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs (SACSA), Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Appendix A Summary of MACSOG Documentation Study (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1970), accessed 2 September 2011, http://www.dod.gov/pubs/foi/International_security_affairs/vietnam_and_southeast_asiaDocuments/520-22.pdf, a-18.
332 Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs (SACSA), Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Annex A to Appendix C Psychological Operations (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs ofStaff, 1970), accessed 2 September 2011, http://www.dod.gov/pubs/foi/International_security_affairs/vietnam_and_southeast_asiaDocuments/520-1.pdf, C-a-7 to C-a-13. MACVSOG attempted on three separate occasions between 1965 and 1968 to gain approval to execute an actual unconventional warfare plan against North
Vietnam.  333  John Plaster, SOG: The Secret Wars of America's Commandos in Vietnam (New York: Penguin Group,
1998), 125.334  Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs (SACSA), Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Annex A to Appendix C Psychological Operations, C-a-14 to C-a-15. The sacred sword was a reference to a Vietnamese legend about a heaven-sent sword used by Le Loi during his nationalist campaign to drive the Chinese from Vietnam in the 15th Century. The SSPL story reflects an exceptional attention to detail with regards to the targeted culture. SeeShultz, Secret War, 
Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs (SACSA), Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Annex A to Appendix C Psychological Operations, C-a-40.
Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs (SACSA), Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Annex A to Appendix C Psychological Operations, C-a-62.
Shultz, Secret War,[142][143][144] 
Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs (SACSA), Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Annex A to Appendix C Psychological Operations, C-a-129
Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs (SACSA), Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Annex A to Appendix C Psychological Operations, C-a-110. Additionally, Ho Chi Minh issued several directives aimed specifically at suppressing internal dissent.
Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs (SACSA), Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Annex A to Appendix C Psychological Operations, C-a-40.
Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs, Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Appendix H Security, Cover & Deception, H-10.
Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Affairs, Draft MACSOG Documentation Study Appendix H Security, Cover & Deception, H-12.
Reference Book 31-40: Techniques for Deception, 6-16.
Garnet Wolseley, The Soldier's Pocket-book for Field Service, 2nd ed. (London and New York:  MacMillian and Co., 1871), 81.   
I would like to thank the faculty and staff of the 
Defense Analysis Department
Dr. Hy Rothstein
Dr. Kalev Sepp
Zooey Lober
Dudley Knox Library Interlibrary Loan desk
United States Army Military History Institute
Army Doctrine Publication ADRP mislead the enemy. 
166
Surprise is the most common reason cited for the use of deception. Surprise in the military context is defined as: "[striking] the enemy at a time or place or in a manner for which he is unprepared." 
167
168
Secrecy requires the systematic confusion and deception of the enemy." 169
Deception can enhance freedom of action by decreasing the chance of enemy interference. Disguising movements of personnel, materials, and equipment as something innocuous can facilitate staging for future operations. Deceptions designed to prevent the target from interdicting lines of communication support freedom of action. Deception can also be used to assist the movement of key leaders. For example, President Roosevelt's secret meeting with Prime Minister Churchill to hammer out the Atlantic Charter in the fall of 1941 was facilitated by a portrayal depicting the president as being on a fishing trip off Cape Cod. 170 166 Jock Haswell, The Tangled Web: The Art of Tactical and Strategic Deception (Buckinghamshire, UK: John Goodchild Publishers, 1985), 23. 
167
168 Whaley, Stratagem (2007), 102 -103. 
169
In addition to the detailed planning processes, a number of authors have published sets of deception principles, factors, and maxims. FM 100-5 (1954) and FM 3-13 each present their own doctrinal set of principles. The CIA's maxims from Deception Maxims:
Fact and Folklore are included in slightly altered form in FM 90-2 (1988) and JP 3-13.4   (2006). Michael Dewar, Jon Latimer, and Jock Haswell each offer their own take on deception principles; though there is a good deal of overlap. Finally, Daniel and Herbig provide a set of deception success factors; while Dudley Clarke muses on deception reflections. From these various sets of deception guidance, it is possible to synthesize seven broad principles for deception practitioners 247 (Table 
8
246 Joint Staff, JP 3-13.4, IV-13. 
247
289
299
312
313
314
In addition to the notional forces, WEDLOCK included a number of other deception events in support of the story. WEDLOCK coopted the American press-ULTRA intercepts confirmed that Japanese intelligence used the press as a means of collection. Rather than keeping the meeting between Buckner and Nimitz a secret, the press was encouraged to report the meeting and speculate on its meaning. In addition, Joint Security Control fed disinformation directly to Japanese intelligence through double agents in the U.S.; via military attaches in neutral countries; and by incorporating disinformation into shared intelligence with Russia-expecting the disinformation to be collected by Japanese agents. Furthermore, troops embarking for the tropics through Seattle were issued artic gear so as to appear that they were heading north. Finally, an entire simulated airbase was constructed at Holtz Bay on the westernmost Aleutian island. 
323
324
Whereas there were initially 25,000 troops and 38 aircraft stationed in the Kurils before WEDLOCK, after WEDLOCK the garrison had grown to 70,000 troops and 590 aircraft. 
325
323
324
326
326
327
344
The deception story was that the DIAMOND firebases were just more of many firebases, but conveniently located for attack: a variation of cry-wolf with an element of honeypot.   weight is given systemic disruption and deception, while cumulative destruction wanes.
If this is indeed the case, then the emerging era of austerity and economy of force roles would seem to suggest a shift towards systemic disruption and with it deception is in the offing. Furthermore, since balance of power ratios are essentially meaningless against adversaries relying on heavily systemic disruption approaches-e.g., Al Qaeda and other non-state actors-deception would appear to be of increased utility. However, the most recent capstone doctrine publications ADP 3-0 and ADRP 3-0 between them have a single bullet point mentioning deception without elaboration. 
358
Stratagem is cheap. It requires a very small initial investment of men and materiel. Effective stratagem can be the part-time work of only one man, particularly if he is the commander. And the most elaborate of such operations involved only diverting for a few weeks the services of several hundred men, a dozen or so small boats, a few aircraft, a fair amount of radio and other electronic gear, some wood, canvas, and paint, and bits of aluminum scrap. None of this was permanently lost to inventory, except the aluminum. 359
What follows are some recommendations the U.S. Army should adopt to address the current shortfall of deception emphasis within doctrine and operations. These recommendations are an economy of force middle ground between the current doing nothing, and the actions of a resource rich U.S. Army. If resources and personnel were as effectively unlimited as they were in World War II, these recommendations would include a call for purpose built deception support battalions-modern versions of 23rd
Headquarters Special Troops. However, this recommendation is unfeasible in the current fiscal and force cap environment, thus the recommendations focus on increasing the capabilities of existing units and personnel. 
358
A commander who is ingenious and resourceful in the use of tactical strategems [sic] and ruses often will find methods of deceiving or misleading the enemy and of concealing his own intentions. 
362