# ID: de72910715114cabbd62ac1135c10401
# Title: The Pentomic Era: The US Army Between Korea and Vietnam
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1986.0
# Fulltext:
These advancing ground forums would deploy not for heavy fighting-the initial nuclear preparation having made that unnecessary-but for exploitation.
Thu tactical requirements ware tight control and rapid movemnent, With this aspect in mind, units would attack in column.
Such a formation accommodated high-speed movement and also facilitated socurity since the shaken enemy would have difficulty fixing the attacker's fast-moving spearhead.
While such a narrow array could bring little firepower Immediately to bear, the Army did not see this lack as a serious impedimentY Army leaders billed their new offensive doctrine as a revolutionary departure, But was it'?
Granted, a Rommel or Guderlan* hardly would have recognizod it as maneuver warfare, But an earlier generation of British and French staff officers from World War I would have grasped Its essentials immediately.
Its principal aspect mirrored the approach they had unflinchingly pursued through years of deadlocked trench warfare in France: a stubborn faith in the ability of fires to shatter prepared defenses; a belief that preliminary *Erwin Rommel.
Gurinki field marshal.
brilliiiant I) cot ndod an armored division in the attack on France in 1940; In Febru.
ary 1941 he tnok the specially trained tank corps.
thEm Afrika Korps, Into Libya, For his succuso there, he earnud the namo "the desert fox," Heinz Guderlan, German goneral, was cnni- mandor in chie of armored units against Poland, wt:iu, France, 1940, and Russia, 1941, The Pentom|t Era bombardments reduced the attacker's role to securing by rapid, controlled advances the gain that fires had made possible;, and a consequent attempt to improve responsiveness and control by simplifying tactics--attacking straight ahead, using stereotyped formations, and de-emphasizing factors such as deception or surprise that complicate an operation, Army leaders in the 1950s did not acknowledge any similaritlis between their thinking and discredited offensive doctrines of World War 1.
They believed that nuclear weapons made all the difference.
A few well-placed tactical warheads would accomplish what millions of shells fired over periods of days or weeks had failed to do in World War 1.
Armed with this faith In nuclear firepower, the Army believed the only question to be the technical one of learning how to pass exploitation forces through an area scorched by nuclear fires.