# ID: e088621a3e1d41b08f422eebe9bfbcd2
# Title: Coercive Nuclear Campaigns in the 21st Century: Understanding Adversary Incentives and Options for Nuclear Escalation
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
What are the implications of our analysis and findings?
At the most basic level, our report suggests the need for policymakers, analysts, and scholars to reconsider the challenges of nuclear deterrence in the 21 st Century and the incentives that U.S. adversaries have to employ nuclear weapons in the midst of a conventional conflict.
Most scholars and analysts of deterrence dismiss the likelihood of intentional nuclear attack by one state on anther, especially the possibility of an intentional nuclear attack by a country against the United States.
Similarly, within the U.S. military, regional war planners generally treat conventional conflicts as the "base case" and relegate consideration of escalation to a war plan's annex.
But those analysts and war planners should reconsider why they assume that adversaries will keep their most powerful weapons on the sidelines, even as those adversaries suffer terrible military defeats.
Historically, weak states with nuclear weapons planned to use them in an escalatory fashion to prevent military defeat - and in fact, that was NATO's strategy throughout most of the Cold War.
Even today, the strategy of stalemating nuclear escalation is a core part of Russia's and Pakistan's stated nuclear doctrine, and it is also probably Israel's doctrine if that state were to suffer an unexpected military collapse.
If the risk of wartime escalation is high, as we have argued here, then analysts -both inside and outside of government -need to develop richer theories of intra-war deterrence and escalation control during regional conflicts.