# ID: e088621a3e1d41b08f422eebe9bfbcd2
# Title: Coercive Nuclear Campaigns in the 21st Century: Understanding Adversary Incentives and Options for Nuclear Escalation
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
This report examines why and how regional powers armed with nuclear weapons may employ those weapons coercively against the United States or U.S. allies during a conventional war. We argue that the problem of intra--war deterrence -preventing nuclear--armed adversaries from escalating during a conventional conflict - is arguably the most important deterrence challenge facing the United States in the 21 st century.
The strategic environment facing the United States, its allies, and its potential adversaries has changed dramatically since the end of the Cold War. For nearly four decades, the United States and its NATO allies planned to use nuclear weapons to defend themselves from a major Warsaw Pact invasion of Western Europe. The armies of the Warsaw Pact were perceived to be too formidable to confront with a strictly conventional defense -at least at spending levels that would be acceptable to the North Atlantic alliance.
Nuclear weapons were thus NATO's "trump card": NATO planned to employ nuclear weapons coercively during a war to raise the costs and risks to the Warsaw Pact and thereby convince them to halt their military operations before they could inflict a total defeat on NATO.
Today, the global balance of power is reversed. Now U.S. military forces are the most formidable, and potential U.S. adversaries need trump cards of their own to stalemate the United States. This reversal in the balance of power helps explain why the United States now seeks to delegitimize nuclear weapons and reduce their role in the world.
Unfortunately, the same conditions that once made NATO rely on nuclear weapons will now likely compel other countries -including several potential U.S. adversaries -to rely upon nuclear weapons.
In today's world, relatively weaker adversaries face a range of incentives and options to use nuclear weapons coercively during conventional conflicts. Facing conventionally superior foes, regional nuclear--armed states will worry deeply about the consequences of military defeat. Recent history shows that such defeats are often extraordinarily costly for adversary leadership -as the fate of Manuel Noriega, Slobodan Milošević, Radovan Karadžić, Saddam Hussein, and Muammar Qaddafi demonstrate so starkly. Therefore, regional adversaries face powerful incentives to employ nuclear weapons coercively to stalemate their opponents before suffering major battlefield defeats and the attendant catastrophic consequences.
The logical appeal of coercive nuclear escalation is well understood by countries around the world. The strategy appears to be reflected in the defense plans and doctrines of key states. Moreover, the countries that appear to have internalized the strategic logic of coercive nuclear escalation are the same ones predicted to do so according to the arguments in this report. Some conflicts are more likely to escalate than others. Some of the world's nuclear "hotspots" are more dangerous than others. Threats to invade and conquer an adversary and overthrow its regime are obviously the most escalatory, but other kinds of conflicts offer grounds for deep concern. Military campaigns that significantly degrade an adversary's ability to defend itself, military operations that target adversary strategic assets, and conflicts that make regime downfall more likely if the adversary fails to achieve its political objectives all contain the seeds of escalation.
The principal implications of this study for U.S. policy makers can be summarized in five points:
• U.S. adversaries have powerful incentives to use nuclear weapons against the United States during conventional wars. The same logic that led NATO to adopt a strategy of coercive nuclear escalation during the Cold War will likely drive future U.S. adversaries to do the same to stalemate the United States.
• History suggests that most nuclear--armed countries that face overwhelming conventional military threats develop, and rely upon, coercive nuclear doctrines.
• Most of the world's most dangerous conflicts -i.e., those that create the greatest incentives for combatants to use nuclear weapons -involve the United States: including war on the Korean Peninsula, conflicts in maritime East Asia, and in the future war in the Strait of Hormuz. (The most notable non--U.S. conflict which involves high nuclear escalation risks is India--Pakistan.)
• Because the United States seeks to prevent escalation during conventional wars, regional war planners need to fully integrate the goal of escalation prevention into the foundation of their war plans and conventional concepts of operations (CONOPS). Existing "limited aims" plans may pursue limited objectives without restraining U.S. military operations sufficiently to mitigate escalation risks.
• The challenges of deterring escalation during conventional wars, and assuring allies during those conflicts, place a premium on flexible U.S. conventional and nuclear forces. Proposals regarding the size and composition of the U.S. nuclear arsenal should assess the proposed force against the challenge of deterring intra--war escalation, and not just the mission of peacetime deterrence.
The most critical question about nuclear weapons in the 21 st century is whether states will ever use them again. Is the possibility of inter--state nuclear war sufficiently plausible to be a major concern? In the coming decades, are there realistic circumstances in which states might choose to use nuclear weapons against enemies, including the United States? In short, might some states be so powerfully motivated to use nuclear weapons that deterrence will fail?
Many analysts would answer each of these questions with a simple "no." According to an increasingly common view, states are unlikely to use nuclear weapons at all, highly unlikely to use them against other states that can retaliate in kind, and extremely unlikely to use them against the United States - the world's preeminent military power. No other act seems as foolhardy. Although U.S. President Barack Obama pledged, in his "global zero" speech in Prague in 2009, that "the United States will maintain a safe, secure and effective arsenal to deter any adversary, and guarantee that defense to our allies," most analysts do not believe deterrence is a demanding mission - because the odds of an adversary nuclear attack seem vanishingly small. "To put an end to Cold War thinking," President Obama also proclaimed, "we will reduce the role of nuclear weapons in our national security strategy, and urge others to do the same." 1 Those analysts who favor further deep cuts to the U.S. nuclear arsenal commonly make the point that such weapons are stale leftovers from the Cold War. According to this logic, nuclear deterrence is a "legacy" mission. Cold War era nuclear arsenals, strategies, war plans, alert postures, deterrence puzzles, and worst--case scenario planning are relics of a bygone era. 
2
1
For two examples of prominent scholars who argue that nuclear weapons were unnecessary to deter the Soviet Union during the Cold War, see John E. Mueller, Atomic Obsession: Nuclear Alarmism from Hiroshima to Al--Qaeda (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009); and Richard Ned Lebow and Janice G. Stein, We All Lost the Cold War (Princeton,  NJ:  Princeton  University  Press,  1994). More broadly, many scholars and policy analysts argue that nuclear deterrence - whatever its role in the Cold War - is either unnecessary today or a simple mission because intentional nuclear attack is so unlikely. materials; accidents may lead to unwanted detonations; or states may start inadvertent nuclear war. But none of those dangers can be effectively mitigated through nuclear deterrence strategies. Terrorist acquisition is so terrifying precisely because terrorists are difficult to deter. 
3
Unfortunately, the increasingly influential perspective in Washington and the broader analytical community rests on a weak understanding of the role that nuclear weapons played during the Cold War, and it therefore overlooks the strategic continuities between the Cold War and the present. When one examines why NATO once relied so heavily on nuclear weapons, the continuities between past and present become clear, and the policies of those countries that are "hold outs" against the global campaign for nuclear arms reductions begin to make sense. In fact, nuclear deterrence will continue to be central to the conduct of international politics, now and long into the future. Moreover, the likelihood of intentional nuclear attacks -even against the United States -is far higher than most scholars and analysts realize. In short, nuclear deterrence is likely to be quite difficult in the foreseeable future. This report argues that the U.S. policy community has given too little attention to the problem of intra--war nuclear deterrence. Specifically, relatively weak but nuclear--armed countries -including potential adversaries of the United States -will face intense pressures during conventional wars to use nuclear weapons coercively to create a stalemate and avoid a calamitous military defeat. The United States has little experience at deterring intra--war nuclear escalation. 
4
This report makes four principal arguments: First, nuclear weapons are just as salient today as they were in the past. During the Cold War, nuclear weapons were enormously valuable because one set of countries (members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, or NATO) lacked the conventional military power to defend itself from the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies. Nuclear weapons allowed the "weak" side to deter the "strong" one. 
5
6
But the end of the Cold War did not make every country safe; in fact, many of America's potential adversaries face the same overarching problem today that NATO faced during the Cold War: how to deter and if necessary stalemate an adversary that possesses overwhelming conventional military power. The platitude that nuclear weapons are not well suited to the security threats of the 21 st century is incorrect; it is more accurate to say that they are not well suited to the security problems that confront the United States in the 21 st century. But for those who fear U.S. military might -or who fear other strong statesnuclear weapons are as helpful as they were for NATO during the Cold War. 
7
Vol. 9, No. 3 (Winter 1984--85), 47--88. 7
the logic of peacetime deterrence with the logic of war. Leaders facing the prospect of imminent defeat have compelling reasons to escalate coercively - with nuclear weaponsto bring about a ceasefire. Coercive nuclear escalation by the weaker side forces the stronger side to choose among several options - all of which are grim. It is because all of those options are unattractive that an adversary will be tempted to escalate in the first place. Viewed through this lens, Pakistan may have powerful, rational reasons to use nuclear weapons if it is losing a conventional war to India; North Korea has powerful reasons to use nuclear weapons coercively, rather than permit its enemies to prevail in a war. And Chinese leaders would face some of these same incentives if their armed forces were suffering a humiliating defeat in a war in maritime East Asia. In short, an escalatory strategy is cold--blooded, but not far--fetched -indeed, it was NATO's policy for nearly thirty years. 
8
Fourth, this report identifies global "hotspots" where plausible conventional conflicts are most likely to trigger dangerous escalatory dynamics. We posit a set of exacerbating conditions -including the prospect of conquest, regime change, and the escalatory nature of certain military operations -which make escalation during conventional war more likely, and then we use those conditions to distinguish the hotspots 8 A policy of coercive nuclear escalation - to create stalemate during an unwinnable conventional war - was NATO's policy from the mid--1960s through the end of the Cold War. Prior to the 1960s, NATO believed it could win a nuclear war, and so it had a different nuclear doctrine: immediate escalation of a conventional conflict, not to coerce, but rather to destroy the enemy's nuclear force and win. For a detailed discussion of the evolution in U.S. and NATO war plans, see Keir A. Lieber and Daryl G. Press, Nuclear Weapons and International Politics (unpublished book manuscript), chapter 4. See also Gregory Pedlow, "The Evolution of NATO  Strategy,  1949--69,"  in  Gregory  W.  Pedlow,  ed.,  NATO Strategy Documents, 1949--69, and accompanying documents, available online at http://www.nato.int/archives/strategy.htm. which pose high risks of escalation from those that pose lower levels of risk. We find that most of the world's most dangerous conflicts -i.e., those that create the greatest incentives for combatants to use nuclear weapons -involve the United States: including war on the Korean Peninsula, conflicts in maritime East Asia, and (in the future) war in the Strait of Hormuz. To be sure, an India--Pakistan conflict would trigger dangerous escalatory dynamics, but a South Asian conflict -which has appropriately attracted considerable attention because of the grave risks of escalation -appears no more dangerous (and, in fact, may be less combustible) than several quite plausible future U.S. wars .
Why do so many other analysts reach a different conclusion about the likelihood of deliberate nuclear escalation? One possibility is that scholars and other analysts typically think about peacetime nuclear deterrence (preventing a surprise nuclear attack), rather than wartime deterrence (deterring nuclear escalation during conventional wars), the exception being the extensive literature on escalation risks during an India--Pakistan war. 9
But surprisingly, even scholars who understand the difficulty of deterring escalation during a conventional war when applied to South Asian security dynamics, argue elsewhere that rational leaders would never use nuclear weapons against the United States. 10 But if analysts believe that Pakistan (the weak) could use nuclear weapons to prevent conventional defeat (even though Pakistan cannot win a nuclear war), why would the same analysts dismiss the possibility that North Korea, or in the future Iran, or possibly China, would use nuclear weapons in an escalatory fashion against a strong nemesis? However one explains this apparent contradiction, the bottom line is that the same fears that made vulnerable and fearful countries cling to nuclear weapons in the Cold War will make those weapons essential to the weak and vulnerable in the coming decades. 
9
Vol. 30, No. 2 (Fall 2005), pp. 127--152;
and V. R. Raghavan, "Limited War and Nuclear Escalation in South Asia," Nonproliferation Review, Vol. 8, No. 3 (2001), pp. 82--98. 10
Nuclear weapons are the ultimate instruments of stalemate -they are the ultimate weapons of the weak. Viewed through this lens, the end of the Cold War radically changed who needed nuclear weapons, but did little to reduce the utility of the weapons. This report has five main sections. First, it explains the logic of coercive nuclear escalation -why the weak might feel compelled to escalate a conventional war, and why they might hope doing so would grant them the ceasefire they desire. Second, we demonstrate the rationality of that logic by examining the options available to a state seeking to respond to coercive nuclear escalation. Third, we assess the nuclear doctrines of nuclear--weapon states across four decades to determine if states actually act according to the logic developed in the preceding sections. Fourth, we identify the most dangerous global hotspots based on their coercive nuclear escalatory potential. Finally, we discuss the policy implications of our analysis.
The core national security problem for many militarily weak countries is straightforward: how to keep powerful enemies at bay. For weak countries, military defeat can be disastrous. In some circumstances, battlefield losses are followed by conquest and harsh treatment of the defeated society: e.g., a brutal occupation, the loss of sovereignty, or in rare cases genocide. But even when those terrible outcomes are not likely, war is often disastrous for the leaders of the defeated. Military planners in weak states - particularly those with adversarial relations with the United States (which has easily vanquished a half-dozen military opponents since the end of the Cold War) 11 -must, therefore, address a fundamental question: if war occurs, and conventional victory is impossible, what strategies might create a stalemate and avoid catastrophic defeat? 
11
Although the United States has a long history of treating defeated enemy societies well -e.g., in Germany, Japan, and more recently Iraq -the leaders of countries that recently fought the United States have suffered severe consequences. In 1989, the United
States conquered Panama and arrested its leader, Manuel Noriega. For most Americans, this short war is forgotten. For Noriega, it triggered a calamitous reversal of fortune: he exchanged a life of power and riches for twenty--three years in prison -and counting.
Saddam Hussein suffered a worse fate; he lost power, he was humiliated, his sons were killed, and he was hanged in front of jeering enemies. Muammar Qaddafi spent his last days hiding from U.S.--supported rebels before being caught cowering in a culvert. He was then beaten and shot to death. Dozens of Qaddafi loyalists, including his son, were also rounded up and executed.
Even leaders whose countries were never conquered -those that suffered only "limited" defeats -often paid a high price. Bosnian Serb leaders Karadžić and Ratko Mladić are still in prison in the Hague, where Serbia's former leader, Milošević, died in detention. 
12
Furthermore, military operations -especially those conducted by the United States -Increasingly involve intense campaigns against enemy command bunkers and other leadership sites, posing direct, daily threats to the leaders, their key political allies, and their families. 14 Leaders who see their military being destroyed, their security services being savaged, and who have bombs raining down upon their command bunkers, may feel great pressure to halt the war as soon as possible.
In short, losing wars is often a terrible outcome. Sometimes it results in horrendous consequences for the defeated society. In the early decades of the Cold War, West
Europeans were understandably horrified by the notion of being conquered by the Soviet Union, losing their democratic institutions, and living under a murderous Stalinist tyranny.
Today, many Israelis believe that a military defeat at the hands of their neighbors would usher in another tragic era in Jewish history -including genocide and ethnic cleansing. But even when the outcomes of war are unlikely to lead to mass societal suffering among the defeated, enemy leaders (not just the supreme leader, but ruling party officials, military officers, and members of the domestic security services) rightly fear the consequences.
The critical message is this: America's recent conflicts are considered "regional wars" in Washington; for adversaries there is nothing "regional" or "limited" about them.
For the weak, these are existential struggles. 
The leaders of weak states face life--and--death incentives to quickly halt wars that are going badly for them. But why are nuclear weapons needed for this mission? Several attributes of nuclear weapons make them uniquely useful for stalemating a stronger enemy. Nuclear weapons are small and hence relatively easy to hide -enhancing their chance of surviving the early stages of a conflict. 
15
16
Not only are nuclear weapons better suited for wartime coercion than conventional alternatives, there are three other considerations that make more useful than other weapons that analysts worry may spread in the 21 st century, including cyber, chemical, and biological weapons.
First, although popular culture frequently portrays nuclear weapons as uncontrollably destructive, their effects can be surprisingly calibrated. Weapons designers have created nuclear weapons with widely varying "yields," allowing mission planners to tailor a strike to create a huge area of destruction or very little -whichever is desired. For example, the largest yield weapon in the current U.S. arsenal releases up to 1,200 kilotons of energy (80 Hiroshimas); the smallest U.S. nuclear weapon can be set to detonate with 15 A weapon cannot be a good tool for creating stalemate during a losing war if it is likely to be destroyed before it becomes clear that the war is going badly. In later sections of this paper we consider various adversary escalatory strategies, and the trade--offs U.S. adversaries may face between early--and late-employment of nuclear weapons during a conventional war. 
16
17
19
20
21
vulnerabilities -reducing the effectiveness of future weapons. 
22
Finally, the effects of nuclear weapons are far more predictable than cyber or bio weapons, an essential attribute for a leader who needs to coerce an immediate end to fighting. Nuclear weapons are more predictable on at least three key dimensions: the functioning of the weapon, the damage it will cause, and the timing of the effects. No one knows whether the coercive effect of a nuclear, or biological, or a cyber attack would work, as we discuss below. But leaders under duress could at least be confident that a well--tested nuclear weapon would function; would create a reasonably predictable level of damage (as long as targeters selected a height of burst to prevent fallout); and would detonate at roughly the desired time. By contrast, one cannot know whether a cyber weapon will infect the target computer system -or whether an infection would produce the desired 
22
24
During wars, the leaders of the states on the losing side may face life--and--death pressure to rapidly force a ceasefire -even if their enemy is not seeking to conquer them or impose regime change. Conventional weapons provide little leverage in this regard -most of them become progressively more difficult for the weak to employ as the strong gains the upper hand militarily, and they generally inflict too little damage to shock the strong state into submitting to stalemate. 
25
Losing a conventional war could have catastrophic consequences for the defeated society or leaders; but how could a country, facing an overpowering foe, employ nuclear weapons to create stalemate? Wouldn't the use of nuclear weapons by a weak country against a strong one incite a devastating nuclear response, rather than a truce? For example, in a war on the Korean Peninsula, wouldn't North Korean use of nuclear weapons against the Republic of Korea, Japan, or U.S. military forces in the region trigger a devastating U.S. nuclear retaliatory strike? If so, then nuclear escalation would simply turn 
24
25
28
South Korea, and possibly Japan or China. 
29
Option Two: Conventional Military Response. A second option would be to condemn the nuclear strike, send aid to the people of Okinawa, and accelerate the conventional offensive toward Pyongyang to end the war and capture the North Korean leadership as rapidly as possible. The advantage of this approach is that it reinforces the core of U.S. nuclear policy:
by not giving in to coercion, and by not responding in kind, the U.S. response would demonstrate that nuclear weapons are both horrible and useless. The subsequent trials of surviving senior North Korean leaders would demonstrate to the leaders of other weak states that nuclear escalation is not a viable way to escape the calamity of military defeat.
The disadvantages of this strategy are enormous. First, the strategy would accept the risk that North Korea would carry out its threat and launch nuclear strikes against a half--dozen Japanese cities. There is substantial risk that some (perhaps many) of those missiles would leak through missile defenses. Second, and relatedly, this course of action would presumably be implemented over the strenuous objections of Japan's government.
The consequence would likely be the end of the U.S.--Japan alliance. More broadly, if the United States ignores the pleas of a critical ally, and the consequences were the destruction of several of that ally's cities (in a war in which the ally played no direct role), many U.S.
allies around Asia and the rest of the world may rethink their tight military ties to the United States.
Option Three: Counterforce: Disarm, then Defeat. The third option would be to respond to the nuclear attack with a major military strike against known and suspected North Korean nuclear targets to prevent North Korea from launching additional weapons. A counterforce strike could be conducted with conventional weapons, nuclear weapons, or a mixture of the 
29
two, with respective implications for the promptness of destroying the intended targets and the likelihood of destroying them all. This option, like the others, would rely on imperfect missile defenses to help with any North Korean weapons surviving a U.S. strike.
And, as with the first two options, a rapid conventional advance on Pyongyang to conquer the regime and seize any surviving leaders would follow this strategy. The advantage of this option is that it would avoid giving in to nuclear blackmail, and it would take direct action to protect U.S. allies as much as possible.
The disadvantages of this option, however, are substantial. First, a counterforce attack would not be a small operation. It would likely require prompt attacks on scores of targets across North Korea in order to rapidly destroy suspected nuclear storage sites, military command and control, mobile missile garrisons, and tunnel entrances which may be associated with North Korea's nuclear weapons or missile launchers. The nuclear component of the attack might involve several dozen -or more -U.S. weapons. Second, depending upon the details of the U.S. operation, and the location of North Korean targets, the U.S. strikes could kill a large number of North Koreans. (This would probably be the case even if U.S. strikes did not generate regional radioactive fallout, as in the counter-leadership -or punitive -option described above). 
30
30 It is critical to note that strikes on tunnel entrances and other hardened facilities may not require ground bursts, and appear to be possible without creating significant fallout. Unlike a "punitive" strike designed to kill the leadership (option 1) the nuclear missions in option 3 do not need to destroy deeply buried facilitiesbut could merely destroy the near--surface elements of those facilities (using air bursts) to disable the weapons or prevent them from being used until teams could seize the sites. Declassified documents reveal that the United States has been planning low--fallout, low--casualty nuclear options for decades. would be further isolated by its conduct -for example, China would feel immense pressure to cut off any assistance for Pyongyang after such events -and suggest that the regime would thus soon collapse. Most important, one could argue that the potentially huge political and strategic implications of buckling to nuclear coercion could be mitigated. For example, before accepting the "ceasefire" option, the United States might levy a symbolic U.S. nuclear response (e.g., responding to a North Korean strike on Kadena Air Base with a nuclear response against one or more North Korean military facilities) before halting military operations. 
32
33
32
33
adversaries, but also by allies that lose faith in the U.S. nuclear umbrella. And while symbolic escalation and subterfuge might make the "deal" politically palatable in the short term, when the dust settled it would become apparent that coercive escalation had worked.
None of the response options discussed above are attractive. The reflexive course of action in the wake of a nuclear attack on an ally -a devastating nuclear retaliatory strikeis not grounded in a careful assessment of the costs and benefits of that response. A U.S.
president might select that option, but nothing about such a decision is preordained.
Others believe that the United States would select the counter--force option; once an enemy has used nuclear weapons, a U.S. president would have no alternative to destroying as many of those weapons as possible. (It is noteworthy that current proposals regarding the future of the U.S. nuclear arsenal make the nuclear force less well suited for a counterforce strike.)
All the response options in this scenario are grim, but options three and four would likely dominate the first two. Marching to Pyongyang and simply absorbing additional attacks on Japanese cities - praying that missile defense will work flawlessly - (i.e., option two) seems unviable, as does a punitive counterstrike not specifically focused on disarming the North Korean nuclear arsenal (option one). The wrenching decision for a U.S. president would be whether to order a nuclear counterforce strike to disarm the enemy (option three), or whether to accept a ceasefire with some attempt at saving face (option four). The key factor pushing a U.S. leader toward option three or option four is the likely effectiveness of a counterforce strike. If a president believed that a counterforce strike would leave the enemy with zero -or perhaps a couple -deliverable nuclear weapons, and if he or she believed that it was possible to execute such an attack without killing large numbers of noncombatants (particularly allied civilians), he or she might lean in that direction. On the other hand, if the president believed that a counterforce strike would still permit the adversary to destroy many allied cities -or U.S. cities -he or she might prefer a face--saving symbolic strike followed by a ceasefire. 
Nuclear weapons have the capacity to be the ultimate tools of stalemate. If weak nuclear--armed states feel sufficiently threatened by a militarily superior foe, they could develop defense plans around the concept of coercive nuclear escalation, and create nuclear doctrines for wartime employment. This report, so far, makes the case that such steps are logical. But do countries actually follow this cold--blooded logic?
To explore whether weak states actually employ this logic, we first identify below the conditions under which states would be most likely to build defense plans around doctrines of coercive nuclear escalation. Second, we sort nuclear--armed countries according to those conditions. Finally, we determine whether those states that (according to our argument) should have adopted coercive nuclear doctrines have actually done so.
Two factors should have a powerful effect on whether nuclear--armed states develop coercive nuclear doctrines. First, countries are more likely to view nuclear weapons in this manner if they expect to lose conventional wars. In other words, coercive nuclear doctrines should be far more appealing to the weak than to the strong. Second, these doctrines will be more attractive to states for which the consequences of conventional military defeat are dire. When the United States loses conventional wars -e.g., in Vietnam, perhaps in Afghanistan -it may damage presidential approval, but the republic does not fall, and leaders are not hung. For other states and leaders, defeat often brings terrible consequences. Many Israelis believe that the consequences of a military defeat to the Syrians or Egyptians would mean the end of sovereignty at best - and genocide at worst.
Even countries that do not fear military conquest might worry that a humiliating  countries that have not articulated doctrines for the coercive use of nuclear escalation. One state -North Korea -is ambiguous about its nuclear doctrine. 35 
35
1
2
2
37
36
37
The overarching argument in the first half of this report is that the same escalation dynamics that existed during the Cold War exist today as well -and they are just as powerful. Nuclear deterrence is not a legacy mission, because states still face the same critical national security threats they faced during the Cold War and throughout history: namely, the leaders of weak states fear that the strong will conquer them or take steps that will lead to their downfall. The high--stakes poker game of international politics has not fundamentally changed - contrary to the claims of many observers. What has principally changed is merely who has the best cards. Those who were weak during the Cold War are now strong; and another set of militarily "weak" countries -such as North Korea, Iran, and even China and Russia -now clutch nuclear weapons to defend themselves from overwhelming military might, just as NATO once did.
The failure of analysts in the West to appreciate the continued value of nuclear weapons reflects a striking lack of strategic empathy. The first rule of good strategy is to develop an understanding of how one's adversaries see the world, and how they might utilize their resources to achieve their goals. Analysts in the United States who claim that nuclear weapons are essentially irrelevant to the problems of the 21 st Century either ignore this dictum or have forgotten what was once better understood: how helpful these weapons can be for stalemating the strong.
Weak countries have a powerful interest in using nuclear weapons during a conventional war to create a stalemate and prevent catastrophic defeat. And, as we illustrated above, they have historically adopted nuclear doctrines for exactly that purpose. But for U.S. policymakers and senior military leaders, the key question is not about the past but the future: which potential U.S. adversaries and conflicts are most prone to coercive escalation? More broadly, which of the world's "hotspots" are prone to see conventional wars escalate and become nuclear conflicts?
The logic developed throughout this report suggests three conditions that should help identify the most escalation--prone conflicts. First, leaders should be most likely to take the risks associated with nuclear escalation if the war they are waging may lead to the conquest of their country. A state's political and military leaders (and not just the top few) stand to lose power, wealth, the ability to protect their families, and in many cases their own lives -either at the hands of the conquering government or angry domestic rivals. For the conquered society, occupation can be disastrous even if the conqueror has no desire to inflict collective punishment.
The factors that make conquest of the losing state likely in some wars - and less so in others -are varied, and no simple rulebook that can be applied to every case.
Nevertheless, the crucial conditions are intuitive, and include factors such as geography (the size of the weaker state's territory, and perhaps the location of key cities), population, the ethno--religious--sectarian identity of the combatants, and the military force structure of the stronger state. For example, if war erupted between China and the United States over Taiwan, there are compelling reasons for the Chinese leadership to be confident that the United States would not seek to conquer China. ("Regime change" as a military goal is distinct from conquest and is discussed below.) China's geographic size is large and its population is vast, making it virtually inconceivable that U.S. conventional military objectives in a war in the Pacific would involve conquering and occupying China. Moreover, U.S. military force structure reflects its comparative advantage in high--tech air--, naval--, and ground--operations, not the mass army approach to war that would be required of a country seeking to take over and conquer a major power. At the other extreme, although Israeli leaders are justifiably confident in the superiority of their conventional forces relative to their neighbors, those same leaders undoubtedly understand that any unexpected conventional defeat -as almost occurred in 1973 on the Golan Heights -would immediately expose Israel to conquest: its small geographic space and population give Israel little strategic depth. For Pakistan's leaders, the case is less clear--cut. On the one hand, Pakistan is a very large country with a big population; it is roughly forty--five times as big as Israel with nearly twenty--three times the population. Furthermore, Pakistan's leaders undoubtedly understand that their neighbor India has no desire to conquer and rule over 180 million Pakistani Muslims. On the other hand, most of Pakistan's largest cities -including Karachi, Lahore, Faisalabad, Rawalpindi, and its capital Islamabad - are within approximately 100 miles of the border with India. Pakistan's leaders might reasonably worry that a major conventional war could lead India to seize, or isolate, major Pakistani cities, to be surrendered at some future time of India's choosing -unless Pakistan can use nuclear escalatory threats to prevent this. 38
A second key condition that may affect the propensity of leaders to escalate conventional wars -rather than accept defeat -is their vulnerability to coups or revolutions. 
39
38
39
Wars tend to undermine governing regimes in a variety of ways. In many authoritarian regimes, popular uprisings are prevented by "collective action" problems: if every regime opponent rebelled at once, they could overwhelm the regime's internal security forces, but no group wants to be the first: it would be slaughtered, and there is no guarantee that other groups or individuals would follow their lead. Oppressive governments exacerbate these collective action problems by using spies and informants to make coordination against the regime too dangerous. 
40
In addition to emboldening regime opponents, the conduct of the war might directly reduce the ability of the regime to defend itself against its opponents. If the war involves attacks on internal security forces, leaders may become unable to defend themselves against a popular uprising, or defend themselves against a military coup, or even against a coup attempt by elements of those security forces. Oppressive governments typically put their most--trusted allies in charge of leadership security forces. If those forces are being targeted and destroyed -and hence the regime's closest allies are being killed -the leadership may face intense pressure to compel a ceasefire immediately. Finally, for many governments, the greatest threat to regime survival comes from the country's own military.
If a war results in the devastation of a country's military forces -and the humiliation of the military leadership -the risk of a coup surges. As a result, leaders must compel a ceasefire long before enemy forces start to advance on their capital; they must create a ceasefire before domestic opponents sense weakness, before regime security elements are too 
40
The implication for regimes that face considerable internal opposition is clear: if a war begins to go badly, find a way to create a battlefield stalemate immediately - or face the prospects of a revolution or coup. The implication for countries that might face weak regimes in war is equally important: adopting even a "limited aims" war plan may not be sufficient to prevent escalation. Inflicting a major conventional defeat on the enemy - like the one inflicted on Iraq in 1991, and the one the United States would seek to inflict in almost any limited war -may cross the enemy's escalatory red line.
The third key factor that may make leaders more inclined to employ nuclear weapons coercively stems from the style of war waged by their opponents. If leaders are driven to escalate by fear of conquest or post--war regime change, then certain kinds of military operations are likely to exacerbate that fear. Specifically, operations that aim to blind enemy command and control, directly target political leaders and regime security elements, or degrade strategic deterrent forces will intensify adversary incentives to escalate.
Conventional war has changed dramatically over the past three decades as computers have become fully integrated into every facet of warfare. The computerization of weapons and warfare has changed nearly every aspect of combat: e.g., command, communications, reconnaissance, navigation, and the precision with which weapons can be delivered against targets. Increasingly, military forces derive combat effectiveness from their ability to integrate information from multiple sources, make effective decisions, and coordinate the actions of widely dispersed units. Thus, the battlefield payoffs from disrupting an adversary's command and control system -i.e., severing the links between sensors and commanders and forces, and destroying command sites themselves -have become enormous. Not surprisingly, powerful states like the United States have made such operations the centerpiece of their way of war. The problem is that although this style of warfare can produce one--sided battlefield outcomes, it is also highly escalatory.
Over the past twenty years, every major U.S. military operation has begun with an intense effort to destroy the enemy's command and control. For example, the first five days of U.S. air operations in the 1991 Persian Gulf War focused on degrading the Iraqi military's central nervous system, rather than hacking off its limbs. More than a thousand airstrikes targeted Iraqi surface--to--air radars and missile systems (to allow the United States unfettered access to Iraqi airspace), command posts, electricity, communications, and organs of government control -all aimed at denying the Iraqi leadership "situational awareness" and preventing it from coordinating military forces in the field. 
41
42
2003
43
2001
41 Data derived from Gulf War Air Power Survey, Vol. V, Table 
178
Vol. 22, No. 2 (Fall1997), 137--146. 42
178
43
In sum, strong states with sophisticated militaries like the United States will almost inevitably target weaker states' command and control systems, leadership, and strategic assets at the outset of a conventional conflict. This compounds the adversary's fear of not surviving the conflict, thus making nuclear escalation as a means of forestalling defeat more likely.
Table 
1
in East Asia: Implications for the US--Japan alliance," Honolulu, HI: CSIS Pacific Forum. May 31, 2012; Thomas P.M. Barnett, "Big--War thinking in a small--war era: The rise of the Air--Sea Battle concept," China Security 18 (2010). On the escalatory risks of Air Sea Battle, see Raoul Heinrichs, "America's dangerous battle plan," The Diplomat, August 17, 2011; Greg Jaffe, "U.S. model for a future war fans tension with China and inside Pentagon," Washington Post, August 1, 2012; "Air--Sea battle plan renews old hostility," Global Times (China), November 14, 2011. Many analysts and U.S. officials would argue that these operations are a vital necessity; without striking those targets, moving ships into the Western Pacific or flying aircraft from regional bases might be impossible. Tehran, the pressure on an Iranian government to coerce a rapid end to hostilities would likely be intense. Nuclear escalation -directed against U.S. facilities in the region, or the facilities or cities of U.S. regional allies -would be one of Iran's main options. 
50
50
unlikely. The logic developed in this study raises profound questions about that view. 
Critics might concede that conventional wars between nuclear--armed adversaries would be highly escalatory, yet counter that such wars are unlikely to occur in the first place. In fact, critics might say, the arguments that we present here about the dangers of wartime escalation are exactly the reason that these conventional wars will not occur. As Kenneth Waltz argues, nuclear weapons do not merely deter nuclear attacks; they deter conventional attacks as well. As he explains, launching a major conventional offensive against a nuclear--armed state would be foolhardy; yet, launching a limited conventional attack would be equally senseless - as the small potential gains would be trivial compared to any residual risk of escalation. 
51
The lack of high--intensity conventional war between two nuclear weapon states is evidence on the side of Waltz, but there is worrisome evidence, as well. First, if Waltz is right that the risk of nuclear escalation will reliably deter conventional attacks, then Further, the Syrian attack on the Golan Heights at the outset of the 1973 Yom Kippur
War reflects a level of risk acceptance that does not jibe well with Waltz's arguments. On October 6, five divisions of Syrian ground forces launched a major surprise attack on Israeli defenses along the Golan Heights. The Syrian ground forces nearly broke through the Israeli line; at the worst moment for Israel, roughly a dozen tanks stood in front of the Syrian Army -and there were no additional Israeli reserves between the Golan Heights and Tel Aviv. (Some accounts of the war claim that Israel took steps during the war to prepare its nuclear arsenal in case the Syrian Army broke through.) Syria was fortunate: its attack on the Golan Heights failed. But their decision process does not match the level of caution one will require if conventional wars against nuclear--armed states are to be banished. 
53
52
53
54
More broadly, the claim that the risk of catastrophe will reliably deter conventional wars seems to contradict much of history. For most of history, starting a war meant risking catastrophe. Leaders who lost surrendered not merely their crowns, but also their heads.
In the era of dynastic succession, defeat often meant that one's children were killed as well - to prevent future claims to rule. Throughout history, those who led rebellions - against ancient empires, colonial powers, or even against modern occupiers -usually paid with their lives (and often died gruesomely). And the populations on whose behalf the insurgents rebelled were sometimes slaughtered, to teach others not to emulate their disloyalty. In more modern times, the Japanese who planned Pearl Harbor understood that they were attacking a country with ten times their economic power, and they understood that if the war went badly it meant catastrophe for themselves and Japan. (They were right.) But despite those risks, the Japanese attacked. Germany's leaders understood that they were risking personal and national calamity when they invaded France, and especially when they invaded the Soviet Union. But they attacked anyway. In 1980 Saddam Hussein invaded Iran, a country with three times Iraq's population -a gamble that nearly led to his overthrow and death. If it were true that leaders do not start conventional wars if the possibility of catastrophe looms, human history would be much more pacific.
To be clear, we agree with the premise underlying Waltz's argument: that conventional wars could only occur between nuclear--armed states if leaders were willing to embrace major risks. He does not think that will happen; we see that occurring throughout the pages of history. If leaders were not willing to take enormous risks, China and Syria would not have launched major ground attacks on nuclear--armed states, people would have never rebelled against empires, and few of the major wars of the modern era would have occurred.
54 Choe Sang--Hun, "South Korea Publicly Blames the North for Ship's Sinking," New York Times, May 19, 2010; Sang--Hun, "South Korea Returns Fire After Shots From North," New York Times, August 10, 2011.
when facing nuclear--armed adversaries. This recommendation has at least two implications.
First, when creating plans against nuclear--armed adversaries, U.S. regional commands should develop both limited and decisive military options, to provide alternatives for U.S. political leaders. In many cases, limited contingency plans may already exist. However, what is essential -and perhaps lacking -is ensuring that the limited options are not merely limited in the endstates they seek, but that they are also limited in the operations they entail. In particular, limited war plans designed to prevent adversary escalation -by demonstrating that the enemy leadership will survive the war -should probably not seek to destroy the enemy's national--level command and control, directly target senior enemy leaders, or seek to destroy adversary strategic forces. Those would all be logical operations in a war designed to achieve decisive objectives, but they are counter-productive in a limited war.
This simple observation -that military operations must be consistent with campaign objectives -may seem obvious, but ensuring this consistency given the complexity of modern military forces is a substantial challenge. In 1991, for example, the United States conducted a limited war to eject Iraqi forces from Kuwait, while leaving Saddam Hussein's regime in power (to dissuade him from using his chemical and biological weapons, and to avoid the costs of occupation). But although the Coalition's goals were limited, the air operation involved hundreds of strikes against Iraqi command and control and senior leadership targets. U.S. air operations in 1991 made sense from the perspective of destroying Iraqi military capabilities, but were inconsistent with the overarching objective of leaving the Iraqi regime in power -and signaling that restraint to the Iraqi leadership. 
55
55 Similar contradictions could arise in a future war on the Korean Peninsula. A limited Combined Forces Command (CFC) war plan might seek to avoid North Korean escalation by having CFC ground forces advance only a few kilometers north of the DMZ -remaining far south of Pyongyang. But if the CFC air war plan entails air strikes throughout North Korea to blind adversary command and control, target senior leaders, and degrade its strategic forces, adversary leaders may reasonably interpret these operations as part of a decisive -not limited -campaign.
its forces and the forces and populations of regional allies, then a robust and flexible U.S.
nuclear force structure would be a vital necessity.
Taking a step back, the findings from this report may be startling for most defense and international security analysts -but they should not be surprised. Historically, we know that weak countries have planned to use nuclear weapons coercively to stalemate the strong. We know that the United States and its NATO allies were resolved to do exactly this when they felt weak. We have contemporary public statements by several so--called "weak" countries that confirm that they currently view their nuclear weapons in this manner, and plan to use their weapons to stalemate powerful enemies. And we know that U.S.
conventional CONOPs envision the United States fighting conventional wars by blinding our enemies and, in many cases, targeting adversary strategic weapon systems.
And yet, among many in the U.S. nuclear weapons community, the disarmament community, and more broadly across the U.S. military, it is a standard assumption that no country would dare use nuclear weapons against the United States. To the contrary, our findings suggest that the deterrence challenges ahead are far more difficult than is generally imagined, and the deterrence mission in particular requires far more attention than it has recently been given.
instruments of coercion, nuclear weapons offer desperate weak--state leaders tailored escalatory options.
instruments of coercion, nuclear weapons offer desperate weak--state leaders tailored escalatory options.
A. Pape, Bombing to Win: Airpower in Coercion and War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996); for an insightful critique, see Karl Mueller, "Strategies of Coercion: Denial, Punishment, and the Future of Air Power," Security Studies, Vol. 7, No. 3 (Spring 1998): 182--228. a Qadaffi and Hussein, or they could ask themselves: what means do we have to force the United States and South Korea to immediately halt offensive operations? Nuclear escalation could take many possible forms: Pyongyang might begin with just a statement -demanding an immediate ceasefire and threatening nuclear escalation. If North Korea has nuclear weapons married to missiles, it could launch a missile and detonate it harmlessly over the Sea of Japan. If North Korea develops missiles that are accurate enough, it could launch a nuclear strike on a U.S. military base in the region, such as Kadena Air Base on the island of Okinawa, Japan. It could even strike a Japanese or South Korean city. But the most important aspect of a coercive escalatory operation is not the initial strike, but the threat of what is to come. Whatever the first step, Pyongyang could then declare that the United States and ROK must cease military operations against
A. Pape, Bombing to Win: Airpower in Coercion and War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996); for an insightful critique, see Karl Mueller, "Strategies of Coercion: Denial, Punishment, and the Future of Air Power," Security Studies, Vol. 7, No. 3 (Spring 1998): 182--228. a Qadaffi and Hussein, or they could ask themselves: what means do we have to force the United States and South Korea to immediately halt offensive operations? Nuclear escalation could take many possible forms: Pyongyang might begin with just a statement -demanding an immediate ceasefire and threatening nuclear escalation. If North Korea has nuclear weapons married to missiles, it could launch a missile and detonate it harmlessly over the Sea of Japan. If North Korea develops missiles that are accurate enough, it could launch a nuclear strike on a U.S. military base in the region, such as Kadena Air Base on the island of Okinawa, Japan. It could even strike a Japanese or South Korean city. But the most important aspect of a coercive escalatory operation is not the initial strike, but the threat of what is to come. Whatever the first step, Pyongyang could then declare that the United States and ROK must cease military operations against
31  
31  
One can only speculate about what a U.S. president might do under these circumstances. But what should be clear from this illustrative scenario is that an adversary's coercive nuclear strategy might work: it might induce the stronger statewhomever that might be -to opt for a ceasefire (option four). Why would North Korea -or Pakistan,
regional wars are even more prone to escalation. The likelihood of escalation seems greatest on the Korean Peninsula: the Pyongyang government has every reason to expect that a major military defeat equals regime change, with calamitous consequences for the existing leadership. Regime change could occur as a result of intentional U.S. / ROK policy -i.e., if leaders in Washington and Seoul choose "regime change" as the war's desired endstate.
regional wars are even more prone to escalation. The likelihood of escalation seems greatest on the Korean Peninsula: the Pyongyang government has every reason to expect that a major military defeat equals regime change, with calamitous consequences for the existing leadership. Regime change could occur as a result of intentional U.S. / ROK policy -i.e., if leaders in Washington and Seoul choose "regime change" as the war's desired endstate.
51  
51  
The U.S. Department of Defense's 2006 Deterrence Operations Joint Operating Concept (DO JOC) holds that deterrence "is achieved by credibly threatening to deny benefits and/or impose costs while… convincing the actor that restraint will result in an acceptable outcome." In many potential conflicts, however, the nature of U.S. desired end--states, the fragility of adversary regimes, the proximity of an adversary's conventional weapons and strategic systems, and the nature of U.S. military doctrine (which is designed to deny the adversary situational awareness) will make it difficult to assure adversaries that their restraint will lead to "acceptable outcomes." Furthermore, it may be difficult to deny adversaries the benefits of nuclear escalation or credibly threaten to impose adequate costs. In short, intra--war deterrence will likely pose daunting challenges for the United States and its partners in the coming years.
In this report, "weak" refers to the country (or alliance) that lacks the conventional military power to prevail in a conventional war against its key enemies; "strong" refers to a country that is likely to win a conventional conflict. Used in this fashion, weak and strong are dyadic features -i.e., they refer to the relationship between two states (or groups of states) rather than to underlying features of the states themselves. Using this formulation, because NATO declined to spend sufficiently on defense to create a robust conventional defense, which could be expected to reliably defeat a major Warsaw Pact attack, it required nuclear weapons to create stalemate and effective deterrence.
Note that the conventional military balance in Europe was not as one--sided as was often portrayed. But even in the late--1980s, at the height of NATO's conventional military might, the NATO--Pact military balance was merely competitive -meaning that either side might have prevailed in a conventional conflict. There was
The Baltic countries are not nuclear--armed states, of course, but they are covered by NATO's nuclear umbrella.
Postgraduate School Center on Contemporary Conflict, and the 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
Naval Postgraduate School
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
Department of Defense
United States Government
This report is approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
Countering WMD (PASCC)
Project Cost: $99,808
Report Number: 2013-001 The Naval Postgraduate School Center on Contemporary Conflict is the research wing of the 
Department of National Security Affairs (NSA)
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
different military threats than France or the United Kingdom -we have located Baltic NATO separately from the other alliance members.) 
34
2
2
In recent wars, the United States has often sought to destroy the enemy's strategic assets. In 1991, the U.S. air campaign included intense attacks on Iraqi WMD sites and suspected delivery systems. More than one hundred WMD--related targets were struck on the first night alone, and nearly six hundred WMD targets were attacked during the first five days of the campaign -comprising 15% of all U.S. strikes. 
44
45
178
45
USCENTAF, 20 April 2003, pp. 4--5. 46
What are the implications of our analysis and findings? At the most basic level, our report suggests the need for policymakers, analysts, and scholars to reconsider the challenges of nuclear deterrence in the 21 st Century and the incentives that U.S. adversaries have to employ nuclear weapons in the midst of a conventional conflict. Most scholars and analysts of deterrence dismiss the likelihood of intentional nuclear attack by one state on anther, especially the possibility of an intentional nuclear attack by a country against the United States. Similarly, within the U.S. military, regional war planners generally treat conventional conflicts as the "base case" and relegate consideration of escalation to a war plan's annex. But those analysts and war planners should reconsider why they assume that adversaries will keep their most powerful weapons on the sidelines, even as those adversaries suffer terrible military defeats. Historically, weak states with nuclear weapons planned to use them in an escalatory fashion to prevent military defeat - and in fact, that was NATO's strategy throughout most of the Cold War. Even today, the strategy of stalemating nuclear escalation is a core part of Russia's and Pakistan's stated nuclear doctrine, and it is also probably Israel's doctrine if that state were to suffer an unexpected military collapse. If the risk of wartime escalation is high, as we have argued here, then analysts -both inside and outside of government -need to develop richer theories of intra-war deterrence and escalation control during regional conflicts.
In addition to this call for analytical reinvigoration, our analysis makes two critical recommendations for U.S. defense planners to mitigate the coming dangers. First, we urge the reevaluation of existing regional war plans -and conventional concept of operations (CONOPS) - to assess their suitability for waging conventional war against nuclear--armed adversaries without triggering escalation. Second, this analysis suggests that as the United
States considers the future size and shape of its nuclear arsenal, the challenges of intra--war deterrence and escalation control should be paramount considerations. Each of these issues is discussed briefly below.
The first recommendation of this analysis is that the critical goals of escalation prevention and escalation control must be worked into the very core of U.S. regional war plans, at least
The second, related, implication is the need for concepts for conventional operations To be clear, the development of limited war plans does not imply that limited war is always the best approach when confronting nuclear--armed adversaries. In some cases, wars may be triggered by events that compel U.S. leaders to pursue decisive victory, conquest, and/or regime change - even if the enemy has nuclear weapons. Furthermore, restricting U.S. conventional operations and, in particular, withholding attacks on enemy strategic weapons involves major risks. But our overarching point is simple: if the analysis in this paper is sound, then future adversaries have a powerful incentive to use nuclear coercion to stalemate U.S. conventional military power. Given that reality, the United States should develop both limited and decisive military options for wars against nuclear-armed adversaries: limited options to try to prevent adversary escalation, and decisive options for those circumstances in which escalation prevention has already failed, is deemed impossible, or is a lower priority than achieving decisive victory. Half--steps in this direction -such as contingency plans that are limited in the endstates they seek, but are not limited in the operations they entail - may pose the greatest dangers of escalation by obscuring the escalatory potential of a regional conflicts.
A second major implication of this study is that proposals for the future of the U.S.
nuclear arsenal should be assessed against the deterrence mission that, based on this analysis, seems to be both "most demanding" and "most likely": preventing and mitigating escalation during a conventional conflict. 
56
nuclear arsenal often assess the force's adequacy solely against the missions of peacetime assurance and peacetime deterrence. But nuclear deterrence must succeed all the timenot just during peace. Nuclear deterrence must succeed even when U.S. enemies are engaged in conventional wars and fighting for their lives.
The analysis in this report of U.S. options in the face of adversary nuclear escalation -the "four grim options" discussed above (pp. 19--25) -suggests that the two primary choices for U.S. leaders (accepting a cease--fire or conducting a disarming strike) become only one option, ceasefire, unless the United States has palatable disarming strike capabilities. Stated differently, unless the United States has palatable disarming strike options, nuclear coercion against the United States during a conventional war will likely succeed, and thus deterring a coercive strike will be very difficult. Ensuring that the United States can respond effectively to nuclear coercive threats is thus the foundation of the U.S.
deterrent, and the foundation of U.S. efforts to assure its allies.
A credible deterrent in the context of a conventional war should give U.S. leaders a range of retaliatory options, including the ability to respond to nuclear attacks with either conventional or nuclear strikes, to retaliate with strikes against an enemy's nuclear forces rather than its cities, and to minimize casualties. Deterrence during conventional wars would thus be enhanced by an arsenal that included capabilities to conduct prompt and accurate strikes, using high--or low--yield weapons, against enemy nuclear forces. This is not a call for brand new nuclear capabilities: the foundation for this flexible deterrent already exists. The question, however, is whether those flexible retaliatory options will be preserved in the force as the arsenal shrinks -especially in the face of proposals to consolidate from a triad to a dyad, and to greatly reduce arsenal size.
In short, if the United States hopes to deter adversary nuclear escalation during future conventional conflicts, it needs to ensure that the threat of its own nuclear operations is credible to adversaries. If deterrence fails, and the United States must defend 56 See, for example, Keir A. Lieber and Daryl G. Press, "The Nukes We Need: Preserving the American Deterrent," Foreign Affairs (November/December 2009), pp. 39--51.