# ID: e2538fe6ae8943e4bd8f50ccebd0645a
# Title: Strategic Reform: A Battle of Assumptions
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
E veryone has a worldview that shapes how he or she interprets the environ- ment and interacts with others, and every worldview is based on assumptions. Similarly, those individuals responsible for the unenviable task of creating, defining, and implementing national security strategy are forced to begin with assumptions. Worldviews underwritten by inaccurate or incomplete assumptions will struggle to produce predictable outcomes, regardless of the resources applied. 
1
The first assumption is that "uncertainty" has become the dominant characteristic of our security environment, requiring America to spend ever more money to sustain general readiness for unpredictable contingencies. The second is that our only reliable guide star is a need to pace China with high-end forces optimized for a forceon-force clash waged close to the Chinese coast for decisive control of the Pacific. The third is that all other potential applications of military power constitute "lesser included" cases requiring merely diminished application of high-end US strength. These assumptions drive the Department of Defense (DOD) to demand an overage of unaffordable forces while neglecting the innovations and long-term investments which could ensure that the twenty-first century will be an American century.
Some people see reduced defense spending as the end of America as a superpower, but this is not the beginning of the end. Rather, it is the passing of a phase. Defense strategy should set conditions that allow America to remain a (if not the) global superpower, but the DOD owes the nation a feasible strategy and an affordable military. Doing so requires reassessing inherited assumptions and strategic concepts as well as optimizing military forces to backstop political objectives with tailored hardpower options.
The military cannot build these strategies unilaterally. The DOD should either inform, and be informed by, the whole-of-government strategic community or risk building a quiver full of arrows that no politician wants to shoot-or worse, can shoot well. Reinvigorating a defense strategy community that can dive deeply into these challenges in all their complexity and emerge with profound designs to make America stronger and wealthier should lie at the heart of an overdue defense reform.
Strategic military planning periodically cycles between "capability based" and "context based" paradigms. 
2
3
Three conditions generally determine the preferred paradigm. The first is the degree of uncertainty in the security environment. The second, the degree to which the military perceives an internal or external mandate to move away from an undesirable "way of war." 4 And the third, the desire to curate some aspect of present force structure-such as force size, technology investments, or particular missionswithout self-evident justification. 
5
The United States as a superpower has undergone two prolonged periods of capability-based planning. First, Eisenhower's "New Look" at the onset of the Cold War favored long-range nuclear deterrence over large forward forces. New Look allowed the demobilization of millions of American Soldiers after World War II and helped reset the American economy to a peacetime footing. By the end of the Cold War, concepts such as "Assault Breaker" and "Air-Land Battle" were extremely context driven with technology optimized to particular battlefields. The second capabilitybased period followed the collapse of the Soviet Union and continues today with generic culminating concepts like "Air Sea Battle" and hardware like the F-35.
In both cases, following World War II and the Cold War, the potential for military action was high, but the context of the next war remained unpredictable, due either to external uncertainty or shifting internal preferences. Defenders of the current capability-based paradigm point to Saddam Hussein's surprise invasion of Kuwait, peacekeeping in the Balkans, the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, and the rise of China as evidence of uncertainty. They go on to postulate that the devolution of destructive technologies from near peers to client states to nonstate actors will lead to even greater potential for threats to gestate in unexpected corners of the globe. All are treated as proof of uncertainty and co-opted into a narrative justifying broad defense spending on better versions of current capabilities rather than as indications of trends that have changed the context for military action.
The United States did go through a major period of uncertainty as the world thawed from the Cold War. However, trends connecting recent events enhance certainty about competitor archetypes that the military may be called upon to engage, favoring a return to context-based planning. The first likely archetype that the DOD should account for includes rogue states enabled by weapons of mass destruction (WMD) (e.g., Iran, Pakistan, and North Korea). The second includes "competitive superpowers" attempting to create regional hegemonies to challenge US primacy and undermine American rule sets that ensure our peaceful geopolitical and geoeconomic power. This archetype is distinguished by competitive power projection and exemplified by Russia and China although the former may be collapsing back towards rogue status. The final archetype is the global insurgent who broadly rejects the Westphalian state system and threatens to wage revolutionary wars of culture and identity. There will be other enduring military missions-missile defense, nuclear deterrence, maintenance of a strategic reserve, rescue, noncombatant evacuation, humanitarian aid, and so forth-but these are only military activities within strategy. Strategy should contextualize specific adversaries and the means to achieve sufficient control over them. Not every regional conflict demands American attention, but rogue states that reject international law and destabilize regions become a special case when they pursue WMDs. Such rogues threaten to terrorize allies or ignite arms races, both of which undermine American interests. While possession of WMDs is not a blackand-white trigger for action, the military should be prepared to deter hostilities, compel disarmament, or forcefully disarm a rogue of offensive WMDs through air strikes. The United States' recent experience in Iraq demonstrates that total regime change of the state order maintained by a rogue may be less advantageous than strikes in support of limited objectives to modify the rogue's behavior while leaving it largely intact. To maintain the strategic initiative, the US Air Force and Navy should be equipped to disarm an adversary quickly through limited-duration precision strikes with local penetration of defended territory.
As a planning factor, the scale of these operations is likely to require less capacity for high-end penetrating forces than the DOD is currently pursuing since they are likely to be used briefly and returned to a deterrence posture. Just as the United States will predictably use its asymmetric advantage in the vertical flank, so are rogue adversaries likely to exploit their asymmetric advantage in local human and physical terrain, unleashing reprisals via conventional, unconventional, and proxy forces (Russian "separatists" being only the most recent manifestation of that phenomenon). To counter this threat, the United States' land forces-experts in territorial security and human terrain-should be ready to assist foreign partners most likely to feel the brunt of reprisal via an extended conventional defense capability. At this point, the Army, special operators, and the US intelligence enterprise-supported by lowend airpower-should be ready to assist regional allies through partnership and cooperation.
Of the two "competitor hegemons," China is by far the more important. Although the rise of an Asian peer competitor tempts many individuals to dust off Cold War power models, a fundamental distinction between the Soviet Empire and the People's Republic of China (PRC) merits discussion. Following World War II, the globe was rebuilt into two distinct economic spheres of influence. The Western world, led by the United States, remained distinct from the Communist bloc. The economy of the one could rise or fail without significantly affecting the other. 
6
Globalization requires multiple powerful participants. The United States may currently establish the rule sets that enable the globalized market space, but the market itself requires the manufacturing engine and fiscal liquidity of China, the resource base of the Middle East and Latin America, and the technology development of America, Europe, Japan, Brazil, and India (to name but a few). The globalized market space would be diminished if a major player were knocked out, so purely competitive economic theories are insufficient to optimize creation of global wealth and security. The most promising economic strategy for the United States involves pursuing a blend of cooperation and competition to ensure that the international market grows but remains ultimately aligned to US-championed rule sets such as rule of law; protection of intellectual capital; preference for transactions denominated by the US dollar; transparent, multilateral treaty structures; access to the global commons; and respect for human rights.
Maintaining "co-opetition" between the United States and China assures that the economies of both countries remain intertwined. 
7
9
10
Countering force projection and holding a nation's vulnerable lines of communication at risk (sea-lanes, supply chains, and pipelines), again, happen to be a specialty of the US Air Force and Navy. Since the abject "defeat" of China may be undesirable, given our economic interdependence, and unnecessary, given China's frequent accommodation of US pressure, guaranteeing our ability to exploit specific vulnerabilities and respond to limited escalations may be a far more effective military contribution to US grand strategy. Such limited actions allow the United States to modulate its "red lines" and ensure that China continually adapts to America rather than telegraphs monolithic strategic designs that an adversary must merely optimize against. (Paradoxically, we present China with a context-based threat par excellence, and its investment in the "Joint Anti-Air Raid Campaign" is a logical optimization to counter our capabilities.) 
11
12
This does not imply that the US Air Force or Navy will sink Chinese oil tankers in the Indian Ocean (and cause environmental disasters) whenever tension escalates past diplomacy. Military options well short of sinking a vessel (e.g., influencing port access, waylaying Chinese vessels, and selectively closing straits) apply scalable pressure to China's vulnerabilities. 
13
The Chinese could respond by attempting to convoy their energy and/or commodity shipments with the protection of navy vessels of the People's Liberation Army, but the United States can continue to hold maritime assets at risk-particularly in the Indian Ocean, where America has near-total submarine dominance (for now). Old techniques can take on new relevance in this kind of fight with stealth aircraft mining harbors with standoff weapons and a return to the use of Marines (and now SEALs) as boarding parties to seize Chinese-flagged cargo ships as a prize for political leverage. It will also demand the cultivation of US access to, and partnerships with, nations around the Indian Ocean that own the ports on which China relies.
China's globalized role means shared risk and pain for pursuing an offshore control or distant-influence strategy. In 1905, near the height of the Royal Navy's power, First Lord of the British Admiralty John "Jackie" Fisher said, "Five keys lock up the world"; Singapore and the Strait of Malacca led the list of vital nodes. 
14
The DOD should exchange aspirations of a costly and risky short war to embrace a successful, long-competition strategy. We should also consider expanding our portfolio of Pacific allies beyond the dwindling number able to afford the capabilities we deem decisive for a hypothetical Pacific battle. To do so would expand US potential to enlist partners who either cannot afford the financial strain of high-end forces or whose position within China's sphere of influence prevents them from bearing the diplomatic strain of an unambiguous alignment to the United States. The security-force-assistance and partnership-building specialists of the US Army, Special Operations Command, and Air Force are uniquely optimized to provide rugged, inexpensive, tailored activities that build on touch points of shared interests around the Pacific. Many of these engagement activities thrive on shoestring resources now but could be upscaled to increase our agile strategic access and complicate China's ability to take unilateral action.
Slow, long term, persistent-successful US strategy in the Pacific will likely need words like these, but the services are currently doubling down in pursuit of resourceintensive, high-end-capability portfolios. This is potentially the most difficult part of proposing strategic reform: overcoming bureaucratic inertia and political headwind to create new strategic platforms and to invest in projects that will mature over decades rather than by the next election cycle. China is likely to exploit our perceived short-attention spans, unpredictable politics, and pay-for-play influence within think tanks to undermine such a long-term effort. The DOD should not only harmonize service strategists but also integrate a long-horizon strategic effort within the broader policy community. National strategies with such staying power are typically signature doctrines like the Monroe Doctrine, Truman Doctrine, or Carter Doctrine. It remains to be seen whether the United States or DOD can establish such an enduring doctrine with regard to China, but failure to make the attempt invites emergent pathologies to become dominant in their own right.
Finally, irregular adversaries and global insurgents, whether unleashed as proxies of a rogue state or coalescing in pursuit of their own agendas, are likely to continue demanding low-intensity containment and engagement. These threats are so consistently likely across any strategic forecast that failure to develop low-cost/low-intensity engagement capability will probably waste vast resources through constant overmatch. Takfiri terrorists, pirates, third-generation gangs, and cartels have all proven capable of threatening US interests, and the fiscal strain they impose has become our Achilles' heel. Planning to use high-end forces against such threats gives them more clout than they merit by amplifying their impact on our own resources.
Containment of irregular adversaries is a long-term affair, often continuing until they either collapse under the frustration of disallowed objectives or fracture when a subtle instrument of containment denies local political factions a unifying foe. Successful containment can thus be measured by ever-less expenditure of resources yielding a satisfactory measure of control. Fortunately, commonality exists between the types of forces required for containing a rogue's irregular proxies, establishing partnerships for security force assistance, and containing global insurgents; consequently, these low-end forces are multimission, enhancing their efficiency. The absence of any serious efforts by the Air Force and Navy to present forces optimized to the lower-end spectrum of conflict means that low-end adversaries will be able to exploit this national vulnerability for the foreseeable future.
The DOD would serve the nation well by reassessing the assumptions that guide national strategy. If the department's assumptions are not right, then strategists risk frittering resources pursuing capabilities we cannot afford rather than reforming the DOD for success in a context we can create. The nation needs a respite from massive defense spending but cannot give up an activist, full-spectrum foreign policy or risk allowing competitors to destabilize the world into fragmented power blocs that communicate through violence. We are overdue for a reorientation from inward to outward and from capabilities to context, to design-control strategies appropriate for actual adversaries. The first step is to reject underperforming, compressed, or exceptionalist assumptions about the security environment and invest in establishing a DOD strategic community that can address challenges-complex as they may be-as they actually confront us.
If they are currently unable to identify-or politically constrained from identifyingthese adversaries by name, then DOD planners should at least prepare for them as likely archetypes. This essay (remember, that word means "attempt") proposes that the DOD optimize to at least three predictable adversary archetypes. Proper understanding of each particular adversary is the key to attaining the most control from the fewest resources. Monolithic and generic strategic concepts will not do, and the DOD should resist the temptation to retreat to the false defilade that simplicity is certainty and nuance is uncertainty. The capability-based paradigm has gone far enough, leaving the services hostage champions for pinnacle capabilities, at premium prices, to deal with catastrophic chimeras. America requires more than the defeatist refrain, "Undo sequester or face losing battles against uncertain threats." The DOD should reform-and the reform begins with strategy.  Notes 1. "Unfortunately, intellectual rigor can only guarantee that reasoning is internally consistent: its conclusions follow from its premises. It cannot guarantee that those premises were right in the first place, and with bad premises, even the most rigorous reasoning will produce nonsense. Premises don't even have to be wrong to generate false conclusions. They only have to be incomplete, and no set of premises can prove its own completeness." Ian Fletcher, Free Trade Doesn't Work: What Should Replace It and Why (Washington, DC: US Business and Industry Council, 2011), 11.
2. The author's use of the term context based expands upon the rubric of threat-based planning. An excellent review of the cyclical transition between capability-based planning and threat-based planning can be found in John F. Troxell, "Force Planning and U.S. Defense Policy," chap. 12 in Joseph R. Cerami and James F. Holcomb Jr., eds., US Army War College Guide to Strategy (Carlisle Barracks, PA: US Army War College, February 2001), http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/army-usawc/strategy/.
3. The F-35, optimized in the 1990s to fight former Soviet Union air defenses associated with the bygone "central front" in Europe, is poorly suited to the Pacific. The F-35 lacks the range to cover Pacific Command's area of responsibility and requires creation of expensive NATO-style "main operating bases" to satiate its intense logistical demands. These facts have been the subject of multiple reports, but a particularly relevant assessment is found in David Axe, "Test Pilot Tried to Warn Navy about Troubled Stealth Jet," War Is Boring, 26 August 2013, https://medium.com/war-is-boring/8d09a6b858ae. 4. See John T. Correll's account of the Air Force's advocacy of "The New American Way of War," Air Force Magazine 79, no. 4 (April 1996): 20-23, http://www.airforcemag.com/Magazine Archive/Pages/1996/April%201996/0496airpower.aspx; and a critique of such "new way of war" concepts expertly compiled by LTC Antulio J. Echevarria in "An American Way of War or Way of Battle?," Strategic Studies Institute, January 2004, http://www.strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil/pdffiles /pub662.pdf.
5. "The theory of 'anti-access/area denial' . . . is gobbledygook that we sell to Congress because if we just told them, 'We can kick anybody's asses,' they wouldn't buy us all the stuff we want." From Thomas P. M. Barnett, well-known Pentagon planner and author of The Pentagon's New Map: War and Peace in the Twenty-First Century (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 2004). See Barnett, "Let's Rethink America's Military Strategy," video, 23:43, TED, February 2005, http://www.ted.com/talks/thomas_barnett _draws_a_new_map_for_peace.html.
6. "There is one clear similarity and one important difference between Chinese-US relations today and USSR-US relations in the second half of the past century. The similarity is that there is a likely enduring gulf in core principles and worldviews between China and the United States-certainly making possible another intense and lasting geopolitical rivalry. The difference, however, is that China is deeply integrated into the global economy and joined at the economic hip with the United States, whereas the USSR was not part of the global capitalist economy and its economic ties with the United States were close to nonexistent." Prof. Geoffrey Garrett, "China-US Economic Relations after the Global Financial Crisis," in Rising China, Global Challenges and Opportunities, ed. Ligang Song and Jane Golley (Canberra: Australian National University Press, 2011), 149. 
sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect