# ID: e2da1b9860dd424489d080434f24f7ae
# Title: Military Applications of Nanotechnology: Implications for Strategic Security I
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 biotechnology, including systems biology; and the intersection of each with information and communications technologies (ICTs).
Less predictable is the possibility that research breakthroughs will transform the technological battlefield. Allies and partners should be alert for potentially disruptive developments in such dynamic areas as information and communications technology, cognitive and biological sciences, robotics, and nanotechnology [emphasis added]…. The most destructive periods of history tend to be those when the means of aggression have gained the upper hand in the art of waging war. 1    New and unpredicted technologies are emerging at an unprecedented pace around the world.
Communication of those new discoveries is occurring faster than ever, meaning that the unique ownership of a new technology is no longer a sufficient position, if not impossible. In today's world, recognition of the potential applications of a technology and a sense of purpose in exploiting it are far more important than simply having access to it. 2 Advanced technology is no longer the domain of the few.
"What keeps me awake at night is, are we going to miss the next big technological advance? And perhaps an enemy will have that." 3 Anticipating the types of threats that may emerge as science and technology advance, the potential consequences of those threats, the probability that new and more diverse types of enemies 4 will obtain or pursue them, and how they will impact the future of armed conflict is necessary in preparing for the future security of the nation. The potential synergies among the information and communications technologies, biotechnology, and other emerging technologies,
Nanotechnology has emerged as a major science and technology focus of the 21st century.
Proponents assert that military applications of nanotechnology have even greater potential than nuclear weapons to radically change the balance of power internationally. The suggestion that nanotechnology will enable a new class of weapons that will alter the geopolitical landscape remains to be realized. A number of unresolved security puzzles underlying the emergence of nanotechnology have implications for international security, defense policy, and arms control regimes.
This research gives the first systematic analysis of this new technology's role and significance in security and foreign policy and contributes to the development of similar frameworks toward designing policy responses to address the promise and perils of nanotechnology, biotechnology, and other emerging sciences. This work accomplished two related ends: review and analysis of the current state of nanotechnology efforts in Russia in the context of military technology development. Although not included in this report, similar reviews by the author were done previously for the European Union and concurrently for China. These analyses are part of a larger comparative effort of nanotechnology for international security, including the United States, Turkey, Israel, Iran, the Republic of Korea, and Singapore.
Second, a set of variables was developed, tested, revised, and assessed in the context of a single foreign state. Limiting the proliferation of unconventional weapons for the 21st century starts with an awareness of the factors driving the capabilities, the changing natures of technological progress and of warfare, and the relationship between science and international security. This work establishes a codified variable approach to the development of strategically significant nanotechnology and emerging science programs, with the eventual goal of enabling crossnational comparisons and an understanding of their impact on security; to better enable mechanisms for the world to govern the implications of its own ingenuity; and to inform security, defense, and foreign policies. Critical factors in the role and significance of emerging technologies (e.g., institutional, ideational, and technical) have been identified. This material is made in part by support from the Project on Advanced Systems and Concepts for Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction (PASCC), Center on Contemporary Conflict, Naval Postgraduate School, under Grant No. N00244-12-1-0050. PASCC is supported by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA).
In order to understand the changing paradigms for national security in the 21st century, it is crucial that policymakers and analysts have an awareness of the factors driving new and emerging capabilities, possess the ability to analyze the changing nature of technological progress and assess potential impacts on the nature of conflict, and understand the relationships among cutting-edge science, advanced technology, and international security. What are the roles and significance of emerging technologies and how should the national security community respond to the promise and perils of biotechnology, nanotechnology, the cognitive neurosciences, advanced information and computing sciences, and other emerging technologies?
How will these nascent scientific and technological developments impact local, regional, and international security, stability, and cooperation? What are the most likely sources of technological surprise with the largest threat capacity and how can the national security community better identify them sooner? Emerging technologies present regional security challenges and may exacerbate (or mitigate) the geo-political, military, energy, and economic challenges in the future to a state or region and the potential impacts on U.S. interests and national security. Deep strategic and practical understanding of the significance of emerging technology and its diffusion as well as extending thinking concerning how science, technology, and inter-and intra-national social relations interact to shape and facilitate management of the changing global security landscape is a pressing need for the 21st century. To that end, the Georgia Institute of Technology and the Sam Nunn School of International Affairs was funded to pursue initial research on "Military Applications of Nanotechnology: Implications for Strategic Cooperation & Conflict" to complement the efforts of the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) and its Center on Contemporary Conflict (CCC) as part of the Project on Advanced Systems and Concepts for Countering WMD (PASCC). Submission of an analytic report of the study's results follows.
Emerging innovations within today's most cutting-edge science and technology (S&T) areas are cited as carrying the potential of bringing the future envisioned to bring both near-term capabilities, as well as those that might appear scientific fictions, closer. Those S&T areas include nanotechnology: robotics, including artificial intelligence; the cognitive neurosciences; like nanotechnology and the cognitive neurosciences, not only suggest tremendous potential for advancement in technology for military applications, but also raise new concerns. When asked what are the current approaches and thinking on means for deterring emerging technologies of concern to the U.S., then-outgoing U.S. Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM) Commander General Robert Kehler, U.S. Air Force (USAF), responded, "surprise is what keeps me up at night" and cited current uncertainty in how to assess and address emerging and disruptive technologies. 
5
Nanotechnology-which broadly encompasses the design, creation, synthesis, manipulation, and application of functional materials and systems through control of matter at the atomic and molecular levels-is emerging as the major focus of scientific and technological innovation for the 21st century. Although surrounded by popular hyperbole in the 1980s and 1990s associated with the specter of self-replicating assemblers, 6 nanotechnology and related innovations in materials, electronics, optics, biomedical applications, pharmacological formulations, fabrics, and super-strong protective coatings are now coming to practical fruition. Engineered nanoparticles, for example, are currently used in a number of commercial products, including While Eric Drexler has professionally reemphasized the fundamental limits of physics relating to nanoengineered devices, he now emphatically distancing himself from the self-replicating "nano-bots" notion while still advocating for consideration of safety in generation of nano-assembled material, and he acknowledges the unexpected and unintended hyperbole that arose with the "grey goo" concept. Nonetheless, molecular selfassembly remains a topic of popular media, scholarly, and policy discussions.
cosmetics, sunscreens, clothes, photovoltaics (solar cells), sporting good, paints and coatings, pharmacologicals, and electronics. 
7
8
10
11
12
13
From the chlorine gas attacks of World War I to the use of atomic weapons against Japan in WWII through the biological threats of the Cold War and to the present day, limiting the actors-currently presents a threat that is difficult to predict and for which traditional solutions are increasingly less effective. In a parallel way, nanotechnology has arisen as a rapidly emerging and well-funded discipline that has been painted as a ground-breaking technology with potential for unpredictable harm.
Reducing the risk from misuse of technology will mean consideration of the highly transnational nature of the critical technology required. Traditional and innovative new approaches to nonproliferation and counterproliferation are important policy elements to reduce the risk of malfeasant application of technology that may enable advanced weapons or make production or dissemination of biochemical agents available to a much wider group of actors. Efforts to strengthen existing international regimes to control transfers of dual-use materials are important. 
20
• Spintronics, i.e., spin transport electronics, i.e., using the inherent spin of electrons and magnetic moment, in metals usually, to move electrons [charge]   where and how you want it; 
When examining the literature about Russian innovation, it is difficult to separate scholarship produced during the Cold War from contemporary literature. This is a consequence both of the remnants of Soviet government (people, institutions, structures) and culture that color the Russian Federation today as well as the sheer volume of literature on the subject produced by military and academic scholars during the decades-long arms race. This section will attempt to outline the variety of approaches to this topic that have helped shape both Western and Russian scholars' understanding of these phenomena. It will begin with a brief overview of scholarship about the Soviet process of innovation and then summarize the work of contemporary scholars attempting to make sense of the current Russian system of innovation. innovation following American innovation to the structure of the Soviet military itself. In his view, the highly centralized, administrative structure of the military meant that any decision to begin development of a new weapon or weapons system came from the military. 
23
24
Scholarship about contemporary Russian innovation draws heavily on existing commentary on innovation in the Soviet Union. This is largely due to the hybrid nature of the current government structure. Slavo Radosevic, a prolific author on this subject, attributes the current state of the Russian government to the country's conflicting desires to both retain the remnants of the Soviet Union in the government structure and to reform the government entirely. 
25
26
31
A similar frame of reference appears in a much later article as McNamara attempts to provide guidance on how the United States should address and improve relations with Russia and China in a post-Cold War world. 
33
36
In his book The Culture of Military Innovation, Dima Adamsky attributes the differences between American and Soviet military innovation to a series of cultural variables rather than strictly to military competition. Specifically, he posits that "[t]he relationship between technology and military innovation is not deterministic, but rather socially constructed; national military tradition and professional cultures interact with technology, affecting the course and outcome of military change." 37 Adamsky attributes these cultural differences to differences in countries' strategic culture. The cultural differences he measures include high-versus lowcontext communication and the perception of time. The cognitive variables include holistic versus dialectical thought and logical verses analytical thought. According to this theory, the Soviet Union constituted a "high-context" society that drew frequently on a sense of shared 36 Ibid., 72. history and tradition. Individuals in such a culture express themselves "in indirect, reserved, cynical, and vague language, relying on the listener/reader's ability to grasp the meaning from the context." 38 Time is also perceived in a very non-linear manner; individuals' frequent reliance on past experience creates a culture where the present is colored heavily by the past. There is a strong sense that "everything will happen in its time" and that "everything is connected to everything else." 39 Adamsky claims that this understanding of time leads to workplace behavior that is less than ideal for innovation; specifically, he claims that cyclical behavior is common in the workplace, meaning that individuals frequently change from one task to another and, though they may understand a great deal, do not concentrate on any one task for long periods of time. 
40
42
43
38
39
40
41
42
The first reason Adamsky cites for this failure is the lack of bureaucratic support for Ogarkov's proposals. As the Chief of the GS, Ogarkov had the power and leverage to implement real change in the Russian military's grand strategy. He drew upon a variety of "interrelated professional discussions" about NATO's shift to a "follow-on forces attack," which was designed to attack the enemy as far in the rear as possible. 
44
45
46
Ogarkov's failure to garner sufficient bureaucratic support for his ideas is not the only factor in the MTR's failure, however. Adamsky also points to two external factors that colored the general military climate at the time in which Ogarkov's proposals were being circulated. While many general officers in the military agreed with his analysis and ideas, the political climate was changing. Ogarkov served as the Chief of the GS from the beginning of perestroika. Not only did civilians rail against the notion of increasing military budgets any further, many members of the government also disagreed. As such, military authorities were unable to exert the kind of authority that they had in the past, which ultimately led the military to ignore Ogarkov's proposals and the end of his military career. The lack of support for these policies may also have stemmed from a variety of economic factors that were becoming increasingly obvious at this time: the Soviet Union never possessed the necessary economic capacity to embark on the kinds 
44
45
of "ambitious military transformations" that Ogarkov proposed. 
47
While Russia is several decades removed from the specific problems addressed in Adamsky's work, the broad strokes of these issues continue to color the government's policies. As such, the model presented here is more applicable than the time period covered would seem.
The impact of the culture of the Russian military on the failure to implement the MTR using the cultural variables discussed earlier is also important. Given the larger culture's tendency toward collectivism and to the reliance on history and tradition, Adamsky claims that Russian strategic experts saw all problems and issues as interconnected in a single system. 
48
50
47 Ibid.,
38. 48 Ibid.,
[43]
[44]
46. 50 Ibid.,
[50]
[51]
operations, but also for "synthesiz[ing the] insights of military knowledge." 52 One of the GS's primary tasks was to generate revolutions in military affairs and to determine how they could be implemented. The Russian government and Russian military establishment saw the GS as a "brain" that not only commanded operations but also distilled military operations from the general to the particular. Creating an audience for new MTRs or other new ideas was therefore very difficult, particularly given the economic and political climate discussed above. The sense of tradition further manifested itself in the general understanding within the Russian military that saw suffering as essential to producing fortitude among soldiers and that also attributed military success to "men, spiritual power, and psychological factors" 53 rather than to improved weapons technology or any other material component. Therefore, Ogarkov's assertion that the Russian military needed to invest more money and resources into research and development (R&D) to maximize the efficacy of both its nuclear and conventional weapons was not well received. It not only flew in the face of both governmental and public desire, but also in the face of prevailing military tradition. Lastly, the prevailing military dogma of the day, Marxism, may have impacted the military's ability to implement the MTR. The problem, he claims, comes where Marxism and the high-context nature of the Russian culture intersect. Marxism, Adamsky argues, reinforced notions of an "imagined future" and also placed particular emphasis on ignoring rather than fixing problems. As such, the Russian military was very good at "developing revolutionary concepts of modern operations" but never implemented those theories. 
54
55
53
54
55
Military Technologies, Cornell University: Ithaca, 1988, 26.  organizational slack, five structural characteristics (variables) "that appear to affect organizational innovativeness" are put forward. 
56
57
Evangelista's first step in Soviet military innovation is known as "stifled initiative." At this early stage in the innovation process, there is evidence of technical antecedents to future military innovations and discussion of possible military applications of emerging technologies. However, this step is also marked by "organizational and systemic constraints preventing the active pursuit of potential developments that do not coincide with existing priorities." 58 This is in direct opposition to the same stage in the American military innovation process that is undertaken after the independent development of new technology by scientists working in private firms within the larger military R&D apparatus. 
59
In the second step of the process, "preparatory measures," low-level efforts in a particular area continue, but they still yield to higher-priority programs. Evangelista credits the institution of new scientific research to evidence of similar technologies being developed abroad. 
60
57 Ibid., 52-53. 
58
59 Ibid., 53.
research base to respond to foreign developments. This is a particularly important stage in Soviet innovation because it generally indicates the beginnings of a change in Soviet military priorities.
The final two steps, "mobilization" and "mass production," are similar processes on two different scales. In the first step, Soviet leadership typically endorses an all-out effort to pursue a particular innovation. The sheer amount of resources dedicated to the development of this process allows the system to overcome its typical inertia and make rapid advances in this area.
However, speed of discovery does not equate to greater freedom for the scientists working on the problem. Military leadership retains a remarkable ability to "intervene in the process of carrying out an innovation," even choosing to end further development of a program after extensive testing. The final step in the process is the most public, as the government issues both policy statements and information about the new technology. This step also is indicative of the current priorities of the Russian military establishment. Any changes to the GS's priorities are formalized with these announcements and with the mass production and implementation of a new technology. 
61
65
Because the Russian R&D apparatus remains highly centralized, the majority of prominent organizations encouraging innovation are tied to the government. The Russian government's current approach to innovation in many ways mirrors the process that took place in the Soviet Union. Just as the Soviet government funded the bulk of R&D activities through state-owned branch research institutes, Russia's current structure boasts a large network of research institutes that are largely separate from both industrial firms and the university system. These institutes, known collectively as the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS), are more than thirty component organizations that publish independently and compete for state funding as individual entities. 66 institutes and the university system. 
67
Legislation enacted in the last several years provides evidence that some of the traditional government structures responsible for inciting innovation are beginning to be reformed, however. While still in the early stages, many of the Russian government's programs in this area seem to aim to increase growth in the private sector rather in particular. In 2005, the government passed a law incentivizing the creation of special economic zones (SEZs) to attract investment in manufacturing and "high-technology" development. 
68
69
Law 217 seeks to encourage further collaboration among universities and private industry by "encourag[ing] companies to establish partnerships with universities and get engaged in joint R&D activities and technological innovations. 
70
• Federal Government Decree 218, "The Federal Support of Cooperation Between Higher Education and High Tech Industry (April 9, 2010)," allocated $633 million between 2010 and 2012 for joint industry-university projects. Selected projects could be awarded up to $10 million according to three criteria: 1) that the project proposed by a research institution and company must require joint R&D at the research institution, 2) that the company will match the government grant with its own funding, and 3) that at least twenty percent of federal funding will be used for R&D.  2008 and 2020. 
76
78
79
While some steps are being made to loosen the government's control over many of the major institutions within the innovation apparatus, the reality of the country's current economic state and population poses its own problems. While the Soviet Union was long regarded one of the leading countries in the number of highly educated individuals within its population-Russia still retains one of the best-educated populations in the world according to OECD data-strict divisions between the government, military, universities, and research institutes has led to a smaller number of science and engineering graduates over the years. Given President Putin's ambitious goals for improving the Russian economy by once again improving the scientific community's ability to innovate, the decreasing population of individuals qualified to take on these jobs may halt the project in its tracks if steps are not taken to reverse this trend. Secondly, the strong ties between the government and the research institutes mean that all employees are considered civil servants and that the resulting laws governing the firing of scientists and engineers currently employed in the research institutes are notoriously strict. 
86
87
As mentioned above, Russia is in a transition period with regard to how it approaches technology technology a driving force of the economy." 
89
the lack of interest and weak participation of the business sector in R&D; the generation gap (high average age of researchers) in the sector; the competitiveness of the working conditions for scientist and researchers; the poor integration of the Russian R&D sector into the international R&D sector; and the obsolescence of the resource base for the R&D sector. 
90
94
95
In 2010, the Russian Duma approved a proposal to allocate more than $4 billion (in USD at the time) to Skolkovo, a three-pronged approach to encouraging innovation that includes a high-tech "innovation city" meant to serve as Russia's answer to Shenzhen in China and India's largest technopark in Thiruvananthapuram (Trivandrum), Kerala; a business incubator for entrepreneurs in the technology and applied research sectors (the Skolkovo Foundation); and a "world class technology university, Skolkovo Institute of Technology (SKTech)." 96 Each of the three parts of the effort is intended to perform a role in the innovation process while also working collaboratively with the others to draw both domestic and international investors. Since construction of the project began, members of the Russian government touted the project as the the city will raise $11 billion through private investors by 2020 and that it will add up to $45 billion to national GDP. 
98
99
100
In On paper, the 2005 SEZ act seems to strike a reasonable balance between the two extremes.
While the Skolkovo program has received a large amount of government seed money, the benefits to residential companies expire after a decade. Although the technopark is in its early stages, this provides a definite point at which the self-sufficiency of the resident companies is expected. Currently, the law also holds both established corporations and technology startups to the same process of government review to ensure that their research is beneficial for Russian consumers and that the money being given to the corporation is used wisely. Although such measures may seem extreme to established companies, the review process is one way of monitoring the government's investment and of ensuring that the R&D occurring is focused on the creation of new technology rather than simply transferring existing technology to Russia.
International investors are beginning to respond to the program. In August 2012, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) agreed to partner with the SKTech and work alongside prominent Russian universities, including Lomonosov Moscow State University, to create a more innovative atmosphere while drawing on the considerable scientific knowledge of the partner universities. 
102
Such close ties call the self-sustainability and independence of the program into question. This significant government involvement with the leadership of the program is similar to projects that undertaken during the 1950s and 60s under the Soviet government. In 1957, the government established Akademgorodok-literally "academic town"-a "science city" that included research institutes, a university, housing, entertainment, stores, and other resources for its citizens. Similar cities were built near Tomsk in 1972, and a town known as Zelenograd was "repurposed from a manufacturing to a high technology city in 1962." 
103
therefore becomes to what extent is the current Russian model of innovation in this area different from that of the Soviet Union? Applying Evangelista's five-step process for Soviet innovation to this question reveals surprising similarities between the two innovation systems. While step one, "stifled initiative," seems to be corrected by the principles underlining the creation of all three prongs of Skolkovo, the concept underlying the second step, "preparatory measures," has more resonance. While the Skolkovo program is a very large, public display of the government's commitment to innovation in the private sector, the five year gap between the passage of the 2005 SEZ law and the passage of the bill creating the Skolkovo program could indicate low-level support for the idea within the government. Large projects require time to draft, but five years seems quite long given the magnitude of success that similar SEZs have achieved in the other BRICS countries. Therefore, the lag may indicate hesitancy or a general lack of interest on the part of government leaders.
The third step, "high-level response," obviously occurred in this process as evidenced both by the passage of the law and the subsequent government support, both monetary and verbally in a variety of high-profile speeches and conferences. What is unclear about this step, however, is whether the push by government officials truly occurred in response to perceived change by peer states. Successful SEZs have been a large part of the global economy for many years, especially in Asia. If the government decided to make Skolkovo a priority in response to success in areas such as Shenzhen, the program took a longer time to pass than would be expected by the model. Evangelista's understanding of this step indicates a fairly rapid response to innovations by other countries, but the five-year gap in the Skolkovo process indicates something else may be a driving factor. Even taking into consideration the global recession that occurred in 2008, the gap seems unusually long.
Because of the size and singular nature of the Skolkovo project, it is difficult to tell if any "mobilization" process occurred, or if the concept of "mass production" is more applicable to the current rollout of the program. Voting to fund the creation of such a large program, in addition to the repeated statements on the part of government leaders indicate that a hybrid of the two steps may provide the most comprehensive explanation of the process. For Evangelista, the mobilization process is marked by an all-out government effort to support the creation of a needed product. Such support is clearly evidenced here; however, the very public nature of the manner in which the program was created-through the passage of a bill in the Duma-also provides evidence for the public statements about a given government policy toward new technology that are the hallmark of mass production.
Using Evangelista's model as a template for exploring the development of the Skolkovo program indicates a large amount of overlap between the current innovation process and that which occurred under the Soviet Union. This is not to say that no differences exist between the twothe very nature of the Skolkovo program and its emphasis on private sector innovation differs substantively from the Soviet model. Nonetheless, it is important to recognize that the Russian government's ambitious plans for scientific innovation may be foiled by this close resemblance, organizational structure fidelity, and predominance of older individuals. Such a resemblance is only intensified by a variety of scandals associated with the Skolkovo Foundation recently. In February 2013, the Russian Investigative Committee filed criminal charges against Kirill Lugovtsev, the Finance Department Director at the Development Foundation of the Center for Development and Commercialization of New Technology (the Skolkovo Foundation) for the embezzlement of 24 million rubles ($800,000 USD at the time).
The charges followed the revelation of "materials from the Audit Chamber and the Federal Security Service."
104
105
Moving beyond the historical frameworks, a set of variables that would inform the international security implications of emerging technologies and specifically nanotechnology were sought.
Initially, a set of twelve variables was proposed based on analysis of historical and current programs, as well as review and analysis of federally funded nanotechnology programs in the United States related to national defense. These programs were identified through participation We are currently in the process of testing the variables and doing a semi-empirical analysis against data from the 2013 and 2014 NT4D conferences. Across all the variables, a score from 0 to 10 for each variable will allow a single cumulative score to be calculated for a technology or program. A high cumulative score is expected to indicate that a technology is offensive, disruptive, institutionalized, privately funded, covert, technologically driven, and regulated by a highly restrictive framework. Scores of 5 on all scales indicate that a technology is neutral on that measure.
As global interest surrounding nanotechnology continues to grow in both the public and private sphere, nations will increasingly seek out both commercial and military applications of such emerging technology. The ubiquitous nature of nanotechnology-along with biotechnology and information and communications technologies-means that its applications are likely to be far reaching. Understanding potential proliferation challenges and threats that may be wielded through application of these technologies is critical. 
106
The most general prediction of offense-defense theory is that international conflict and war are more likely when offense has the advantage, while peace and cooperation are more probable when defense has the advantage. Offense-defense theory share the basic assumptions of structural realism: states seek to maximize their security by pursuing their self-interests, and ultimately their survival, in an anarchic system. However, the offense-defense power theory offers an explanation of the relationship between power (resources) and threats. When the balance favors the defense, resources are more easily used to counter threats rather than to threaten, while if the balance favors the offense, resources are more easily used to threaten rather than to counter threats. 
109
When analyzing the impact of innovations in nanotechnology, the resulting military applications, including novel weapons as well as the expansion of existing capabilities, can be measured in the 108 Keir A. Lieber, "Grasping the Technological Peace: The Offense-Defense Balance and International Security,"
International Security, Summer 2000, 71-104. 
109
112
The  enhance the efficiency of its energy sector, for example, UAVs might serve an important role in helping to protect its resources and the infrastructure that helps deliver those resources to the market. Some U.S. observers indicate that in this scenario Russia's ability to project its authority using conventional weapons will extend only to the "near abroad" (i.e., eastern Europe, the Caucuses, and central Asia). In such a scenario, Russia would come to rely heavily on UAVs and other aircraft to aid in intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) and conduct nearautonomous operations. 
127
Analysis of potential military applications of nanotechnology needs to consider the likelihood of specific strategic, operational, and tactical uses of nanotechnology. There is a need for robust technical cases studies that combine such knowledge with the consideration of motivation and intent that will drive the military capability. Such case studies will also help disaggregate whether something is intended for offensive or defensive purposes, or perhaps even dual usage. In addition, although funding data was available for DOD-proposed investment in nanotechnology broken down by program component area, any comparable Russian military nanotechnology funding data was not available.
The Department of Defense's Office of Net Assessment originally defined a revolution in military affairs (RMA) as "a major change in the nature of warfare brought about by the innovative application of technologies which, combined with dramatic changes in military doctrine and operational concepts, fundamentally alters the character and conduct of operations."
128
129
130
A disruptive technology, by definition, is a technological advancement that drives political and societal changes. Although pundits and scholars, along with a few scientists, hypothesize that nanotechnology may in fact provide the changes to society and to warfare necessary for it to be considered a truly disruptive technology, current deployments of nanotechnology indicate that this may not be the case-or at least, not for a very long time. The U.S. National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) provides a list of potential innovations in defense technologies that nanotechnology may allow in the future, including: information dominance through nanoelectrics; virtual reality systems for training; automation and robotics to offset reductions in manpower, reduce risks to troops, and improve vehicle performance; higher-performance platforms with diminished failure rates and lower costs; improvements in chemical/biological/nuclear sensing and casualty care; improvements in systems for nonproliferation monitoring; and nano/micromechanical devices for control of nuclear weapons. 
131
If nanotechnology is understood to be a "disruptive technology," then by definition technological advances will ultimately drive political and societal changes. Disruptive technology within the military can be understood through examining the concept of revolution in military affairs (RMA). Nikolai Ogarkov's writings on the Soviet military during the 1970s and 1980s examined the potential revolutionary impact of new military technologies, resulting in what was once referred to as the military-technical revolution, an idea that has evolved into today's concept of an RMA. 
132
133
134
If technology is in fact at the core of a revolution in military affairs, then it is important to understand how revolutions in technology have the ability to influence or shape society.
Nanotechnology proponents are often noted for underscoring how future advancements in nanotechnology will reshape the world and society as we know it. 
132
Army 
In order to measure the extent to which advancements in nanotechnology are in fact driving a technological revolution, a qualitative analysis must be conducted. One possible method is to utilize Carlota Perez's techno-economic paradigm. Perez defines a technological revolution (TR) as a "major upheaval of the wealth-creating potential of the economy, opening a vast innovation opportunity space and providing a new set of associated generic technologies, infrastructures and organizational principles that can significantly increase the efficiency and effectiveness of all industries and activities." 
135
136
It is unclear, particularly in the case of a "late, late innovator" like Russia, whether the current model the government is employing will allow Russia to benefit from the advancements in military technology in a significant way. Although Putin continues to espouse his belief in nanotechnology's ability to revolutionize life in Russia, recent actions on the part of the government may stymie Russia's growth. In April 2013, the Accounting Chamber-responsible for auditing government programs-accused RusNano of investing approximately $40 million in shell companies and further decried the company's $450 million investment in a silicon factory that was not functioning and declared insolvent. 
137
Norway and Talinn University of Technology, January 2009. 136 Ibid. 
137
also lost an additional 24.4 billion ruble reserve that the government had formed against potential losses from risky ventures. Rather than support the head of RusNano, Putin appeared on a widely televised call-in program and spoke in a manner that clearly indicated that the program is out of favor with the Kremlin. This is especially problematic for Russia's current economic plan, which had development and eventual privatization of much of the country's nanotechnology research at its center. Given the Russian government's enormous investment in nanotechnology to this point, it is unlikely that this scandal will be problematic for RusNano; however, if the program flounders and remains entirely in state control, Russia's nanotechnology sector runs the risk of falling into the inefficient model of innovation outlined by Evangelista. The Russian military may eventually undergo change on a large scale due to the introduction of nanotechnology into many of its conventional weapons, but the widespread political and societal changes described above may never come to fruition. There is a chance, therefore, that nanotechnology may not prove to be a disruptive technology for Russia.
In-depth study is necessary to identify and measure the extent to which the industry of Participation of national institutes in international co-operative initiatives can be understood as an extension of the participating nations' self-interests. There is widespread anticipation that nanotechnology will be a critical component in addressing global challenges in such areas as energy, environment, health care, security, and sustainability. In order for one nation to effectively respond to the noted emerging global challenges, it is imperative to glean the most from R&D initiatives in the field of nanotechnology. International collaboration is currently the most effective means to further research throughout the field of nanotechnology.
The extent to which nanotechnology has become institutionalized can be measured by the extent to which it is used in the manufacturing or as a component of commercialized products. Using data gathered from the following sources, this section presents a [qualitative and/or quantitative] assessment of the commercial use of nanotechnology:  produced $900 billion in nano-enabled products, bringing it to a projected 3% of the world market in the nanotechnology industry. 148
More research needs to be devoted to disaggregating the value added of nanotechnology as it pertains to the overall value of the final product. Additional data also needs to be collected on the revenue projections of the global nanotechnology industry, as well as more specifically revenues of commercialized U.S. nano-enabled products so that a true comparison of the rates of commercialization of nanotech products between the U.S. and Russia can be made.  Such diversity is imperative for both commercial and military advancements in the future, and each of these companies might play an important role in future military development. Again, the extent to which RusNano funds companies for military R&D is unclear; however, the same scientific breakthroughs needed to produce nanoelectric components that will revolutionize cybersecurity or lightweight, inexpensive UAVs is needed to create and market next-generation Ethernet solutions or basalt fiber construction materials for regions with permafrost conditions.
The desired outcome or application may be slightly different, but the requisite knowledge is the same. As such, it is safe to assume that that the origin of Russia's military R&D for nanotechnology is publically funded and that the government may draw on the breakthroughs of scientists working purely in the commercial sector to further its military goals.   Like so much else in Russia's development of nanotechnology, the amount of transparency offered by the government is somewhat of a hybrid. President Putin and other high-ranking members of the government have made no secret of their desire to transform Russia into a great power by stimulating the economy through investment in scientific research and development.
The focal point of this investment is the government's $7 billion investment in nanotechnology.
RusNano, the government's nanotechnology investment arm, has a very detailed website that includes links to a variety of information about the projects and companies in its portfolio, which seems to suggest Russia's development of nanotechnology is overt. RusNano's willingness to partner with foreign firms including MIT also indicates a willingness to share information with other states that is uncharacteristic of the Soviet government during the Cold War.
Finding information about the specific research that the Russian military is conducting on nanotechnology is extremely difficult, however, which prevents Russia's development of nanotechnology from being classified as overt. It is possible to piece together some educated guesses about the sectors of nanotechnology that are most attractive to the Russian government from records of government hearings and from those areas of defense where Russia has historically dominated. One of these is the aeronautics and space programs, which some military analysts predict will serve as the basis for Russia's attempts to navigate around improved sensors and radar. Specifically, analysts assert that nanobots and nanomachines will become central in this effort due to their inherent stealth properties. 176 Such innovations are hypothesized as critical for Russia's military. Due to demographic shifts, the Russian population is aging rapidly without the possibility of replacement. 177 Therefore, it is speculated that the Russian army will lose the mass that formed the basis of its military capacity for centuries, which will force the leadership to find practical, relatively inexpensive ways to overcome the lack of manpower.
Nanotechnology, if embraced and developed, is put forward as having the potential to help Russia overcome this problem.
Although it will be impossible to research the covert nanotechnology research and development programs currently being conducted throughout the world, it is possible to record information on all publically released military nanotechnology research and development.
Those who subscribe to the ideology of the "technological imperative" believe that if something is technically possible then action ought to, must, or inevitably will be taken; as Daniel Chandler explains, "the information technology revolution is inevitably on its way and our task as users is to learn to cope with it." 178 If one were to apply the ideology of the technological imperative to understanding potential future implications of advancements of nanotechnology on society, it would suggest that a revolution in nanotechnology will drive changes to policy and ultimately society. As public opinion of advancements in nanotechnology wavers amid rumored consequences that mirror something out of a science fiction movie, the public continues to call for government interference and regulation to ensure the safety and health of the general population.
While Putin and other government leaders continue to place a great deal of emphasis on nanotechnology's potential to pull Russia back into the position of a great power, it would seem that the implementation of the technological imperative is incomplete at best. Soviet military innovation was very slow to embrace new technologies, even if scientists had the ability to develop the technology. This pattern of slow or incomplete innovation serves as the foundation of Adamsky, Evanaglista, and Radosevic's critiques of the government. Such systemic resistance to innovation seems to indicate that the technological imperative did not drive Soviet adoption of military technology.
Contemporary Russia is more difficult to classify given the government's heavy investment in nanotechnology in recent years. Although the government's reliance on nanotechnology indicates a desire to invent anything and everything that might aid the growth of the Russian economy, the development of nanotechnology in the country is so recent that only small changes are evident. If a technological imperative is driving innovation in the country, signs of social and political change would likely be more evident. Perhaps an argument could be made that the government's desire to spur private investment in RusNano and Skolkovo is indicative of a fundamental shift in the manner in which the government approaches innovation, but such an argument is weak. RusNano and Skolkovo are first and foremost government entities and will remain so for the foreseeable future, particularly if RusNano is truly out of favor with the government and therefore unable to engage in the first sell off of the corporation next year. 
179
179 Leonid Bershidsky, "Power Grab Trumps Nanotechnology in Putin's Russia," Bloomberg, 16 May 2013, par. 7.
Categorizing or measuring whether a technological innovation can be considered tech driven or requirements pulled is difficult. However, there are indicators of whether or not a technology can be considered tech driven; for example, a tech-driven technology results in documentable societal changes, such as regulation. Qualitatively, a case can be made for nanotechnology as a tech-driven innovation revolution by applying a similar framework as was proposed in the discussion of the second variable in which innovation was measured through Carlota Perez's techno-economic paradigm. This work will also be expanded to address DOD's uses of tech driven versus requirements pulled in acquisitions.
Many take the view that "[n]anotechnology is so new and so untested for potential effects on human health that we do not even know what we don't know." 180 Advancements in the field of nanotechnology have already made it into common consumer products including household appliances, automobiles, electronics and computers, food and beverages, children's toys, textiles, paints, cleaning materials, and even sunscreen. 
181
180 Steven Higgs, "Mama, Dada, and Nano?" The Progressive, October 2009, 20.
182
Aside from regulation due to environment, health, and public safety concerns, standardization initiatives within the field of nanotechnology are very important to streamline research and to encourage collaboration across borders, fields of study, and industry. Joint standardization efforts will be an important contributor to continued growth and research and development of nanotechnology.
Implementing a national regulatory framework will not be sufficient to regulate nanotechnology.
Although national regulatory frameworks are best able to promote international competition and diversity in research and development, national approaches may also result in a "race-to-thebottom in environmental and labor standards," and may be unable to control potential security risks. 
183
13 SJ Blank, "The Soviet Strategic View: Ogarkov on the Revolution in Military Technology," Strategic Review, Summer 1984, 12, 3-90; DR Herspring, "Nikolay Ogarkov and the Scientific-Technical Revolution in Soviet Military Affairs," Comparative Strategy, 1987, 6, 29-59; WJ Perry, "Desert Storm and Deterrence," Foreign Affairs, Fall 1991, 70, 66-82; AF Krepinevich, "Cavalry to Computer: The Pattern of Military Revolutions," The National Interest, Fall 1994, 37, 30-42; J McKitrick, J Blackwell, F Littlepage, G Kraus, R Blanchfield, and D Hill, "The Revolution in Military Affairs," in BR Schneider and LE Grinter (eds.), Battlefield of the Future: 21st Century Warfare Issues, Air University Press: Maxwell AFB, AL, 1995; JS Nye, Jr and WA Owens, "America's Information Edge," Foreign Affairs, March-April 1996, 75, 20-36; EA Cohen, "A Revolution in Warfare," Foreign Affairs, March-April 1996, 75, 37-54; J Arquilla and SM Karmel, "Welcome to the Revolution … In Chinese Military Affairs," Defense & Security Analysis, December 1997, 13, 255-269; AH Bernstein and M Libicki, "High-Tech: The Future Face of War? A Debate," Commentary, January 1998, 105, 28-31; FW Kagan, "High-Tech: The Future Face of War? A Debate," Commentary, January 1998, 105, 31-34; J Arquilla, Worst Enemy: The Reluctant Transformation of the American Military, Ivan R. Dee: Lanham, MD, 2003; TG Mahnken and JR FitzSimons "The Limits of Transformation: Officer Attitudes toward the Revolution in Military Affairs," Naval War College Newport papers no. 17, 2003, DoD Office of Force Transformation, Military Transformation: A Strategic Approach, November 2003; EO Goldman and TG Mahnken (eds.), The Information Revolution in Military Affairs in Asia, Palgrave Macmillan: New York, 2004; AA Nofi, Recent Trends in Thinking About Warfare, CNA Corporation, September 2006, http://www.cna.org/documents/D0014875.A1.pdf; and TG Mahnken, Generation? Assessing the Concept of 'Fourth-Generation Warfare,'" Comparative Strategy, March 2008, 27, 148-163; MJ Artellia and RF Deckrob, "Fourth Generation Operations: Principles for the 'Long War'," Small Wars & Insurgencies, June 2008, 19, 221-237; JF McKenzie, Jr., "Elegant Irrelevance: Fourth Generation Warfare," Parameters, Autumn 1993, 51-60; and JA Echevarria, Fourth Generation War and Other Myths, November 2005, Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, PA. proliferation In the post-Cold War environment, possessing the most technologically advanced military power no longer guarantees national security. Globalization and the information revolution, including the Internet and other communication leaps, have led to much greater visibility into the availability and potential for technology. 15 New technological developments have become accessible and relatively inexpensive to a larger number of nations and within the grasp of nonstate actors; advanced technology is no longer the domain of the few. 16 In the 21st century, both nation-states and non-state actors may have access to new and potentially devastating dual-use technology. 17 Nanotechnology is one such emerging technology that has dual-use applications. 18 Understanding these changing paradigms and limiting the proliferation of unconventional weapons for the 21st century starts with an awareness of the factors driving the capabilities, understanding the underlying science and the challenges of defense, considering the changing 15 JK Rennstich, The Making of a Digital World: The Evolution of Technological Change and How It Shaped Our World, 18 For this research, dual use and the dual-use conundrum refers to the fact that almost all the equipment and materials needed to develop dangerous or offensive agents, particularly biological and chemical agents, have legitimate uses in a wide range of scientific research and industrial activity, including defensive military uses. Within this text it does not refer to the demarcation between civilian and military uses.
13 SJ Blank, "The Soviet Strategic View: Ogarkov on the Revolution in Military Technology," Strategic Review, Summer 1984, 12, 3-90; DR Herspring, "Nikolay Ogarkov and the Scientific-Technical Revolution in Soviet Military Affairs," Comparative Strategy, 1987, 6, 29-59; WJ Perry, "Desert Storm and Deterrence," Foreign Affairs, Fall 1991, 70, 66-82; AF Krepinevich, "Cavalry to Computer: The Pattern of Military Revolutions," The National Interest, Fall 1994, 37, 30-42; J McKitrick, J Blackwell, F Littlepage, G Kraus, R Blanchfield, and D Hill, "The Revolution in Military Affairs," in BR Schneider and LE Grinter (eds.), Battlefield of the Future: 21st Century Warfare Issues, Air University Press: Maxwell AFB, AL, 1995; JS Nye, Jr and WA Owens, "America's Information Edge," Foreign Affairs, March-April 1996, 75, 20-36; EA Cohen, "A Revolution in Warfare," Foreign Affairs, March-April 1996, 75, 37-54; J Arquilla and SM Karmel, "Welcome to the Revolution … In Chinese Military Affairs," Defense & Security Analysis, December 1997, 13, 255-269; AH Bernstein and M Libicki, "High-Tech: The Future Face of War? A Debate," Commentary, January 1998, 105, 28-31; FW Kagan, "High-Tech: The Future Face of War? A Debate," Commentary, January 1998, 105, 31-34; J Arquilla, Worst Enemy: The Reluctant Transformation of the American Military, Ivan R. Dee: Lanham, MD, 2003; TG Mahnken and JR FitzSimons "The Limits of Transformation: Officer Attitudes toward the Revolution in Military Affairs," Naval War College Newport papers no. 17, 2003, DoD Office of Force Transformation, Military Transformation: A Strategic Approach, November 2003; EO Goldman and TG Mahnken (eds.), The Information Revolution in Military Affairs in Asia, Palgrave Macmillan: New York, 2004; AA Nofi, Recent Trends in Thinking About Warfare, CNA Corporation, September 2006, http://www.cna.org/documents/D0014875.A1.pdf; and TG Mahnken, Generation? Assessing the Concept of 'Fourth-Generation Warfare,'" Comparative Strategy, March 2008, 27, 148-163; MJ Artellia and RF Deckrob, "Fourth Generation Operations: Principles for the 'Long War'," Small Wars & Insurgencies, June 2008, 19, 221-237; JF McKenzie, Jr., "Elegant Irrelevance: Fourth Generation Warfare," Parameters, Autumn 1993, 51-60; and JA Echevarria, Fourth Generation War and Other Myths, November 2005, Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, PA. proliferation In the post-Cold War environment, possessing the most technologically advanced military power no longer guarantees national security. Globalization and the information revolution, including the Internet and other communication leaps, have led to much greater visibility into the availability and potential for technology. 15 New technological developments have become accessible and relatively inexpensive to a larger number of nations and within the grasp of nonstate actors; advanced technology is no longer the domain of the few. 16 In the 21st century, both nation-states and non-state actors may have access to new and potentially devastating dual-use technology. 17 Nanotechnology is one such emerging technology that has dual-use applications. 18 Understanding these changing paradigms and limiting the proliferation of unconventional weapons for the 21st century starts with an awareness of the factors driving the capabilities, understanding the underlying science and the challenges of defense, considering the changing 15 JK Rennstich, The Making of a Digital World: The Evolution of Technological Change and How It Shaped Our World, 18 For this research, dual use and the dual-use conundrum refers to the fact that almost all the equipment and materials needed to develop dangerous or offensive agents, particularly biological and chemical agents, have legitimate uses in a wide range of scientific research and industrial activity, including defensive military uses. Within this text it does not refer to the demarcation between civilian and military uses.
together scientists and engineers from defense service laboratories (U.S. and allies), universities, small business, and industry who are working on applications of nanotechnology for national defense capabilities. Initiated a decade ago by the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), Army Research Laboratory (ARL), the Office of Naval Research (ONR), the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA), and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the NT4D Conference remains the premier event to address emerging and nanotechnologies for defense. The Second International Conference on Advanced Complex Inorganic Nanomaterials (ACIN 2013) provided an excellent perspective internationally into state-of-the-art work being performed in one area (therefore a "boundable" problem set) of nanotechnology research.
The Problems of Development and Training," part of which consisted of Nobel laureate Z. I. Alferov giving a report entitled "Nanostructures and Nanotechnology." 62 This is a small example of the kind of process that Evangelista celebrates in the United States, but it might, perhaps, 61 Ibid., 69-78. 62 A. I. Terekhov, "Evaluating the Performance of Russia in the Research in Nanotechnology," Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 2012, 14 (11), 16.
The Problems of Development and Training," part of which consisted of Nobel laureate Z. I. Alferov giving a report entitled "Nanostructures and Nanotechnology." 62 This is a small example of the kind of process that Evangelista celebrates in the United States, but it might, perhaps, 61 Ibid., 69-78. 62 A. I. Terekhov, "Evaluating the Performance of Russia in the Research in Nanotechnology," Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 2012, 14 (11), 16.
• Federal Government Decree 219, "Federal Support of the Innovation Infrastructure Development in the Higher Education Sector (April 9, 2010)," sought to support "innovation infrastructure development such as "business incubators, engineering centers, certification centers, transfer technology centers, information centers, and innovation consulting centers," as well as for entrepreneurial education and technology transfer consulting services. 72 All research institutions of higher education in Russia are eligible to compete for up to $1.7 million per year for three years. 70 Uvarov Alexander & Perevodchikov Evgeniy, "The Entrepreneurial University in Russia: from Idea to Reality," Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2012, 52, 47. 71 Ibid.
• Federal Government Decree 219, "Federal Support of the Innovation Infrastructure Development in the Higher Education Sector (April 9, 2010)," sought to support "innovation infrastructure development such as "business incubators, engineering centers, certification centers, transfer technology centers, information centers, and innovation consulting centers," as well as for entrepreneurial education and technology transfer consulting services. 72 All research institutions of higher education in Russia are eligible to compete for up to $1.7 million per year for three years. 70 Uvarov Alexander & Perevodchikov Evgeniy, "The Entrepreneurial University in Russia: from Idea to Reality," Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2012, 52, 47. 71 Ibid.
81  
81  
84  
84  
the majority of the successful technoparks, resident businesses are initially granted special tax incentives or other comparable benefits in exchange for becoming a resident company. Ideally, however, this government assistance is eventually discontinued because the technopark is selfsufficient. Determining the exact point at which a government should begin removing incentives from a technopark is far less straightforward than it might seem, however. A recent IEEE Technology Management Conference considered this issue and reached only the tentative conclusion that while 98 Ibid., par. 3. 99 J.Q. Trelewicz, "An Analysis of Technology Entrepreneurship in the Modern Russian Economy exploring SEZ, Technoparks, and the Skolkovo Program," IEEE International Technology Management Conference, 2012, 289. 100 Ibid., 290. 101 Ibid.
111  
111  
Although no data specifically regarding Russian military spending as it pertains to research and development of nanotechnology was identified during this project, statements made by political and military elites have underscored Russia's intent to invest heavily in potential military applications of nanotechnology. One such statement was made by then-President Medvedev during a speech to the Moscow International Nanotechnology Forum, indicating the perceived value of advanced technologies and challenges in October 2009: "what we really need is the transfer of high technologies and their adaptation to Russian industries … this is the most difficult challenge, and so far in this regard we have had very little success."
Although no data specifically regarding Russian military spending as it pertains to research and development of nanotechnology was identified during this project, statements made by political and military elites have underscored Russia's intent to invest heavily in potential military applications of nanotechnology. One such statement was made by then-President Medvedev during a speech to the Moscow International Nanotechnology Forum, indicating the perceived value of advanced technologies and challenges in October 2009: "what we really need is the transfer of high technologies and their adaptation to Russian industries … this is the most difficult challenge, and so far in this regard we have had very little success."
134  
134  
143
149 159
164 Subcommittee on Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology Committee on Technology National Science and Technology Council, "The National Nanotechnology Initiative: Supplement to the President's 2013 Budget."
National Research Council, A Matter of Size: Triennial Review of the National Nanotechnology Initiative, National Academies Press: Washington, DC, 2006.
Carl Kaysen, Robert S. McNamara, and George W. Rathjen, "Nuclear Weapons After the Cold War," Foreign Affairs, Fall 1991, 70 (4),95-110.   
Adam Grissom, "The Future of Military Innovation Studies," Journal of StrategicStudies, 2006, 29 (5), 905-934.   
A. I. Terekhov, "Evaluating the Performance of Russia in the Research in Nanotechnology," Journal of NanoparticleResearch, 2012Research,  , 14(11), article: 1250, 16.  , 16.   
Itzhak Goldberg, John G. Goddard, Samita Kuriakose, and Jean-Louis Racine, "Igniting Innovation: Rethinking the Role of Government in Emerging Europe and Central Asia," The World Bank, 2011,
Carl Kaysen, Robert S. McNamara, and George W. Rathjen, "Nuclear Weapons after the Cold War," Foreign Affairs, Fall 1991, 70 (4), 96.
Dima Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation: The Impact of Cultural Factors on the Revolution in Military Affairs in Russia, the US, and Israel, Stanford University: Stanford, 2010, 10.
Ibid., 48.   
"Two Skolkovo Managers Suspected of Stealing $ 800 Thousand," Russia Beyond the Headlines, 12 February 2013, par. 3.
"Skolkovo Will Get over 100 Billion Rubles of Non-State Funds in the Next Eight Years-Medvedev," Russia Beyond the Headlines, 1 August 2013.
Margaret E. Kosal, "The Security Implications of Nanotechnology," Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, July/August 2010, 67-74.
David E. Jeremiah, "Nanotechnology and Global Security," Palo Alto, CA; Fourth Foresight Conference on MolecularNanotechnology, 1995.   
Earl H. Tilford, "The Revolution in Military Affairs: Prospects and Cautions," U.S. Army War College's Strategic Studies Institute, June 1995.
Ibid.    
Joseph L. Bower and Clayton M. Christensen, "Disruptive Technologies: Catching the Wave," Harvard Business Review, January 1995.
Mihail C. Roco and William S. Bainbridge, Societal Implications of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Boston: Kluwer, 10-11.
Carlota Perez, "Technological Revolutions and Techno-Economic Paradigms," The Other Canon Foundation: Norway and Talinn University of Technology, January 2009.
Jon Toon, "International Collaboration Boosts Nanotechnology Research," Research News and Publication Office Georgia Tech, December 2010.
RusNano: USRBC's 18th Annual Meeting "From Silicon Valley to Skolkovo: Forging Innovation Partnerships," Fostering Innovations in Russia through Nanotechnology, October 2010.
Igor Ustimenko, "Market Insight: Myths and Realities of Technoparks in Russia," Gartner, 25 March 2011.
A. I. Terekhov, "Evaluating the performance of Russia in the research in nanotechnology," Journal of NanoparticleResearch, 2012, 14(11), article: 1250, 3.
David E. Jeremiah, "Nanotechnology and Global Security," Foresight Conference on Molecular Nanotechnology, November 1995.
"RusNano Invests in Selecta Biosciences and BIND Biosciences. To Develop and Commercialize Cancer Drugs in Russia," nanowerk, 27 October 2011, par. 3.
"RusNano Portfolio Companies," RusNano, http://en.rusnano.com/portfolio/companies.
"NNI Supplement to the President's FY 2011 and 2013 Budget," http://nano.gov/sites/default/files/pub_resource/nni_2013_budget_supplement.pdf and http://www.nano.gov/NNI_2011_budget_supplement.pdf
A. I. Terekhov, "Evaluating the performance of Russia in the research in nanotechnology," Journal of NanoparticleResearch, 2012Research,  , 14 (11), 1250, 11.  , 11.   
Nikita Dulnev, "Rusnano's Big Nanotechnology Secrets Revealed," Russia Beyond the Headlines, 3 August 2011, par. 2.
A. I. Terekhov, "Evaluating the performance of Russia in the Research in Nanotechnology," Journal of NanoparticleResearch, 2012Research,  , 14 (11), 1250, 11.  , 11.   
Lawrence Osborne, "The Gray-Goo Problem," The New York Times Magazine (book summary), December 2003.
Lawrence Osborne, "The Gray-Goo Problem," The New York Times Magazine (book summary), December 2003.
"Products," The Project on Emerging Nanotechnologies. http://www.nanotechproject.org/inventories/consumer/browse/categories/
"Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies," June 9, 2011, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/for-agencies/nanotechnology-regulation-andoversight-principles.pdf, 4.
Acknowledgements to 
Taylor Smith
Elizabeth Cupido
Submission of the analytic report of the study's results, which advances critical thinking on the potential role and impact of nanotechnology and emerging science on defense, follows.
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
The security dilemma provides strong motives for fast innovation because technological superiority is a seen as a decisive factor in armed conflict. A nation armed with advanced nanoenabled capabilities could in theory disarm potential competitors; this would ultimately result in an arms race marked with bursts of innovation and the continued degradation of the security environment. The lack of transparency and the ambiguity associated with identifying nanoweapons as either offensive of defensive systems further exacerbates the imbalance of power and security dilemma, thus contributing to a potential nano-arms race.
Militaries can benefit from technological advances in civilian technology, primarily in the field of information technology, because civilian technology is often more advanced than military technology. 
154
155
More research is needed in order to measure reverse brain drain. Further data needs to be collected to calculate the percentage of foreigners educated in the United States who stay in the United States (undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral) and the percentage of all foreign educated citizens who stay in the country in which they received their education (undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral). Data also needs to be collected to effectively measure for brain drain: the percentage of foreigners educated in the United States who leave the United States as well as the percentage of all foreign educated citizens who leave the country from which they received their education (undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral).
As the nanotechnology industry continues to advance, voluntary transparency in both private industry as well as defense industries will prove to be a critical component in confidence building between nations. Transparency is integral in private industry to mitigate the fears and public distrust of nano-enabled products as well as nano-manufacturing. Transparency will serve to separate facts from fiction that surrounds societal implications of nanotechnology. One such science fiction scenario famously introduced by the "father of nanotechnology," Eric Drexler, is that of "grey goo." In this scenario, self-replicating nano-machines or nano-bots run amok and take over the world. 
173
175
In addressing issues raised by nanomaterials, agencies will adhere to the Principles for Regulation and Oversight of Emerging Technologies.
Specifically, to the extent permitted by law, federal agencies will: 
Further research is needed in order to capture the ongoing international dialogue surrounding the creation of a global nanotech regulatory framework as well as any emerging regional regulatory nanotech frameworks.
The ultimate goal, which is beyond the scope of an initial one-year project, is to develop new theoretical frameworks to explain variable approaches to the development of strategically significant nanotechnology and emerging science programs; to understand their impact on security; to enable mechanisms for the world to govern the implications of its own ingenuity; and to inform security, defense, and foreign policies.
The development of military applications for nanotechnology in the Russian Federation could be perceived as a threat to international security and could spark counter-militarization by states such as the United States, Western Europe, Poland, Ukraine, and Georgia due to the security dilemma. Some Russian elites claim to be militarizing nanotechnology in response to the alleged military advances of the United States. However, the Russian Federation does not currently pose a threat to the international community due to its inability to convert nanotechnology research into development as a result of financial mismanagement and changing views on the infrastructure. The international community recognizes this lack of a threat and therefore the security dilemma is less likely to cause mass militarization and mobilization by states feeling threatened.
This work establishes a codified variable approach to the development of strategically significant nanotechnology and emerging science programs, with the eventual goal of enabling crossnational comparisons. Critical factors in the role and significance of emerging technologies, e.g., institutional, ideational, or technical, have been identified. The application of these variables and their assessment against new data, interviews, and field work done by the author will be explored in future work.