# ID: e2ec139918f34473a1bfc19852ab4059
# Title: The Chinese Way of War: How Has It Changed?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2020.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including
The title of this paper is "The Chinese Way of War: How Has it Changed?" The answer is that it has changed dramatically from what it was 20 years ago, but that does not mean that everything is new. There are some components of People's Liberation Army (PLA) thinking (deception, stratagems, etc.) that remain as important elements of China's way of war and they are being integrated into technologies. Such issues offer an overall sense of historical continuity in China's approach to warfare that is based on a thought process going back thousands of years, to include the transcendent impact of Sun Tzu, Marx, and Mao on strategic and tactical issues. The number of articles and discussions in the journal China Military Science (CMS) over the past 20 years devoted to these three men fully support this contention. On the other hand, China's intelligentization of operations and focus on joint and all-domain capabilities (to include domains not currently under consideration in the US) create new challenges. Artificial intelligence (AI) is now being used to help design warfare-repeat, help design warfare-to further provide control over conflicts and to ensure the PLA has a future deterrent force with which to confront other nations.
The report notes that the PLA is examining a host of topics to support its way of war, to include: AI topics regarding future war; a specific Chinese method of defining strategy; the PLA's continued use of historic concepts; the move from informatized to intelligentized warfare; China's continued use of cyber spying and reverse engineering; the focus of "strategic directors" on the use of various control mechanisms; and the PLA's focus on "designing future battlefields" in peacetime. Appendix Four develops the basics of the PLA's thought process that help further indicate how they will fight. Other important points to keep in mind include the following:
1. There is a continual goal of creating a strategic advantage or shi on the battlefield, in diplomatic relations, geostrategic settings (through considerations of numerous factors, such as distance attenuation, etc.), supply chains, and any area in which it China has an interest. A strategic advantage is the goal of any manipulation of the strategic environment, and it is probably the most important Chinese concept to keep in mind. 2. Today there may exist a slight change in focus from system-of-systems to combatting AI algorithms, but the system sabotage issue will continue to play an important role. 3. There is a higher reliance on the offensive aspect of active defense in the cyber age, where the first battles will establish who has attained the strategic initiative in war. Once the armed conflict is inevitable, no effort should be spared to strive for strategic initiative, one author noted. Conflict will proceed quickly once unleashed and involve all domains. 4. Critical infrastructure targets must be uncovered and planned in peacetime, the PLA notes, for special operations. 5. There is a growing focus on the use of swarm operations (wolves, wasps, and fish [or land, air, and sea] robotics) and their potential applicability to all domains of an opponent.
6. Military strategy starts with national interests and the overall interests of war as the goals to pursue. Strategic fulcrums must be established in advance. 7. Strategic psychological warfare will employ numerous means to force an opponent to submit without a fight. Five specific types of information topics were: information deterrence, blockades, deception, disruption, and attacks (computer  viruses, hacking, etc.). 8. Regarding asymmetric operations, making use of favorable temporal and spatial factors and the consequent environmental condition are important aspects of designing asymmetric battlefields. 9. There is a focus (32 articles in the journal CMS from 2013-2018) on various aspects of 'civil-military integration,' with titles addressing power projection, power grid advantages, economic construction, science and technology, and integration strategies. 10. And, as a final warning, pay attention to China's methods to manipulate others with deceptive stratagems. It is easy to fall into traps the PLA lays for opponents. For example, "appear weak when strong" would certainly apply to the PLA's current attempts to downplay its AI and quantum prowess. The country's 2019 Defense White Paper titled China's National Defense in the New Era stated that China was only now coming out of its period of mechanization, a total fabrication of its current advanced competencies.
Strategically, the reach of the PLA and other nations into another country's infrastructure, independent of that nation's distance from China, with cyber, space, or physical (ports, 5G, etc.) means, has increased. S&T developments can be very influential when integrated with deception or stratagem techniques and will influence campaigns. The intelligentization of warfare appears to be taking center stage, with flames being stoked in the cognitive domain to light up innovation and produce products that enable commanders to see and assess the battlefield condition in front of him before an opponent can do so and then act first.
China will continue to probe and penetrate the infrastructure of any opponent. After all, China sees no difference between war and peace since confrontation and competition are consistent and eternal. Regarding the reigns of the past three presidents, the latest, Xi Jinping, has been the most creative in regard to the use of reforming the military with new S&T and implementing grand strategy. He has reached out across Europe and Central Asia with his Belt and Road Initiative, focused on expanding Chinese ports worldwide, used his close relationship with President Putin of Russia to gain access to the Arctic (and perhaps consequently buy more oil and gas from Russia), and constructed a significant infrastructure of influence (transport, communications, natural resource exploitation, etc.) in both Africa and Latin America. His way of war must be closely watched, for in addition to the development of a grand strategy and Armed Forces reform, Xi appears to have an insatiable appetite for natural resources and a desire to make China the most powerful nation on earth. Recent legislation aimed to quell dissent in Hong Kong is but one example. When combined with China's historic legacy of deception and stratagem use, he will remain a formidable opponent for many years to come.
China's way of war is a topic that has been a focus of interest for centuries, both for the value of its military inheritance from warriors of ancient dynasties to the continued application of these and other military measures of contemporary Chinese origin. For example, the ancient sage who developed the stratagem of "loot a burning house" would be intrigued to know that the Chinese journal National Defense (Guofang) used the concept in 2008 to discuss how the Soviet Union took advantage of (looted) a weak situation in Afghanistan (the burning house, a country plagued at the time by political instability), to begin its occupation of that nation.
1
The report examines the People's Liberation Army's (PLA) way of war over the past 20 years. This methodology only looks at military sources and ignores the diplomatic, economic, and other sectors that China has penetrated with similar tactics and techniques. It is divided into three sections that coincide with the reigns of China's last three presidents: Jiang Zemin (1993-2003) ;  Hu Jintao (2003-2013); and Xi Jinping (2013-present). Jiang's reign was an agenda setter. While it did not result in many innovative concepts or developments, discussions set the stage for later and more diverse topics. Strategy, deterrence, psychological warfare, and the use of stratagems were particular topics of coverage, and his reign witnessed the release of the 2001 Science of Military Strategy. Hu's reign is where innovation starts rolling, as it introduced several technological concepts and achievements, such as an interest in system of systems and further advanced the development of information technologies. Hu's reign also produced the 2013 book Science of Military Strategy. Xi's reign has clearly been the most dynamic, interesting, and progressive. It has focused on restoring the "China dream" of a reformed military. Science and technology (S&T) advancements have been significant and these developments, such as those in artificial intelligence and quantum issues, were integrated into the military realm and resulted in a host of robotic and other capabilities. His reign has witnessed the release of a White Paper on Strategy.
The discussion of each reign will include a selection over the past 20 years of appropriate topics (by years of Presidential reign, with only the last four years of Jiang's reign used 2 ) from the journal China Military Science (CMS), which provides PLA officers strategic, historical, and numerous other subjects of military importance. The topics stressed in the journal, which is somewhat like the US's Joint Force Quarterly or Parameters, help point out new vectors of interest (war control, civil-military integration, etc.) that are relevant to the time periods "way of war." Over 400 titles were perused, and those reflecting change or stability in the Chinese way of
True icons of early Chinese military thought include Sun Zi (Sun Tzu), Wu Qi, Sima Rangju, and Sun Bin (among many others). They were associated with various aspects of Chinese military thought, especially the development of stratagems and deceptive techniques, to achieve a strategic advantage or shi (this concept is the foundational principle behind almost any PLA action [trade, diplomacy, battlefield positions, etc.]). Much later, the accomplishments of China's historic icons became the strategic bedrock of thought for important leaders of the past century in China, such as Zhu De, Liu Zhidan, Ren Bishi, Ye Jianying, and Su Yu, all of whom used ancient military thought to achieve success in battle and enhance their leadership capabilities and image. Chinese history, H. R. McMaster noted in regard to his travels to China as President Trump's national security advisor, is used to convey their messages. 
4
These thinkers and leaders have left an impressive cultural tradition for 21 st century officers in the PLA to follow and build on. This tradition is being further supplemented with new future war concepts (quantum computing, cognitive warfare, etc.) and weapons (hypersonic weaponry, cognitive neuroscience, terahertz technologies, etc.) that are under study in China. These new concepts and weapons are affecting and perhaps slightly changing the content of traditional topics such as People's War, active defense, and frontier defense. Another "traditional" focus that appears to be changing is China's former belief in Engels statement that "technology determines tactics." The constant focus of PLA theorists on strategy indicates it may now be more correct to assert that "technology determines strategy" due to the current emphasis on ways that information technologies (cyber incursion, for example) can capture the initiative for friendly forces at the start of a conflict and thereby dramatically construct immediate strategic advantages. China's increased access to advanced weaponry, focus on system sabotage techniques, and reliance on different deterrence options (space, etc.), among other issues, have sharpened the PLA's focus on strategy and lessened the focus on campaigns and combat according to some, as discussed below. Concepts are adapting and changing. While these adaptations may not yet be locked in stone, they are playing an important role in contemporary thought and are worth following.
Jiang Zemin served as the President of China from 1993-2003. During Jiang's Presidency the military took some initial steps to improve its capabilities and ensure that the regime did not suffer the same disintegration fate as did the Soviet Union. Traditional concepts, such as the work of Marx, Mao, and Sun Tzu in particular, continued to dominate the pages of journals. Views on strategy and geostrategy were of interest throughout Jiang's reign.
A 2001 comprehensive discussion of strategy in CMS noted that important components were planning and war guidance issues. More ominously the article stated that non-war forms of struggle are now only the extension of warfare actions and that the two are not different, indicating there was no separation between war and peace, only constant competition. Other initial thoughts in the CMS article included the following:
• Mao Zedong was quoted for his adherence to locating a "focal point" or "overall situation" principle. • It was noted that Jiang's "winning local wars under high-tech conditions" is the period's focal point as was keeping war under "control." Preparing for war and keeping its outbreak under control was a peacetime function, while controlling war's expansion and restraining its escalation was its wartime function. • War's outcome, according to Mao, is the result of the military, economic, political, and natural condition of the two sides and their war-guiding abilities. • The design of war depends on three issues: safeguarding national interests; paying attention to new forms of war; and building up new concepts (stratagems, asymmetries, etc.) and channels for preparing for war.
5
In 2001 the book The Science of Military Strategy was released. The diagram below describes the contents of the book in outline form. 
6
High-tech warfare thus became a very popular topic and was discussed in 21 articles in CMS from 1999-2003. Most likely there were many more at the beginning of Jiang's reign. The most significant titles (as they appeared in the English table of contents of CMS) of the 21 are listed below (the entire list is at Appendix One): When the total number of 21 articles are contrasted against the one article on People's War and the three articles on active defense over the same time period, the implication is that the PLA's focus had switched from non-conflict traditional themes to "how" to win a contemporary conflict.
PLA strategy expert Li Bingyan wrote an important article on an important ingredient of winning contemporary conflicts, one that had been ignored in the past. He wrote that the PLA's historical focus on stratagems failed to integrate them into technology. Instead, China's cultural heritage of trickery and lack of emphasis on science and technology stood in the way of progress. Li stated that China must "boldly collect cultural genes from Western military science and its emphasis on technology. We should make traditional strategy merge with modern science and technology and scientific methods, to restore the original intent of 'Sun Tzu strategy. 
'" 7
8
Another important article answered many questions about how China views grand strategy and perhaps the logic behind how and why decisions are made today. In 2002 author Wu Chunqiu, in his CMS article "Dialectics and the Study of Grand Strategy: A Chinese View," wrote that, officially at the time, China had never used the term "grand strategy." It had been, however, used in Chinese academic circles, according to Wu, since the 1980s. Academicians considered grand strategy as a system of knowledge, a special mode of thought for decision-makers, like national strategic management. Grand strategy included all elements of "comprehensive national strength" and was described as a combination of national security and national development, applicable to wartime or peacetime and a guide to domestic policy and foreign affairs. It was the overall strategy of the state and thus above military strategy. The concept of grand strategy may even influence the decision-making criteria behind why China may have purchased the Panama Canal, why it establishes ports and telecommunication links worldwide, and why it has instituted the Belt and Road Initiative.
Wu then went on to make the important point that strategy is made up of objective reality and subjective initiative at a high level. 
10
By objective reality we mean the objective world [the strategic environment] which exists independently of man's will and has its own law of development. By subjective initiative [a leaders use of stratagems, etc.] we mean man's ability to comprehend the objective world and consciously transform it to achieve certain purposes. The two constitute the unity of opposites. Fundamentally speaking objective reality as material base is first and primary, whereas subjective initiative is secondary but the most active of the two. 11
If subjective initiative was the lone way to make strategy it would indicate that man's "will" decides everything. If objective reality were the lone way to make strategy, leaders would become fatalists. It is only when the two are considered together that strategy is understandable, 12 when objective reality is the strategic environment before planners and subjective initiative is the ability of leaders to think and manipulate the environment to one's benefit (of interest is that a few years later a PLA text defined military strategy in the same way, as described during Hu's reign).
The subjective initiative of a grand strategic plan, therefore, must agree with the relative stability of objective reality. If the latter experiences a partial or even a fundamental qualitative change, then the initial objective reality under consideration will have to be replaced with a new one so that the correct subjective initiative can be applied against it. The director of grand strategy must understand such information feedback from reality and have a strong sense of strategic opportunity or foresight that can be exploited. 
13
Science, No. 3 2002, pp. 144-145. 11
13 Ibid.,
14
With strategy in mind, it is instructive to see what was written about geostrategy during Jiang's reign, as it was even the focus of one CMS issue's "subject discussion" section of the journal. Six articles were listed in that publication: Due to the emphasis in Jiang's period on local war under high-tech conditions, it is important to examine at least one article of the period in which a local war was under discussion. In 2002 one such article was titled "Chinese Modern Local War and US Limited War: A Comparative Study" (2/2002). It was noted that "local" describes the status of a war, relative to the "whole" war. Modern local war is based on the changing contemporary international political order and the tension between war and peace. Deng Xiaoping decided that the inevitability of a large war between the US and the USSR had lost importance and that forces of peace were stronger than for war. This change shifted the focus of military strategy toward countering possible local wars and military conflicts. 
15
Of course, defense in Chinese modern local war theory is an active, not a passive defense, one that includes both counterattack and attack. Our strategic principle of 'striking only after the enemy has struck' certainly does not exclude sudden 'first strikes' in campaign battles or counterattacks in self-defense into enemy territory. 
16
17
18
19
Hu Jintao was General Secretary of the Communist Party of China from 2002-15 November 2012. He stepped down as President of China on 14 March 2013. As during the reign of Jiang Zemin, numerous traditional concepts, such as the works of Marx, Mao, and Sun Tzu in particular, continued to appear on the pages of CMS. The focus of the Jiang era on local war under high-tech conditions changed under Hu (high-tech was used only three times in a title), replaced with the concept of local wars under informationized conditions. That concept was listed as titles of articles, however, only three times. They were "On Air Superiority in Local Wars under Information Conditions" (4/2009), "On Main Operational Forms of Local Warfare under Informationized Conditions" (2/2010), and "Accomplishing Diversified Military Tasks with Winning Local Wars under Informationized Conditions as the Core" (6/2011). But the term "information" was used some 102 times in CMS titles during the period 
2004-2012. 20
The 2013 Science of Military Strategy did not utilize the same template as the 2001 publication. The latter broke that publication into basic and applied sections [thus, the 2013 breakdown in the diagram above is this author's interpretation, not that of the book's authors]. The 2013 book's preface indicated that four parts make up the most recent book, those being basic theory, circumstance analysis, strength application, and strength building. The book did not indicate which chapters fell in which parts. Changes in the world's science and technology sphere caused this "new look" at the strategic environment, resulting in the development of new ways to conduct conflict. 
21
23
25
Grasping contradictions and changes in conditions was the focus of one of the most important CMS articles of the Hu reign, that being "On the Change in the Relationship between Strategy and Campaign-Combat Operations in Modern War (4/2008)." The article, the real initial "black swan" of importance, made the following important contributions to the understanding that changes in the strategic environment were directing the PLA's way of war:
• There is a new change in the relationship among strategy, campaigns, and combat. Strategy now is in the lead, consuming the other two who have lost their independence in organizing and implementing operations. Now, the highest military and political leaders can interfere with operations on the battlefield. Strategy has become the stratagem for directing local war under informatization conditions. • War goals in the information era have expanded beyond military factors, and now include shaking, isolating, limiting, striking, and paralyzing an opponent's political core, seeking to force an opponent into giving in politically. • The intellectual economic era has made mastering science, technology, and knowledge more important than plundering resources as in the past.
Information technology makes it more convenient to put wars under control, to scout and detect important strategic targets and destroy them from long distance. • Strategic guidance needs to be enhanced and the integration of joint operations needs to be reinforced as strategy consumes campaigns and combat. The structure of services and arms needs to be adjusted. • The 'assassin's mace' of long-distance precision strikes must be focused on hitting vital points, quickly reaching strategic goals, and wrecking an opponent's will to resist. • Priority must be given to light weapons and to increasing the mobility and the strategic projection of the capabilities of operational platforms. operational platforms incorporating target captures, mobile strikes, and the efficient evaluation of information transfer capabilities. 
26
An aspect of Chinese strategy mentioned in Chinese publications is the use of acupuncture war or hitting vital points of an opponent's force. The article above clarified that the destruction of focal or vital points can affect a situation. These vital points were defined further in the 2013 SMS as strategic command, strategic strengths, and strategic support, and where the weak links in systems exist. Important nodes include those in information network space, centers of strategic command and major directions of operations, crucial operational platforms, and areas of strategic support. 27 These, it would seem, are the targets of Hu's informationized warfare.
Understanding new trends and making new forecasts of future struggles ensures that the PLA will not passively adapt to future warfare but will actively design it and provide support for innovating and drafting military strategy. 
28
29
For a period of time in the future, the state of informationized warfare will become increasingly mature and, as regards military strategy, it will need to organically combine innovations in science and technology, innovations in combat methods, and innovations in the military's organizational system, as it strives to find the path to victory in future wars. 31 There were other CMS articles of importance in the Hu era. Summarized below are five such articles: war control situations in informationized war; informationized warfare fighting styles; and strategic psychological warfare under informationized conditions. Two articles, one on strategic deterrence (which also had a separate chapter in the 2013 SMS) and a second article on war control, were special topics of the Academy of Military Science (no specific author listed) and are also summarized here.
The authors of "On the Art of Controlling War Situations in Informatized Warfare" noted that such control is different from the use of arms control, crisis situations, and other types of control designed to deter war's outbreak. War control is guided by what the PLA refers to as a "war director," which would be the leader offering subjective guidance to the war effort. The concept is defined in the following manner:
The art of controlling war situations refers to the supple and superior skills as well as creative ways and methods revealed in the war director's use of various kinds of means, primarily military means, to master and control the whole war situation or a series of engagements in a certain war theater in order to form a certain kind of expected state of the battlefield and military situation in a war. 
32
33
34
Warfare," China Military Science, No. 2 2010, pp. 24-31. 33
34
wars requires bringing the war back on a political track, requiring a combination of fighting and negotiations to end war. For war directors, this should be based on whether objectives have been achieved and whether the battlefield situation is favorable. 
35
36
37
38
39
40
39
Conditions," China Military Science, No. 3 2005, pp. 77-83. 40
encouraged the so-called "civilianization" of war, resulting in the recruitment of society's information experts to reinforce SPW forces. 
41
What is termed deterrence is the military conduct of a state or a political group in displaying force or showing the determination to use force to compel the enemy to submit to one's volition and to refrain from taking hostile actions or escalating the hostility. As part of military strategy, strategic deterrence refers to strategic behavior performed for deterrence on the overall strategic situation. 
42
43
44
Information deterrence includes the disruptive effects and features of permeability, ambiguousness, and diversity. The permeability factor, for example, means that it is transmissible, 41 Ibid. 42 AMS Research Group of Strategic Science, "Strategic Deterrence," China Military Science, 
No. 5 2004, p. 143. 43 Ibid., pp. 143-145. 44 Ibid., pp. 145-147.
China intends to use these types of deterrence to develop an integrated strategic deterrence concept with comprehensive national power as its base, conventional forces as the mainstay, nuclear forces as conventional force's backup, and the reserve force as support. The article stated that, in summing up, there are three deterrent postures to utilize: "creating momentum by military preparation," "demonstrating momentum by showing the disposition of strength to the enemy," and "augmenting momentum by military strike." 45 Deterrence decisions must be made cautiously since China and its opponents can use stratagems and tricks that might not be clearly obvious. This requires leaders to possess the talent and ability to use them and to uncover them when opponents employ them. Strategic deterrence operations must be directed against an opponent's defects and give play to one's own strength while concealing one's weakness. Understanding an opponent's mentality is important along with the risks he might take. A nation's objective must be highlighted to force an opponent to give something up, to demand his action be restrained, or to press him to take other activities. Multiple deterrent means (diplomatic, economic, science and technology, etc.) should be integrated and complement each other. Leaders should focus on grasping the initiative throughout a struggle and on changing the opponent's psychology if possible and offering compromise and concession when needed. In the end, due to the difficulty of predicting an opponent's response, "one should examine the worst and the toughest scenarios and be well prepared in advance, so as to steadily and effectively cope with the opponent in case of the failure of deterrence." 
46
Regarding arms control, five features were listed, which were its political nature, indirect violence nature (use of military strength with peaceful means), limited effect, balance of interest and strength, and relevance. One important issue was the strategic conductors (a term used to reference those in charge of war control, which may be the same as the before mentioned war director) use of military strength to "influence an opponent's cognition and information system and even to change the will and action of an opponent, and thereby to realize the expected strategic objective." 
47
45 Ibid., pp. 148-151. 46 Ibid., pp. 152-156. 47 AMS Research Group of Strategic Science, "War Control," China Military Science, No. 6 2005, pp. 129-130.
48
49
Once the armed conflict is inevitable, no effort should be spared to strive for strategic initiative. As armed conflict is a struggle pattern much limited by the time factor, a quick decision is the key to taking the strategic initiative. When conflict occurs, the side that acts quickly often seizes the opportune moment to act swiftly and compels the opponent to submit before he has enough time to react. 
51
48 Ibid.,
p. 139.
Mao Zedong. 52
Xi Jinping has served as the General Secretary of China from 2012 to the present time and as President since the fall of 2013. Under his reign China has reemerged as a powerful nation in both an economic and military sense. He has worked closely with President Vladimir Putin of Russia and within the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, pushed his Belt and Road Initiative across Central Asia, and increased China's presence in Africa and South America. He supported Italy with doctors and equipment during the Coronavirus outbreak in that nation and was one of the first to respond to disaster-stricken areas of the Caribbean during hurricane season. In a geostrategic sense he has developed a series of Chinese ports that offer presence and influence on many continents, not to mention China's growing list of military facilities on the reefs of the South China Sea.
From a strictly military planning focus, while Jiang's focus was local war under high-tech conditions and Hu's was local war under informationized conditions, Xi's team of experts offered a focus somewhat like Hu's, namely "winning informatized local wars." This indicated that the concept of informatized war was playing a prominent role in PLA preparations for conflict under Xi, whereas under Hu it was a "condition." In the analysis that follows, the Xi era's important 2015 White Paper on China's military strategy will be examined first. It is followed by an article in CMS that, in this author's opinion, outlined the strategic concepts that will influence the PLA's way of war beyond the concepts expressed in the White Paper. Finally, there are descriptions of China's development of informatized war and artificial intelligence, quantum surprises on the battlefield, use of drones, and other topics. More importantly the discussion causes one to ask if Xi's "winning informatized wars" slogan has metamorphosized into "preparing for and winning AI-and intelligentized-enhanced battles" based on these new S&T developments.
The 2015 White Paper on military strategy is a public document and most likely includes some external propaganda intended to shape the opinion of international observers. The document initially noted that there was a change in the balance of power worldwide, in the Asia-Pacific geostrategic landscape, and in the international economic, scientific, technological, and military fields. When discussing the theory of active defense, the White Paper began offering hints that it was more likely to become an offensive theory due to changes in weaponry and the importance of gaining the initiative in order to succeed in future conflicts. Other items of initial interest in the document were in the section titled "National Security Situation." Two statements of importance were that China's national interests had grown (no explanation of how or what these interests 52 Ibid., pp. 140-141.
were); and that strategic sea lines of communication were important due to the need to protect the security of overseas interests in energy and resources. A final point of interest was that outer space and cyber space have become commanding heights in strategic competition among all states, with the "form" of war accelerating and evolving toward informationization. 
53
54
McMaster, the most totalitarian of the three policies China is establishing in its attempts to create a new tributary system (the other two being the Belt and Road Initiative and Made in China 2025). 
55
56
In the section on "Building and Developing" the Armed Forces the aim was stated to be building an informationized military and winning informationized wars. The PLA Army will reorient from theater defense to trans-theater mobility. The PLA Navy will combine offshore water defense with open sea protection, and the traditional mentality of land outweighing the sea must, the paper noted, be abandoned. The PLA Air Force will shift from territorial air defense to both defense and offense and build an adequate air-space defensive force. 57 It was also stated that As cyberspace weighs more in military security, China will expedite the development of a cyber force and enhance its capabilities of cyberspace situational awareness, cyber defense, support for the country's endeavors in cyberspace, and participation in international cyber cooperation, so as to stem major cyber crises, ensure national network and information security, and maintain national security and social stability. 
58
59
60
In a 2016 CMS article titled "An Analysis of the Impact of Modern Biological Technology on Future Forms of War," a new spin was provided to the topic of control. In the article, a medical university doctoral advisor and student wrote on the impact of modern biological technology and its effect on future forms of war. approved a new weapon nicknamed the "zombie Gun," which is used to attack the central nervous system of the human body. The US DARPA organization was said to have invested money to develop a battlefield illusion weapon to control an adversary's sensing organs and to develop friendly "super soldiers."
With such weapons in mind, the authors stated that biological warfare operations were deemed to become the commanding height in future battlefield competitions, with "biological control warfare the main mode of combat operations." 
62
• Information warfare's objective is to exert influence on the epistemic domain through information flows in the physical and information domains.
Influence on the outer man affects the inner man but cannot go deep inside man.
• When bioscience reveals microorganism mysteries between different races, groups, and individuals and explains mechanisms of memory, emotion, decision, and thinking functions, then it is possible to filter out targets at the biomolecular level with a weapon system attacking biological functions that de-capacitate forces. When genetic roots and cognitive space are understood, commanders will be able to weaken the will of people and control people's consciousness from the "inside of people." 63
Returning to Russian weapons, the authors noted that the Kremlin's mind-control weapon uses low-frequency electromagnetic waves to affect human brain cells, transmit psychological suggestions, and control target behavior. War will evolve from firepower war, to information war, to "biological control warfare." 
64
65
62
War," China Military Science, No. 3 2016, pp. 31-36. 63
64
65
optimizing the military strategic layout, and adhering to the strategic guiding principle." It developed the content of active defense and stressed long-term preparedness and molding a favorable posture, comprehensively bringing crises under control, and resolutely deterring and winning wars, 66 which are almost the identical words in the White Paper's section on active defense.
Luo proceeded to call Xi's guidance the "New Guideline," which has three characteristics. The first is innovation, which shapes military strategic guidance and is synchronized with national security developments. The second is flexibility, which ensures that offense is combined with defense. 67 Strategic defense is combined with offensive actions at the campaign and tactical levels. More importantly, after the outbreak of a war, "the first battle should grasp the strategic pivot and the center of gravity in a campaign to launch decisive operations." 68 Luo added that
The New Guideline requires adherence to the principle of maneuvering flexibly and fighting independently according to the security threats…Combat should be fought in our own way no matter how the opponent may act. Integrated combat forces of multiple services should be used to fight system-of-system operations with information playing a dominating role, with precision strikes being delivered to the opponent's vital parts, with flexible means used to win victories. 
69
The third characteristic of the New Guideline is activities that help seize the initiative. Seven themes were listed, to include the following:
1. Move forward strategic guidance's center of gravity 2. Give prominence to military struggle's preparations in the maritime domain 3. Effectively control major crises 4. Appropriately cope with chain reactions 5. Resolutely safeguard national territorial sovereignty, unity, and security 6. Actively cope with threats in space, cyberspace, and other new security domains 7. Strengthen international security cooperation in regions related to China's overseas interests, safeguard these overseas interests, and so on. Luo added that the contemporary context, marked by S&T developments and geopolitical changes, has resulted in adaptations to China's security environment and changed its comprehensive national power and military power capabilities.
While the basic spirit of active defense remains unchanged, the New Guideline emphasizes "the necessity of actively creating a favorable situation and seizing the strategic initiative." As has been underscored on many occasions, creating a favorable situation is the basis of shi, and seizing the strategic initiative indicates, in the cyber age, the offensive portion of China's active defense. This is accomplished using the appropriate stratagems, Luo noted. Further, he writes that "The military strategic capability is not only based on objective conditions but is also contingent on decision-makers' strategic thinking level." Seizing information dominance is the way to seize comprehensive battlefield control and integrated joint operations are now a basic form of military operations. 
71
72
Implementing information dominance, delivering precision strikes at vital parts, and winning victories through joint operations are taken as the basic combat methods of operational guidance. The New Guideline consistently takes integrated joint operations as a basic form of our military's military operations in an informatized local war, with system-of-systems operations based on information systems being a basic combat method, with systems sabotage warfare being the core combat method for achieving the objective of battle. 
73
The temporal and spatial environment of military operations may augment or lessen combat power…Reevaluating and making use of favorable temporal and spatial factors and the consequent environmental condition is an important aspect of designing asymmetric battlefields. An important task in operational guidance is to choose a form and a method in keeping with the specific battlefield environment to win victories in asymmetric operations. 
75
There were several additions to the asymmetric concept that indicated a slight expansion of the concept. It was stated that there now appears to be no division between front and rear, meaning the significance of fronts will decline; that a close examination must be made of enemy methods to restrict PLA advantages; that it is necessary to fight according to the PLA's design; and that it is necessary to shape a non-linear posture through campaign-level outflanking, encirclement, infiltration, and full-depth strike capability against an opponent's vital targets. The careful use of crucial technical and tactical means in unconventional and extraordinary ways was advised to boost the effectiveness of asymmetric operations. 
76
The terms active defense and People's War were used once each in the Defense White Paper, whereas the important terms civil-military integration and forward edge defense were never used. In 2015 author Wen Bing had noted that strategic judgement had moved beyond initial descriptions of information war as "mechanization plus informatization" to an advanced state that features "smart manipulation plus all-area coverage plus long-range precision operations," yet the White Paper some four years later resorted back to stating that China was seriously behind in 
75
76
technology compared to other nations and that the nation was still striving to achieve mechanization. No doubt, this was an attempt to "appear weak when strong." The rest of the world, the paper asserts, is conducting intelligent warfare, and applying artificial intelligence, quantum information, big data, cloud computing, and the Internet of Things in their military affairs, all topics that CMS previously had written about between 2013 and 2018 (see Appendix one for actual titles) on more than one occasion. The Defense White Paper attempted instead to make China a beacon in search of peace and prosperity, working in accordance with United Nation regulations. Apparently such cooperation only occurs when decisions are in China's favor, for the Defense White Paper ignored how China rejected UN decisions regarding the South China Sea that did not fit the Middle Kingdom's aspirations. The paper used the term system of system only once and the concept of "create a strategic advantage" twice. Military operations other than war, a topic in all previous discussions of military operations, was missing entirely. 
77
• Careful Preparation: pre-war preparations; ability to react to ever-changing battlefield conditions; having accurate intelligence of enemy capabilities ahead of battle • Multi-level integration: supplying friendly forces with timely intelligence data collected from platforms and tied together to guide the reconnaissance-target guidance-strike-assessment loop • Precise release of energy: strike critical nodes with anti-radiation, directed energy or electromagnetic pulse weapons against the following targets: reconnaissance and early warning, wireless communications, guidance and fire control systems, navigation and positioning systems, and friend-or-foe identification. 
79
80
To further demonstrate the weak character of the previous document, listed next are sections on artificial intelligence and quantum computing that appeared in the Chinese military press, with a short summation of important items in each. They demonstrate that the PLA is thinking well beyond mechanization and are well-positioned in science and technology fields to match US capabilities. These sections primarily rely on information from Jiefangjun Bao Online, since there were no table of contents available for CMS after Issue 6 of 2018 and there were very few translations of 2018 CMS articles available.
The focus of competition between the two warring sides will be shifted to the cognition domain. The side that can be the first to gain control of this domain will be able to seize the strategic initiative in war…The AI-enabled decisionmaking support system is…making sure that commanders may rapidly and accurately judge and predict the development of a war situation to make operational decisions and gain decision-making superiority over the adversary. 
81
A March 2018 article noted that power, whether from fire strikes, information, mobility, or defense, must be discharged at the most appropriate time and place. A combat power generation chain was proposed, consisting of a "posture sharing-synchronized collaboration-focused energy unleashing" chain designed to take shape around a unified operational objective. The author stated that a machine's cognitive element should never go beyond human control. The human-machine integration effort is important, naturally, and could include the following components:
Along with the appearance and implementation of neural network computers, optical computers, biological computers, and other types of new-concept computers, being supported by AI technologies for voice, text, and image 80 Ibid. 81 Niu Yujun, Cao Zhi, "Deeply Transform the Contemporary War System," Jiefangjun Bao Online, 8 November 2018, p. 7.
recognition, the human-machine interface of the command information system will become highly intelligent. The art of command and the employment of military stratagems will be deeply merged into the human-machine interactive relationship and will be applied through the expert knowledge repository system and smart weapon-guided systems. 82
This article was followed a month later with a discussion titled "Intelligence War is Coming: Are You Ready?" It stated that AI is generating new combat modes such that the "intelligent factor" can "radiate from military hardware" and make a breakthrough regarding army building. New combat theories such as "distributive killing," "multi-field combat," "wasp colony technology," and "intelligent safety combat" have been proposed. The goal is to cut off an opponent's information and decision-making control with friendly advantages gained after intelligent technology and information-led theory are combined. The intelligentization of the command information system is, the article notes, "the key to the enhancement of the means of operational combat and the formation of decision-making advantages." 
83
Intelligent perception was described as intelligent sensing and networking technology. Intelligent decision-making was said to be based on a "command brain" possessing machine learning, neural networks, and other technologies. It will assist commanders making rapid decisions based on in-depth calculations and reasoning. Intelligent unmanned combat systems are a "new trend of future wars," with targeting requirements such as "full coverage" and "quick response." No further explanation of intelligence control was offered. 
84
The intelligent new combat power system is a comprehensive product of artificial intelligence technology development, the formation of emergent combat effectiveness, and the evolution of war for-a 'trump card' used to win the active fight in the future global operational space, the key to constituting an integrated joint combat system, and a new growth point of our combat effectiveness. 
85
86
88
89
90
91
92
• Wasp swarm operations-enhanced effects with massive quantities, turning quantity superiority into qualitative superiority • Trojan operations-based on stealthy deployment ahead-of-time and the activation of systems only when needed • Self-determined operations-those without human command whose actions use a quick rhythm moving under cover, which requires automatic sensing, decision-making, and actions • And incapacitation operations-those that destroy points and neutralize bodies, taking aim at nodes, hubs, and other vital parts of an opponent's operational system. 93
To effectively respond to various risks and challenges in the change of war patterns, it was noted that China must "free its mind from traditional concepts about military operations, discern and grasp the attributes of AI warfare, play the game well by taking the initiative proactively, so 91 You Guangrong, "Artificial Intelligence Will Deeply Change the Outlook of War," Jiefangjun Bao Online, 17 October 2018, p. 4. 
92
93
as to stay invincible on the future battlefield." 
94
95
• Regarding thinking speed, Chinese military theorists are considering the importance of direct control of the other sides automatic operational systems through controlling the other side's personnel or incapacitating them through brain control technology or sentiment control technology. • Regarding planning, there are four types of operations under consideration.
First, smart ambush (Trojan type) operations will use offensive or cyber weapons with bionic or stealth features to sneak into an opposing side's core facilities, sea routes, equipment, vital parts, or systems, where they lie dormant and are only activated when war or conflict breaks out. Second, smart clustered operations are 'wolf pack or wasp swarm' saturated attacks that break through enemy defenses and destroy major targets. Third, precision second-killing operations are supersonic and ultrasonic weapons that enable high-speed instant strikes against important facilities. Finally, cognition control operations disrupt an enemy's smart operational systems and undermine an opponent's thinking and cognition. 96
Battle domains will gradually expand into the two extreme limits of macroscopic and microscopic fields, where domains are transformed by the technical domain. The latter will combine with various conventional physical domains to form a cross-domain battlefield. Advances in brain and cognitive technologies will give rise to the cognition domain of war which, together with other domains, will forge a mega-domain operational system. This could make warfare more "humane" and mitigate responsibility and political pressure for launching war. Even war's definition may change, as it could be redefined as the violation of another side's sovereignty in one or all domains. 
97
98
99
104
105
106
However, AI's use of automatic decision-making in areas such as reconnaissance, strikes, and damage evaluation contain several risks, and each should be dealt with discreetly. Once an opponent figures out a certain algorithmic logic behind an AI system, the latter could be led into making erroneous judgements. Counters must be considered. AI systems also have no human emotion at present and can "hardly be restricted by morals and ethics" and this entails another element of risk in their use. Decisions must still be reached with discretion. 
108
111
• Drone swarms can flexibly organize into different units • Swarm operations can transmit battlefield information so that a commander's intentions can be accurately implemented • Individual drones are small targets and can hide near the battlefield • Swarm operations eliminate human-operations machine limitations • And swarm operations logistic support is low. 
113
The basic method of multi-domain attacks is to use a drone swarm platform to carry many individual drones. During battle, drones are launched or deployed through the platform as battle groups to achieve data sharing, flight control, situational awareness and intelligentized decision-making, so that the drone can flexibly respond to battlefield contingencies and conduct various combat missions, such as swarm reconnaissance, fighting, and attacks. 114
Not only can drone swarms be configured with various modules, but they can form a large assault formation that can penetrate deep into enemy territory and strike high-risk targets. 
115
• The technical domain will combine with various conventional physical domains to form a cross-domain battlefield. Advances in brain and cognitive technologies will give rise to the cognition domain of war which, together with other domains, will forge a mega-domain operational system • Drone swarm operations will attempt to overload an opponent's defensive systems and responses. Swarms will be used in the air, sea, and land domains.
One huge drone swarm could involve reconnaissance, jamming, attack, and other capabilities that fulfill multiple missions. • A group of 'smart warfare systems' is being built where AI is the brain, operational networks the nerves, and operational big data the blood. Counters to an adversary's use of smart wars must also be considered, and topics such as algorithmic and anti-algorithmic warfare must be researched in depth. • The focus of military engagements will change from system confrontations to algorithm competition, due to the use of AI. It was noted that algorithms are stratagem mechanisms for resolving various issues. intelligent decision-making, intelligent control, and unmanned platforms. The intelligence factor radiates from military hardware. • Cross-domain unconventional and asymmetrical fighting will be the new normal, and intelligence control will replace territorial control as the center of gravity in war-and perhaps this will cause the definition of war to be redefined. • Attrition warfare launched with intelligent swarms, cross-domain mobile warfare, and cognition control warfare will become basic types of combat operations.
• Civil-military integration, which involves the collaborative industry-universityresearch innovation system, will open society's innovative power, and promote the development of military intelligence. The development of CINGAIDS is but one civilian development that will be integrated with the military response.
On 13 April 2020, the Wall Street Journal published a special section titled "5G: What's Next." The journal offered an estimate of "who leads who" in crucial areas in the US-China competition: 5G (China leads), AI (US leads, but barely), semi-conductors (US), and autonomous vehicles (US). Surprisingly, the US was said to lead China in quantum computing, but China leads the US in quantum communications. China's Pan Jian-Wei, the nation's "father of quantum," has led the charge to develop quantum communications, sensors, and radars, which all have potential military applications. In 2016 the nation launched the Micius satellite, which uses quantum state photon beams to make transmissions that are impervious to interception. Further, China has "exponentially increased the number of quantum information technology (QIT) patents," largely in the realm of software. 116 US concerns, of course, are that 5G and quantum capabilities could let the Chinese government intercept communications, sabotage military networks, infrastructure, or economies, or even turn Internet connected items into weapons.
China's military entered the game long ago. State Councilor and CPC Central Committee Political Bureau member Liu Yandong noted in 2011 that quantum communications have made "fresh contributions to scientific development." 117 One 2011 report stated that the University of National Defense Science and Technology had conducted quantum information technology research since the 1990s; and that the PLA's University of Science and Technology (PLAUST) had been studying quantum communication technologies since at least 2011. 
118
119
121
122
123
124
In less than 10 minutes, the detachment completed the setting up of a quantum communications network and opened a command organ quantum video communication system, and the battlefield situation was clearly indicated on the screen of the command vehicle. 
125
125
An important 2016 report out of Singapore examined China's quantum satellite experiments for both strategic and military implications. The report noted that on 16 August 2016 the Chinese launched the Micius satellite, named after an ancient Chinese philosopher, and tasked it to establish a hack-proof communication line. By 2030 China hopes to have a network of quantum satellites to augment its ground-based quantum computer network. The network would establish a strategic asset to enable the PLA's capacity for power projection through a "constellation of space-based intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance platforms; tactical warning and attack assessments; command, control, and communications; navigation and positioning; and environmental monitoring."
127
In 2017, it was reported that China is building the world's biggest quantum research facility, useful in the military for code-breaking or employment on stealth submarines. The National Laboratory for Quantum Information Science will be built next to a lake in Hefei, Anhui Province.
128
129
130
In late 2018, PLA hawk Luo Yuan, in a speech at the 2018 Military Industry Awards Ceremony and Innovation Summit, described asymmetric attacks that China could use to defeat the US. First, he discussed attacks that an enemy fear, an example of which would be to sink US aircraft carriers. Second, he suggested internationalizing the RMB to cause the dollar to stumble. Third, develop China's high-tech industry with independent intellectual property rights. Fourth, strike at the US's agricultural sector (especially soybeans) with import penalties since this is where President Trump's strength is located. Finally, make more friends which will make more enemies for the US. 
131
133
134
The means of cyber-electronic operations will not only effectively combat the enemy's electronic targets such as those for reconnaissance, early warning, command and control, weapon guidance, navigation and identification, but also mount strikes on the enemy's information infrastructure facilities and such potential war targets as energy, power, and transportation information networks. 
136
138
139
In strategy, when we do not know the true intent of our opponent, we can also make some actions locally where there will be no decisive impact on the overall strategic interests; or we can create some false information that does not involve our own strategic intent. Then we can make the correct judgment or decision by observing the corresponding reaction of our opponent so that the true intention of our opponent can be found out. 
140
139
More recently, one can even see this cultural influence on the actions surrounding the Covid-19 outbreak. The primary goal of the PLA and diplomats is to gain a strategic advantage or shi that could be exploited in case of conflict. Several authors (only one is footnoted here) have stated that there are speculations that Xi Jinping, aware of the serious potential economic situation in which the virus had placed his nation, decided to make sure that other countries weren't spared the problem, thereby keeping China from being at a disadvantage. Secrecy is reflexive for a regime whose survival is threatened with explosive situations, so other nations were not warned about it in time to begin mitigation or collecting medical supplies (on which Xi cornered the market). Xi allowed international air travel from Wuhan to other nations to ensure the spread. 
141
Peter Navarro, an advisor to President Trump and Director of the Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy and National Coordinator for the National Defense production Act Policy, stated on 22 April that China kept the virus secret and first hoarded all protective gear months before the virus hit other nations and then resold it at a significant profit. Such deception indicates it is past time for the US to bring its supply chains home 142 (pharmaceuticals, medical equipment, etc.) and stop placing them in the hands of others, who use them to gain an advantage. On Fox News on 25 April, Navarro added that a Chinese delegation met with President Trump on 14 January, which was seven days after Xi Jinping allegedly took control of the situation and weeks after the virus had begun to circulate in China. 
143
Thus, it may be a good time to reexamine China's way of war internationally as well as militarily. Science and technology (S&T) are affecting not only the balance of power among nations but also the strategy, campaigns, and tactics of not only trade and diplomacy but militaries in ways never expected.
There are some general conclusions to draw from this short report that should provide a few ways of assessing the Chinese military way of war. What follows is a final look at important concepts to keep in mind. They include an examination of AI topics regarding future war; a specific Chinese method of defining strategy; the PLA's continued use of historic concepts; the move from informatized to intelligentized warfare; China's continued use of cyber spying, reverse engineering, and other issues; the focus of "strategic directors" on the use of various control mechanisms; the basics of the PLA's thought process that help indicate how they will fight; and the PLA's focus on "designing future battlefields" in peacetime.
141 Holman W. Jenkins, Jr. "China's Coronavirus Culpability," The Wall Street Journal, 22 April 2020, p. A19. 
142
First, and perhaps most important, is the way that AI and other S&T developments are changing PLA concepts and their potential wartime focus. Priority concepts included the following main areas:
1. Intelligent power will become the most crucial factor (all bolding is to stress emphasis of actual Chinese wording) in determining war's outcome. Battlefield control, deterrence theory, and arms negotiations will all need new analysis and consideration. Attrition warfare launched with intelligent swarms, crossdomain mobile warfare, and cognition control warfare will become basic types of combat operations. Cross-domain unconventional and asymmetrical fighting will be the new normal, and intelligence control will replace territorial control as the center of gravity in war. 2. The four forms of smart operations in AI warfare will be as follows: wasp swarm operations; Trojan operations; self-determined operations; and incapacitation operations. A system of "smart warfare systems" is being built where AI is the brain, operational networks the nerves, and operational big data the blood of this system. Counters to an adversary's use of smart wars must also be considered, to include topics such as algorithmic and anti-algorithmic warfare. The form of military engagements will change from system confrontations to algorithm competition, due to the use of AI. It was noted that "algorithms are stratagem mechanisms." 3. The goal in future war is to cut off an opponent's information and decisionmaking control with friendly advantages gained after intelligent technology and information-led theory are combined. The intelligentization of the command information system is "the key to the enhancement of the means of operational combat and the formation of decision-making advantages" and includes intelligent perception, intelligent decision-making, intelligent control, and unmanned platforms. The level of military intelligentization of a nation (or terrorist group!) may be the new measure of a great power. 4. New battlefield and operational space will consist of the following: space, the Internet, all fields of human activities and ideologies, quick response satellites, autonomous network security, brain control weapons, gene weapons, and other emerging combat powers that will be integrated into combat systems. 5. Brains and machines will interact to identify vital points and weak links.
Intelligence in hardware will guide information-firepower attacks and attacks on system-of-systems structures. Battlefield superiority will be reliant on a system's intelligence superiority relative to an opponent, since destroying or paralyzing an opponent's system-of-systems structure is what helps ensure success.
Second, it is important to consider the definition of strategy that several strategists have proposed. Perhaps most important is that it offers US strategists another way to consider the concept instead of just through the lens of ends, ways, and means. The objective-subjective method helps us understand better how the PLA may be planning operations and why, based on a leader's observation of the situational environment (objective reality) before him and how he applies subjectivity to manipulate these conditions to his advantage. The situational environment presented to leaders/commanders at all levels (the economy, diplomacy, geography, level of science and technology, troop dispositions and capabilities of an opponent, etc.) forms objective reality. Leaders/commanders then manipulate these realities or strategic situations to their advantage through specific subjective guidance which, naturally, may include the use of stratagems or other devices. This enables the PLA to fight "its way" and the definition and methods can apply to both grand and military strategy. This definition of strategy was cited in four places above (Wu's grand strategy article in CMS in 2000, the 2007 Military Strategy book, the 2013 book The Science of Military Strategy, and Luo Derong's explanation of Xi's New Guideline).
Mao was an adherent of the concept as well. He noted that strategy in war is a contest of subjective capabilities between two military commanders vying for dominance and initiative when military strength, financial resources, and other material conditions (objective reality) serves as the basis for their decisions. 
144
The mathematical line of thought used by a commander in executing tactics is: based on how dangerous or favorable, broad or narrow the terrain is make judgments on its use [space]; determine the holding capacity for the battlefield [quantity estimation]; based on holding capacity, estimate the number of troops the two sides could commit [calculations, comparison, and thus chances of victory]. 
145
Fourth, it is important to consider the "focal points" of interest to each leader of China. The focus of Jiang was on high-tech warfare while Hu and Xi focused on informationized local warfare, demonstrating their keen interest in information systems and ways to conduct system sabotage warfare through targeting vital points of strength in systems. It is here where the concept of acupuncture warfare finds its utility, where taking out key nodes can upset or control an entire system's infrastructure. However, Xi's era has witnessed a greater concern for AI and quantum issues than past leaders. This indicates that it might be more likely to characterize Xi's era as "preparing for and winning AI-and intelligentized-enhanced battles." Xi's concerns, Luo Derong stated in the New Guideline, underscored the importance of the principles of innovation, flexibility, and the activeness of offense and defense. Innovative thought is encouraging work on Li Bingyan's concept of combining technology with stratagems. Further, cyber spying and reverse engineering are being used to put the PLA beyond the possibility of defeat by knowing what their opponent plans to do. Collecting operational data provides real-time support for combat operations, serving as the foundation for operational calculations and control. 
146
• The strategic conductor uses military strength to 'influence an opponent's cognition and information systems and even to change the will and action of an opponent, and thereby to realize the expected strategic objective.' • The strategic conductor must comprehensively employ both military and nonmilitary means to carry out war control. • War control is the war conductor's behavior to limit and restrain consciously the occurrence, development, intensity, and outcome of a war. Armed conflict control must, however, spare no effort to strive for the strategic initiative if armed conflict becomes inevitable.
Control, naturally, extends to China's domestic environment in numerous ways. For example, in a recent Economist article, it was noted that domestically social control is the most important method the communist party has in its efforts to ensure compliance with its internal laws and regulations.
This is not social control on the Internet but the concept of hukou or household registration that makes it difficult to move one's home from place to place without party permission.
147
Sixth, many of the concepts mentioned in the discussion above must be considered in any assessment of how the military might be planning actions. They included forms and methods of warfare, the use of asymmetric concepts, preemption and pre-practice concepts, and many others. Familiarity with these terms is important for anyone studying China's way of war.
It is equally important, in accordance with the PLA's focus on strategy, to reconsider Engels concept that "technology determines tactics," since it has been overcome with the planetary reach of the cyber, AI, and quantum age (and in CMS articles) to foster the expectation that "technology now determines strategy." While not explicitly stated by the PLA, theorists imply that the first nation to grasp this concept may be the best prepared both offensively and defensively for the future, as the thoughts of one officer above so indicated:
• There is a new change in the relationship among strategy, campaigns, and combat. Strategy now is in the lead, consuming the other two who have lost their independence in organizing and implementing operations. Now, the highest military and political leaders can interfere with operations on the battlefield. Strategy has become the stratagem for directing local war under informatization conditions. Priority must be given to light weapons and to increasing the mobility and the strategic projection of the capabilities of operational platforms. • The intellectual economic era has made mastering science, technology, and knowledge more important than plundering resources as in the past.
Information technology makes it more convenient to put wars under control, to scout and detect important strategic targets, and to destroy them from long distance. Sensing and detection, navigational positioning, intelligent computing, and data transfers must be integrated to expedite the development of comprehensive operational platforms incorporating target captures, mobile strikes, and the efficient evaluation of information transfer capabilities.
148
Other concepts (some were only mentioned briefly in the discussion above but not defined) were covered in the paper "Concepts Influencing the Thought of a Chinese Officer," which is attached as Appendix Four. The discussion first lists concepts that coincide with Russian concepts of the same type, sometimes using the same words. Then specific Chinese concepts are listed, such as war engineering; turning points in war; capabilities index; and combat power development, among others.
Seventh, it is important to consider how the US's MDO concept and the concepts of other regional nations affect China's design of conflict and way of war. PLA theorists study US concepts and their conclusions are reflected in the PLA's Blue Force, the training element that uses US operations and conducts conflict against friendly Red Forces at training areas. Fights against the Blue Force indicate ways the PLA can potentially seek advantages against the West and are included in the future design of their battlefield planning and preparations. The PLA is continuing to update its design scenarios based on new developments in S&T, new adjustments they perceive in the US's MDO theory, and new ways of considering how to reorganize or manipulate situational environment to the PLA's advantage and an opponent's disadvantage. Among them would be attempts to paralyze enemy systems, based on the discussion above.
Finally, there are a few other important points to keep in mind in a consideration of China's way of war. They include the following (some refer to points covered above):
1. There is a continual goal of creating a strategic advantage or shi on the battlefield, in diplomatic relations, geostrategic settings (through considerations of numerous factors, such as distance attenuation, etc.), supply chains, and any area in which it China has an interest. A strategic advantage is the goal of any manipulation of the strategic environment, and it is probably the most important Chinese concept to keep in mind. 2. Today there may exist a slight change in focus from system-of-systems to combatting AI algorithms, but the system sabotage issue will continue to play an important role. 3. There is a higher reliance on the offensive aspect of active defense in the cyber age, where the first battles will establish who has attained the strategic initiative in war. Once the armed conflict is inevitable, no effort should be spared to strive for strategic initiative, one author noted. Conflict will proceed quickly once unleashed and involve all domains. 4. Critical infrastructure targets must be uncovered and planned in peacetime, the PLA notes, for special operations. 5. There is a growing focus on the use of swarm operations (wolves, wasps, and fish) and their potential applicability to all domains of an opponent. 6. The overall situation in terms of military strategy is to start with national interests and the overall interests of the war as the goals to pursue. Strategic fulcrums must be established in advance. 7. Strategic psychological warfare will employ numerous means to force an opponent to submit without a fight. Five specific types of information topics were: information deterrence, blockades, deception, disruption, and attacks (computer viruses, hacking, etc.). 8. Regarding asymmetric operations, making use of favorable temporal and spatial factors and the consequent environmental condition are important aspects of designing asymmetric battlefields. 9. There is a focus (32 articles from 2013-2018) on various aspects of 'civil-military integration,' with titles addressing power projection, power grid advantages, economic construction, science and technology, and integration strategies. 10. And, as a final warning, pay attention to China's methods to manipulate others with deceptive stratagems. It is easy to fall into traps the PLA lays for opponents. For example, "appear weak when strong" would certainly apply to the PLA's current attempts to downplay its AI and quantum prowess. The country's 2019 Defense White Paper titled China's National Defense in the New Era stated that China was only now coming out of its period of mechanization, a total fabrication of its current advanced competencies.
Just as the ancient sage at the start of this article would marvel today at how his stratagems are used in conjunction with diplomatic issues, another sage may marvel in ten years at how his or some other philosophers stratagems are utilized to manipulate advances in artificial intelligence or quantum computing. There will be new applications of ways to deter opponents, new methods to conduct war control or psychological operations (with biological means?), and new types of fighting styles. China's strategic and campaign templates will be altered to fit the circumstances and technologies at hand, just as active defense is leaning toward an offensive posture to ensure that China can gain the initiative in a future conflict (while offering a peaceful outer appearance). The ever-growing integration of civilian agencies with military ones offer new attack means against the vital nodes of an opponent's infrastructure. Chinese leaders will adjust to contradictions and changing conditions when assessing objective reality, to include the causes and effects of conditions such as these above and will plan comprehensively/holistically for many eventualities.
Strategically, the reach of the PLA and other nations into another country's infrastructure, independent of that nation's distance from China, with cyber, space, or physical (ports, 5G, etc.) means, has increased. S&T developments can be very influential when integrated with deception or stratagem techniques and will influence campaigns. With regard to tactics, robotic developments have changed how wars will be fought from a distance through their detailed ability to conduct reconnaissance ahead of time (use of miniature unmanned aerial or under water vehicles for land or maritime warfare) and to prepare precision fires. Traditional methods of warfare are available but will be used less often. Rather, the intelligentization of warfare appears to be taking center stage, with flames being stoked in the cognitive domain to light up innovation and produce products that enable commanders to see and assess the battlefield condition in front of him before an opponent can do so and then act first.
Thus, China's way of war is continually being updated in accordance with the manner in which nation state relations change and evolve; the discoveries of weak links in an opponent's way of war and strengths in the PLA's new concepts; and the way stratagems can be used in conjunction with technology to deceive opponents and lure them into disadvantageous positions. It is clear, then, that there are specific factors to consider when looking at China's way of war: attaining a strategic advantage; establishing control of all types; use of stratagems and deception; the design of war; psychological actions (blockage, disruptions, deterrence, etc.); asymmetries (time, space, environments, etc.); system sabotage aimed at vital points; swarm operations; taking the strategic initiative instead of active defense; a focus on AI and quantum communications; and a specific way to define strategy are among the most important of them.
China will continue to probe and penetrate the infrastructure of any opponent. After all, China sees no difference between war and peace since confrontation and competition are consistent and eternal. With regard to the reigns of the past three presidents, Xi has been the most creative in regard to the use of reforming the military with new S&T and implementing grand strategy. He has reached out across Europe and Central Asia with his Belt and Road Initiative, focused on expanding Chinese ports worldwide, used his close relationship with President Putin of Russia to gain access to the Arctic (and perhaps consequently buy more oil and gas from Russia), and constructed a significant infrastructure of influence (transport, communications, natural resource exploitation, etc.) in both Africa and Latin America. His way of war must be closely watched, for in addition to the development of a grand strategy and Armed Forces reform, Xi appears to have an insatiable appetite for natural resources and a desire to make China the most powerful nation on earth. Recent legislation aimed to quell dissent in Hong Kong is but one example. When combined with China's historic legacy of deception and stratagem use, he will remain a formidable opponent for many years to come. trends in future warfare. Their essence is to face the future, to design the future, and to win the future. 156
Russia: In a 1975 Russian book on forecasting, 157 authors Yu. V. Chuyev and Yu. B. Mikhaylov stated that a forecast "was what may occur," while a plan was defined as "what is supposed to occur." 7 Forecasting was more specifically defined as "the study of the military-political situation, the pattern of future war, the prospects of developing strategy, operational art, and tactics, the qualitative and quantitative composition of the means of armed conflict (one's own and the enemy's), the prospects for the development of the war economy in the future, and also the forecasting of the enemy's strategic and tactical plans." 158 All of these are linked. Four types of military forecasting were described: military-strategic, operational-tactical, militaryeconomic, and military-technical.
China: Foresight means predicting the characteristics of the age and developments and changes in the international and domestic strategic environment. The more accurate the foresight, the better the planning and guidance. The following foresight predictions were listed as needed:
• Predicting trends in military matters and military science and technology.
• Predicting potential strategic opponents and operational targets;
• Predicting potential changes in the ratios between an enemy's strength and China's; • Predicting the nature, direction, and levels of potential threats; • Predicting possible opportunities, forms, direction, scale, process, and outcome of future wars; • And revealing the features and laws of future wars, providing an objective basis for determining strategy and defense building. 159
Russia: General Staff Chief Gerasimov noted regarding strategy that "each conflict has a logic all its own." It is also a part of military art, a system regarding the nature of modern warfare's preparations to resist invasion; and the methods and forms to carry out total warfare on a strategic scale. 
160
163
Russia: Forms are organizations or operations, and methods are the weapons and military art that will be used. China: The following forms and methods were offered in one Chinese article addressing the transformation to new-type operations:
• Forms and methods of long-range operations include ways to defeat the enemy far away from one's borders to capture key points and stage strategic sabotage.
• Forms and methods of information-firepower integrated operations combine soft attacks with hard strikes that include information-fire deterrence, information-fire raids, information-fire targeted attacks, information-fire blockades, and information-fire encirclement and annihilation. • Forms and methods of precision operations include precisely conducting battlefield sensing, command and control, fire-strike effects evaluations, and comprehensive support, thereby shaping the closed cycle of reconnaissancecontrol-striking-evaluation-support. • Forms and methods of low-altitude operations include air-ground integrated assaults and vertical speed-based attacks. 171
In the work SMS it was noted that studying the enemy's forms and methods of operations was important, as well as establishing the basic guiding thought for friendly operations and its main forms and methods. 172 A strategic concept includes determining not only opponents and targets of operations but also the basic forms of operations and main combat methods to be used. 
173
Russia: In his 2019 presentation at the Academy of Military Science, Russian General Staff Chief noted the following: "For the past few years military scholars, together with the General Staff, have been developing conceptual approaches regarding the neutralization of aggressive actions by probable enemies. The basis of 'our response' is the 'strategy of active defense,' which, taking into consideration the defensive nature of Russian Military Doctrine, envisions the conduct of a set of measures for the preemptive neutralization of threats to the security of the state. It is namely the validation of the measures being developed that should comprise the activities of military scholars. This is one of the priority trends for safeguarding the security of the state. We must outstrip the enemy in the development of military strategy and move 'one step ahead.'" 175
China: It was stated that active defense is manifested in the following: adhering to a position of self-defense and striking back, which does not preclude preemptive strikes as regards campaigns and combat; combining strategic defense with campaign and tactical offense, since active defense is an offensive defense and not an exclusively defensive defense; operations are based upon fully taking the initiative; do not fight a battle for which you are not prepared, meaning first be sure of victory and only then seek a fight; restrain war from starting with preparations but if unavoidable, resolutely make your opening move to use war to stop war; and soldier and the people are the source of victory. 176 The PLA's July 2019 Defense White Paper, in regard to strategic guidance, noted that:
The military strategic guideline for a new era adheres to the principles of defense, self-defense and post-strike response, and adopts active defense. It keeps to the stance that 'we will not attack unless we are attacked, but we will surely counterattack if attacked,' places emphasis on both containing and winning wars, and underscores the unity of strategic defense and offense at operational and tactical levels…China's armed forces give full play to the overall power of the people's war by innovating in its strategies, tactics, and measures. 177
Thus, the active defense concept continues to occupy a special place in Chinese military theory.
In 2015 China produced a White Paper titled "China's Military Strategy" that mentioned active defense twelve times. Section III discussed the concept the most and, in addition to calling active defense the essence of strategy, offered the following definition:
From the long-term practice of revolutionary wars, the people's armed forces have developed a complete set of strategic concepts of active defense, which boils down to: adherence to the unity of strategic defense and operational and tactical offense; adherence to the principles of defense, self-defense and post-emptive strike; and adherence to the stance that 'We will not attack unless we are attacked, but we will surely counterattack if attacked.'… China's socialist nature, fundamental national interests, and the objective requirement of taking the path of peaceful development all demand that China unswervingly adhere to and enrich the strategic concept of active defense. 178
The implementation of the active defense concept will include the following:
• The basic point for the preparation for military struggle (PMS) will be placed on winning informationized local wars, highlighting maritime military struggle, and maritime PMS.
• China's armed forces will innovate basic operational doctrines. Integrated combat forces will prevail in system-vs-system operations featuring information dominance, precision strikes, and joint operations.
• China's armed forces will optimize the military strategic layout. In view of China's geostrategic environment, the armed forces will make overall planning for strategic deployment and military disposition, clearly divide areas of responsibility for their troops, and enable them to support each other and act as an organic whole.
• China's armed forces will uphold nine basic principles (see Appendix One). 179
Russia: In February 2015 Colonel-General Kartapolov, at the time the head of the Main Operations Directorate of the General Staff, discussed Western actions as built on a foundation of hybrid actions which "include both measures of a military nature and measures without the e mployment of military force." 180 He o utlined a new-type war being fought against Russia that associated indirect actions with hybrid ones. Further, in October 2015 in Issue 10 of Military Thought, two Russian officers who write often for the journal, Colonel (retired) S. G. Chekinov and General (retired) S. A. Bogdanov, used the new-type warfare terminology often in an article on forecasting.
China: PLA authors note that new-type operational forces must have special characteristics, to include timeliness, high efficiency, and the ability to be relative to the contemporary situation. Future war will be based on the "three no's" of warfare: "nobody" (unmanned weapons such as robots or drones), "no-see" (invisible, such as stealth fighters), and "no-hear" (silent, such as infrasound weapons that create psychological havoc). The new-type operational forces must protect friendly operational systems while "at the same time finding the 'acupuncture points' and 'floating ribs' of enemy operational systems." 181 These systems must be paralyzed. Further, the author notes that it remains necessary to continue to use self-criticism as a methodology and to integrate both civilian and military forces into the new-type operational force. 182
Russia: the Initial Period of War (IPW) was defined as when warring states "conduct military operations involving groups of their armed forces that were deployed before the start of the war to achieve their short-range strategic objectives or to create favorable conditions for committing their main forces and continuing with more operations;" 183 the IPW has new political, economic, and military conditions that are changing its parameters, which accords with history's lessons that each war appears as a special case with different factors affecting the IPW; 184 the projected speed of future wars may not allow countries time to put their economies on a war footing, making it even more important to prevent potential adversaries from achieving military and technological superiority [note: there appear to be three phases to an IPW plan: commit forces in secret before war begins; create conditions for the main force; and be aware that new conditions will continuously change the initial parameters]. 185 China: The modern battlefield was described by Wei Daiqiang, a PLA lecturer, in 2013 as a place where the strategic prepositioning of forces and materials must be studied in order to attain a strategic advantage and reduce uncertainty. Wei, a lecturer in the Department of Military Thinking and Military History at the Nanjing Political College, noted that the official 2011 book Military Terminology of the Chinese People's Liberation Army defined strategic prepositioning as the arrangement or distribution of troops, material, and equipment made in preparation for satisfying future strategic needs. Wei added that the noted PLA strategist, retired General Li Jijun, had defined strategic prepositioning as a practice of military strategy that enables the seizure of strategic opportunity; and that a principle of war is to use battlefield creation and strategic prepositioning as a means for gaining strategic and battle initiative. The authors of the 2001 version of The Science of Military Strategy noted that all strategic thoughts are embodied in foresight and prepositioning. Another author wrote that strategy is essentially a strategic prediction and strategic prepositioning. 
186
Russia: Asymmetric operations are defined in Russia as a strategy of the struggle of a weak side against a strong one, a strategy employed in conflicts between enemies' unequal with respect to economic development or their level of military force. 189 However, that is the soft side to the term's definition. Asymmetric means discussed in Russian publications include what is described as "nonstandard" forms and methods of operations and the use of prohibited means. Clearly, something nonstandard and prohibited imply the use of illegal means as an asymmetric method, and such examples represent the hard side of the term's definition.
China: Differences in weapons, numbers of personnel, structure, thoughts, cultural background, behavioral criteria, temporospatial conditions, and operations activities constitute asymmetric relations. 190 Asymmetric operations require specific analyses of specific situation and the exploitation of them for all variable factors along with flexible application. The subjective qualities (creative thought) of officers should be fully brought into play. Exploit all conditions (weather, geography, etc.) and adopt irregular, nontraditional operational models, methods, and means as required. Methods should not be limited to established 
practices. 191
This instrument is reflexive analysis, the content of which is the reproduction of the enemy's probable goals, methods of achieving them, the logic of his thinking, and assumed methods of obtaining the necessary information about the situation. Reflexive analysis is a mirror of complex military thinking, which determines the degree of practically implementing a systemic approach and the basis of a creative approach to accomplishing the tasks assigned to commanders in combat. 
193
The commanding officer, on the basis of certain strength, fully performs his subjective initiative, and manipulates and drives the enemy in the confrontation of intelligence, so as to create a situation that is favorable to his own troops but unfavorable to the enemy. 
194
According to Michael Pillsbury, a stratagem is closely aligned with the concept of shi, or the alignment of forces, where one studies an opponent's psychology and manipulates them into acting according to a friendly plan. Pillsbury noted that a feature of shi is called wu wei, "which means to get other nations to do your work for you." 195 Another long time China analyst stated that stratagem is "creating the enemy's perception." 196 All told, the concept is very similar to Russia's concept of reflexive control.
Russia: When constructing strategy against a potential adversary, the latter's "political, economic, scientific and technical, military, ideological, demographic, psychological, geographic, and other factors" are considered as part of the correlation of forces (COF), according to a 1968 Military making criteria. Finally, environmental power assesses international (balance of power), natural (geography, ecology, etc.), and social (stability, etc.) factors. Altogether more than 18 factors are under consideration. Huang's CNP index system is multilayered with subsystems and subsubsystems.
Huang further states that CNP continually evolves. CNP changes with time and with changes in the world's structure. He writes that CNP changes with the interchange of energy flows, material flows, and information flows of science and technology (he believes a type of "motion equation" is needed to explain this flow). Huang adds that his equations are "in keeping with the universal relations principle in the Marxist materialist dialectics theory system." 
202
203
Russia: Operational design is a broad outline of forthcoming combat operations. It includes the direction or axis of the main attack and other thrusts (area of concentration of main efforts); sequence and modes of accomplishing the adversary's defeat; procedure of delivery of fire for effect and, in a nuclear war, nuclear weapons as well; force groupings and tactical order of battle (disposition).
China: It was noted that the form of planning had changed from schematic designs which are primarily qualitative to what was termed "meticulous" design that combine man and machine. Design is focused on overall planning more than on single items, and on top-level designs to implement strategic objectives. 
204
The following terms offer a more specific Chinese method for visualizing warfare to include its preparation and conduct.
Turning point: An analyst with a broad strategic view and sense of innovation is needed to identify a turning point. Science and technology are the main elements for analysts to consider, as they help distinguish the form of warfare (mechanized, information, nuclear, etc.) from one era to another. 205 A turning point is a strategic opportunity whose value is often inversely proportional to the clarity of the transformation. That is, the technological transformation may not be clear to others and thereby offers friendly forces a strategic opportunity for reform. The army that survives is the one constantly seizing strategic opportunities. Benefits are directly proportional to the timeliness of decisions. 206 It was stated that the "key to exploiting the turning point is to base it on the condition of the country and army and to seize the timely opportunity subjectively and objectively."
War engineering: In 2007, Hu Xiaofeng, a professor in the Information Operations and Command Training-Teaching and Research Department at China's National Defense University, stated that war engineering is "a method of systems engineering that studies, designs, tests, controls, and evaluates war systems and that is guided by systematic thinking, based on information technology." 
207
208
209
Capabilities Index: An information network linking fighting forces, fire control systems, reconnaissance assets, and communication capabilities becomes a way to measure a "capability index" when constructing a battlefield. 210 Most likely these capabilities would be measured against those of a potential opponent in a specific area. Another article noted that developments must be able to provide an asymmetrical advantage over an opponent and the full use of China's advantages must be used in the creation of asymmetrical developments. Examples of such forces include cyber-warfare, space warfare, remote warfare, and unmanned warfare. Combat standards will be developed in the form of capability indexes. 
211
212
213
215
216
217
219
CPGM is a military state in which a military system that is composed of man, weapons and equipment, and other combat resources generates certain combat functions. The structure, actions, and state of the military system are in a dynamic stability within certain time and spatial scope, therefore, the combat power generation model can be described using a military system's features, such as elements, structures, environment, and functions. 220
The military system's features were then further explained. System elements were defined as man, weapons and equipment, and other combat resources. System structures were defined as the quality, quantity, time, and spatial structures among the system elements, and the connection among information, materials, and energy. A system environment was defined as the natural environment, human environment, operational objects, and so on, that exist outside of the military system under study and congregate with things associated with them. A military system's management level, information level, and science and technology level have become main factors for generating combat power. CPGM combines intelligence with human intelligence plus information systems and information energy plus various service and arms combinations. A man's intelligence replaces skills in an information-dominated environment, the latter a critical node in the generation of combat power. Since man's creative actions are key, subjective and objective efforts must be made to create the necessary condition to turn possibility into reality. 
221
222
Hu's thoughts on the CPGM reflects the evolution of warfare's mode of development, where informatized weapons and equipment are key material factors for combat power; information capability becomes the engine and multiplier for combat power generation; and the CPGM transforms from a mechanized platform model to one dominated by information capabilities. The CPGM determines the level and strength of combat power and the breadth and depth of its scientific development. Initial measurements of the PLA's CPGM's efficiency indicate it is not commensurate with the requirement of winning local wars under informatized conditions. Much work remains to be done to transform the PLA from a quantity-to a quality-driven force and from a manpower-intensive force to one that is science and technology intensive, especially where combat power is no longer linear but based on a SoS's capability. The PLA's indigenous innovation of weapons and equipment based on information technologies is vital to success. Newtype operational forces include strategic early-warning, air defense anti-missile troops, information attack and defense priorities, strategic projection, and digitized units. All are required elements of the transformation process. 
223
226
Chinese strategy contains a constant search to achieve a strategic advantage (which is also a goal of the popular Chinese strategic game of Weiqi or Go) over an opponent. Shi is sought everywhere, whether it be with the use of forces, electrons, or some other force. The Chinese 2015 White Paper on Strategy discussed this concept in four places:
• China's Armed Forces will lay stress on farsighted planning and management to create a favorable posture, comprehensively manage crises, and resolutely deter and win wars. • China's Armed Forces will work harder to create a favorable strategic posture with more emphasis on the employment of military forces and means • A principle of active defense is to foster a strategic posture favorable to China's peaceful development • China will strive to establish fair and effective security mechanisms…and create a security environment favorable to its peaceful development. 227 SMS Thought Section: One section of the 2013 SMS described "The orientation of thought in drafting military strategy." It stated that forward thinking (reveal trends, stages, and characteristics for the future state of warfare), holistic thinking (relationship among military, political, economic, and other aspects of conflict), active thinking (creating situations), and thinking through hardships (take precautions) were all required measures of thought. 
21 Sun Zhaoli, copy editor, The Science of Military Strategy (Zhanlue Xue, hereafter SMS), 2013 edition (2013 Nianban), Academy of Military Science, Military Strategy Studies Department, pp. 1-2. 22 Ibid., p. 4.
58  
58  
appeared to summarize and expand on Xi's military 2015 White Paper focus, serving as a guiding light for PLA planners to follow. While not as dramatic and design oriented as the earlier summary of author Wen Bing above, the article did expand somewhat on the meaning of the White Paper.
67  
67  
71  
71  
110  
110  
113  
113  
176 SMS (2013), pp. 48-50. 177 China's
227  
227  
Liang Shoulei, "Loot a Burning House-Fifth of the Thirty-Six Stratagems," Guofang, No. 7,
2 China Military Science was not available to this author before the year 1999, so for that reason Jiang's articles are limited to four years. The issue number and year follow the title of the article in parenthesis, for example, issue 5 of 2000 would be (5/2000).
A black swan is understood for this report as something that comes as a surprise, uses hindsight for rationalization, or influences something.
H. R. McMaster, "How China Sees the World," The Atlantic, May 2020, Internet edition.
Yao Youzhi and Zhao Dexi, "The Generalization, Conservation, and Development of'Strategy'," China Military  Science, No. 4 2001, pp. 120-127.   
This diagram is this author's conceptual understanding of strategy, constructed based on the book's outline.
Li Bingyan, "Emphasis on Strategy: Demonstration of Oriental Military Culture," China Military Science, No. 5 2002, pp.
80-85.
8
Ibid., p. 152.   
Ibid.
Ibid., p. 154.   
Ibid., p. 155.   
The information term, or on occasion the terms "soft power" or "network warfare," was used 12 times on 2004, 18 times in 2005, 7 times in2006, 8 times in 2007, 11 times in 2008, 9 times in 2009, 11 times in 2010, 14 times in  20111, and 12 time in 2012.   
Zuo Dengyun, "Where Lies the Course of AI-Driven Transformation in Maritime Operations," Jiefangjun Bao Online, 12 February 2019.
Michael Raska, "China's Quantum Satellite Experiments: Strategic and Military Implications," S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies (in English) 4 September 2016.
Stephen Chen, "China Building World's Biggest Quantum Research Facility," South China Morning Post, 11 September 2017, as provided by Ms. Cindy Hurst in the May 2018 issue of OE Watch, p. 42.
No broadcaster identified, "The Future is Coming-the Advent of the Era of Quantum Communications," CCTV News, 26 December 2017, as provided by Ms. Cindy Hurst in the May 2018 issue of OE Watch, p. 42.
No broadcaster or title noted, CCTV News (in English), 4 January 2018.
Luo Yuan, "Speech at the 2018 Military Industry Awards Ceremony and Innovation Summit," Sina.com, 23 December 2018, as provided by Ms. Cindy Hurst in the February 2019 issue of OE Watch, pp. 23-24.
Yao Youzhi and Ma Debao, "Sun Zi's Art of War and Mainstream Contemporary Chinese Theories ofWar,"  China Military Science, No. 6 2004, pp. 9-13.   
Ibid.   
Sun Cuijuan and Yin Chengyou, "The Curtain of the 'Era of Machine Warfare' is Being Pulled Open," Jiefangjun Bao Online, 4 May 2017.
No author provided, "Caught in the Middle," The Economist, 14 December 2019.
Cui Yafeng, "On the Change in the Relationship between Strategy and Campaign-Combat Operations in ModernWar," China Military Science, No. 4 2008, pp. 27-37.   
SMS (2013), p. 47.   
Fan Zheng Jian and Ma Bao An, The Theory of Military Strategy, National Defense University PublishingHouse,  2007, p. 288.  
Frontier Defense
Years of Theory and Practice in Border Defense Construction in New China
4/1999
China's Frontier Defense Facing the New Century
3/2003
Deliberation of the Issues of Establishing the Science of Frontier Defense
3/2003
New China's Theory of Frontier Defense and Strategy of Frontier Management
3/2003
Develop China's Superior Frontier Defense Culture and Enhance the Construction of Advanced Frontier Defense Culture
3/2003
Major Strategies of Western Frontier Defense Construction by China's Feudal Dynasties of Past Ages
Information Frontier Defense: Prospects for Future Frontier Defense
3/2003
Mao Zedong Thought
Governing Frontiers
Modernization of Border Defense
6/2003
Sun Tzu
Sun Tzu Thinking of 'Disrupting His Alliances Through Diplomatic Means' and Settlement of International Disputes by Peaceful Means
2/1999
Cultural Heritage of The Art of War and International Security at the Turn of the Century
2/1999
Concept of National Strategy in The Art of War and China's State Security Strategy
2/1999
Art of War
Study of the Strategy of Nuclear Deterrence
2/1999
Sun Tzu
2/1999
Subduing the Enemy without Fighting' and 'Information Warfare
China's Ancient Military Science and The Art of War
Carry Forward the Quintessence of Sun Zi's Art of War and Promote Peace and Security
Open a New Chapter in the Study of Sun Zi's Art of War
1/2001
Sun Zi
National Security Strategy of China
1/2001
On Issues of War at the Beginning of the New Millennium
1/2001
An Analysis
Sun Zi
On Strategic Thinking
3/2004
Theory of Strategic Deterrence with Chinese Characteristics
3/2004
A Study
Theory of Marxist Strategic Psychological Warfare
4/2004
Basic Features of Strategic Psychological Warfare
4/2004
Developing Trends of Psychological Warfare in Grand Strategy
4/2004
Operational Role of Political Work-On Media Warfare, Psychological Warfare
Law Warfare
4/2004
Characteristics of Information Mobilization
4/2004
Prevalence of Clausewitz's 'On War' in China
5/2004
Sun Zi's Art of War and Mainstream Contemporary Chinese Theories of War
6/2004
Sun Zi's Art of War: Gem of Chinese Strategic Culture
6/2004
Summary of the Symposium on the Study and Application of Sun Tzu's Art of War in the Information Age
1/2005
Strategic Political Work and Strategic Psychological Warfare
3/2005
Important Issues Concerning Strategic Psychological Warfare in Informationalized Conditions
3/2005
Analyze Sun Zi's Art of War
Thirty-Six Stratagems
3/2005
A Study of the Operational Mechanism of Psychological Warfare
4/2005
Characteristics of Strategic Psychological Warfare
4/2005
National Interests and Military Security
6/2005
Military Strategic Thinking
Scientific Decision-Making
1/2006
Development of CPLA Psychological Warfare Thinking in War Times
1/2006
Ensure Historical Orientation and Promote All-Round Innovation of Army Informationalization
1/2007
Study of Urban Terrain Operations
2/2007
Unity of an Army of the Party, of the People
Marx and Engels and Clausewitz's 'On War'
5/2007
Nature
Characteristics of Strategy
6/2007
Promote a Better and Faster Scientific Development of Informationalization in Political Work
1/2008
China's Strategic Cultural Evolution Ideas
Orientation of its Values
2/2008
Study of Non-War Military Operations
3/2008
Fundamental Issues of Complex Electromagnetic Environments
4/2008
Reform and Opening-Up
5/2008
A Study of the Laws in Ethnical and Religious Issues Involved in Armed Conflicts
2/2009
An Analysis
Comprehensive National Power Plus State Soft power
5/2009
Characteristics and Trends of the Development of Special Forces
5/2009
The Nature of Psychological Warfare, 'Spiritual Warfare' as Opposed to War of Flesh and Blood-a Philosophical Perspective on the Nature of Psychological Warfare
6/2009
Innovative Development in Compiling and Revising PLA's Operational Doctrines and its Implications
6/2009
Preliminary Study of Compressed Operations in Modern Warfare
1/2010
Development of National Interests
Development of Military Strategy
3/2010
Characteristics of China's Traditional Strategic Thought
3/2010
An Analysis
Controlling Strategic Maritime Passage Ways
5/2010
PLA Informationization
Development of a Space Military Force
6/2010
Fundamental Strategy for Building the PLA into a Powerful Iron Army-Studying the Newly Revised 55 Regulations of the People's Liberation Army on Political Work
6/2010
An Explorative Study of the Laws in Developing Capabilities for Systems Operations Based on Information Systems
1/2011
A Study of Basic Issues on Systems Operations Based on Information Systems
1/2011
Clearly Understand the Laws, Master the Direction, Speed Up Promoting the Change of the Formation Mode of War-Fighting Capabilities
3/2011
Hu Jintao
National Defense and Army Building As Creative Development of the Party's Military Guidance Theory
4/2011
Unified Planning for Weapons and Equipment Mobilization
Guidance of Scientific Development Methodology-Views on Studying Hu Jintao's Mastering and Applying the Fundamental Methods of Overall Planning and All-Round Consideration
4/2011
On the Problem of Cultural Development for Joint Operations with PLA Characteristics
4/2011
An Exploration of Hu Jintao's Strategic Thinking on Strengthening the Military by Means of Science and Technology
5/2011
Strategic Considerations of the Army in Speeding Up Transforming the Mode of Generating Warfighting Capabilities
1/2012
Scientifically Judge the New Situation and Calmly Respond to New Challenges-An Interview
Major General Chen Zhou
AMS Center for National Defense Policy
3/2012
Basic Issues in Speeding Up Transforming the Mode of Generating Warfighting Capabilities
5/2012
A Study of Systemic Warfighting Command Based on Information Systems
6/2012
6/2012
Development of National Defense Science and Technology
6/2012
Military Personnel
6/2012
No titles are listed for special topics, just general subject areas for which there may or may not be translations available. Special topics of interest do not have titles, just the number of times they appeared, which included the following: historical/ancient experiences; war guidance; RMA (25); strategic deterrence (2); system of systems; Marx (29); psychological war (13); 3 warfares; geostrategy/geographical (14); nature of war; war theory; space warfare/power (8); war control; national interests (6); urban operations; Hu on the military (42); military guidance (17); non-war military operations (8); military pre-practice (6); warfighting capabilities (21); advanced military culture (starts in 2012, 18).
In addition, the following articles were available on the topics of active defense, People's War, frontier or border defense, 
Sun Tzu
Mao Zedong
); information war/information operations (13); RMA (13); campaign (10); political officers (12); deterrence (4); Korea (11); Kosovo (13); psywar/psyops (9); space (9); Iraq (5); science and technology increase combat power (3); and (1) each for asymmetry, nanotechnology, stand-off war, war control, foresight, and non-war issues. There were also 34 articles (6/2000 x 6; 3/2002 x 6; 4/2002 x 9; 5/2002 x 5; and 6/2002 x 7) on Chinese Military Culture. Many of these were summarized in Chapter Three (pp. 56-89) of the 2009 book titled The Dragon's Quantum Leap.
In addition, the following articles were available on the topics of active defense, local war under high-tech conditions, People's War, frontier or border defense, Sun Tzu, and Mao Zedong.
Active defense was only discussed briefly in the time period in the following manner: In addition, the following articles were available on the topics of active defense, People's War and civil-military integration, frontier or border defense, Sun Tzu, Mao Zedong, and Xi Jinping. 
One of the most important elements of understanding China's way of war is to understand how members of the PLA utilize specific thought constructs to plan military operations. This section initially discusses similarities in military thought concepts used by Russia and China. That section is followed by a few specific terms in the PLA's lexicon that do not appear in Russia's.
Russia: In the 21 st century there are three significant trends in the "nature of armed struggle." 149 First is the shift toward aerospace (longer range, greater power and accuracy, possibility of consecutive and simultaneous attacks across the entire theater of operations by piloted and pilotless aerial vehicles) 150 ; Second is the move from positional confrontations to the evolution of exchanging fire from a distance (precision guided munitions, etc.) with critical infrastructure (control, economic, and logistic systems) targeting priorities in the IPW; 151 Third is the role played by information superiority, special operations forces, and EW (to disorganize control); network-centric methods used to control actions, which are characterized by increased operational speed and efficiency; and the use of special forces to achieve strategic goals [destroy launchers, destroy air defenses, capture oil platforms, PSYOP, etc.]. 152
China: Describing future trends has long been a PLA tradition. For example, in the book Chinese Views of Future Warfare, author Gao Heng, a research fellow at the Institute of World Economics and Politics (Beijing, Academy of Social Sciences) authored a chapter in 1995 on "Future Military Trends." 
153
154
155
COF. 198
China: Huang Shuofeng, perhaps China's leading expert on comprehensive national power (CNP), writes, "Comprehensive National Power research is done in order to accurately analyze the international strategic situation and evaluate the comprehensive power of enemy states, allies, and one's own country for the purpose of scientifically planning one's own national strategic decision making." 200 He uses theoretical research, systems theory, and mathematical methods to develop his qualitative and quantitative analysis. CNP represents an objective reality assessment of the strategic environment. 201 CNP is a dynamic process but establishing superiority in CNP does not automatically spell success, as things change over time, and the subjective input of commanders, leaders, or scientists can dramatically change earlier calculations. Qualitative factors impacting on CNP include technological advancements, economics, strategy, population, national territory, and international influence.