# ID: e3c04d104e4d4f0bba492f48857a8d14
# Title: Plague and the Fall of Baghdad (1258)
# Database: ProQuest
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
In 1977 and 1978, historians John Norris and Michael Dols engaged in a heated debate about the geographic origin of the Black Death, the plague pandemic that devastated the Middle East, North Africa and Europe in the fourteenth century. According to Norris, the wave of plague that moved northward across the lands of the Golden Horde (what is today southwest Russia, north of the Caucasus Mountains) in 1346, and southward towards Tabriz and Baghdad in 1347, emerged out of the Caucasus Mountains themselves. According to Dols, the Black Death’s origins were much further to the east, in Central Asia. Norris argued there was no evidence that plague moved due west across the steppe from a region in western Kyrgyzstan, where plague was reported in 1338–9, over to the territory of the Golden Horde by 1346. Dols, in contrast, both in his direct debate with Norris and in other writings, insisted on taking at face value the testimony of Arabic writers at the time of the Black Death who tied the presence of plague in the Black Sea and Mediterranean regions to events further east. 1 What could be called the ‘rapid trans-Eurasian transmission thesis’ was also adopted by William McNeill in his Plagues and Peoples , which appeared (unbeknownst to Norris and Dols) in 1976. Although McNeill’s claims about the Black Death’s origins in east China proved unpersuasive, for the next 40 years, the assumption remained that plague had covered at least 3 000 km between Central Asia and the Crimea in about a decade’s time. In other words, all these theories placed plague’s westward movements squarely within the fourteenth century. 2