# ID: e46086138fbc470ea25c2f16fc434e70
# Title: Battle Analysis: Villa Verde Trail, Luzon Deliberate Assault, Mountain, Jungle, February-May 1945.
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1984.0
# Fulltext:
Infantry Division conducted offensive operations to
16 . This book, written by a Japanese author who lived through this period, is a strong polemic against Japan's militarism of the 1930's and the early 1940's. The author provides some useful facts and figures on Japan's prewar military induction system, but the main value of the work lies in the picture it paints of the pervasive militarism of Japanese society at the time. Not intended as a scholarly, or even objective, work, iit does provide a good insight into the cultural factors which motivated Japan in World War It.
Triumph in the Philippines, by Robert Ross Smith. This work is probably the definitive military history of the US reconquest of the Philippines. Intended for the military reader-the degree of detail is too excruciating for all but the most masochistic general reader--the book relies almost exclusively on primary sources.
Smith provides a good overview of the Luzon-Formosa debate, as well as the overall plan for the Luzon invasion.
One particularly valuable chapter deals with the Japanese, where Smith describes Yamashita's strategy, logistics, command arrangements, and troop dispositions. Throughout, the author remains dispassionate and objective, providing a history rich in detail if not in color.
Soldier's Guide to the Japanese Army, Military Intelligence Service, War Department. Written in 1944, this 182-page pamphlet was designed to familiarize the average American soldier with the Japanese Army. Surprisingly, the work generally avoids many of the more egregious stereotypes of the Japanese prevalent in the US during this period. Rather, it attempts--and usually succeeds--in describing both the strengths and weakness of the Japanese soldier. Given the "hands-on" nature of the pamphlet, much of it is devoted to Japanese weapons, ranging from small arms to artillery to armor. However, the work also contains useful information on the organizational structure of the Japanese Army, as well as its tactics in the offense and defense. Such data is noticeably absent from much of the more recent literature 1-4 ':i-" " I on the Japanese Army, and thus this little pamphlet fills an important historical void.
Louis L. Snyder's Historical Guide to World War II. This book is intended U.. primarily as a desk-side reference for general readers. It is arranged alphabetically, with encyclopedia-type entries. While lacking documentation, it does provide some -useful facts and figures. The sections entitled, "Japan at War," and "The United States at War," for example, contain good summaries of such diverse national factors as civilian morale, mobilization of manpower, production statistics, labor supply, etc..
While hardly a substitute for more detailed works, it does serve as a good repository for a variety of data all too often dispersed in a number of volumes.
Always a Commander. The Reminiscences of Major General William H. Gill, by Edward Jaquelin Smith. A short section covers the action on the Villa Verde Trail. It
shows the commander's general impressions of the battle well (by the 1st of April, Gill was convinced the mission was too big for his division) but does not explain why he fought the battle as he did.
Operations Reports, After-Action Reports, Intelligence Summaries, etc. The reports that were available were complete and provided valuable information pertaining to the area of operations, the scope of the operation, and the assigned missions. Many of the available documents were from late in the campaign; however, they were useful in determining task organization and other pertinent unit information. Several of the subordinate unit Operations Orders also proved to be reliable because they contained information that could not be found in nonexistant higher headquarters field orders. During the first four decades of the 20th Century, Japan had created an impressive industrial society. Nevertheless, Japan was at heart a poor nation; its only major asset was its 75,000,000 well-educated and industrious people. The country lacked almost all essential raw materials--iron, coke, oil, rubber, bauxite, manganese, lead, copper--for modern industry. This need to secure resources, as well as a desire to maintain foreign markets for Japanese goods, convinced the Japanese that territorial expansion was a necessity if the nation was to prosper. The French Indochina, and Japan was well on the road towards establishing its "Greater -East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere."
Long before the Japanese occupation of Indochina, however, Tokyo's objectives were coming into increasing conflict with those of the United States. Determined not to sanction aggression, Washington's initial policy toward Japanese conquests was E simply to refuse to recognize sovereign/ty over the occupied territory. Gradually, the American stance hardened as Japan refused to accede to Washington's demands to cease aggression in China. Finally, in July 1941--following the Japanese move into Indochina--President Roosevelt ordered all Japanese assets in America frozen; Britain and the Netherlands immediately took similar action. The net effect of this move was
to create an economic blockade, including an oil embargo, against Japan. According to one American newspaper, it was "the most drastic blow short of war."
For Japan, oil indeed was the critical commodity, in particular for the Navy.
...
Attempts at restricting internal consumption in the late 1930's were not successful in reducing Tokyo's dependence on its three principal suppliers: the United States, Britain, and the Netherlands. Through stockpiling, however, Japan had managed to accumulate 23,000,000 barrels of crude oil and 15,000,000 barrels of refined products--enou.h for one year of war. Thus the American embargo, supported by Britain and the Netherlands, gave Japan only two options: disengagement from China and Indochina in response to Washington's demands, or immediate; rapid expansion further south to secure the oil of the Dutch East Indies before stockpiles were consumed. To the militarists in Tokyo, the United States' action was the last step in the encirclement of the Empire by hostile powers, a denial of Japan's rightful place in Asia. As a result of this mindset, the course Tokyo chose was war. r
To achieve its objective of securing resources, Japan believed it could fight a would run south through Wake, the Marshall, and the Gilbert Islands. The southern flank would be anchored by the Solomon Islands, New Guinea, and the Dutch East .,
Indies (See Map 1). These bases would provide an outer shield behind which the LF esources of the region--primarily oil, rubber, and tin--could be exploited, while providing the Japanese with secure interior lines of communication. In effect, Tokyo's strategy was predicated on the premise that the United States would accept Japan's fait accompli and negotiate rather than fight a costly, protracted war to regain lost territory. Even if America did fight, Japan believed the Allies would wear themselves out by frontal assaults on its strongly-defended perimeter.
The Japanese fixation with a string of lightning victories followed by a negotiated settlement was a legacy from the recent past. In 1894, Japan precipitated a war with China over control of Korea. In rapid succession, Tokyo's forces destroyed Chinese naval units, overran southern Manchuria, and captured the port of Wei-hai-wei in China proper. Less than a year later, the Treaty of Shimonoseki granted Japan a large Chinese indemnity, full independence for Korea, and ceded Formosa to the Japanese. The war was a brilliant debut for Japan's newly-modernized
Army and Navy, and demonstrated that the country had joined the ranks of the modern military powers.
Less than a decade later, Japan would again astound the world with its military victories, this time against Russia. The issue once again was over influence in North Asia, particularly Korea. Japan initiated hostilities with a surprise attack on the Russian fleet at Port Arthur. This was followed by a dazzling string of victories over Russian forces, highlighted by the battles of Tshushima at sea and Mukden on land.
Exhausted by the war, Russia sued for peace eighteen months later, and under American mediation, conceded Japan's paramountcy in Korea and southern Manchuria.
There is little doubt that the Sino-Japanese and Russo-Japanese Wars convinced Tokyo that it was not necessary to completely destroy an opponent in order to
."
,.
----. ,,", achieve desired objectives, but rather that a limited war could obtain the same goals.
The Japanese misperception of the anticipated American reaction to the Pearl
Harbor attack probably represents one of history's greatest examples of national self-delusion. If Japan's war aims were limited, Pearl Harbor insured that those of the United States would not be. America isolationist sentiment, so prevalent in 1940 and 1941, vanished overnight. Embued with the strategic tradition of General Grant and annihilation of the enemy, the United States would not settle for a negotiated peace, or even a return to the status quo ante bellum. Rather, America was determined to destroy the entire structure of Japanese militarism, which demanded unconditional surrender of the enemy. American sentiment--and strategy--were perhaps best summed up by Admiral Halsey, who on 9 December 1941 stated, "Before we're through with them, the Japanese language will be spoken only in hell."
Japan's misperception of America's reaction to its initiation of war in the Pacific underscores the fundamental political, social, cultural, and economic dif.ferences between the two nations. Although Japan was a modern state with a formal constitution, cabinet, and civil service, the legacy of the feudal past weighed .':
heavily on the nation. Hundreds of years of rule by men of the sword preconditioned the population to accept rule by military leaders, and as the militarists gained the upper hand in national politics during the 1930's, there was little public reaction.
Indeed, throughout the culturally homogenous society, the concept-of obligation--to family, to emp!oyer, to :he nation, to the Emperor--was paramount. Both prior to and
during the war years, the government could and did exploit such sentiment to demand extraordinary sacrifices from the populace.
The Japanese sense of obligation was also exploited by the Army. Between the ages of seventeen and forty, all able bodied males were subject to military conscription, and a phased system of military service was developed. All men who reached the age of twenty were required to perform "Service with the Colors," or r 2-4 %o...-.
6P. The Japanese doctrine of warfare was reflected in the organization of the Army. Basically, it was a manpower-intensive, light infantry force--the ideal structure for closing with the enemy.
Two types of division structures were employed, triangular (with three infantry regiments), and brigaded (with two infantry brigades).
At the height of the war, sixty-nine of the Army's 127 divisions were triangular, with N brigaded divisions accounting for twenty-five of the total. The triangular division consisted of about 16,000 troops with supporting artillery, cavalry, engineer, and transport regiments. While only slightly larger in size than a standard US division of the period, the Japanese triangular division was equipped with 2,200 more rifles.
Brigaded divisions were somewhat smaller; they consisted of 12,000 troops and lacked some supporting armament. In general, brigaded divisions were used for garrison duty and anti-guerrilla operations. At the start of the Pacific War, most Army units were equipped with 6.5mm rifles and light machine guns. Profiting from their experiences in jungle fighting, however, the Japanese began to replace these weapons in mid-war with 7.7mm rifles and machine guns, since the muzzle velocity and bullet weight of the earlier models were inadequate.
The Japanese political and military syste n--a military largely free of civilian control, an autocratic government, an obedient and quiescent population--contrasted markedly with that of the United States. Long suspicious of standing armies, America The Army, with some 10,400,000 military personnel, was the largest service. The
US division structure was similar to that of the Japanese triangular division and consisted of three infantry regiments with supporting elements. Although the US division had fewer rifles, it had significantly greater firepower in the form of more automatic rifles and machine guns, and heavier field artillery (105am and 155mm versus 70mm, 75mm, and 155mm weapons). In addition, the American division was highly mobile; all elements except the infantry were motorized. By contrast, the Japanese triangular division still included 5,215 horses in its table of organization and equipment at the end of the war.
The difference in political and military values between the United States andi.
Japan were underscored by the vast difference in the war-making potential of the two nations. The US began the war with a population of 132,000,000--twice that of Japan.
Although war industry accounted for only two percent of total US industrial capacity in 1939, America had vast reserves of raw materials, energy, and space. The Japanese themselves realized the American potential; in the summer of 1941, military planners estimated war potential and assigned the United States the following advantages: steel, 20:1; oil, 100:1; coal, 10:1; aircraft, 5:1; shipping, 2:1; labor force, 5:1. Against the torrent of US industrial production, the Japanese found it impossible to hold their own. Lacking raw materials, the Empire was dependent on the arrival of merchantmen from the far-flung corners carrying the essential supplies: oil from the Indies, rubber and tin from Malaya, iron ore from China and Manchuria. By utilizing stockpiles, Tokyo managed to keep increasing production of war material until 1944.
Beyond that point, however, the American submarine offensive began to have its effect, sinking 529 Japanese merchant ships that year alone. Such losses could be "..made good only by new construction, which was now impossible. Well before the war 2-7 J . . began, senior officials realized that such an outcome would be possible in the event of a protracted war. As Admiral Yamamoto stated in the summer of 1941, "...I will unleash all I have in the first six months and promise you an uninterrupted sequence of victories. But I warn you, if hostilities continue for two or three years, then I have no confidence that ultimate victory will be ours."
True to Yamamoto's word, the Japanese did achieve a string of lightning victories in the efforts to secure both resources and a defensive perimeter.
Simultaneously with the attack on Pearl Harbor, Japan launched assaults against other ,Allied positions in the Far East. Guam, Wake, and Hong Kong fell in December, and three days after Pearl Harbor, Japanese forces landed in the Philippines. On 15 February 1942, Singapore--along with 70,000 troops of the British Empire-surrendered. Less than two months later, Bataan capitulated, yielding 75,000 American and Filipino prisoners. 3y May 1942, Japan threatened India in the west, Australia in the south, and Midway and Hawaii in the east. Indeed, it looked as if Admiral Yamamoto's pre-war quote was well on the way to fulfillment. "After two years of war, we shall have made all the conquered territory in the south impregnable."
Despite Japanese hopes, it soon became apparent that the United States was not about to concede mastery of the Pacific to Tokyo. While America did not renounce its prewar strategy of defeating Germany first, it did begin to' fortify lines of communication across the South Pacific to Australia. In addition, rather than accepting a completely defensive strategy, the United States began to take limited offensive actions. As early as February and March 1942, small carrier task forces hit the Marshalls, Wake, and Marcus Islands.
Eventually, a two-pronged offensive strategy against Japan emerged. In the south, two American forces would converge on the Japanese bastion at Rabaul on New The American strategy was based on the premise that an invasion of the Japanese Home Islands would be required. A key prerequisite for such an operation would be aerial bombardment, which planners felt could best be undertaken from bases along the south China coast. In such a strategy, Formosa played a critical role; from here US forces could sever the air and sea lifelines from Japan to its Southeast Asia possessions. In addition, Formosa was less than 1,500 miles from Tokyo--well within Given the importance of Luzon Island, the Japanese originally envisioned that the decisive battle for the Philippines would be fought on that island. The US assault on Leyte, however, caused a change in Japanese strategy, and Tokyo began to commit significant forces there. The result was disaster; as one author wrote, "Leyte turned
into a graveyard of Japanese hopes." By the time the struggle for the island ended, Japan had lost 56,000 dead, its Navy had suffered staggering losses--twenty-six ships, including four aircraft carriers--and several hundred carrier and land-based aircraft had been destroyed. The commander of the Japanese 14th Army Area in the Philippines, General Yamashita, had steadfastly opposed a major stand on Leyte.
Eventually, he was able to convince his immediate superior, the Commander of the Southern Army, to abandon the island and direct reinforcements to Luzon.
Unlike MacArthur three years earlier, Yamashita did not intend to defend the Central Plains-Manila Bay region for several reasons. Knowing there was no hope of 5'
reinforcements, there was little need to keep a major port open. Also, Yamashita viewed the Bataan Peninsula as a cul-de-sac, where his troops would find little food and where the Americans could bring overwhelming fire and airpower to bear against 'him. Rather, he decided to fight a static defense, moving the bulk of his forces to mountain strongholds from where he hoped to delay the inevitable Allied advance on Japan. On paper, Yamashita commanded a significant force--some 275,000 troops. Terrain:
Observation and fields of fire: The Japanese were defending in depth along the Villa Verde Trail. The first few kilometers of the trail crisscrossed the top of a bare ridgeline under the direct observation of Japanese who were occupying strongly fortified positions along the higher elevations of the trail. As the trail rose from a mere 400 feet at Santa Maria to nearly 5,000 feet at the Salacsac Pass, movement became more rigorous and restricted and was virtually limited to the poorly constructed road. As such, US movement was extremely vulnerable to Japanese machine gun and mortar fire. The Japanese were initially successful with a reverse slope defense but were later neutralized by US high angle mortar fire and air sorties.
The nature of the terrain along the Villa Verde Trail was a significant combat multiplier for the Japanese. Their well-orchestrated defense and masterful use of the terrain allowed them to defend much longer than would have been expected.
Cover and Concealment: The terrain provided good cover and concealment from the effects of direct fire weapons. The effect of progressively higher elevation, however, allowed the Japanese to cover the area with fire from key heights thus t( reducing the US ability to take advantage of the terrain. Thick forests and jungle vegetation in some areas of the trail also provided excellent cover and concealment. q
The advantage, of course, normally rests with a defender who can take advantage of the best possible terrain.
Obstacles: The entire Caraballo spur which divided the central plains from the eastern coastal plains was the major obstacle in this battle. The only east-west .
passage was the erratic Villa Verde Trail. The trail itself was so restrictive that it channelized US forces and compounded their susceptibility to enemy fire. The
Japanese were able to defend in depth along the narrow trail and slowed US progress.
The thick vegetation and the steep slopes along the trail also became an impediment to US progress. The composition of the soil could also be categorized as an obstacle.
In dry weather, the dust affected equipment operation and obscured visibility. When it rained, the mud became severe enough to halt operations. The Cabalisiaan River crosses the trail twice; once near Santa Maria and again about five miles northeast of 1.. the first crossing. The 10th Reconnaissance Regiment attempted to stop the 127th
Infantry at the second of these crossings but was unsuccessful. The river at this point was little more than a stream and presented no obstacle to the US. operation.
The key terrain in the area was the Caraballo Mountain chain, a spur which separated the central plains from the Japanese main supply route. The only promising passageway across the spur was the Villa Verde Trail which was little more than a carabao path. The total length of the trail was twenty-seven miles from Santa Maria to Santa Fe, but the air distance was eleven miles, indicating the winding character of the road. There are numerous hilltops and ridges along the path that L.
could be construed as key terrain because they afforded the Japanese a marked Cabalisiaan River crossing and the western and eastern limits of the Salacsac Pass.
The Japanese made superb use of the terrain and exploited every advantage the ground offered. They established an effective system of mutually supporting defensive -% positions that covered every twist and fold of the trail. Every knoll and hillock along the trail held at least one machine gun emplacement; every wooded draw providing a route for outflanking a position was zeroed in for artillery or mortars. Caves, natural or man made, came to characterize the Japanese defense.
Avenues of Approach: With the exception of the Villa Verde Trail, the rugged, heavily-vegetated precipitous terrain was totally inhospitable to ground maneuver of I any military significance. In every instance, the terrain favored the defender. Direct and indirect fires by the Japanese were extremely effective due to the absence of maneuver space. With minor exceptions, the enemy could not be outflanked because of terrain limitations. The only approach was a direct frontal assault up the trail.
Strength and Composition, 32d Infantry Division:
.
As the campaign opened, the 32d Infantry Division had an assigned strength of 666 officers and 11,593 enlisted men. Of this strength, 625 officers and 10,499 enlisted men were actually present for duty on Luzon. The Division was almost 4,000 men understrength. This shortage included many commissioned and noncommissioned officers and was to be exacerbated by combat losses in April, losses which led to substantial leadership and morale problems later in the campaign. The problem was compounded because the Division came directly from action in western Leyte. The men had less than three weeks rest--some units less than two weeks--before being committed along the Villa Verde Trail.
For this operation, the Division was subordinate to the Sixth Army and I Corps.  . .
--.
-. ' ''""'% °.. , "%.u "" .'
..-_"_'""_"-,'_"_"________ ""__"__'___ '"""_'"___'_,___.-_________._'____-____'____'________ . '5._ ' '-'' '-',' , '' %' ''2ai,'',_' -final analysis, it was primarily the weapons of the infantry small unit which would % ( decide the battle.
US forces held a decided edge over their adversary in technology, but in many instances were unable to capitalize on their advantages. Areas of major technological superiority included indirect fire systems, air superiority, and communications.
Improvements made in field artillery between the First and Second World Wars -provided a longer ranged medium artillery weapon which, with its improved munitions, proved much more effective than its predecessor. The improved fire control system allowed unprecedented massing of fires. The rugged nature of the Villa Verde Trail constricted this ability to mass fires. It was generally impossible to position supporting artillery so that more than one battery (sometimes only a section of a single gun) could range a particular target. Thus, one of the major technological advantages of the US forces was usually unavailable to the 32d Infantry Division.
By this time in the Pacific theater, American air superiority was so pronounced it was virtually air supremacy. This allowed US ground units to plan for and use massive amounts of close air support. Unfortunately, the nature of combat along the Villa Verde Trail obviated the continuous application of close air support. The 3apanese defenders were well dug in and had expertly camouflaged their positions.
Probably, only point type munitions could have defeated these emplacements, but these were not available in 1945. Additionally, the battle occurred at such close range that it was highly improbable that close air support could have been employed
without unduly endangering friendly forces.
Finally, the weather in the area of operations was not conducive to air operations. The combination of fog and precipitous heights made air support potentially dangerous to the fliers as well as the ground forces.
The communication system tied these technological advances to the infantryman.
Here the system worked well. Field wire and radios were netted together to
.--coordinate support and control front line units. In too many instances, the support . ' -\ requiring coordination simply was not available for the reasons mentioned earlier.
The .50-caliber machine gun was used with the 37mm mountain gun to support the frontal assaults with direct fire. These weapons were employed on the flanks of the attack to suppress enemy both on the objective and on interlocking supporting positions. The terrain required a weapon with a range of 1,000-2,000 yards, and the .50-caliber machine gun met that requirement.
Once the assault elements of the attacking force reached the Japanese positions, they had to clear bunkers, tunnels, and caves. Machine guns and mountain guns were of limited value here, but the flamethrower, military demolitions, and hand grenades proved their worth again and again. Flamethrowers and hand grenades provided close-in suppression, while demolitions were used to seal positions with the Japanese still inside.
This battle, as well as all of World War II, reflected the significance of ,-..:. .t Japanese to conduct a static defense that required US forces to "slug it out."
The Japanese doctrine and tactics of a static defense in depth with human-wave-counterattacks could be adequately supported by the level of technology available.
The Japanese displayed total mastery of cave warfare using a successive series of interconnecting positions along the trail. The Japanese 90mm mortar and individual weapons were the equal of their US counterparts. Their light machine gun was also equal in capability, but it was available in much greater quantities. Finally, their 47mm anti-tank gun was effective but limited in use because of the few areas allowing direct fire.
Technology did effect how the battle was fought, but it did not significantly alter the scheme of maneuver of either force. Technology's major contribution was to assist the US by limiting Japanese resupply and reinforcements through air attacks, the preparation of fortified positions prior to an attack through massive artillery and air attacks, and the clearing of caves through the use of napalm. 2. Engineer expendable supplies were limited.
Ordnance vehicles Class IX was limited.
4. Class V. 81mm mortar and artillery ammunition for 105mm and larger were ," limited during the period 10 April to 30 May.
-With the low level of technology applied by the US, very few items of equipment were introduced into the campaign, explaining the low level impact maintenance operations had on the campaign. physically unfit for combat.
Even with the excellent replacement program, the Division did experience some critical shortages of infantry officers, medical corps officers, and medical department enlisted personnel.
Japanese Logistical/Administrative Systems: Throughout the battle, the Japanese were plagued by logistical and administrative problems. These problems were never resolved and eventually contributed to the Japanese defeat and subsequent withdrawal.
Due to the relatively static nature of the Japanese defense, the primary demands on the logistical system were for Class I, excessive amounts of Class V, As the battle began, the Japanese were already experiencing shortages in all classes of supply since resupply to Luzon from the Japanese mainland had been interdicted. As the battle progressed, shortages increased due to both in-country depletion and the interdiction of lines of communication. Japanese survivors indicated that throughout the battle, although ammunition remained plentLful, severe shortages in food, clothing, and medical supplies were experienced.
Japanese supply dumps throughout Luzon were routinely attacked and damaged by US aircraft. Additionally, the critically important food supply (rice) was obtained entirely from the Cagayan Valley and was subject to continuous Filipino guerrilla
attacks and US aircraft strikes.
Medical supplies were apparently inadequate throughout Luzon, and there was no hope of improving the situation.
In addition to attacking the source of Japanese supplies, the Americans mounted an increasingly effective campaign against the Japanese LOCs. Japanese supplies were .. , originally moved primarily by motor vehicle since their air capability had been
completely destroyed. Upon reaching the Villa Verde Trail, supplies were moved by vehicle for a limited distance and then were off-loaded and moved by foot. Once again, US airpower and artillery were able to interdict these LOCs and limit resupply I operations to foot movement during the hours of darkness when they were less detectable and less vulnerable. Additionally, these LOCs tying the Villa Verde Trail to other supply centers were routinely interdicted by Filipino guerrillas. Finally, the Japanese limited communication system precluded the rapid dissemination of requests for supplies.
As the battle progressed, the Japanese decided to stockpile each defensive position with Class I and V prior to occupation rather than relying on ground resupply during the battle. Eventually, the entire logistical system broke down due to excessive personnel losses and repeated US attacks.
The Japanese solution was to use ever-increasing amounts of manpower to carry in supplies which became limited to Class V at the expense of all others. As the Japanese continued to "defend to the last man," salvage and maintenance operations ceased.
The Japanese personnel replacement system became limited to the retraining of all available troops into infantrymen and then rushing them as reinforcements to the * Villa Verde Trail. Despite this desperate system, the tenacity and effectiveness of these soldiers was commendable.
The enormity of the personnel replacement requirements is evidenced by the casualty figures of the primary units. The 10th Reconnaissance Regiment was reduced to 80 of 250 personnel during its delaying operations, while the 2d Tank Division lost 3-14 the majority of its tanks and three-quarters of its personnel (5,000 remaining) in battles at San Jose a month earlier. The 2d Tank Division's losses included the majority of its combat troops and were so severe that the unit was stationed at Dupax to train its combat service support personnel as infantrymen. This was supposed to be a two-month process, but the Division had to be committed to the Villa Verde Trail after only one month's preparation.
Major General Konuma, the Bambang Front's commanding general, was aware of the unit's lack of training but committed it because it was the only combat unit available. During the remainder of the battle, no attempt was made to provide individual replacements. Entire combat service support units from the Front's assets would receive accelerated small unit tactical training and then be committed to the battle.
Undoubtedly, the overall shortages of personnel, equipment, and supplies contributed to the final Japanese defeat. The Japanese would routinely conduct human-wave assaults rather than remain in defensive positions once they had run out of ammunition. Their primary downfall was linked to their inability to reinforce critically vulnerable defensive positions and to recover from continued personnel losses resulting from suicide attacks. Rather incredibly, the Japanese spirit to resist was able to overcome the severe food shortages and the lack of medical supplies which resulted in numerous nonbattle casualties. These nonbattle casualties were often utilized on suicide missions. In summary, it appears that the relatively static nature of the Japanese strongpoint defense minimized the detrimental effect of poorly Infantry (-) is probably due to its mission which was (after relief by the 127th Infantry) to mop up isolated pockets of resistance. This example also shows evidence of task organizing, as one regimental headquarters (127th Infantry) controls five battalions plus supporting units. In some other instances, this task organizing was not followed, and the Division simply relieved units in place as they began to lose combat effectiveness.
The Buena Vista Regiment was a Filipino unit outfitted with US equipment and utilized as a fourth regiment of the Division.
The resources used in this example enhanced the Division's combat power. Field ,
). " 'o .
Artillery, mortars, and tanks were all used. Additionally, the 114th Combat Engineer .
Battalion operated in support of the 32d Infantry Division during the Luzon campaign.
Their major activities included the construction of three combat roads: along the Villa Verde Trail, the Ambayang River Trail, and the Arboredo River Trail. The Villa Verde road was completed to a length of eighteen miles with half the construction two lanes. The remainder was only one lane. Some spurs and turn-arounds were built from this road, but no alternate roads were constructed. The road improvement proved valuable. Prior to this construction, the trail could support only man-packed, animal, or occasionally, one-quarter ton traffic. By April, over 148 vehicles were using the I.road daily, and this considerably eased the logistical burden of the Division.
Additionally, four artillery battalions and a tank platoon were eventually employed from this road. In many other instances, the terrain hampered the utilization of these supporting units, and the Division's resources were limited to small arms and limited artillery support (usually in an H&I role). The Division's I&R Platoon was another resource which was effectively used. This unit operated independently and provided much of the intelligence the Division was able to use. Later, when this force was attached to units in contact, it lost much of its effectiveness.
Aerial artillery spotting was the final resource used by the Division. The terrain imposed severe restrictions upon all aspects of the battle, and aerial forward observers were one solution which was especially useful.
The staff coordinated the use of resources, but factual information on staff responsibilities and functioning is lacking. Inferences based upon existing records and unit performance allow some suppositions concerning staff expertise. Continuous written orders were provided throughout the operation, and these orders followed the approved format although they were issued in an abbreviated form. The G2 emphasized patrolling and provided commanders with estimates of enemy capabilities In conducting these attacks, heavy reliance was placed on a communications system constructed around wire and messenger service. Radios, suffering from range attenuation due to the terrain, provided a back-up to this system. Due to the slow nature of these battles, the system proved sufficient to handle requirements. At regiment and lower levels, emphasis shifted to primary reliance on radios, which were initially in short supply. The Division used teletype for communications with I Corps.
Enemy action did affect communications, especially wire systems. The Japanese
soldier had proved himself to be an expert in infiltration, and he used those skills to penetrate the Division's lines and cut wire.
After initial experiences produced casualties, the Division refrained from repairing cut wire until the next morning. Loss of wire, when coupled with radio problems at night, did cause some loss of communications.
One of the Division's strong points concerned its transmission security.
Sufficient code clerks were available as other message center personnel had been cross trained in cryptographic skills. Operations codes were well used and were changed during the operation with minimal disruption.
Japanese Command, Control, and Communications Systems: When discussing the 3 3 Japanese C systems, it is important to make the distinction between C at the tactical and the division and higher levels.
C 3 at the tactical unit level was,_ characterized by hasty and relatively simple plans, executed by small staffs, and coordinated in relative isolation. At the division and higher level, planning became more detailed, but communications with higher headquarters and with forces available
to influence the tactical situation became extremely limited. Due to the inability of the higher headquarters to influence the tactical battle, execution and planning became primarily decentralized.
During the battle, tactical units were primarily piecemeal organizations whose leadership, especially at the lower levels, was extremely fragmented. Although staffs and commanders had previously been extremely effective, their ranks were decimated by casualties and subsequent high turnover rates. Luckily, these types of defensive operations and limited counterattacks did not require detailed planning and could easily be controlled by aggressive small unit leaders. Thus, unity of command was F maintained at the tactical unit level.
At division and higher level, the staffs became larger with less turnover of "7.4, personnel, although their ability to influence the battle became extremely limited.
Unity of command was maintained through the campaign by a clearly defined chain of command, even though operations at battalion and lower level were primarily Runners became the primary method of communications, even with higher headquarters. At division and higher, wireless using morse code was the primary method of communicating. However, numerous outages occurred, and severe problems with transcribing messages were encountered, this resulted in the isolation of the individual headquarters. Messengers were routinely used, and commanders often
had to walk to subordinate .eadquarters and personally brief operation orders.
Much of the Japanese difficulty with wireless may be attributed to US jamming.
As the battle progressed, US intelligence personnel indicated that the Japanese COMSEC/TRANSEC procedures and control and dissemination of classified documents improved significantly, perhaps in response to their perception of US intelligence efforts. Ironically, Japanese efforts to encode transmissions often resulted in extreme difficulties in deciphering them.
Once again, the Japanese experienced numerous C 3 problems. However, their negative effects on the battle were minimized by the relatively static nature of the Japanese defense and the lack of additional resources to commit to the battle. during daylight, as they proved to be more difficult to detect than those conducted during hours of darkness, although all were forced to avoid the aggressive Japanese counter-screen patrols. Guerrilla patrols were also useful, but they normally provided information on deeper enemy targets. The importance of prisoners 'Vas limited to the relatively few that were captured. Throughout the battle, only fifty-two Japanese were captured, and they were normally extremely ill and had been separated from their units for several days. The information they provided was therefore of limited value. Enemy documents provided the primary method of identifying enemy units and .
intentions. However, as time progressed, fewer documents were obtained due to improved Japanese security measures and fewer "souvenir hungry" Americans. SIGINT sources were relatively effective in intercepting traffic, but they were limited In
effectiveness due to the small number of Japanese radio transmissions. Japanese attempts to encode their transmissions significantly slowed their flow of traffic. ,.
Finally, battlefield sightings were numerous and valuable. The only problems were the routine habits and lack of detail and/or generalization and assumptions.
Intelligence dissemination within the Division appeared to be adequate and
utilized either immediate reports or the Periodic Intelligence Report (PERINTREP).
The only problem with dissemination appeared to be the normal complaint that limited information was being received from higher headquarters.
The primary intelligence derived was unit identifications of forces in contact including unit strengths. Other information included scheduled reinforcements. The only problem experienced in the intelligence field was the lack of good maps, .
primarily of the Salacsac Pass area. Most maps lacked sufficient contour lines. The problem was solved by overprinting 1:10,000 photomaps.
Although the US had the superior intelligence collection system, there were several limits on the effectiveness of the intelligence gathered. The Japanese maintained a static strongpoint defense and rarely moved. So unless a US unit obtained a sketch of the enemy position, information as to who was inside it was of limited value. Offensively, all Japanese counterattacks were "spur-of-the-moment"i actions normally following seizure of a position and were thus unplanned. The primary importance of intelligence proved to be the identification and interdiction of Japanese raids were limited in their effectiveness since the majority of raids had the primary purpose of sabotage, and few of these personnel ever returned. Although the Japanese felt that the local agent program was effective, in reality, local guerrillas had infiltrated the program in order to pass incorrect information to the Japanese.
-Perhaps the greatest Japanese shortfall was their lack of aerial reconnaissance.
Without air reconnaissance, they were unable to determine the "big picture" on a timely basis. Thus the flow of all intelligence was from the bottom up with higher headquarters unable to provide any information to its subordinates. This resulted in General Yamashita and Major General Konuma both initially underestimating the size of US forces attacking along the Villa Verde Trail. Only through successive delays by V.
the 10th Reconnaissance Regiment were the Japanese able to move the 2d Tank Division onto the Villa Verde Trail in sufficient time to block the US advance.
At the tactical level, the Japanese were able to obtain sufficient information through direct observation and patrolling. Although the Japanese usually knew who they were fighting, their relatively static defense and limited counterattacks did not require detailed knowledge of US forces or intentions. Sufficient intelligence was passed up through commard channels to allow Major General Konu~na to provide the required reinforcements when the situation became critical.
It is significant to note that throughout the battle, the aggressive US intelligence collection effort resulted in significant improvements to the Japanese counterintelligence effort. These efforts included aggressive counter-screen patrols which attempted to capture US patrols, restriction of reinforcement and resupply to hours of darkness, limited use of artillery when aircraft were overhead, improved ( COMSEC/TRANSEC operations, improved control and dissemination of classified
)A documents, and excellent camouflage of defensive positions. ,.
( "US Doctrine and Training: Current American doctrine as stated in FM 72-20, Jungle Warfare, emphasized the employment of an infantry division in the type terrain i encountered along the Villa Verde Trail. The restrictions that thick jungle places upon mobility make such terrain virtually impassable to anything but foot traffic. For this reason, the employment of any other type unit would not only have been contrary to doctrine, but would have been ridiculous. Once past the coastal plain, northern Luzon " -"
was strictly infantry terrain.
The doctrine which required an infantry division also provided a basis for the tactics employed by the 32d Infantry Division. At battalion and higher levels, the doctrine in FM 100-5, Operations, as well as FM 72-20, seemed to have been closely 
it had fought on Leyte, another jungle environment but without mountains. There the Division found it easier to apply doctrine. Thus, the Division had been exposed to mountain and jungle combat for over two years, but the influx of replacements mitigated to some degree its level of expertise. Many of these replacements arrived with a solid foundation of basic combat skills but were woefully unprepared to handle the rigors of combat in a Pacific jungle.
The doctrine which was applied at battalion and higher levels did not address the realities of combat at the squad and platoon level. Here innovation was the key to success as junior leaders handled day to day problems in an expeditious manner. Use of flamethrowers and shoveis to bury Japanese in caves were among the most frequently applied solutions in the battles to secure the Salasac Passes.
These innovative solutions reflect the state of the Division as it was upon commitment on Luzon. It was composed of veteran cadres, and although short some 4,000 men, it was a capable combat unit flushed with success after its operations on Leyte. This state of affairs was to gradually erode as attrition removed those combat experienced leaders. As combat losses removed the veteran officers and NCO's from their positions of leadership, the efficiency of the Division drastically declined. The problems were compounded as replacements, most without jungle training, began to make up the majority of the line units.
The losses of junior officers and NCO's was especially criticil as this battle was fought at the small unit level. Combined arms were employed at battalion task force and higher, but the battle would be won or lost at the platoon level. It was here that most casualties were sustained. Thus, the unit's level of training could be considered poor since the majority of men were performing new jobs in combat without the required level of training. Despite P these shortcomings, the small core of combat arms soldiers and the determined Japanese mindset allowed this relatively untrained force, to conduct a tenacious and -* ( effective defense for several months.
.r_. Each Japanese defensive area was organized into three distinct areas. The first was the outpost line which consisted of well-emplaced small unit positions capable of covering all avenues of approach into an area. Next was the main line of resistance consisting of the main defensive positions. Behind that was the rear area, normally used for combat service support operations, operations virtually nonexistent throughout the battle.
In the main line of resistance, the Japanese became masters of cave warfare.
AlI positions utilized excellently prepared terrain that afforded fields of fire along I every avenue of approach. They often utilized reverse slopes for protection. All fortified positions were interconnected allowing undetected movement between them.
The Japanese used alternate and supplemental firing positions. Each position could mass its fires in any direction and receive mutually supporting fires from several adjacent positions. Successful attacks against these positions were only possible by attacking several adjacent positions at once. The intricacy of these positions was amazing. Most contained work and sleep areas as well as fighting positions. There were large supply areas and positions from which artillery could be fired and then retracted under cover. These positions were capable of sustaining massive artillery and close air support preparations.
Japanese combined arms operations were limited to the use of supporting artillery fires. The level and accuracy of Japanese artillery fire was the most
effective experienced by US forces on Luzon. The Japanese also made excellent use of light and medium mortars as well as an apparently excessive quantity of light machine guns. There are even some indications that the 2d Tank Division removed some heavy machine guns and main guns from their tanks and mounted them along the trail.
Japanese offensive operations were limited to poorly executed linear counterattacks. These human wave attacks were normally conducted immediately following the loss of an objective, in the early morning, or as a delaying tactic. Its most frequent use was to regain a lost objective at which time all available artillery would concentrate on the objective regardless of Japanese soldiers in the area. The deep raids were normally one-way suicide missions by small groups of sappers whose mission was to destroy some piece of critical equipment or a vital storage area. The Japanese also effectively employed night infiltration tactics and counter-screen patrolling to support their reconnaissance operations. The weather and terrain took its toll on the Japanese soldiers as well as the Americans. However, the Japanese tended to move less than their American opponent, and this, combined with the reduced heat in their fortified positions, provided increased protection from the weather.
Food was always short, and dehydration and fever took a severe toll. As mentioned earlier, sick soldiers were normally sent on some type of suicide mission.
The American use of mortars, artillery, and aircraft fires on prepared positions temporarily disoriented soldiers and lowered their morale. .
Regardless of US actions, the Japanese soldier never waivered in his belief in his cause. His discipline was exceptional, and personal courage in close combat had been indoctrinated in him throughout his military service. He remained basically ,.
isolated from the outside world, and there are indications that he was told he would be killed if he surrendered to the Americans.
During the battle, an interesting conflict in enemy morale occurred at the %' Regardless of one's personal opinion about the Japanese mentality, there can be no doubt that their resolve to continually fight to the last man significantly slowed the 32d Infantry Division's advance and increased US casualties. Hospital returnees provided some relief, but by March, the majority of the leadership positions were filled by inexperienced officers and noncommissioned officers.
The US Army had an extensive pre-war training and education sy4stem which had developed technically and tactically proficient leaders. By the time of the Luzon invasion, most of the personnel who had benefited from this system were in high leadership positions.
The majority of the small unit leaders had arrived as replacements after attending some form of wartirhe training. They had learned their skills on the job in earlier campaigns. They had absorbed the tradition of good leadership. This, in conjunction with the exigencies of the situation which rewarded individual initiative, allowed the 32d Infantry Division to maintain at least a modicum of cohesion and finally achieve its mission.
There was no single leader who dominated the battle. With the exception of the division commander, no officer in a position of leadeship on 5 March held that same position on 29 May when the operation ended. The initial leaders had been killed, K wounded, or promoted to succeed a casualty.
Japanese Leadership: There is limited information available on the leadership style of the Japanese, although many points may be derived from reviewing the situation. The majority of the commanders were veterans of numerous campaigns The senior commander in the area was Major General Konuma at the 14th Area Army Bambang Front. He consistently displayed a positive attitude and ordered the majority of his forces to "defend until the death," which they did without exception. . Konuma did not have the additional forces or the opportunity to conduct any truly innovative operations. But his tenacity was directly responsible for the duration of 'A the Japanese defense. It is significant to note that Konuma maintained his positive attitude despite the wavering attitude of his higher headquarters.
Undoubtedly, the Japanese Commander's job was made easier by each soldier's willingness to obey orders and maintain his honor to the death. However, most of the leaders, although demanding absolute discipline of their soldiers, led by example and.
were spoken of favorably by their soldiers. 
east to Route 5. and disposition along the Villa Verde Trail.
Japanese Immediate Military Objectives:
The immediate objective of the Japanese was to defend the southern limits of the Bambang Front and repel the US penetration to the north. After a devastating defeat on the central coastal plains, the Japanese fell back to the mountains to defend their lines of communications in the Cagayan Valley. The Japanese disasterous attempts to battle US forces on even terms in the coastal plains where the flat terrain favored neither side and where success in battle came to the side with superior firepower caused the Japanese to move to terrain that was more advantageous for their defense. The Japanese had no alternative but to retreat to the hills. With no immediate reserve and with a lack of good roads to bring up reserves over the Caballaro Mountains, their defense of the lowlands would have been absolutely futile. The Japanese could not afford to let US forces sever their lines of communications along Route 5. Feasible Courses of Action, Japanese:
The Japanese had three courses of action. They could defend along the line San Quentin-Natividad-Santa Maria with their backs against the foothills of the Caballaro Mountains. This would have caused them-.
to accept battle on US terms. The Japanese could also have attacked US forces.
Japanese strength, however, was so depleted from the coastal plains battles that, combined with poor roads and few reserves, this course of action was not feasible.
The most prudent and feasible course of action wis to defend along the Villa Verde Trail. This option allowed the massing of troops in depth along a narrow axis of advance. The Villa Verde Trail was the only passage of military significance which led to Santa Fe. This course of action was also most logical as it made su-ei;ative use of the terrain. The ground gave the Japanese a combat multiplier to apply against superior US strength. The Japanese were well aware of the tactical significance of the Villa Verde Trail and committed over 8,000 soldiers to its defense. The Americans underestimated the strength of the Japanese and consequently sustained heavy losses in a very protracted engagement. Command and control was effected through wire, radio, and messengers. The system worked well during this period as evidenced by the coordination of air and ground operations over exceptionally difficult terrain. Flank attacks, a turning movement, and frontal attacks were synchronized with air and field artillery support in driving in the Japanese outpost line.
Tactics were standard, and application followed current doctrine. The one exception was the night attack conducted by the 127th Infantry on 8 and 9 February.
The preferred solution to this type of problem was to move toward the enemy defenses at night and assault at first light rather than attack at night. The attack
was unsuccessful due to the unexpected encounter with Japanese forces prior to the objective more than from any other reason.
The 32d Infantry Division was probably at the height of its effectiveness during this portion of the campaign. Leaders at all echelons were experienced and handled their duties well. The synchronization of frontal attacks supported by all available fires and augmented by maneuver would not be evident later in the battle. Soldier reaction was good, and unit cohesion was maintained throughout the opening phase which was a distinct victory for the 127th Infantry.
Casualties during this phase of the operation were relatively light. Coordination of combat support and maneuver had assisted the division in defeating the 10th
Reconnaissance Regiment without suffering the attrition which would characterize the remainder of the action. Although exact figures are not available, the Division completed this phase of the action with its combat power intact.
Assessing this portion of the battle in terms of the principles of war shows application of maneuver and offense by the 32d Division. The terrain, although restrictive, did allow some routes around Japanese flanks, and the Division used these 4-6 Leadership throughout the initial phases of the battle was extremely effective.
Major Suzuki had commanded the 10th Reconnaissance Regiment during all its operations on Luzon and was respected by all his soldiers. These soldiers were combat hardened infantrymen and were not retrained combat service support troops who
would make up the majority of the Japanese follow-on forces. This unit's loyalty to its leaders and the solider's willingness to defend "to the death" caused the Regiment to be more effective than would be expected of a unit of its reduced strength. Unit cohesion remained strong even in the face of heavy casualties and the lack of food, water, and medical supplies. The Regiment's only shortcoming was its inability to completely break contact with US forces and gain sufficient time to establish effective defensive positions.
In assessing the results of the initial hostilities, the tactical advantage was 
% :
The The cost of this success had been high. The 127th had taken an additional 750 casualties, many of which were non-battle (including ten self-inflicted gunshot wounds). By now, the regiment was virtually broken and was in dire need of relief.
After this battle, the regiment would only be able to accomplish mop up operations in the Division rear.
The 126th Infantry was the strongest regiment of the 32d Infantry Division on 5
April when it began operations north of the Villa Verde Trail. The Regiment was 900 men understrength as a result of operations in the river valleys to the west of the   Approximately 6,000 of the 8,700 men of the 2d Tank Division were killed during the Villa Verde Trail operation. The 2d Tank Division would no longer be an effective fighting force.
The events considered key to the 32d Infantry Division's operations during the L. 
Air superiority, outflanking, reinforcements. Once the Japanese were committed to the Salacsac Pass, they knew that this piece of terrain was the only formidable ground between US forces and Santa Fe. Everything had to be committed to that area. While it was great defensive terrain, it was also an area where US forces could commit all of their forces and perhaps outflank, which they did. The battle was one of attrition. As long as replacements were funneled into the pass, the . Japanese could hold. US air eventually eliminated that option. Heavy artillery and 4-24 incessant airstrikes kept supplies and troops from moving west to the pass.The ( Salacsac Pass was also the first time the 32d Infantry Division had full control of its three regiments. This allowed the Americans to execute a flanking maneuver with the
126th Infantry. This was most successful in that it allowed the US forces to concentrate on multiple enemy strongholds and effectively neutralized the Japanese converging and supportive fire network. Over 3,300 replacements were sent to the Salacsac Pass to reinforce the 2d Tank Division. These replacements were fragments and remnants of other units rendered combat ineffective, or they were service troops being committed from higher echelons of the 14th Area Army. No heavy weapons were able to make it to the pass due to US air interdiction, so replacements were armed with individual weapons at best. The quality of these troops was not as good as the initial troops committed. Approximately 6,000 of the 8,700 men committed to the trail were killed. '.
resist and loyalty to his superiors. The Japanese logistical support system was inferior to the US system and was degraded by air and artillery interdiction. Supplies were initially stockpiled at the various defensive positions and then infiltrated during the hours of darkness. Regardless of the success of US interdiction efforts, Japanese defensive positions were normally overrun before supplies ran out. The terrain and weather took its toll on both the Japanese and Americans. However, the Japanese were able to utilize the restrictive terrain to overcome their numerical inferiority.
"-Luck, although undoubtedly involved in several company-level contacts, cannot be credited with playing a significant role in the battle. Rather, it appears that the effective use of the terrain and weather combined with the effective defen atactics and the tenacity of the individual soldier were the keys to the stiff Japanese resistance.
In the strictest sense, the Japanese accomplished their mission of delaying the on one axis of advance, the Japanese in turn, would have been able to concentrate
• ,i. . Although the Japanese were successful in tying down US forces in a battle of .
v. :-: :. attrition, there was no effect on the long term objectives of either nation. The outcome of the battle had little effect on the Japanese and did not decide the outcome of the war. It did not even appreciably delay the timetable for the US assault on the Japanese home islands.
The 32d Infantry Division learned many lessons covering a variety of subjects _ ranging from infantry tactics to methods of cross training code clerks. Because of the nature of the battles, most of the militarily-significant lessons are applicable at the tactical rather than the operational level.
The most pertinent lesson was that the doctrine, as espoused in period field manuals, was effective. This was specially mentioned in the after action report, but it is also evident from other comments made in the lessons learned sections. Many of these comments simply re-emphasize procedures which had not been followed as described in the field manuals. Other lessons highlighted the expedients used by small unit commanders.
Coordinated fire planning was instrumental in the successful assaults and, when absent, contributed to the heavy casualties suffered during unsuccessful attempts.
Heavy weapons and machine guns were positioned on the flanks. Supporting positions on adjacent terrain features were included in the fire plan. Mortars used a walking rather than a bracketing technique, and corrections as small as five yards were common. Artillery generally employed high angle fire which proved more effective against reverse slope and was less prone to altitude errors than low angle fire. The net result of coordinated fire planning was fire superiority at the moment of the assault.
Initially, these assaults consisted of isolated attacks by single units. These were frequently unsuccessful as the prepared Japanese works allowed reinforcement of a threatened sector even in the face of tremendous US fire superiority. Subsequent kept the Japanese from reinforcing an easily identified point, but once the attack had cleared two, or at most three, positions, the axis of advance became apparent, and reconsolidation was required before reemploying the same tactic later.
The necessity of employing proper troop-leading procedures was noted. Too often, there was insufficient time for reconnaissance. Evidently, the 2/3-1/3 rule of subordinate to senior planning time was not enforced. The lack of reconnaissance would have a significant impact on combat, because map reconnaissance, which was
the only opportunity open to the commanders, was completely ineffective. The scale of maps provided (1:50,000) simply did not show the terrain in sufficient detail to be useful. On those rare occasions when sufficient time was available to conduct reconnaissances, improper patrolling techniques compromised the mission.
The reconnaissance patrols were frequently too large to perform their mission without alerting the enemy. This may have been a result of attempts to beef up these patrols so that they could seize terrain forward of the line of departure. This mixture of missions generally resulted in a compromise force that was capable of neither efficient reconnaissance nor effective terrain seizure.
The 32d Infantry Division did not, as a rule, operate at night. This may have been due to the significant losses of small unit leaders and the loss of personnel experienced in night operations. Another factor which had dramatic impact was the difficulty of conducting night operations in mountainous, jungle terrain, especially for personnel without previous training. Additionally, the Japanese were more adept at 
"..,.
"..,.
'
'
"."-... ' * ... i*. . . . . .--. ,d< --:.,---. r . I By 22 May, the 2d Battalion had secured hill 527, then moved to and secured hill 526, * As the 32d Infantry Division secured its objective, the 127th Infantry was involved in mopping up scattered pockets of resistance. By this time, the 127th Infantry could no longer perform in the main battle area due to excessive casualties, low morale, "neffective leadership, and virtually non-existant cohesion. During the L final phase of the battle, the regiment suffered 480 casualties, but 350 were non-battle casualties. oI On 30
• --°•
.x. N ... . . . . . . . . . .
* . . . . , . o. .-.-. . . . -•. --. .•". ... . .. . . . .. -. ... . . . . •.. . .".-
\bat' 1 'k prepared by students of the 
US Army Command
At this time, the Division was operating under I Corps Field Order #8 which directed the seizure of a line from San Macario-Batchelor-Santa Maria-San Felipe. All objectives were secured without opposition except the town of Santa Maria, the entrance to the Villa Verde Trail, where a reconnaissance patrol from the 127th Infantry encountered a Japanese outpost covering the Cabalisiaan River crossing site.
Disposition of Japanese Forces: (See Map 3, Overlay 3) 1 Though the Battle of Villa Verde Trail is primarily concerned with actions between the 32d Infantry Division and the 2d Japanese Tank Division, the importance of the Villa Verde Trail to the overall defense of the Bambang Front must be considered in order to understand Japanese troop deployments. The overall mission of
the Japanese forces in the region was to defend the southern approach to the Bambang Front following the devastating defeat of the Japanese on the southern coastal plains. Inherent in this mission was the need to consolidate all available forces to guard the entrance into the Cagayan Valley which had become the Japanese's major source of food.
The Japanese appreciated that the major avenue of approach into the region would be along Route 5 through Santa Fe. The Villa Verde Trail provided the second best approach through the Caraballo Range to Sante Fe and was expected to be utilized by US forces as a diversionary attack. The Villa Verde Trail was also significant in that it provided access to the Arboredo, Agno, and Arnbayabaig Valleys to the north which provided avenues of approach to Bambang. The Ambayabang Valley also provided direct access to the Baguio-Arita Road which was the main Japanese east-west supply route. On 17 April, the 127th Infantry, after completing a three week rest, began 3 relieving the 128th Infantry along the Villa Verde Trail. This was completed by the 19th. Initially, elements of the 2d Battalion supported the 126th Infantry attacking toward hill 515 and the unnumbered, or X hill.
After providing this support, the 2d Battalion began to clear the Japanese positions from hill 506B to hill 507. This was a slow process which was accomplished with the support of massed field artillery fires. The operation had moved so slowly that the artillery battalions were finally able to set up along the trail and provide effective massed support.
In  ----Field Orders, Luzon, 1945.
-.
Field Orders 2 -91945.
Department of the Army, FM 31-20, Jungle Warfare, 1941.
----FM 70-10, Mountain Operations, 1944.
FM 72-20, Jungle Warfare, 1944.
----FM 100-5, Operations., 1944.
.0-f 0 .I..-'.
.'
". 