# ID: e670c07a3acd4d8d960ad058b38d665c
# Title: From the Air: Rediscovering Our Raison D'Etre
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2012.0
# Fulltext:
preserving the peace and security, and providing for the defense, of the United States, the Commonwealths and possessions, and any areas occupied by the United States; • supporting national policies; • implementing the national objectives; and • overcoming
air-minded predecessors." 
2
3
This problem is exacerbated by the fiscal challenges facing the Department of Defense (DOD). During a time of declining military budgets, forgetting that the Air Force represents (as an independent service) the nation's principal strategic military arm creates problems in determining which of its core functions are most critical to the national interests. In a recent off-the-record conversation, one senior Airman suggested that "the Air Force is a budget in search of a strategy," indicating that years of supporting ground forces may have produced insufficient understanding, within the service at large, of how airpower and the Air Force can perform their main core functions, which are often independent from those that undergird land forces.
Given the daunting issues confronting the Air Force, Airmen would do well to look back at the service's reason for being and remember why the nation established an independent air arm. Admittedly, the Air Force will and should continue to support ground forces when appropriate, but Airmen should concentrate on those core functions that the service was created to perform. Current doctrine lists 12 such functions, but the Air Force could leverage its most fundamental purposeattaining national security objectives-by prioritizing seven of them:
(1) air superiority; (2) space superiority; (3) cyberspace superiority; Feature power projection through (4) global precision attack and (5) rapid global mobility (including airlift and aerial refueling); (6) global integrated intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR); and (7) nuclear deterrence operations. 
4
The Air Force came into being as the nation moved from an isolationist to an internationalist perspective. The experience of World War II, coupled with the advent of nuclear weapons, placed the Air Force in a unique position as the service that could most readily react to future conflicts and strike distant adversaries. The National Security Act of 1947 described the organizing principle of the Air Force:
In general the United States Air Force shall include aviation forces both combat and service not otherwise assigned. It shall be organized, trained, and equipped primarily for prompt and sustained offensive and defensive operations. The Air Force shall be responsible for the preparation of the air forces necessary for the effective prosecution of war except as otherwise assigned and, in accordance with integrated joint mobilization plans, for the expansion of the peacetime components of the Air Force to meet the needs of war. 
5
6
Most recently, Department of Defense Directive (DODD) 5100.01, Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major Components, unambiguously requires the Air Force to "gain and maintain air superiority, and air supremacy" as well as to "gain and maintain space superiority" and "conduct nuclear operations in support of strategic deterrence." 
8
Gen Norton Schwartz, the Air Force chief of staff, apparently having the foresight to see past current conflicts, has begun to lay the groundwork for prioritizing Air Force functions for the future. Core functions listed in current Air Force doctrine include the following: In a speech to the Air Force Association in 2011, General Schwartz identified certain "core contributions" that must be protected from budget cuts if the Air Force is to provide the nation's leaders strategic Feature options. These core elements include control and exploitation of the air and space domains, as well as mission assurance in cyberspace; global strike; rapid global mobility; and worldwide ISR. 
10
11
Air superiority has long been a central concern of American airpower. 
12
13
The Normandy invasion was based on a deep-seated faith in the power of the Air Forces in overwhelming numbers to intervene in the land battle . . . making it possible for a small force of land troops to invade a continent. . . . Without that Air Force, without its independent power, entirely aside from its ability to sweep the enemy air forces out of the sky, without its power to intervene in the ground battle, that invasion would have been fantastic, it would have been more than fantastic, it would have been criminal. 
14
The need for air superiority is no less important today than it was in 1944. Although the doctrinal definition of air superiority leaves room for varying interpretations, it is best understood as local control of the air, which enables air, land, and naval forces to operate without interference from the enemy. 
15
Air superiority is a central core function in each of the three scenarios mentioned above. For example, air sovereignty alert serves as the primary Air Force / Air National Guard contribution to homeland defense. 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
One must not undervalue the significance of air superiority to joint operations and to the Air Force's ability to deliver strategic effects independently. Control of the air, which enables victory on the land and at sea, may become even more influential in the future. Hence, ceasing production of the F-22 Raptor may be a mistake if the nation continues to demand that the Air Force maintain broad air superiority. Accusing the service's leadership of suffering from "next-war-itis" and failing to concentrate on the ground campaigns of Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates relieved both Air Force Secretary Michael Wynne and Chief of Staff T. Michael Moseley in 2008-ostensibly for failure to maintain proper stewardship of the nuclear arsenal. 
24
25
26
28
29
Maintaining air superiority with fewer less capable aircraft will prove difficult. With the appearance of the MiG-15 during the Korean War, the Air Force nearly lost air superiority with its less capable F-80 Shooting Stars. Fortunately Gen Hoyt Vandenberg, the Air Force chief of staff, released more of the advanced F-86 Sabres to the theater of operations, regaining dominance of the skies over the peninsula. If the Air Force cannot match an adversary with sufficiently capable aircraft, it may be forced to move away from more than 60 years of theater air superiority as a fundamental tenet/ability of American airpower, and Soldiers and Marines may no longer be able to take the friendly skies for granted.
DODD 5100.01 requires the Air Force to "conduct offensive and defensive operations to gain and maintain space superiority," but significant disagreement exists as to whether the United States can or should dominate space. 
30
The United States began research and development of space platforms in the early 1950s for two primary reasons: reconnaissance of the Soviet Union and development of an early warning system for the detection of Soviet nuclear missile launches. 
31
32
33
What began over half a century ago as a need to conduct imagery intelligence of the Soviet Union has developed into an impressive array of space-based communications and intelligence satellites that have played a major part in assisting commanders during irregular warfare in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
34
35
36
Maintaining preeminence in space is likely to be especially difficult as the number of nations with advanced technology and access to space increases. What was, and is, a strategic asset may also become a strategic vulnerability. Electromagnetic pulse, directed energy, ballistic missiles, and cyberspace present a threat to the space-dependent and netenabled American way of war, which will grow over time and has the potential to deliver a debilitating attack. 
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
Soon after taking office, President Obama commissioned the 60-day Cyberspace Policy Review, which noted that "the globally-interconnected digital information and communications infrastructure known as 'cyberspace' underpins almost every facet of modern society and provides critical support for the U.S. economy, civil infrastructure, public safety, and national security." 
44
45
46
47
Clear evidence indicates that China and Russia, potential adversaries in a peer competition, are investing heavily in cyber warfare capabilities. 
48
49
50
Irregular warfare is also an area of concern as nonstate actors prove adept at waging cyber warfare from remote locations using less sophisticated methods and equipment. The reported hacking of video feeds from American drones by Iranian-backed insurgents in 2009 represents one example. 
51
52
Given its ubiquitous nature, cyberspace is the most pressing core function in need of attention. Unlike other functions in which the Air Force historically assumed leadership in innovative technology, cyberspace has become the one area in which the service trails in technological development and has constantly asserted a reactive rather than proactive strategy in dealing with cyber threats. Turning the Air Force into a cyber fortress not only keeps adversaries out but also keeps Airmen in-harming mission accomplishment. If the Air Force wishes to operate in an environment where opposed network operations are the norm, then it must develop an alternative approach to protecting the integrity of information. 
53
54
55
56
58
59
In his book Air Power, Budiansky notes that "after every war, soldiers curse the generals and politicians who neglected to anticipate and prepare for war. Airmen, more than most, would draw an especially bitter pleasure in this pastime, forever repeating stories that demonstrated the obtuse shortsightedness of the great men who had dismissed the importance of the airplane." 
60
61
62
63
64
65
Certainly, Afghanistan and, until recently, Iraq remain the most pressing security concerns, but they too will diminish in their significance as the military attains mission objectives and as budget constraints and war weariness take their toll. Ensuring that the Air Force can serve the nation in its capacity as a strategic arm represents a responsibility for which failure is not an option. Lengthy design, development, and deployment times dictate that the Air Force begin planning for a security environment in which peer competition assails the existing order. 
66
The United States has long thought of itself as an island protected by the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Technology, however, is bridging these Feature watery expanses. In the future, as in the past, the Air Force's core function of global precision attack, whether conventional or nuclear, will be important to homeland defense. Bombers designed for global precision attack, for example, send a clear signal to adversaries that the US Air Force can strike anywhere on the earth with speed and precision. Nuclear-capable bombers and the remaining ICBMs also deter adversaries from attacking the United States. These capabilities (conventional or nuclear) have served the nation well for half a century and will become increasingly important in the years ahead. Developments in ballistic missile and other technologies bring enemies within striking distance.
Fortunately, defending the nation's vital interests against peer competition over the next two decades may not require major combat operations. Much more likely is the deterrence of a potential competitor from challenging the status quo with options for global precision attack. 
67
68
The nation's potential competitors understand the importance of American power projection, illustrated by China's focus on A2/AD, ballistic missile, and cyberspace capabilities. That country's expansion of the People's Liberation Army Air Force and People's Liberation Army Navy, together with its reduction of the People's Liberation Army, signals where China considers its strategic interests most vulnerable. Continuing to hold adversaries at risk with formidable options for global precision attack is in the best interest of the United States.
As the opening campaign of Enduring Freedom demonstrated, the Air Force, unlike other services, can generate strategic effects anywhere in the world. 
69
70
Today, however, global precision attack is in precipitous decline because a much smaller Air Force continues to depend on many of the Feature same global attack platforms it did when the Berlin Wall fell; indeed, some were in service when East Germany erected the wall. If, as Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Michèle Flournoy suggests, the United States will take a leading role in defending the "global commons," then the nation will need sufficient global precision attack to do so. 
71
During the previous generation, global attack platforms experienced a slow, steady decline in both numbers and capability. Only our 19 B-2 bombers are capable of penetrating advanced antiaircraft defenses; fielding a new global precision attack bomber is imperative. Although design and production of the "2018 bomber" are currently delayed, initially five blocks were planned for production between 2018 and 2025with the initial Block 10 configuration (24 aircraft) serving as the Air Force's last manned bomber. Subsequent blocks would integrate technologies on the leading edge and continue to improve US capabilities. 
72
73
Finally, the retirement of air launched cruise missiles from the arsenal and the unsettled fate of the much shorter-range joint air-to-surface standoff missile and its extended-range variant create a decline in the Air Force's critical capability. 
74
Although global precision attack is the kinetic element of power projection, airlift enables the Air Force to deploy personnel and materiel rapidly to any point on the globe when and where needed. 
75
76
At its simplest, airlift swiftly moves people and materiel across great distances. Because the United States has a history of taking war to its enemies rather than waiting for the fighting to reach its shores, the homeland has not seen the ravages of conflict in more than a century. Thus, airlift has an indirect role in homeland defense-principally in military support to civil authorities. Mitigating the effects of a largescale disaster is the primary role of airlift in homeland defense.
Projecting American power to the far reaches of the globe during peer competition will remain an important function for airlift. Examples of such Herculean efforts abound. Whether Gen William Tunner's airlifters flying supplies over "the Hump" to Gen Joseph Stilwell in the China-Burma-India theater during World War II, Gen Curtis LeMay's creation of the Berlin airlift in response to a Soviet blockade, or the Feature transport of military personnel and supplies to the Persian Gulf during Operation Desert Shield, airlift plays a strategic role in the ever-present geostrategic competition against peer/near-peer competitors. 
77
Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom, operations involving irregular warfare, serve as excellent illustrations of the significance of airlift in this type of conflict. Air Mobility Command reports that by the end of 2009, the Air Force had carried 9.66 million passengers and 3.92 million tons of cargo during 529,981 sorties in support of these two operations. 
78
79
Airlift has become the backbone of American expeditionary warfare, making it a critical component of any strategy. Representing the majority of Air Mobility Command's inventory, the C-130 Hercules first entered service in 1956, and the latest model (C-130J) appeared as recently as 1999. The Air Force, Air Force Reserve, and National Guard fly more than 400 of these durable aircraft-the nation's principal intratheater airlifter. 
80
81
82
83
With few exceptions, projecting airpower depends on the Air Force's refueling tankers to extend the range of American and allied airpower. As the only country in the world with the aerial refueling capability to carry out global combat operations, the United States boasts tankers that greatly enhance the operational scope of US military aircraft and that of its allies. 
84
85
86
87
Irregular warfare against nonstate actors places a high demand on the Air Force. For air-breathing platforms, persistence, which increases mission effectiveness, is a particularly important characteristic because of the often unexpected and brief opportunities that arise for striking fleeting targets. Aerial refueling gives ISR and air-to-ground attack aircraft that persistence by increasing loiter time in places such as Afghanistan and Iraq. Regarding future irregular conflicts in which the United States is unlikely to have a large ground presence, RPAs with a combined ISR and strike mission will need aerial refueling as they undertake long-endurance missions and serve as a key instrument of American power projection. 
88
Despite aerial refueling's importance in supporting many of the other critical core functions in all three scenarios, some people fail to appreciate its ability to enable long-range operations. Currently 400 KC-135 Stratotankers, manufactured during the Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson administrations, serve as the Air Force's primary aerial refuelers. 
89
90
91
The foreseeable security environment and the missions that airpower will likely undertake leave little doubt about the utmost impor-Feature tance of power projection (i.e., global precision attack, airlift, and aerial refueling) to the Air Force. Moreover, the service will require significant investments to replace the aging platforms that conduct this mission. The Air Force has made significant progress in maintaining existing weapon systems and procuring new ones, but pressure to reduce military spending could jeopardize sustainment and modernization of the fleet.
The history of military aviation is replete with examples of aircraft serving as ISR platforms. During the Civil War, the Army of the Potomac used manned balloons to determine Confederate troop strength and monitor movements of the Army of Northern Virginia. 
92
93
94
Among the Air Force's oldest and most important surveillance roles is its provision of early warning in the event of an attack against the United States. Initially Air Defense Command, the largest of the Air Force's original major commands, had responsibility for early warning and homeland defense. 
95
96
Major combat operations against a large conventional force present a set of distinct, difficult issues for combatant commanders, including the development of comprehensive battlespace awareness. The substantial global ISR assets of the Air Force can greatly reduce the fog of war by providing a constant presence above the battlespace as they send information to commanders. Conflict with a peer/near-peer adversary would likely necessitate very different assets than those deployed to Afghanistan today. One should also highlight the fact that superior battlespace awareness acts as a force multiplier, permitting fewer ground forces to attain tactical objectives against a larger enemy force. Since ISR stands to play a major role in future peer competition, it merits priority among the Air Force core functions.
Operations in Afghanistan and Iraq often serve as public examples of airborne ISR's part in contemporary irregular warfare. 
97
98
ISR contributes to the joint fight and cannot be replicated by any other service. However, the current focus on RPAs (Reaper, Predator, and Global Hawk) capable of performing ISR and strike missions may not Feature constitute the best use of a shrinking acquisition budget. 
99
100
101
The nuclear arsenal remains the most important capability for defending national sovereignty from an attack by a peer competitor or rogue regime. Nothing else gives an adversary more reason for pause than nuclear weapons. Composed of three legs, the nuclear triad-ICBMs, manned bombers, and submarine-launched ballistic missilesgives the United States a deterrent force that makes direct attack on the nation a costly choice. The Air Force fields two of these platforms. 
102
After the United States dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945, the distinctiveness of those weapons soon became Feature apparent. As the world began to comprehend the power of thermonuclear devices, developed in 1951, preventing nuclear war between the United States and the Soviet Union became the principal, if not the only, purpose of those weapons. Without question, deterrence was the most significant and successful policy of the Cold War-and it has not failed to prevent a nuclear holocaust. 
103
104
105
As nuclear weapons material and technology continue to spread, deterring current and future adversaries (nuclear and conventional) will remain central to American national security. Furthermore, because US policy precludes responding to biological and chemical attacks in kind, nuclear weapons provide an effective deterrent against these threats. 106 The ICBM's responsiveness is accompanied by bombers as the only leg useful in signaling escalation or de-escalation. Clearly, nuclear deterrence operations remain a critical capability. In today's strategic environment, some national security analysts believe that the most probable use of a nuclear weapon will come from a nonstate actor or, more likely, a rogue regime such as North Korea or Iran seeking to strike a devastating blow against the United States. 
107
Past experience suggests that terror networks and their state supporters are influenced by existential risks and rewards, which offers reason to believe that a visible limited-strike capability may assist in deterring a nuclear attack against the United States. 
108
109
The United States should retain a credible nuclear strike option, but the preferred alternative calls for improved multinational nonproliferation efforts and nuclear forensics that will reduce the risk of nuclear terrorism by making nuclear material more difficult to acquire and anonymity more difficult to achieve. Extending the nuclear umbrella over America's allies such as Germany, Japan, and South Korea, for example, has proven effective in convincing these governments to forgo development of their own nuclear weapons programs. 
110
111
112
In the final calculation, deterrence equals capability plus will, leaving the United States little option other than maintaining a limited strike capability and nuclear doctrine to support it. Current Air Force doctrine does provide for the limited use of nuclear weapons to convince the enemy of the United States' commitment to using the necessary degree of force to meet objectives. 
113
If the nation's nuclear deterrent is to remain credible, the United States must refocus on the core function of nuclear deterrence by maintaining a nuclear arsenal and delivery platforms of sufficient size and diversity to assure both allies and adversaries that the United States has the capability and will to employ nuclear weapons to terminate large and small conflicts as quickly as possible on favorable terms. 114 By doing so, the nation bolsters the deterrent effect of the nuclear arsenal and, as the Cold War illustrates, reduces the probability of both nuclear and conventional warfare. Peer competition between the United States and Soviet Union remained largely peaceful because the United States could clearly withstand a nuclear strike and retaliate with sufficient nuclear force. The United States, therefore, must ensure that it has a nuclear arsenal sufficient to maintain a credible deterrent "that can under any circumstances confront an adversary with the prospect of Feature unacceptable damage." 115 Moreover, issuing a unilateral no-first-use declaratory policy could undermine the credibility of nuclear deterrence and might encourage adversaries to seek an asymmetric advantage against a United States perceived as weak and unwilling to wage nuclear war.
Although the relationship between the United States and the People's Republic of China differs markedly from that of the United States and Russia, China is actively modernizing and expanding its nuclear arsenal. 
116
117
118
People working in the highest levels of government wish to reduce the nuclear arsenal. The same strategic guidance that reaffirmed commitment to the nuclear deterrent force also stated that "it is possible that our deterrence goals can be achieved with a smaller nuclear force, which would reduce the number of nuclear weapons in our inventory as well as their role in U.S. national security strategy" (emphasis in original). 
119
Not only does the current approach send a signal to adversaries that the United States no longer views nuclear weapons as a critical aspect of national defense, but also technological innovation stagnates when scientists and engineers spend their days maintaining outdated technology instead of developing the next generation of weapons. The latest Air Force doctrine stresses the need for responsive research and development and industrial infrastructure as a critical leg of the nuclear triad. 
121
122
123
124
125
Given the reality of today's fiscal resources, concentrating on the nuclear arsenal makes economic sense. With entitlement spending consuming an ever-increasing percentage of the federal budget, defense spending is declining. 
126
Over the past two decades, the Air Force has spent considerable effort and resources meeting the airpower requirements of US Central Command. Beginning with Desert Shield, Air Force major combat operations in the Middle East, the Balkans, and Southwest Asia, as well as contingency and crisis operations in Haiti, Indonesia, Japan, and Feature elsewhere have continued unabated. The constant demands of major operations such as Desert Storm, Northern Watch, Southern Watch, Enduring Freedom, and Iraqi Freedom require a heavy focus on the tactical and operational aspects of airpower, which has played a role in delaying the recapitalization of some platforms necessary to conduct Air Force core functions at the strategic level of war. While the Air Force is in the midst of acquiring the next generation of multirole fighters, airborne ISR RPAs, tankers, and possibly even remotely piloted long-range penetrating bombers, it still has aging platforms that have long passed their expected service life. Consequently, the Air Force must either engage in costly modifications to maintain combatready status or modify the missions of these aircraft to adjust to the changing threat environment (e.g., using the B-52 as a launch platform for nuclear cruise missiles rather than a penetrating bomber).
In many instances, technological innovation and the capabilities of the nation's adversaries make these systems highly vulnerable. Thus, if the United States desires to maintain an Air Force capable of global vigilance, reach, and power, it needs a clear strategic vision that explains the service's objectives over the coming decades. Such a vision may then guide acquisition and planning. The fact that the service suffers from acquisition requirements well in excess of likely funding is certainly reason for concern. However, the Air Force has weathered difficult days throughout its relatively short history and may do so again.
If the myriad of defense experts are correct in suggesting that the economic and military growth of Asia-China particularly-signals a shift in American interests to the Pacific, then the region's geography may lead to a renaissance of airpower. 
128
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or