# ID: e7c8aadce70b4eb3871eae508f6a2030
# Title: Challenge of applying tactical deception when conducting large scale combat operations in the 21st Century
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
The Army has used military deception in every major campaign since its inception. Military authors conclude that armies that practice the art of deception have significant advantages over their enemies. As noted in FM 3-13.4, deception can be applied to all levels of warfare and can be conducted at any phase of the operation. This thesis explores what gaps the Army has in applying tactical deception in Large Scale Combat Operations. It also examines how the modern American Army and our current pacing threats view deception and how
Mankind has used the art of deception for survival for as long as we dared to venture out of the safety of our caves. Using mud and leaves to disguise ourselves for effective hunting or in a group to distract prey while executing a skillful ambush, deception has played a vital role in our survival against a world where the odds are mostly unfavorable. Ancient philosophers and military theorists have written numerous books and stories explaining how creative deceptive techniques, when applied to warfare, proved to be a critical skill to master against superior and sometimes over-confident enemies. Military history has proven the need to use deception, from tactical to strategic levels, to gain necessary advantages against our enemies and demonstrates that this human trait will always be used to achieve a marked advantage.
Deception has deep roots in the foundation of American history. General George Washington and the Founding Fathers are considered masters of deception and great manipulators of the information environment.0 F 1 Understanding that an emerging America needed to leverage every advantage against a numerically superior, better equipped, and better trained British Army, Washington employed a group of spies known as the Culper Ring to spy on the British Headquarters in New York, gaining information on troop movements and insight into British plans. To prevent unwanted battles, he would deceive 
1
During the Civil War, many Generals used the art of deception to mask the number of troops in their formations, create false marching columns, and deceive their enemies into thinking they were better equipped to fight more robust battles. Union Major General William S. Rosecrans was given the mission to cross the Tennessee River and retake Chattanooga from the south from General Braxton Bragg in the summer of 
2
3 Evan Andrews, "6 Ingenious Acts of Battlefield Deception," History, September 1, 2018, https://www.history.com/news/6-ingenious-acts-of-battlefield-deception. 3 1863. Wanting his force to remain undetected, he ordered the bulk of his Army to begin moving south while simultaneously ordering one of his most clever generals, Brigadier General William Hazen, to conduct a series of feint attacks to the north of Chattanooga.
The feints worked so well that General Bragg ordered his Army to concentrate north on what he believed was to be the main attack. The deception plan was best described by Colonel John T. Wilder, the leading proponent for the feint attacks,
We then commenced making feints as if trying to cross the river at different points for 40 miles above the town, and succeeded in so deceiving them as to induce them to use an entire army corps to prevent the execution of such a purpose . . . Details were made nearly every night to build fires indicating large camps, and by throwing boards upon others and hammering on barrels and sawing up boards and throwing the pieces in streams that would float them into the river, we made them believe we were preparing to cross with boats.3 F 
4
McClellan's overwhelming Union force in April 1862 and was tasked to stall his advance into Virginia. With a contingent of only 13,000 troops, General Magruder used deception to convince McClellan that he was facing a force the size of 100,000. He ordered his troops to be spaced out, create false security patrols to appear to have more soldiers available than anticipated, and construct what were known as "Quaker Guns"-logs fashioned into decoy artillery pieces to appear that fortifications were more heavily defended. Magruder was able to successfully provide McClellan the information he needed to reinforce his expectations and interfere with his decision-making process. The deceit worked, delaying McClellan's forces for several weeks, giving the Confederacy the time needed to reinforce its line in Virginia. 
4 F 5
The blending of art and science worked to apply natural patterns to irregular shapes to disguise familiar forms. Scientists used their understanding of optical effects to create "dazzle" paint on warships confusing the enemy at long distances and misidentify their target.6 F 7 When the Americans entered the war, they quickly learned the inherent value of deception from their allies and adopted these tactics with the Corps of Engineers leading 
5
8
The art of deception had caught the eye of American commanders, most notably General John J. Pershing. Known for the Belfort Ruse, General Pershing sent Colonel Arthur l. Conger to Belfort, France on August 30, 1918. His mission was to write a false but detailed plan of the American Expeditionary Force commencing their offensive from Belfort, a small town in France that bordered Germany. Their true objective was to launch an offensive at St. Mihiel and capture the city of Metz from the Germans. Using a typewriter, Colonel Conger created a false operations order and threw the carbon paper into the trashcan, hoping that suspected German spies would police it. As he went for a walk away from the hotel, the plan worked, and the carbon paper was recovered. Soon after, Colonel Conger began ordering reconnaissance planes to fly over the area and send for multiple staff officers and equipment to flow into Belfort, creating a story credible enough for the Germans to believe the piece of intelligence they intercepted was legitimate.8 F
9
The Allies thought the Americans were too ignorant in the art of deception, believing Germans would see through their disorganized and amateurish ruse; however, American ingenuity prevailed, and the operation continued. On September 12, General Pershing launched his main attack on the St. Mihiel salient. The Germans, confused and dismayed, began to defend the salient; however, most of their units were displaced and already moving toward Belfort. The attack was much heavier than the Germans expected and began to retreat, realizing they were overpowered. General Pershing's deception plan was a great success and one of his highlights of the war, as mentioned in his Pulitzer Prize memoirs.9 F 10 Few young officers who witnessed the value of deception during World War I would remember the lessons learned and steward the art through the Interwar period.
During this transition period, however, the conventional Army lost interest in camouflage and deception, shelving their progress of the art. The Americans may have forgotten about deception, but stewardship fell to the British, who kept practicing the lessons learned from American and French troops. General George C. Marshall, a veteran of World War I and primary planner for the Belfort Ruse, sought to keep the art of deception alive while serving as the assistant commandant of the Infantry School in Fort Benning from 
1927-1931.1 0F 11
10
These tactics gained notoriety due to the success of the Magnum Opus of deception planning: The Allied plans of Operations Bodyguard and Fortitude. These two operations were more than a year in the making. It was a herculean effort conceived by the Allied powers to convince Adolf Hitler and the German Armed Forces High Command of where a mainland invasion of Europe would occur. Operation Bodyguard's intent was to convince Hitler that an invasion was imminent, but it would take the Allies until the spring of 1944 to build the combat power required to attack into Europe. This, in conjunction with a massive, Allied bombing campaign helped legitimize to German intelligence that the attack was focusing north on Pas de Calais, France. The intercepted messages ensured that Germans were not massing combat power on the true landing sites at Normandy. Operation Fortitude was designed to deceive the Germans on the timing and location of the Allied invasion. The messages German intelligence received indicated that the invasion would take place in the North, first through Norway and onward to eventually convince the Swiss to join the Allies and allow forward basing to stage for the invasion of Berlin. However, the main attack would be focused on Pas de Calais, and all the preparation and building of combat power were executed to look like it would be the course of action the Allies would choose for invasion.1 
1 F 12
Their efforts saved thousands of American lives, particularly in the Viersen Operation, where the Ghost Army performed a feint across the Rhine, saving approximately 1,300 lives from heavy machine gun and artillery fire. The ruse was so effective that when the real divisions they were imitating attacked miles upriver, they were met with bewilderment and confusion from the German army.1 2 F 
13
Being an advocate for deception tactics in World War II, General MacArthur eagerly incorporated deception into his most successful operations. Operation Chromite, General MacArthur's plan to conduct an amphibious assault to stop the North Korean People's Army (NKPA) from invading the south included an elaborate ruse to confuse the enemy of where the United States would strike. US Forces staged false raids 105 miles south of Inchon the small port town of Kunsan two weeks before the main invasion.
The plan was to have the enemy focus on the town by conducting bombing missions, laying the groundwork that typically signaled a US invasion, then publicly showcasing Marines and troops receiving briefings on tidal information and soil conditions. Finally, unique equipment was brought forward with an ad hoc Special Operations Company whose mission was to create an elaborate scene where the forces appeared more abundant than perceived. These feints at Kunsan and two other equally viable landing options at Samch'ok and Chinnampo led to general confusion for the NKPA that resulted in the slow response at Inchon, where the main invasion finally took place.1 3 F
14
Due to the unfamiliar guerilla-style warfare, small unit deception became the dominant form of deceit on the battlefield. These missions led commanders to employ deception at the tactical level to gain significant advantages over the Viet Cong (VC). With many rules of engagement restrictions, American fighter pilots needed to find creative ways to engage their well-hidden enemies. North Vietnamese MiG-21s were outmaneuvering and causing devastating losses for the US Air Force's F-105 bomber fleet in 1967. The Seventh Air Force's restrictive policy of engaging enemy fighters only when pilots received visual confirmation and forbiddance of bombing airfields were due to the rules of engagement agreed upon between the Nations, something the VC pilots understood well and exploited. The F-105 fighter-bombers were the Vietnamese favored targets due to their slow-moving, restrictive flight patterns but refused to come out of their airfields when the more maneuverable and powerful F-4 Phantoms were flying in escort. 10 Operation Bolo was devised to counter that MiG threat. The plan used the restrictive flight patterns and radio frequencies that the North Vietnamese People's Air Force (VPAF) interpreted as F-105 bomber signatures to their advantage. F-4 fighters were equipped with the same F-105 radio systems and would fly the same flight patterns, airspeed, and altitude as the bombers, effectively imitating the slower aircraft's vulnerabilities. This mimicry lured the VPAF MiG fighters in the air where, upon visual confirmation, the F-4 phantoms would use their superior maneuverability and speed to engage the aircrafts. The deception resulted in seven destroyed aircraft of the VPAFs reported sixteen in one day.1 4F 
15
Operation Just Cause in 1989 used scheduled procedures against the Panamanian Defense Force (PDF) to condition them to see routine American exercises during the preparation phase of the operation. A Company, 1st Battalion, 7th Special Forces Group (Airborne), along with 3rd Battalion already stationed in Panama, used this tactic to great effect to get Soldiers to predetermined positions to await the beginning of the invasion. Even as successful as these operations were, they have not been convincing enough for the US Army to adopt deception as a standard practice in modern American Army tactics. As America crossed into the 21st century and declared war on terror, counterinsurgency operations (COIN) took precedence and left no time to plan, train, and equip deception plans for conventional forces. Tactical deception became tasks the special operations community would conduct, feinting attacks on villages or demonstrating false insertions into enemy territory. Civil-military relations became the priority, and the US Government did not want deception to be uncovered as it mended fragile relationships with the local populace. As a result, only very few senior leaders today remember the employment of deceptive tactics in their training, and even fewer remember how to plan for it effectively.1 6F
17
Being recursively relegated to the annals of history, the art of deception's favorability fluctuates in the minds of military leaders. With the increase of advanced technology, the rigid structure of our modern military, and the challenges associated with execution, leaders usually do not consider employing deception in their planning. The lack of experience, training, resources, classification authority, restrictive permissions, and limited understanding underestimates the value deception can bring to their success and would deter any commander trained to look for a quick, decisive victory. Current doctrine indicates that the Information Operations, Electronic Warfare, Intelligence, and Engineer officers all have a responsibility to plan for deception operations, but this presents a set of challenges.1 7F 18 First, these planners do not consistently practice or are not allowed to employ deception tactics enough to be proficient. Second, military commanders are not formally trained to think about using deception in their decisionmaking process, leading to disinterest and unwillingness to accept the risk. Third, little evidence suggests that units at the tactical level have the means and training to employ physical deception such as dummies, decoys, and false battle positions effectively and have been left with rudimentary knowledge to employ camouflage. Lastly, there is no position trained to understand and weave the three means of deception (physical, technical, and administrative) capabilities together at the brigade level, creating a gap of understanding and employment, further perpetuating the disuse of tactical deception. As the Army focuses again on Large Scale Combat Operations (LSCO), the art of deception should find relevance and permanency once again in our military culture to enable the commander to take advantage of all their tools that provide an advantage against the enemy.
The Army has used military deception in every major campaign since its inception. Military authors conclude that practicing the art of deception leads to a marked advantage over the enemy. Deception, as noted in FM 3-13. As the Army transitions back to LSCO, tactical leaders need to be capable of applying the principle of war known as surprise. According to ADP 3-0, Operations, to surprise is to "Strike at a time or place or in a manner for which the enemy is unprepared."1 8F
19
The purpose of this study is to determine how tactical units, division and below, should employ deception in a multi-domain environment when conducting LSCO. It aims to identify how the Army can improve its organization, training, and leadership techniques to enable effective tactical deception against expected threats. This study will also examine our current pacing threats, Russia and China, to understand how they would use deception tactics in potential conflict. This study also aims to identify current gaps in 
For the purposes of this study, it is assumed that the reason why military commanders do not use deception to their advantage is due to deficiencies in training and leader development, lack of deception-specific equipment and materiel, and difficulty in obtaining approval to employ deception.
Since the knowledge of military deception is predicated on secrecy and surprise, the author assumes that there is sensitive information on deception preventing commanders' access to resources necessary for training. Furthermore, as deception is not a routine task conventional forces practice, commanders that operated most of their careers in a COIN environment did not need to use deception and would not understand how to employ it.
The author also assumes that, based on how the Army is trained to win quick, decisive battles, commanders would view the planning and employment of deception tactics as a slow, labor-intensive build with little payoff, based on the amount of time it takes to craft a deception story, follow it to its conclusion, and terminate its operations.
Finally, the author assumes that other branches of service use and have their versions of deception, including the Special Forces Community; however, due to the sensitivity of the topic, most of their body of knowledge is classified and will focus more on small-unit deception tactics that is incompatible with the conventional Army.
Due to the nature of deception and the secrecy it demands, this thesis will only focus on what is available at the unclassified level of Army knowledge. This thesis will focus on open-source documents, published military field manuals, and books regarding past attempts to revive the art of deception. This delimitation will allow for the widest dissemination possible within the military community. This thesis will focus its scope to provide solutions to the conventional Army and does not focus on other branches of the military or specialized units such as the Special Forces community. The primary research question focuses on how the Army can improve organization, training, and leadership to enable effective tactical deception against expected threats. The Army's planning with other departments and instruments of national power to achieve strategic deception plans is out of the scope of this thesis. The subsequent research questions will focus on understanding our pacing threats currently stated in the National Military Strategy published in 2018 and rediscovering capabilities from past doctrine that could be re-applied to LSCO.
The following definitions and terms will provide clarity and an understanding of concepts to the reader: Army doctrine: Fundamental principles, with supporting tactics, techniques, procedures, and terms and symbols, used for the conduct of operations and as a guide for actions of operating forces, and elements of the institutional force that directly support operations in support of national objectives.2 1 F 22 Capability: The ability to achieve a desired effect under specified standards and conditions through a combination of means and ways to perform a set of tasks.2 2F 23 Capability-Based Assessment (CBA): The analysis portion of the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS) process. The CBA provides recommendations to pursue a material or non-material solution to an identified capability gap that meets an established capability need.2 
3F 24
25
Military deception (MILDEC): Actions executed to deliberately mislead adversary military, paramilitary, or violent extremist organization decision-makers, thereby causing the adversary to take specific actions (or inactions) that will contribute to the accomplishment of the friendly mission.3 1F 32 Military information support operations (MISO): Planned operations to convey selected information and indicators to foreign audiences to influence their emotions, motives, objective reasoning, and ultimately the behavior of foreign governments, 29 HQDA, FM 3-13.4, 1-7. 
30
This introductory chapter provided the necessary background to understand that deception, whether strategic or tactical, has been used to overcome a numerically superior or overwhelming enemy force. Deception is a human trait that has been used to ensure our survival and will continue to be a part of human development so long as we have the ambition to prevail over our environment. As the military has continued to apply the art of deception in warfare, this capability has proven to be a staple tactic for the future. The disenchantment of deception through periods of peace is only equal to the interest and prominence of the art in times of war. This chapter outlined the purpose of this thesis, its problem statement, scope, assumptions, and limitations necessary to focus the research. 
33 JCS,
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
The purpose of this study is to determine how the Army can improve its organization, training, and leadership to enable effective tactical deception against expected threats, compare our current pacing threats view of deception with our own, and examine previous deception doctrine for lost capabilities to apply at the tactical level for the modern LSCO environment. It will begin by using an abbreviated capabilities-based assessment to identify current gaps regarding tactical deception; then this work will focus on our current pacing threats, China and Russia, to examine how deception plays a role in their armies and to what extent they find value in using it against US forces. By comparing different perspectives, it may yield an answer as to why the US Army is so averse to using deception on a regular basis. Last, the study will provide a comprehensive review of past doctrine to determine what capabilities should be reapplied to TAC-D to use in a modern LSCO environment. This literature review covers many sources, including current and historical documents, past thesis and monographs, and prominent military historians to ensure a complete understanding of how deception's history has evolved in our military and how the military has viewed deception in the past, not just in theory but in practice.
The previous chapter established a brief historical introduction on when deception played a vital role throughout US Army warfare. It has greatly assisted our military leaders in times when the Army was not the best equipped or poorly trained, and it showcased when America, as a superior fighting force, continued to use deception to enhance its combat power against the enemy. It also highlighted this thesis' problem statement as the US Army pivots back to LSCO. Assumptions, limitations, delimitations, and secondary and tertiary research questions were also introduced to shape the focus of the thesis.
The literature review will analyze prominent military authors, past research papers, and historical doctrine to understand what literature has already been published and how this thesis can contribute to the professional body of knowledge. This chapter will also cover various books, journal articles, and case studies to understand where deception fits in the military. Finally, this chapter will summarize the research and provide a conclusion for why tactical deception deserves a renewed focus as the Army shifts back to LSCO in a multi-domain environment.
Where does deception stand today? Deception has had an incongruous history with the US Army. One of the most prominent writers on military deception, Dr. Barton Whaley, writes, "Deception is one of those odd strategic techniques of war, like psychological warfare, that seems fated to cycles of loss and reinvention despite being both older than history and international."3 5F 36 It seems that he is not alone in his conclusion. B. H Liddell Hart had a similar mindset when writing his book, Strategy. In analyzing World War I, he concludes that relearning what he called the indirect approach, surprise can be used to achieve victory over the enemy by placing them off balance before you strike. "This idea of the indirect approach is closely related to all problems of the influence of mind upon mind-the most influential factor in human history. Yet, it is hard to reconcile with another lesson; that true conclusions can only be reached, or approached, by pursuing the truth without regard to where it may lead or what effect it may be."3 6 F 37 In his other book, The Strategy of Indirect Approach, Hart synthesizes many of Sun Tzu's tactics to understand how World War I was fought and attempts to showcase how major campaigns used the indirect approach to achieve victory over the enemy.3 7 F 38 Deception, or more commonly referred to as surprise by older doctrine, is commonly referred to as the ultimate form of warfare. Sun-Tzu, a famous military general and strategist, wrote one of his most quoted verses that many academics and thinkers who periodically revive the subject of deception in the military love to paraphrase, "all warfare is based on deception."3 8 F 
39
Our most revered Western military leaders also have praised the tactical advantage of deception as vital for victory. Even Carl von Clausewitz, a staunch proponent of the direct approach to warfare, writes that surprise is indispensable to basic operations in On War. In his third book, he writes that it is inconceivable to gain superiority at the decisive point without surprise in some sort of role. If executed correctly, surprise can be used in both the offense and defense, leading the army to 
37 B. H Liddell Hart, Strategy (New York, NY: First Meridian Printing, 1991), xx. 38 B. H Liddell Hart, The Strategy of Indirect Approach (Russel Square, London: Faber and
Faber Limited, 1967)
39
Technology has become a catalyst in the way modern warfare is fought. Surprise can come in the form of new equipment to gain a tremendous advantage that could determine the outcome of the war. This was not possible prior to the world wars, where the speed and tempo limited the mobilization of massive quantities of troops. These large formations would lend themselves to observation from the enemy and uncover an Army's intent. Since World War II, Michael Handel writes that stronger armies, like the US Army, tend to lack the "natural incentive" to conduct tactical deception as they feel like they can decisively win without it.4 0F 41 However, he argues that with larger forces, they must make a conscious effort to exploit the full advantage of surprise to achieve their 40 Carl von Clausewitz, "Chapter 9 Surprise," in On War 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976), 198-201. 41
Using deception effectively can be the deciding element if all other parameters of both armies are equal. This was highlighted in historical field manuals the military published in the 1940s and again reemphasized with the Army's big push to revive the art of deception in the 1980s. All Arms, 15 June 1926. These two preliminary texts emphasized using deceptive techniques to protect and hide the military's most expensive equipment using camouflage and earthen materials from aerial reconnaissance and ground troop movements. FM 5-20, Camouflage, an engineer field manual published in 1940, was an effort to preserve the tactics, techniques, and procedures used to deceive enemy forces. The emerging technology in World War I and the Interwar period had the Army reconsider how to use different synthetic materials, paints, and fishnets, combined with natural materials, such as leaves, rocks, and branches to better protect troops from line-of-sight engagements (coined the direct method of observation) and from photographs (termed the indirect method) to preserve combat power. The manual described the roles and responsibilities 
42 Handel,
War,
Strategy,
and Intelligence,
400. 43 Ibid.,
362.
Deception underwent another change in its primary manual, FM 5-20, changing the manual name to Camouflage: Basic Principles and Field Camouflage, published in 1959. Lessons learned from the war included the need to protect airfields, landing sites, and aircraft from bombers and thus, included a lengthy chapter on how to obscure these assets from the air to mask where engineers were building forward airfields for rapid deployment. This new manual would also improve on deception techniques used in different biomes. give several examples of how the enemy would be deceived and their expected reaction if the deception was successful or if it failed, informing staff officers of their options if they encountered either scenario. FM 31-40 would also introduce additional measures, including electronic, sonic, and olfactory deception, signaling that both sides kept refining their techniques to deceive each other over the decades and were committed to master the art of deception to gain a marked advantage over their adversary. FM 90-2, Battlefield Deception, active from 1988 to 1997, was the Army's most considerable effort in modern times to highlight the importance of deception and encourage commanders at all levels to embrace the capability. Recognizing its failure to focus more on deception techniques and realizing that many deception-related skills were in atrophy, the Army attempted to dispel myths and excuses as to why deception was not more widely used and encouraged commanders to keep practice using deception during peacetime. The doctrine outlines the use of deception at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels and emphasizes how essential it is to the commander to achieve their mission. It explained how tactical commanders should use deception in the close fight, a term that still applies to US Army operations today. Much like it does today, the doctrine recognizes that deception is not an end but a means to an end. It should not be the primary effort and instead should reinforce the main effort. It recognizes that the Operations officer (G3/S3) of the staff should plan for deception to generate the maximum amount of options for the commander. Finally, the doctrine also outlined and provided a deception training checklist and evaluation matrices to ensure that effectiveness was measured and that the deception plan was successfully executed. The checklists were tailored to the Operations and Intelligence sections to ensure the plan was synchronized among the staff and determine if the plan was successful. The previous FM 90-2, published in 1978, included an outline on applying deception to field exercises and would detail its use during offense, defense, retrograde and relief-in-place operations.
That manual did not include a checklist for staff planners; however, an update and synthesis of these two manuals would be beneficial to today's Army to begin to operationalize tactical deception.
The research conducted by Mark Lloyd focused on how deception has changed since the Viet Nam era, confirms that deception is still useful. In his research, Lloyd studies how deception contributed to psychological operations during Viet Nam. With the media having access to combat information, the VC were able to manipulate the sentiments of the American public through different forms of media. The United States grossly underestimated the cunning of the VC and were slow to react to an enemy who had defeated French and Russian forces before them. The VC proved to be masters of psychological and deceptive operations, tactics that were considered "un-American."
After the Pentagon's many failed attempts to use psychological operations to their advantage, it decided to rely on superior firepower to accomplish the mission, leaving stealth, subtlety, and subterfuge as tactics of the enemy.4 3F 
44
According to Joint Publication (JP) 3-16, Multinational Operations, the United States has been part of multinational coalitions since Operation Desert Storm in 1991.
Due to the US standing in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), this will be the trend for the foreseeable future. It is incumbent upon current and future leaders to support and collaborate as part of a multi-national force. These operations could include various agencies of the US Government, departments, and nongovernmental organizations. The lessons learned of coordinating between foreign governments and military forces and conducting stability operations during COIN operations will serve to benefit the US Army when the focus shifts to LSCO.4 4F 
45
This presents a barrier to our current doctrine which states that deception should apply to all levels of war, at all echelons, and during each phase of the operation.4 6F 47 In his book, Stratagem: Deception and Surprise in War, Whaley presents a snapshot analysis of how different armies viewed deception and how their military structure influenced their use of military deception in times of need. His book primarily consists of numerous case studies where he looks at how deception influenced the battle, which leads him to conclude that deception, when used and appropriately resourced, is proven to save lives, time, and equipment and help the commander accomplish his mission. Since training for military deception is specialized, the chief planner will likely have no idea how to employ a deception plan, leading to a more traditional approach to warfare.
Latimer's book reveals that there is a wide gap in the way Americans use the Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield (IPB) process when conducting their Military Decision-Making Process (MDMP) and "if anyone had an understanding of deception, especially the use of the Russian Maskirovka, it would seek to exploit this weakness."4 9F 50 This gap in doctrine is one of many the Army has with using tactical deception in LSCO.
Current FM 6-0, Commander and Staff Organization and Operations, published May 2014, outlines all the steps the staff takes to go through the MDMP process. This vulnerability still exists as there is no deliberate step in the process to check whether tactical deception would be feasible, suitable, or acceptable for the operation. The manual mentions military deception in the MDMP process only once, when creating the commander's Essential Elements of Friendly Information (EEFIs) and only in the context 49 HQDA, FM 3-13.4, 1-12. 
50
of protecting and masking our assets, a task known as deception in support of operations security (DISO), which can be conducted with a published Operations Security (OPSEC) plan, which most units fail to do. The field manual also states that when commanders issue planning guidance by war fighting function, Movement and maneuver is where tactical deception is concentrated. 50 F 51 FM 6-0 does have a robust chapter pertaining to military deception but states that although military deception should be considered in all activities of the operations process, there appears to be no step in either planning processes to determine whether deception is suitable for the operation. It only states that the "military deception officer presents the running estimate for deception during the mission analysis briefing."5 1F 
52
Current doctrine states that at lower echelons (division and below), the Command Military Deception Officer (CMDO) is designated by the commander when necessary. It states that deception is not a permanent tactic and may suffer from atrophy if not used regularly. The doctrine suggests that the staff member designated should understand the use of information-related capabilities, as these are most of the means that the commander is likely to use. However, most of the responsibilities lie with coordination with various staff leads to support a tactical deception plan.5 2F 53 Instead of assigning a staff 
51
52 Ibid., 11-5. 
53
According to ATP 3-13.1, The Conduct of Information Operations, dated 2018, the IO officers are the members of the Armed Forces most likely to be assigned as the CMDO. However, it seems that this is not clearly stated. In a passage, it states that the IO officer leads the IO meeting, in which they expect the CMDO to participate. It is unclear if there would be more than one IO officer in the Division; however, doctrine states that The Army renamed FM 90-2 to Battlefield Deception, and published a new version in October 1988 in its second attempt to push deception to regularity and going so far as to admit that the Army has lost an art form that greatly assisted in the victories of past battles. The doctrine outlined three causes as to why deception is no longer planned. These included the focus on acquiring new technological capabilities, which forces low-cost solutions not to receive attention, the belief that modern technology has rendered deception to be too difficult to achieve, and that commanders would refuse to dedicate already limited assets to a deception plan. Together with the Department of Defense (DoD), the Army aimed to revitalize tactical deception and have commanders add the capability to their arsenal.5 5F 56 The new doctrine updated its methods in deception planning and would explain to the warfighter how to employ physical deception effectively, including dummies, decoys, and camouflage. One indicator that showed how dedicated the Army was to incorporate it was the introduction of the Deception Evaluation Checklist, where it attempted to evaluate measures of performance against deception employment. This first step covered all the deception process to include an evaluation of the emplacement of dummies and decoys. As technology progressed and means to deceive became more sophisticated, more specialized sections in the military show the need to discuss deception in their doctrine.
As mentioned earlier, ATP 3-13.1 states that the IO Officer can be the lead for deception, as delegated by the G-5 Plans Officer. When no IO officer is available, the commander may assign any officer as the CMDO. According to current doctrine, the Officers most likely to go to the Military Deception Planners Course (MDPC) would be the IO or Intelligence Officer, though it is not mandatory for either of them. Electronic Warfare Officers also have an obligation to participate in tactical deception operations and receive instruction on using their skills for deception. Doctrine failed to produce a training program for physical deception after FM 90-2 was rescinded in 1997. The research conducted by Michael Handel to study the military's use of deception attempts to understand the Western reluctance to keep it as a routine military exercise. In his study, he conducts a deeper dive into the western way of war than David 
57
58
Charters and Maurice Tugwell, explaining the western teachings of morality and ethics and how the age of chivalry continues to play a critical role in how officers are supposed to act. The conclusion can be drawn that the classes taught in the Command and General Staff College (CGSC) today conflict with the promotion of tactics such as deception. He further explains that by studying modern military strategists, there could be a common denominator to leaders whose proclivities lean to the use of deception. Mr. Handel found that countries that tend to practice deception during peace and war time are more likely to suffer the feeling of isolation as countries strive to seek peace and do not appreciate being taken advantage of.
This study agreed with David Charters and Maurice Tugwell in the general acceptance that countries who practice deception in times of peace ultimately do so to their detriment. While they may seem to gain a short-term advantage in the long term, it greatly hinders their ability to operate free of suspicion from other governments. His conclusion holds that totalitarian regimes have fewer worries in using deception to get to their ends, as they see "peace" as the transition period between wars of resources and ideology. This again contrasts with the Western way of government and, more specifically, the American way of war, where truth is paramount to hold strong alliances.
Truth and reputation are factors to consider when using deception. One must be careful when using these tools as destroying any of these two could have more negative implications than what the deception plan aimed to accomplish. Jon Latimer's study into the American reluctance to accept deception provides a hypothesis as to how our culture is averse to use it as a viable stratagem. Throughout western civilization, the code of chivalry has played a central role in Judeo-Christian thought. His study analyzes how the US military epitomizes the character of honor in combat and makes connections to its use throughout the last five major wars. Deception was heavily used during World War II only due to America collaborating with the British and observing the success they had in using the art against the Germans. Korea saw some use of deception as national policy began to change and the United States. His study also gives a comprehensive look into Viet Nam and explains how that era showed the sharpest decline in the use of military deception due to various factors such as miscataloging the enemy as the same fought in Korea, American over-reliance on technology and superior firepower, and American failed policies in Viet Nam. The VC would learn to use deception and subversion masterfully against US soldiers, which only sowed the seeds of division in the US military psyche. His conclusion states that these factors make the United States turn away when thinking about using tactical deception. He observes as Americans are raised in a culture where they demand direct solutions to problems, this would play a crucial role to dissuade the American commander to think about other alternatives.5 8 F 
59
In his work, The Solider and the State, Samuel Huntington best describes where the state of the military is. He writes that "The essence of objective civilian control is the recognition of autonomous military professionalism."6 1F 62 Simply stated, the civil-military relation works by the political body assigning the military the mission, derived from the military commander's suggestion. In practice, this is not the case. In what he calls "subjective control," civilian authority reduces military autonomy, leading to military commanders' limitations when conducting tactical operations.6 2 F 63 This is evident as recently as the war on terror, where political objectives would shift during the 
60
61
This chapter reviewed the sources regarding the use of tactical deception through the history of the military. It showed how the military used deception to its advantage in times of great stress; however, this tactic still struggles to gain a solid foothold among American military tactics. It analyzed historical doctrine and compared it to the most recent versions to understand perceived gaps the US military must train for tactical deception in LSCO. Finally, it analyses how our pacing threats, Russian and China, view deception. This understanding demonstrates that if we do not know our enemies, they could take advantage of our vulnerabilities and leave us with a severe disadvantage.
The purpose of this chapter is to describe the methodology used to determine why the Army largely discontinued the use of tactical deception. As the focus of the Army changes from COIN Operations to LSCO, deception has received little attention. To remedy this problem, this thesis suggests recommendations for how the US Army can begin to incorporate deception at the tactical level to accomplish its mission. This thesis is only the latest exploration of why deception seems to ebb and flow with the US Army.
Due to the scope and the nature of this topic, this thesis will answer the research questions using the qualitative method of research to gather from public sources and abstain from using sensitive or restricted material.
This study uses the qualitative method approach to understand why US Army leaders forgo the training and use of tactical deception. The qualitative research method is the best approach to study this topic in detail and answer why the Army does not regularly incorporate deception in training. This analysis helps uncover gaps the US Army currently possesses in organization, training, and leadership as it shifts its strategy from COIN operations to LSCO. More specifically, this study primarily uses the case study method to examine past doctrine and determine what can be reapplied when focusing on a LSCO environment. It will rely on the current information available to present recommendations to solve the US Army's current gap. To supplement the primary research question, a capabilities-based assessment will be used as the analytical method to identify gaps in the current Army structure using a truncated DOTMLPF-P framework. Last, this section outlines the structure on which this research was formulated.
According to Robert Yin, a case study has a two-fold definition, with the first defining the scope of a case study, "A case study is an empirical inquiry that investigates a contemporary phenomenon in depth and within its real-life context, especially when the boundaries between phenomenon and context are not clearly evident."6 3 F 64 The second part of the definition analyzes the technical aspect of the case study, "The case study inquiry copes with the technically distinctive situation in which there will be many more variables of interest than data points, and as a result relies on multiple sources of evidence, with data needing to converge in a triangulating fashion, and as another result, benefits from the prior development of theoretical propositions to guide data collection and analysis."6 4 F 
65
To address the primary research question and determine how the Army can improve organization, training, and leadership to enable effective tactical deception 
64
65
As mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, to answer the secondary research question, this study will address how our pacing threats (China and Russia) view deception compared to the US Army and its importance in their doctrine. The case study method will again be used to understand the psychological and sociological factors our pacing threats view the importance of deception and compare it to how the US Army views it to understand how our adversaries would employ it. It will be used to uncover underlying risks to the force if not addressed. Focusing on multiple studies on Russian doctrine will benefit this analysis by understating the adversary's mindset regarding deception and can conclude what the Army needs to counter this threat. Furthermore, acknowledging China as an emerging threat and researching their perception of the art of deception will distill what the US Army can do to protect itself from these two near-peer competitors. Finally, this thesis will examine US Army culture and attempt to understand why it sees the use of deception in warfare as an inferior tactic and not capitalize on its benefit.
The third research question will analyze the content of past and present doctrine, published professional works, and past thesis regarding the US Army's use of deception and conclude what past techniques and standards need to be reapplied to use again in a LSCO environment. It will compare how the US Army viewed deception when the publications were in operation and attempt to answer when the Army degraded its interest in deception. The research will consist of data mining from multiple manuals to explain how deception was used in the past and asses how it can be used effectively in the future.
It will require the author to collect information available, analyze pertinent content, and interpret why tactical deception is rarely employed.6 5F 66 This comparison will be used to conclude why the Army does not use tactical deception.
This chapter explained the various methodologies and analysis this thesis focuses on to determine why the US Army does not use deception at the tactical level in a multidomain environment during LSCO. As the Army shifts back to LSCO, these historical documents become invaluable and suddenly more relevant in understanding how tactical deception was used in the past and can be used as a basis to update current doctrine and understand forgotten tactics, techniques, and procedures. Using the capabilities-based analysis helps provide a framework to work with and address perceived gaps. It can determine what needs to be addressed at the organization and training level and provides an option to look at commercial-off-the-shelf equipment to add deception equipment to the Army's inventory. Finally, this chapter lightly explored the psyche of our pacing threats regarding using deceptive tactics to attempt to gain advantages over US forces in a multi-domain environment. Chapter 4 will distill the information to answer the primary thesis question on how the Army can improve organization, training, and leadership to enable effective tactical deception against expected threats. 66 Yin, Case Study Research, Design and Methods, 24.  CHAPTER 4 ANALYSIS Chapter 4 contains the analysis of the challenges to apply tactical deception in LSCO drawn from the literature review and historical doctrine. This chapter uses the analysis to explore how the Army can improve organization, training, and leadership gaps that enable effective tactical deception against expected threats. This thesis will supplement the primary research question using an abbreviated capabilities-based assessment to identify gaps in the current Army structure using a DOTMLPF-P framework. Topics such as personnel, facilities, and policies will be addressed within the other topics as they support multiple observations. To answer the secondary and tertiary questions, the thesis uses the qualitative research method outlined in chapter 3 to gather multiple forms of data and analysis of literature to identify what capabilities and topics from previous deception doctrine should be reapplied and updated at the tactical level to use in a modern LSCO environment. This thesis intends to identify what deception capabilities the Army has lost from fighting a counterinsurgency conflict these last 20 years, why our military does not encourage the training of deception as a supplemental action to conserve combat power against its adversaries, and finally, to understand the American perspective when applying deception and how our adversaries differ from us.
Recursively relegated to history, the art of deception's interest fluctuates with leaders. Modern Army doctrine dictates that IO, EW, Psychological Operations (PSYOP), Intelligence, and Engineer officers all have obligations to consider deception in their plan to support the operation. However, this presents a unique set of challenges.6 6 F 67 First, and most importantly, commanders and staff officers charged to plan and execute operations do not train in tactical deception as they advance in their military careers, leading to unfamiliarity and disinterest. Second, there is no current training, testing, and evaluation criteria used to measure the effectiveness of a deception plan and little doctrine that teaches how to employ the means of physical deception. The fieldcraft to employ dummies and decoys to confuse, deter, and confuse targets relies on the knowledge to combine assets that use the electromagnetic spectrum to deceive our adversaries.6 7 F 68 Lastly, there is no position assigned at the tactical level that understands how to weave all three means of deception without extensive training and communicate an effective plan down to the brigade level.6 8 F 69 For tactical deception to function, units must use all of their resources to affect as many of the enemies' systems as possible to add validity to the deception story. At the tactical level, three types of deception means are available to employ: administrative, technical, and physical. These means can either be used singularly or in conjunction with one another to add credibility to the narrative. The administrative means of deception is defined as, "resources, methods, and techniques to convey or deny selected written, oral, pictorial, or other documentary information or 67 HQDA, FM 3-13.4, 1-13. 
68
69
The last means of deception, physical deception, is defined as "resources, methods, and techniques used to convey or deny information or signatures normally derivable from direct observation or active sensors by the deception target."7 1 F 72 When thinking about deception and when employing TAC-D, this form typically comes to mind. False movements and exercises, dummies, decoys, false battle positions, and hidden equipment in the form of concealment and camouflage are defined in this category. The three means of deception are used throughout the analysis to emphasize that although there are personnel who have basic understandings of deception at the tactical level, it amounts to understanding one of the means and a nascent understanding of the other two. Officers assigned as the CMDO at the tactical level do not possess the 70 HQDA, FM 3-13.4, 1-12. 
71
72
The officers mentioned previously all have specialties that are involved with one or a combination of these three means of deception. Through professional military education and training, these officers learn to use their knowledge to weave the three means together at the tactical level. As the Army reverts to LSCO, the art of deception should be more prominently considered as a powerful means to conduct warfare in the modern environment. Today's Army's manuals describing the employment of deception are vague and decentralized, resulting in no interest to correctly assign a position at the tactical level the responsibility as a CMDO. With no champion for this position, leaders continue to receive no convincing reason to add TAC-D as a combat multiplier on the battlefield or show interest in adding it to their exercises.
The latest Army doctrine published regarding military deception is FM 3-13.4, Army Support to Military Deception, dated February 2019. TAC-D, although introduced in previous doctrine, FM 90-2, Battlefield Deception, published October 1988, was never truly defined nor adopted when referencing the levels of warfare. Tactical deception is defined as "an activity planned and executed by, and in support of, tactical-level commanders to cause enemy decision-makers to take actions or inactions prejudicial to themselves and favorable to the achievement of tactical commanders' objectives."7 2 F 73 One of the critical ways TAC-D differs from the overarching military deception term is that 73 HQDA, FM 3-13.4, 1-2. the actions and requirements necessary for its employment only need to be tailored to the local commanders and not necessarily linked to the overall deception plan.
Tactical deception offers multiple options for commanders to exploit, gaining crucial advantages for their mission. Having staff members who are well-versed in the employment of the three means of deception can significantly improve the force's protection by obscuring critical vulnerabilities or influencing the enemy to commit resources to their disadvantage. This localized deception plan is intended to be shortlived and provides advantages against enemies in the tactical fight (corps and below).
According to FM 3-13, Information Operations, published December 2016, IO is the proponent for all military deception as of 2006.7 3F 
74
EW officers play a significant role in the subject of technical means of deception. FM 3-12, Cyberspace and Electronic Warfare Operations, published April 2017, states that EW officers contribute to deception in the form of electronic attacks and electronic protection. These attacks involve "the use of electromagnetic energy, directed energy, or anti-radiation weapons to attack personnel, facilities, or equipment with the intent of degrading, neutralizing, or destroying enemy combat capability."7 6 F 77 These actions can be taken defensively or offensively, depending on the target that will be affected. Notably, electromagnetic deception directly contributes to the capabilities tactical units possess to affect the enemy. This deception "is the deliberate radiation, re-radiation, alteration, suppression, absorption, denial, enhancement, or reflection of electromagnetic energy in a manner intended to convey misleading information to an enemy or enemy electromagneticdependent weapons, thereby degrading or neutralizing the enemy's combat capability."7 7 F 78 It is capable of three different effects: simulative, imitative, and manipulative. Electronic protection can protect personnel and equipment from the effects enemies may use in the electromagnetic spectrum (EMS) to degrade, neutralize, or destroy combat capability. 
76
77 HQDA, FM 3-12, 1-104. 
78
MISO, previously known as PSYOP according to FM 3-53, Military Information Support Operations, published as of January 2013, mentions that PSYOP officers are used during the planning of deception to reinforce the effects the information published. Doctrinally, "MISO staff planners synchronize and deconflict messages and psychological actions with the deception story and other IRCs to ensure unified and consistent messages reach the deception target."7 8 F 79 This method of tactical deception decreases the ambiguity for the enemy by presenting information to reinforce existing preconceptions from the enemy's point of view. Deception and PSYOP are different from each other-PSYOP deals in the truth, but not necessarily the whole truth. Deception deals in lies. PSYOP can provide the "bodyguard" the deception needs to be effective.7 9F 80 This capability at the tactical level targets the enemy's command and control and planning structures through deceptive messaging. These actions are described as the administrative 54 means of deception to influence enemy behavior and are a crucial aspect to lend credibility to the deception goal.
The Intelligence Warfighting Function (WfF) surprisingly mentions deception very little. Although by doctrine, intelligence officers have an identified tactical task to provide intelligence to support military deception, it only denotes that intelligence officers remain vigilant and concentrate on confirming intelligence data from multiple sources to prevent the enemy from using deception against friendly forces. According to FM 2-0, Intelligence:
When fighting a peer threat during large-scale combat operations, units must be prepared to fight for intelligence against enemy formations, a range of sophisticated threat capabilities, and many unknown conditions within the operational environment. The challenges to information collection include IADSs, long-range fires, counter reconnaissance, cyberspace, and EW operations, and camouflage, concealment, and deception.8 0F 
81
Since the inception of using deception in our military, engineers have played a lead role in deception activities. Once the proponent for deception, engineers conducted physical, technical, and administrative types of deception. To enhance the survivability of 55 forces, engineers understood the importance of using all means of deception collectively to enhance the chances that the enemy will engage with the deception effort. Many of the lost capabilities and training techniques that need to be revised and modernized will be from past engineer doctrine discussed later in the chapter to answer the tertiary research question.
Today, according to FM 3-34, Engineer Operations, engineer doctrine recognizes that "Because they have distinct appearances and uses, engineer assets can assist in deception operations. For example, moving bridge trucks to various river-crossing sites can deceive the enemy about the actual crossing location."8 2 F 83 Engineers support commanders tactically to achieve surprise through obstacle reduction and emplacement. This surprise "includes the tempo and intensity in executing the attack plan and in employing unexpected factors (such as selecting a less than optimal course of action), Although these officers all have some familiarity with deception actions, they generally understand how their function supports the operational plan better before understanding how to synthesize the different means to create a more robust capability for the commander. IO and EW officers focus on the technical means of deception. MISO focuses on the administrative means, while engineers focus on the physical means.
According to FM 3-13.4, like everything else, the commander will determine the viability of incorporating TAC-D into the scheme of maneuver to achieve their objectives. To assist with the commander's intent, the principal staff officer for planning these tactics is the Operations officer (G-3/S-3) of the division or brigade with support from an IO officer. Their knowledge of the operational plan lends them to be the best equipped to understand how deception is best incorporated to project maximum effects on the enemy.
The responsibility of the G-3/S-3 ranges widely from recommending a deception objective, story, or plan to the commander to submitting detailed RFIs that are key to the deception planning.8 5 F
86
IO officers, when available, can serve as the CMDO. However, if they are not available, the commander can designate another officer that is knowledgeable in using IRCs to influence enemy decision-makers. Since few IO officers reside at the division and with the majority supporting echelons above division, the officer to help plan, shape, and communicate the deception plan is not clearly defined and, if so, not properly trained at the tactical level. Personnel such as MISO, EW, Intelligence, or Engineer officers may qualify for the role of CMDO; however, they suffer from the same lack of experience and training to understand the other means of deception. Those officers are at a disadvantage that is detrimental to plan and execute a convincing deception plan.
Currently, the new FM 3-90, Offense and Defense draft is entering its final draft for publication. In it, it mentions a chapter that will specifically address TAC-D and its benefits. It will describe how commanders play a critical role in integrating TAC-D into the plan and explains how its effects affect the enemy decision-maker. The chapter will clearly outline how deception would benefit commanders in the offense and defense and provide a guide on how to use deception principles for planners who have had little experience using it. It will clearly explain the steps planners should take to incorporate TAC-D and describes the steps needed to include TAC-D in the operations process. It 58 will mention that TAC-D is designed to enable operations to reduce operational risk for commanders. "A TAC-D should never be a decisive operation, although it may become an initial main effort for the operation."8 6F 87 Resourced from within and executed locally, this capability is an effective way to cause the enemy to make mistakes in their decisionmaking processes. The chapter will also discuss TAC-D principles and its multiple variations, including feints, ruses, and demonstrations to achieve the desired effect against the enemy. Finally, it will discuss the three primary means of deception (physical, technical, and administrative) and how to apply these means at the tactical level.8 7 F 88  Currently, to solve this deficiency in organization, doctrine dictates that commanders may appoint officers as their CMDO at their discretion when an IO officer is unavailable to fulfill the role at lower echelons. Officers, traditionally captains or above, who have focused on kinetic tactics to support mission accomplishment, are now charged to plan and execute these complex deception tactics that are supplemental to the operational plan with little training and even less proof of the effectiveness of the tactics. As stated in the doctrine section of this thesis, certain officers at the division level and below understand how their function supports the deception plan. Still, they are rarely trained to weave the three means of deception to full effect. EW Officers assigned to the Division understand that they can employ technical deception in the form of electromagnetic and cyber deception to mislead enemy organizations and degrade their electromagnetic capability.
Engineers can plan for the use of physical deception to cover, camouflage, and conceal units to confuse, mislead or evade enemy formations. For commanders using administrative methods for TAC-D, Intelligence, PSYOP, and the OPSEC Officers are used to manipulate and confuse enemy data collection. Since deception involves so much 
89
Officers assigned to weave all the means of deception together are now trusted to incorporate IRCs that influence enemy behavior. That task is usually the expertise of the intelligence and IO community. As the IO community is not staffed at echelons below division, the plan to mitigate this deficiency would be to train non-IO officers mentioned in deception planning to fill the gap at the tactical level. The number of officers capable of assisting a robust deception plan currently resides at the tactical level. It would only take a measure to codify these positions in the organizational TOE to ensure deception planners are available at the necessary echelons. Divisions and brigades have EW, PSYOP, and engineer officers capable of understanding how to use IRCs to impact enemy formations.8 9 F 
90
91
The current reference for the Army units' tasks is ADRP 1-03, Army Universal Task List, published in October 2015. Its purpose is to inform what the Army can contribute to the joint force in terms of tasks. Included is only one task that addresses military deception, ART 5.11: Conduct military deception. This reference can serve as a primer to begin translating deception measures of performance to training tasks units can perform.9 1 F
92
Today, very few senior leaders remember practicing deception along with their traditional combat tasks. These senior leaders (Division and Brigade Commanders) have forgone deception in favor of quicker, more familiar combined arms tactics. The art of deception is a perishable skill that leads to less options when encountering the enemy when not practiced. According to Jon Latimer, "What made British deception unique during WWII was its steady development. From an expedient start in the days when things appear bleak, it grew to a flexible and highly effective instrument capable of greatly enhancing operations at all levels."9 2 F 93 To master deception, emphasis on training becomes vital. Generally, deception, like the fighting itself, occurs at the small-scale, tactical end of the spectrum. Most of the tactical level commanders and their staff have little or no training experience practicing deception to enhance their war fighting skills.
To these leaders who have operated in an Army where the primary method of fighting 65 was using COIN tactics, they have missed opportunities to understand how small units can contribute toward TAC-D. With no TAC-D training for decision-makers, there is no appetite to attempt deception from tactical commanders.
Tactical level FTXs, Warfighter exercises (WFXs), routine training, professional military education (PME) schools, and even soldier level tasks suffer from a lack of instruction that was once trained as frequently as combined arms maneuvers. Currently, the Army lacks the training evaluation standards needed to assess deception tactics. More so, it lacks a doctrinal reference outlying tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) that could assist units to begin incorporating these actions into their planned training events.9 3 F 
94
The MCCoE, as the proponent for MILDEC, has realized this gap and understood that if the capability to conduct TAC-D, and to a lesser extent MILDEC, is not even offered a classroom environment, it is a capability that will go unused for the future. With this lack of training, tactical leaders opt not to use unfamiliar capabilities in unit training environments. 
94
95
The MCCoE has taken steps to mitigate this gap in training. Slowly, deception is being introduced into military schools in an attempt to revive the capability and present it as a viable option to commanders. TAC-D is discussed among the junior officer's education in specialties that naturally are inclined to practice deception. At the Command and General Staff College (CGSC), one course is currently offered dedicated to the study of MILDEC.9 5 F 96 Additionally, in 2021, the CGSC began to incorporate a scenario where the students needed to plan a TAC-D operation in their Advanced Operations Course (AOC). Just how effective remains to be seen, as this was the first time many junior fieldgrade leaders, with differing military specialties, were required to plan and understand TAC-D. This introduction to incorporating a TAC-D plan into the MDMP process caused the field grade officers to be aware of capabilities, opportunities, and challenges that otherwise were not available. Since the population of IO officers are very small, few IO officers were available in the staff groups. The groups across the sections relied on specialties that could help reinforce the tactics used for deception. In the authors CGSC classroom, civil affairs, special forces, fires, and the engineer officer assisted in planning the operation. Together, the discussions drove the plan to conduct a false insertion with the effect of having the enemy commit forces away from the area we planned to conduct a wet gap crossing. The thought process to resource, synchronize, and deconflict combat elements revealed deficiencies in planning, training and familiarity regarding deception techniques. As a collective, there was a lack of understanding of TAC-D, coupled with a strong sense to avoid risk, resulting in fewer resources spent to credibility develop a proper TAC-D plan to convince the enemy commander of a false major operation, resulting in the enemy ignoring the deception effort, massing forces on the actual objective and making the execution of a wet gap crossing more difficult.
The monograph, Systems Thinking and the Cynefin Framework, by William Dettmer attempts to understand how leaders (managers) confront new environments when all the variables are not present to them. He puts this phenomenon into focus by stating, "Is it any wonder that such managers avoid experimentation, with its consequent risk of failure, in favor of options with quantifiable, predictable costs and benefits?"9 6F 
97
Individually, these may be small steps, but it opens the aperture to military leaders to allow this tactic to promulgate and keep this option available.
Still, several gaps appear to remain. To date, the Army has no course that is designed to teach soldiers physical deception and fieldcraft tactics. This course would have soldiers from any specialty learn survivability techniques that would use deception to protect personnel and equipment from enemy detection, aligning it with current Additionally, war simulations that focus on deception objectives and capabilities must adhere to policies and rules that can lead to the exercise becoming highly classified, limiting the number of participants that qualify and erode the training objective. Tactical deception is an operation that must be deliberately planned for early in the exercises and requires to go through a simulated five-day cycle, much like the Air Tasking Order 98 HQDA, ATP 3-13.4, 3-5.
(ATO) cycle, to receive permission for deployment, negating the chance for deception to rapidly exploit any opportunities the battlefield may present. To improve this capability to practice TAC-D, game administrators need to establish rules early for certain deception actions. The simulation setup allows the Blue Force (BLUFOR) and OPFOR to share a common operating picture without allowing the other access to their strategies.
The challenge arises in subjective adjudication, where deception is typically based on real-world experience and is difficult to assess. However, this may favor the simulation as the goal of deception and its effects are to affect the individual playing the OPFOR role and confuse their decision-making process. A little progress is being made to bridge this gap as the MCTP has seen its last two iterations of units introduce deception plans to their WFXs. The 1st Armored Division recently included deception as a major capability to enhance their primary objective to achieve complex tasks such as a wet gap crossing.
As a result of employing deception, valuable lessons were relearned how best to employ deception equipment to create more believable stories and use more effective techniques to achieve desired effects in a resource-constrained scenario. The lesson learned from these events is yet to be published as of 2021.9 8 F 99 Currently, there are seven courses that are focused on deception in the Army. Of these courses, two of them are restricted to personnel assigned to joint billets, two courses are designed for specific operators (special forces and IO officers), and two are TRADOC courses designed for branch immaterial personnel. 1st IO Command (Land) currently offers these two courses to introduce planners to MILDEC.9 9F 100 One course of MILDEC has been recently introduced to the CGSC elective curriculum.1 00 F 101 The Army Deception and Planners' Course (ADPC) and MDPC both state in their scope to: prepare students to plan, coordinate, and monitor the execution of Military Deception (MILDEC) operations at any command and echelon level. Instruction is a combination of formal lectures and practical exercises using a realistic training scenario. Students are given a grounding in MILDEC terms and principles, legal and policy guidelines, and MILDEC resources during the course. Students also gain insight into time-proven tactics, techniques, and procedures.1 
01 F 102
2
104
The staff officers who support them know less about implementing deception and do not even bother to address it as an option for fear of failure, lack of understanding, and difficulty in attaining approval to perform. Instead, they have learned best practices or at least good practices that have served them well in their careers and remain fearful to experiment with unfamiliar tactics.1 0 4F 105 They recognize that they reached their current position by doing the same, familiar things repeatedly, producing satisfactory results.
Without this course, division and brigade level leaders remain skeptical that TAC-D can greatly help accomplish their mission. And remain unenthusiastic to incorporate deception techniques in their field training exercises or CTCs.
Our premier CTCs are designed to validate unit tactics and training objectives when conducting ULO. It challenges units and leaders to adapt to dynamic battlefield conditions, force them to think critically, and act forcefully to enhance lethality and operation. To accomplish this, units practice the tactics, techniques, and procedures necessary to face a demanding and challenging peer enemy at their home station. Some units specialize in specific events, like Airborne Infantry Brigades, to remain proficient in Airborne Operations to conduct Joint Forcible Entry missions. Others, like Armored Brigade Combat teams, practice gunnery tables and combined arms maneuvers to close with and destroy the enemy. These units, however, are not tasked to practice deception to enhance survivability and combat power against their adversaries.  Brigade Combat Teams (BCTs) must get better at defending/protecting critical nodes and securing their rear areas while conducting offensive operations."1 
13 F 114
Lastly, the practice of photo manipulation has been greatly enhanced since the Soviet Union began this form of deception in World War II. As more sophisticated systems rely on technology to function and synchronize, the Army needs to understand the Internet of Things (IoT) and how most systems will be interconnected. To influence and deceive future command and control nodes, these systems will need to be understood to control the information that the enemy is receiving. The power to control the intelligence enemy planning nodes gather by transmitting manipulated photos, fake orders, and deep fake videos will confuse the enemy to the extent that they cannot distinguish between real and false information. This type of leverage given to tactical commanders can greatly benefit them if faced with near-peer threats. To accomplish this, adequate facilities and proper training to practice these tactics need to be made available, but more importantly, the demand for such capabilities must come from the leadership.
Only then will the Army change its culture enough to see TAC-D as a powerful tool to influence the enemy into disadvantaged positions.
Today's tactical-level leaders have served their careers engaged in a COIN fight.
Except for some senior leaders who served in the 1990s when the Army fought in LSCO, most organizational level leaders have little to no training on conducting any form of deception and, therefore, have no frame of reference to understand the benefit deception can bring to the operation. "Generally, deception, like the fighting itself, takes place at the small-scale, tactical end of the spectrum."1 
25 F 126
In developing such plans the commander must visualize and understand the enemy viewpoint and he must take into account the impact on his operations should the deception fail. The plans adopted must be such that if unsuccessful they will not cause the operation to fail. Then, the commander is cautioned that "coordination . . . with higher, adjacent and lower units is essential to insure against compromise of other operational or deception plans."1 28F 129
Authorities to employ TAC-D are doctrinally held at commands two levels higher than the commander attempting it, meaning that the authorization timeline may exceed the operational usefulness of the deception, as TAC-D is meant for commanders to leverage emerging situations and be creative enough to use equipment in nonstandard ways to achieve the desired effects on the enemy.1 29 F 130 These authorities serve as checks and balances during combat operations but quickly become one of the biggest obstacles to deter training. 
127
128
129
With obstacles such as difficulty finding proper doctrine for tactics, lack of training, knowledge, resources, no assessment standards, and difficulty obtaining the required permissions, it is no wonder commanders avoid attempting any form of deception. As stated in a previous thesis from CGSC, "When one considers that commanders must constantly juggle limited resources and that deception cannot replace men or materiel, this attitude becomes understandable."1 30 F 
131
Every leadership style is different. Generally, American commanders tend to naturally ignore deception as they have not needed to use it in their past. Some commanders will not understand how to employ it properly, causing unnecessary harm to their units. Others, given the opportunity, would embrace it and show great proficiency.1 32F 133 However, there is a deeper root cause of why American commanders oppose deception as a viable tactic to defeat their enemies. Our society is founded on the belief in strong moral philosophies and religious teachings. As Mark Lloyd illustrates, "The western Judeo-Christian idea is of God sanctifying a social order, a way of life and national values to create a 'just' war in which hardships and danger have to be endured as a price for victory of good over evil."1 3 3F 134 Its foundation is rooted in ethics, principles, and morals that value truth and honesty that make deception a difficult concept to assimilate as a part of our daily operation. Our democracy has spent the latter half of the 20th century promoting free and fair markets. This philosophy naturally places a premium on matters of truth. Frenchman Alexis de Tocqueville observed of the ordinary American citizen: "if you scratch most Americans, you find a general respect for honesty and a deep-rooted belief in the old adage, 'honesty is the policy' . . . Honesty and reputation for 
133
134
34 F 135
It, therefore, becomes difficult for Americans to conceive of a modern society that does not share those same beliefs.1 35 F 136 The foundations of our society and history are embedded in the personnel who form our military. In studying Western military philosophy and practice, our leading military theorists emulated the beliefs espoused in the European code of chivalry. The "gentlemanly" education received by modern military officers still reflects parts of this training. Truth, honor, integrity, esprit-de-corps, and expertise are highly valued as essential characteristics of the Army profession. The code of chivalry frowned upon deception and ran counter to military honor.1 36F
137
As Barton Whaley describes it, our leaders study in the "three main modern schools of Western military theory: the 'classical,' the 'romantic,' and that of the 'indirect approach'."1 37 F 138 Briefly summarized, the classical periods include Roman and Greek works like the Strategemata by Frontinus and the De Re Militari by Flavious Vegetius Renatus, which describe military theory, doctrine, and stories of the era. The Romantic periods of study include the works of Niccol Machiavelli as he established the similarities between the politician and the military commander and the qualities needed to succeed. The indirect approach is what most leaders are most comfortable with.
Philosophers like Clausewitz, Jomini, and contemporaries like B. H Liddel Hart fall into this period. These leaders credit surprise and deception as an important strategy on the battlefield. As convinced as these leaders were that practicing deception in times of war should be used to the utmost advantage, Western society views deception as immoral and a tactic that weaker enemies with limited resources execute.1 38F
139
We are bred up to feel it a disgrace even to succeed by falsehood; the word spy conveys something as repulsive as slave; we will keep hammering along with the conviction that honesty is the best policy, and that truth always wins in the long run. These pretty little sentiments do well for a child's copybook, but a man who acts on them had better sheathe his sword forever.1 39 F 140 91 With these sentiments nurtured throughout the 20th and 21st century wars, it presents a strong case as to why officers reject the use of deception.1 40 F 141 World Wars I and II favored more direct approaches to defeat their enemies. Relying on massive firepower and cutting-edge technology to gain the advantage, it provided a convenient excuse to abandon subtly and be more direct. Deception fell out of favor quickly during the Interwar period, with America attempting to restore credibility among its allies.
Deception fared better in World War II, where strategic deception was the cause of success for Operation Overlord. MILDEC was heavily encouraged among the top military and political leaders leading to critical successes over the German Army.
Culturally, it is observed that deception ebbs and flows with global affairs. In times of war, deception is much more tolerated and sometimes even encouraged. As David Charter and Maurice Tugwell concluded:
In principle, deception and democracy are inimical. War however, erodes democratic freedoms as survival becomes the predominant concern and as governments accept that ends justify the means. Deception of an enemy in wartime is certainly legitimate and, to a lesser extent, so too is government deception of its own public, provided that it is temporary and can subsequently be explained. When peace returns, all these doubtful means are supposed to be set aside; open government, respect for the law, and regard for the conventions of international behavior are expected to be the guiding principles of democratically elected governments.1 41 F 
142
141
142
with one who gains victory by force."1 4 2F
143
During the Vietnam War, tactical deception, when used, was used sparingly. America entered a new form of warfare, guerilla warfare, which uses all forms of deceit and secrecy to gain an advantage over the numerically superior and stronger enemy.
Americans learned from the Korean War to rely on superior firepower tactics and advance technology to destroy their enemy. This method of war was rooted in World War II, where American small unit tactics fared poorly against the German Army, constructing a closed mindset for tactical commanders.1 43 F
144
145
146
In an interview with General Don Starry, one of the chief architects of the 1980s operational manual, he admits that there was a gap in understanding deception, saying:
[we] just didn't have time to think about it. It had a spotty history and we didn't have time to think about it in sufficient detail, there was really no organized body of history research, historical research that would cover that and I just kind of chickened out trying to get it in there lest we say something that was not relevant and not useful, better leave it out than expose your ignorance by trying to write something about it. 147F 148 Regardless of little doctrine and training to fight from, a resurgence in deception occurred again in 1991 when American leaders, who were young men fighting in Vietnam, used the media to their advantage to execute one of the most studied campaigns that included deception in modern history. Operation Desert Shield was the American plan to obfuscate the direction the military attacked the Iraqi Army by ensuring media coverage was focused on the disembarkation exercises of troops and equipment in the Gulf of Oman.
Understanding the Iraqi military was watching American news reports to determine unit locations, American forces secretively launched an attack from Saudi Arabia in the west, 
147
148
catching the Iraqi Army by surprise. The stain of deception, secrecy, and "unfair" tactics that were considered offensive to our ethical standards was discarded, resulting in catastrophic success. Leaders were able to execute these tactics due to many of the manuals from World War II becoming unclassified, which resulted in the publication of the field manual for Battlefield Deception in 1988. Curiously, even with this concept proving that deception tactics in warfare can give the attacker an enormous advantage, the military did not choose to incorporate deception into its standard arsenal of tactics.
COIN operations have dominated as the primary military fighting paradigm in the 21st century. The characteristics of modern warfare have changed dramatically as technology further connected the world. Population sentiment now plays a critical factor in how America shapes its policies both politically and militarily. The perception of truth and credibility is even more coveted, ensuring that powerful Armies remain restrained not to cause excessive destruction.
With the lessons learned from the Vietnam and Iraqi wars, modern warfare is just as much a psychological battle as it is physical. Still, "the tendency in the 19th and 20th century has been for the great majority of professional soldiers to either reject stratagem [deception] entirely or to avoid it by passing such an 'unsoldierly' task to the limbo of the secret services along with psychological warfare, covert operations, and the other black arts."1 48 F 
149
Now this thing about culture. I have spent a lot of time around with armed forces. I've been on patrols with the Israelis, Koreans, Salvadorans, Finns, with all sorts of armed forces over the years. I've noticed how, in some of these armies, routine is the essence of the activity. That's associated with a desire to be orderly and be efficient Their routines are all exemplary and spring from their cultures desire for efficiency, order, making proper use of personnel, being careful with government property, and all these other things. For these sorts of forces deception is extremely difficult Deception is an awkward made-up thing, a willed thing, a hard to do thing. Which is done very imperfectly and inefficiently.
Other armed forces which are not procedure oriented, but are goal oriented instead, there job is to do this or do that and then they do is, they focus on another goal for a while. For this sort of unit deception comes naturally.1 49 F
150
Still untrained at regular intervals, the US Army remains deficient when conducting deception. Military professionals acknowledge this gap, but with no demand from senior leaders to encourage or mandate deception training, shifting our fighting paradigm back to LSCO will result in the US Army confronting near-peer enemies who have studied, trained, and practiced deception tactics since the Cold War. As Jon Latimer explains, "commanders should be under no doubt that they will be deception targets themselves, and the greater their own predilection for trickery, probably the greater their own awareness of that likelihood."1 50 F 151 Constantly labeled as evil or cowardly over the last 100 years, it is not hard to imagine why people who have been told to live a true and honorable life may seem reluctant to adopt these tactics. During peace, our society has great disdain for any form of deceit, political or in our everyday lives, and tend to reject 96 its premise outright. This may put our military at a disadvantage when confronting other nations that do not feel compelled to follow Western traditions.1 51 F
152
With the introduction of highly sensitive sensors capable of detecting heat, light, electronic radiation, odor, sound, and movement, it is improbable to "fool" enemies.
When military leaders do attempt to practice tactical deception, the benefits of their success often are not fully exploited due to a lack of confidence, experience, and aversion to risk. Finally, as Latimer highlights:
Most western Soldiers seem to consider personal camouflage as the limit of their deceptive responsibilities, and deception is usually passed over on exercises with the excuse that resources are scarce . . . A military organization lacking these means, or whose appreciation of the doctrine and whose means of deception have atrophied, will have to overcome strong inertia to restore them.1 5 2F 
153
The Russian way of war could not be more foreign to the American mind. Where Americans appear disinterested in deception in terms of individuals collectively disregarding or doubting lessons from past military theorists, the authoritarian structure of Russia's government, past and present, lends to discuss the predilections of its leaders 97 and the adoption of their desires. While the United States considers deception to be a wartime activity, it exists in both peace and war for the Russians. This ideology promoted the one-party state and argued that it possessed the correct interpretation of the laws of history.1 5 5F 
156
Lenin himself once wrote that "ideas are weapons. Propaganda, therefore, was deemed to be among the most important tasks of the revolutionary."1 5 7F 158 Deception, therefore, was a legitimate tool for peace and in war. Never was a government so focused on controlling the minds of the population. This practice of control became second nature to Russians, with deception becoming a routine matter. 
154
Charters and Tugwell,
Deception Operations,
11. 158
Lying and deceit are fundamental to the interpersonal relations among the Russians. One reason for this, according to Parker: the despotic nature of the Russian government, both then and now, which demands the appearance of total loyalty to the state (the party) and enforces loyalty through a massive system of secret police and internal spying and reporting on deviant behavior by one citizen on another or even by a member of one own's family.1 58 F 159
The belief that all civilized people value honesty makes America susceptible to Russian deception campaigns, especially in peacetime.
Although this interpretation is dated, mainly analyzed from studies when the Soviet Union was a competitor against the United States during the Cold War, the sentiments and way of thinking remain unchanged, especially in their military. The umbrella term for deception we use, MILDEC, is instead decentralized in Russian doctrine into three branches: active countermeasures, counterintelligence, and maskirovka. Active measures relate to politics and messaging, counterintelligence is the use of spycraft to acquire intelligence, and maskirovka is what we think of as military deception. These activities are intertwined in their organization's political and military sectors and are given priority for execution. This gives dictators a distinct advantage when planning and implementing deception operations than it is for the United States.1 59F 160
For the Russians, Maskirovka is a military concept defined as an operational function rather than a staff function. This structure lends maskirovka to be implemented 
159
Dailey and Parker,
Soviet Strategic Deception,
512. 160 Ibid.,
[23]
[24]
[25]
161
There are four broad categories that are still in use today: camouflage, simulation, feints and demonstrations, and disinformation. These categories reflect the US's ability to conduct deception as well; however, they are unrestricted by policy, authority, and morality. Their belief of the ends justifying the means, whether in peace or war, means that Army leaders must remain vigilant when confronting Russian adversaries.
During early World War II, the Russians implemented poor maskirovka tactics that led to devastating losses. Joseph Stalin immediately downgraded deception and surprise in favor of more direct forms of maneuver. However, throughout the war, the Russians secretly continued to practice deception tactics and became adept at using camouflage, dummies, and decoys to conserve their combat power. Dr. Luttwak points out how Russians began to think of deception: It comes naturally, therefore, that you cannot work with a deception scheme when you've come up with your deception scheme then you turn around and you start worrying about how your [sic] going to muster your forces what kind of orders your [sic] going to cut for your artillery, infantry and so forth. Then there are other kinds of cultures in which you make a plan, your [sic] going to do this, your [sic] going to use your means to achieve this result and then having worked everything out you then around to the G3 and ask him to come up with some sort or deception plan that will mess that which you have decided to do. In the first instance, you are able to achieve major results by deception, in the second  
165
163
164
165
doctrine, or at least what can be analyzed, has a threefold goal. Maskirovka is designed to create surprise, preserve its forces, and attempt to control enemy actions. The Russian school of thought suggests that deception is paramount throughout planning and execution and is the best way to achieve surprise at any level of warfare. Maskirovka will interfere with the enemy's decision-making process. It seeks to influence the actions of the enemy and leave them at a disadvantage. Lastly, maskirovka can assist in the protection of combat forces. This includes all aspects of cover, concealment, and misinformation. Maskirovka requires unity of effort to compound the power of deception into more credible ruses. All three levels of warfare will work together to achieve the best results.1 65F
166
Maskirovka is still practiced today. As late as 2017, the Russian Defense Ministry constructed the 45th Separate Engineer Camouflage Regiment, which is dedicated to hiding important military equipment and facilities from satellites, air reconnaissance, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). The unit also contains a diverse array of decoys and inflatable vehicles designed to confuse the enemy commanders to commit expensive weapons to false targets. The creation of this dedicated unit exemplifies that Russia is intent on using this style of warfare against future adversaries. The unit has deployed to exercises with the Russian military as well, gaining experience and practice to understand how best to conserve their combat power.1 66 F 167 Maskirovka also came to be used as recently as April 2021, when the Russian military massed approximately 150,000 troops on the border of Ukraine in the region's largest military build-up. The 45th was credited with deploying their arsenal of dummy vehicles and tents to appear as a more credible threat.
Maskirovka is alive and well in the Russian military and is being exercised routinely to perfect the art and confuse their adversaries.1 67 F 168 Totalitarianism, much like communism philosophy, does not hold objective truth, as we understand it, to be either desirable in principle or practicable in application. As noted in the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) deception statistics, "In every way, from the smallest deception gimmick-such as the planting of misinformation in the press-up to secrecy on the national decision-making process, they hold enormous advantages over us." 168F 169 Russians will continue to leverage deception tactics against their enemies, and with their modernization program focusing on information warfare, they will become a formidable opponent to the United States. This is made easier by the fact that most of its maskirovka is state-sponsored and even protected. Since the fall of the Soviet Union, they have carefully observed us and implicitly focused on us as their primary threat. While https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/oe-watch-pastissues/213749/download. their doctrine and strategies do not explicitly state that we are a "military threat," it allows them to compete below the level of warfare to sow suspicion in their intentions.
Out of three perspectives viewed in this thesis, The Chinese hold the oldest traditions of theory and doctrine regarding deception.1 69F 170 In fact, when the conversation surrounding deception arises, it is not Clausewitz, Jomini, Machiavelli, or Liddell Hart that people immediately refer to, it is the works of the ancient philosopher Sun Tzu. More commonly referred to as Sun Tzu, General Sun Wu wrote is famous his famous monograph around the 4th century B.C during the Warring States period. His underlying thesis for his treatise has been quoted by most books and other thesis regarding deception that states, "all warfare is based on deception."1 70 F 171 What Dr. Luttwak described as a characteristic of Russian doctrine also applies to the Chinese when he describes that cultures that start with the intent to deceive and build their plans around that are more prone to use deception. The scarcity of resources during the Warring States period led to the popular strategy of sacrificing less blood and treasure to achieve their goals and instead accomplish it through practiced skill. Tactics like ruses, deception, and feigned retreats became highly admired, and leaders that could master these skills became highly prized.
Interestingly, as central as deception and surprise is to the Chinese culture, it, too, has experienced periods of emphasis and neglect during its history. According to Dr. thought of manipulating the enemy with rapid, sudden actions to deceive, mislead and then catch the enemy by surprise.1 
77 F 178
180
178
179
The success of the Gulf War proved how the operational concept of Air-Land Battle, when applied effectively, could devastate a traditional standing Army. After the Gulf War and the collapse of the Soviet Union, the enemy began to change. The United States learned that destroying the enemy Army is important, but if the political structure that sponsored it is not influenced to change, then a resurgence would likely occur. In other words, the center of gravity needs to be targeted for change to happen. The military shifted to a counterinsurgency fight in 2004 to attempt to do just that. While doing so, many tactics, techniques, and procedures were not used in favor of more rapid and direct-action tactics. The Army is currently changing its operations model from COIN back to LSCO. Many of the manuals associated with deception were labeled "defunct" or superseded by others that abbreviated the contents in those manuals. Deception, in general, was relegated to the proverbial bookshelf again, used sparingly in the conventional Army, but finding utility in the Special Forces community. Although the current manual for deception, FM 3-13.4, was updated as of February 2019, it leaves much to be desired. This section of the thesis will analyze the past doctrine to determine what was not updated that could be relevant to today's revival of deception. This section will address the tertiary question of this thesis, What capabilities from previous deception doctrine should be re-applied and updated at the tactical level to use in a modern LSCO environment?
Due to the current decentralized style of today's deception doctrine, this analysis will break down what theories and capabilities the Army could bring back to help modernize deception for LSCO in a multi-domain operating environment into the three primary means of deception practiced today: physical, technical, and administrative.
The current field manual for most physical deception tactics, techniques, and procedures is ATP 3-13.34, Survivability Operations, published April 2018. Although deception is not its total focus, it does a remarkable job capturing most of the lessons learned from past doctrine dating back to 1940. Much of the tactics and techniques from the past have been rendered obsolete by new techniques and technologies and have been replaced with more efficient ways to deceive the enemy. Still, since the manual is focused on survivability operations in general, some tactics and techniques were not included that with few modifications and could prove useful to reduce the reluctance to use tactical deception.
Engineer FM 5-20, Camouflage, published in 1940, introduced the various ways way we still plan for the use of cover, camouflage, and concealment today. Much of these techniques have proven effective, while some have been rendered obsolete by technological advances (ex. looking up to avoid aerial photography). The primary effort emphasized in the manual was surrounding the protection and camouflage of the lines of communication, a topic that is not emphasized in current doctrine. Although logistical sites are described as critical assets in current doctrine, little discussion surrounds the roads leading to these sites.1 80F
181
4
More evidence of a just American way of war. This manual is the inception of many of our deception processes. To encourage the use of deception, the manual included a section titled "Deception Ideas" (see Figure 
5
185
Missing from today's current manuals is an explanation and application on how to deploy decoys on the battlefield. FM 90-2 outlines recommended techniques, ideas, and procedures to employ decoys to confuse the enemy. According to the manual, "If a decoy momentarily draws enemy attention from a real installation, it has served its purpose."1 85 F 186 In today's modern battlefield, momentary distractions can mean the difference between survival and destruction. It also describes the necessity to couple physical simulation with electronic means such as heat, emission, odor, and radar sensors to give credibility to decoy formations and describes how movement and repositioning of assets at certain times gives the enemy the illusion they need to engage the false target. As David Charter notes, "many officers are convinced that modern technological advances rule out both operational and strategic deception. Technology has produced a wealth of highly sophisticated sensor systems. These systems are capable of detecting signatures caused by heat, light, electronic radiation, odor, sound, and movement, to name just a few."1 86 F 187 Today's modern sensors are advanced enough to mimic these signatures to the extent that it difficult for the enemy to distinguish between the real and the fake. The decoys rely on skill for emplacement, which comes down to training. Modern field manuals find themselves lacking in terms of physical deception means to LSCO. The gap in knowledge and training is evident as the skill is atrophied. Army units today rely much more on the technical means, electronic warfare, to conduct deception if any.
Most manuals referencing the technical and administrative means of deception are classified and out of this thesis's scope. However, FM 3-13.4 refers the readers to an unclassified manual FM 3-12, Cyberspace and Electronic Warfare Operations, dated April 2017. The major reference regarding deception in the manual mentions electromagnetic deception, which is: the deliberate radiation, re-radiation, alteration, suppression, absorption, denial, enhancement, or reflection of electromagnetic energy in a manner intended to convey misleading information to an enemy or enemy electromagnetic-dependent weapons, thereby degrading or neutralizing the enemy's combat capability. Types of electromagnetic deception include manipulative, simulative, and imitative.1 87 F 188 Before this manual, FM 90-2A, Electronic Deception, dated June 1989, was released as an extension to FM 90-2; however, FM 90-2A is still classified. Although the specific capabilities and equipment to conduct electromagnetic warfare at the tactical level remain classified, a trend begins to appear among all three means of deception. There seem to be Regarding training, it stated:
Incorporating TAC-D into operations will be a standing objective in all major Army exercises. TAC-D will be given priority over other exercise objectives during specified portions of the exercises; this will be done to evaluate the capability of US Army combat, combat support, and combat service support elements to perform both cover and deception in a hostile threat environment.1 91F 
192
1. The unit must train for an operation within a scenario that allows the commander to elect deception or the superior tactical headquarters to direct it.
2. There must be sufficient maneuver room and training time to permit several options to be analyzed as possible deception stories.
3. There must be an opposing surveillance system available to gauge the proficiency achieved. The policies for this regulation were aggressive and showed how serious the Army was to incorporate TAC-D into its available engagement options. Corps echelons and below were ordered to use TAC-D during day-to-day operations, mobilization, periods of international tension, and war. Most notably, commanders were authorized to 
194 HQDA,
4. 195
This study has examined the current gaps the Army must overcome to conduct effective tactical deception in modern LSCO using a DOTMLPF-P analysis. It has analyzed the history, psychology, and perceptions of our pacing threats (Russia and China) and ourselves to understand better how deception will play a role in future confrontations. Finally, it analyzed past doctrine to determine what capabilities, tactics, techniques, and procedures should be reexamined and updated to properly align tactical deception against a LSCO environment. With this analysis complete, a reasonable conclusion can be drawn that identifies deficiencies as the Army transitions from COIN back to LSCO. The value of tactical deception cannot be understated. Deception, when used offensively, has historically shown that it is up to eight times more effective at producing casualties and four times as likely to win battles using some degree of surprise.
In the defense, it has shown to greatly reduce the number of casualties received, saving personnel and equipment.1 97F 198 As warfare continues to be more expensive in terms of equipment and personnel, deception will find increased value as a capability to preserve limited resources and influence enemy commanders to make precious mistakes that can be exploited to gain an advantage on the battlefield. Smaller budgets will mean that Army leaders will need to get creative with the resources available to maintain lethality and protect the force.
Throughout the analysis, some recommendations were given in terms of identified gaps, while others were saved for this portion of the thesis. The overwhelming gap the Army currently faces to conduct TAC-D effectively resides in this thesis's training and leadership sections. Presently, Army leaders do not practice any form of deception due to a lack of knowledge and training on applying this tactic. Starting at our professional schooling, very few courses, except for IO officers, have classes that discuss the use of deception operations. This is also reflected in the professional schooling our NCOs Intelligence Officers are underprepared to perceive deceptive techniques leading to the current process of IPB to be ripe for successful enemy deception. The MI community has lost much training in identifying when the IPB process has been exploited, leading to a degradation in our analysis processes.1 98 F 199 As one CIA report for deception statistics stated, "The average U.S. intelligence analyst today is almost totally unprepared to cope with an enemy deception effort-and this will likely be true also of his supervisor and the 123 policy planner."1 99F 200 They do not have the tasks they used to have in the 1980s and 1990s to be committed to assist and evaluate tactical deception activities as outlined in AR 525-21 and FM 90-2, dated 1988. Improved training at the schoolhouses can have a great impact on the thinking required to prevent deception.
Senior leaders also need to be trained to understand the basic concepts and routine uses of TAC-D. Today's tactical-level leaders at the division level may have some understanding of deception when they trained with their units as lieutenants, but they have not practiced it nor seen it employed since. This holds true for new brigade Introducing the engineers to the IRC early in their PME can ensure that they understand that these capabilities exist and that it can be practiced, at relatively low cost to equipment and manpower, to achieve outstanding results.
Ultimately, all training is a command-driven function that considers time and budget. Interest in using the TAC-D also plays a role. While not directed anymore to practice TAC-D in all major training objectives as outlined by AR 525-21, familiarity with using deception can increase its utilization by virtue of repetition. However, training and understanding are the keys to unlock TAC-D as an enduring solution to apply in a LSCO.
The concepts of MILDEC and TAC-D have not been fully explored to examine all their potential benefits to the U.S Army in future operations. Further research to include interviews with the current Commanding Generals of the Combined Arms Center and TRADOC would reveal many insights into why the Army seems to have stagnated on the requirements to use deception as a viable method of warfare.
As a student attending the CGSC, the amount of networking done lends to a wealth of knowledge that passes by with every iteration of command selected future battalion commanders and guest speakers. Conducting a quantitative study on their perceptions, thoughts, and predictions of the use of deception would be a fascinating research topic to understand the mindset of the Army's future tactical level leaders.
Research into new camouflage designs would present interesting ways the military plans to protect its units and equipment from different environments across the globe. The effects of emerging digital patterns against enemy perceptions would merit a closer look into the survivability of future Armies. Additionally, how useful would it be to explore the effects of space and cyber deception on enemy tactical units and how could the Army leverage these capabilities to conserve combat power.
As new doctrine emerges, TAC-D will seem to be mentioned more as a viable option for commanders to train and execute. Future research may want to analyze how incorporating TAC-D into doctrine correlates with its application in FTXs, WFXs, CTCs, and simulation centers. Are commanders using TAC-D more now that it is mentioned in more collective doctrines? Would there be training standards units can apply to determine if their deception efforts are beneficial? Is there an increase in demand for more dummy and inflatable equipment to use in practice? This research could also explore if deception should be its own MOS. Could warrant officers be a viable solution to have TAC-D endure in the Army? One problem this thesis concluded was the risk that if TAC-D was not studied often enough, the enemy could use that lack of knowledge to their advantage and our information collection processes would be susceptible to even the simplest acts of deception. Further research into the subject of counter-deception and how the military currently conducts training for it would be interesting to study. In the realm of military intelligence, what counter-deception courses are offered to the officers to ensure conduits of information are being filtered properly for false information, negating the contamination of the MDMP process? Is counter-deception offered in their PME courses, and if so, in what echelon do these trained officers reside? This study may aim to uncover a resurgence in counter-deceptive training for the intelligence community that could signal a need to understand how deception is used by our adversaries and effective ways to identify deceptive information at the tactical level.
Finally, most of the knowledge involving deception is espoused through the myriad of vignettes and case studies conducted for over eight decades. As we transition to Multi-Domain Operations, further research is needed into exactly how multi-domain deception would be conducted. As Conrad Crane states, "In a world of constant and conflicting news coverage, ubiquitous social media, and a myriad of surveillance technologies and platforms, the possibilities, complexity, and importance of deception operations have only increased."2 02 F
203
Until leaders generate the demand signal for the implementation of TAC-D into their formations, the Army will remain deficient in applying TAC-D to support LSCO.
Whether it is top-down or bottom-up refinement, the Army community needs to generate interest in applying this warfare method. Commanders will not train on it because they do not understand it, and they perceive the risk and resource allocation too high for any benefit TAC-D could provide. If Army leadership is unwilling to be interested in this tactic, it will remain atrophied and deficient. Currently, the Army units' METs are so numerous that units often pick and choose the tasks most relevant to accomplish the mission based on the higher command's priorities. Adding one more task as obscure as "employ tactical deception" can have the same effect as having nothing at all if interest is not present. Leaders are also averse to risk personnel or equipment to tactics that are not proven or evaluated for them. There is currently no training guidance, and the manuals are unclear regarding who can communicate the deception plan to lower units if no IO officer is available and assuming they are trained. The officers assigned as CMDOs must go to training to understand how to weave the three means of deception together.
Our training and education regarding deception remain inadequate. There is still no professional military education school that teaches deception to the conventional Army, except the new CGSC course on MILDEC, but not TAC-D. Our NCOs have lost the art of fieldcraft and are underprepared to execute the physical means of deception.
There are no training and evaluation standards to practice these techniques in a field training exercise, and there is no scenario designed to practice deception at the CTCs. A lack of interest from leadership coupled with no evaluation standards leads to the Army not effectively enabling TAC-D against expected threats.
Our pacing threats are very adept at using deception. It has been rooted in their culture since the early 20th century and has continued to evolve into all facets of their lives. Applying deception, whether in peace or wartime, is second nature to them. There should be no doubt that they will continue to use deception, which comes naturally for them. To them, the ends justify the means and will not be expected to abide by any set of conditions present. The United States, on the other hand, is a culture where it values truth and credibility. Its views on deception are generally negative, which causes hesitation among some officers to practice deceitful tactics to route the enemy. This may seem like the United States may have a disadvantage; however, curiously enough, honest people seem to deceive the best. Michael Handel best explains this paradox, "the more one has a reputation for honesty; the easier it is to lie convincingly."2 03F 204 War seems to bring out the American talent for deception, but American soldiers pay a heavy price to relearn lessons mastered decades ago without proper training.
Many lessons were lost as a result of the Army's operational focus on COIN.
Numerous training and field manuals were rescinded, not updated, or condensed with other manuals. Many of the readily available tactics for Soldiers in the field are now classified secret, and the difficulty to practice these same techniques becomes a serious obstacle to overcome. Only when the Army showed a strong emphasis to practice TAC-D did Army regulation emerge to support the policy. With the emphasis of including TAC-D into every available training event and major operation, the Army was determined to have units proficient in the use of TAC-D. Perhaps another top-down emphasis will be needed to finally get commanders to make this tactic a permanent, viable, and sensible option to face future threats. It will take a concerted effort to relearn what we lost, but this time, as we head into a new era of future warfare, the ancient art of deception will help us to victory, just like it did when we first ventured out of our caves.
Maurice, D'Aoustand, "Hoodwinked during America's Civil War: Union Military Deception," HistoryNet, accessed October 16, 2020, https://www.historynet.com/hoodwinked-during-americas-civl-war-union-militarydeception.htm.
Guy Hartcup, Camouflage (New York, NY: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1980), 16- 26, 35-40.   
7 CecilleCoutin, "Camouflage," in 1914-1918-Online  International Encyclopedia of the First World War, ed. Ute Daniel, Peter Gatrell, Oliver Janz, Heather Jones, Jennifer Keene, Alan Kramer, and Bill Nasson (Berlin: Freie Universitat Berlin, last updated
October 8, 2014
-1918
-1918
John Latimer, Deception in War (Woodstock: The Overlook Press, 2001), 56,  101.    
Robert Paschall, "World War I: The Belfort Ruse," HistoryNet, accessed October 17, 2020, https://www.historynet.com/world-war-i-the-belfort-ruse.htm.
Latimer, Deception in War, 101.   
Jack Kneece, Ghost Army of World War II (Gretna, LA: Pelican Publishing  Company, 2001), 11-25.   
Whaley, Stratagem Deception and Surprise in War, 448.   
Spencer Beatty and Matthew DiRisio, "Vignette 2: Operation BOLO," in Lessons Learned Battlefield Deception: From Alexander the great to Norman Schwarzkopf (Madison, WI: Mentor Enterprises, 2018), 22.
Roland Cole, Operation Just Cause, The Planning and Execution of Joint  Operations in Panama February 1988
-January 1990
MAJ Christine A. Mau, "Military Deception in Counterinsurgency Operations" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2009), 7.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 3-13, Information Operations (Washington, DC: Army Publishing Directorate, 2016),1-14.   
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Doctrine Publication (ADP) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Army Publishing Directorate,
2019), 2-1.20  Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Techniques Publications (ATP) 3-37.34, Survivability Operations (Washington, DC: Army Publishing Directorate, April 2018), 6-1 -6-26.
John Creswell, Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among  Five Approaches (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2007), 35-50.   
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Doctrine Publications (ADP) 1-01, Doctrine Primer (Washington, DC: Army Publishing Directorate, July 2019), July 2019.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCSI), CJCSI 5123.01H, Charter of the Joint Requirements Oversight Council (JROC) and Implementation of the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS) (Washington, DC: Joint Staff, 2018), GL-7, https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Library/Instructions/ CJCSI%205123.01H.pdf?ver=2018-10-26-163922-137.
Ibid., 
Whaley, Stratagem Deception and Surprise in War,
2.
Mark Lloyd, The Art of Military Deception (Barnsley: Pen & Sword Books  LTD, 1997), 162.   
Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), Joint Publication (JP) 3-16, Multinational Operations (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, March 2019), 1-1-1-2.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Techniques Publication (ATP) 3-13.1, The Conduct of Information Operations (Washington, DC: Army Publishing Directorate, February 2018), Appendix A, A-5.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 90-2, Tactical Deception (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, August 1978), 5-0.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 90-2, Battlefield Deception (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, August 1988), 1-3.
Latimer, Deception in War, 
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 3-53, Military Information Support Operations (Washington, DC Army Publishing Directorate, 2019), 4-9.
Latimer, Deception in War, 79.   
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 2-0, Intelligence (Washington, DC: Army Publishing Directorate, 2018), 6-1.
Latimer, Deception in War, 304.   
HQDA,
[1]
[2]
[4]
CG CAC and CG Cyber Cmd, "Deception & Information Warfare 3-star Portfolio Review," slide 9.
HQDA, FM 90-2, Battlefield Deception, 1-1.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 1-03, Army Universal Task List (Washington, DC: Army Publishing Directorate, 2015), ix, 5-76.
Latimer, Deception in War, 145.   
U.S. Army Command and General Staff College (CGSC), "A502 Military Deception," accessed December 14, 2020, https://cgsc.blackboard.com/webapps/FLVN-cgss_electives-BB59d68b9738f4e//detail.jsp?courseid=CGSS_RES_ELECTIVE_A502.
CG CAC and CG Cyber Cmd, "Deception & Information Warfare 3-star Portfolio Review," slides 13-15.
Latimer, Deception in War, 305.    
HQDA, FM 90-2, Battlefield Deception, 1-1.
MAJ Bradley Nelson, "Battlefield Deception: Abandoned Imperative of the 21st Century," (Monograph., School of Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 1998),25-30.   
Center for Army Lessons Learned (CALL), Combat Training Center Trends, 2019 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: CALL, 2019), 95.
Center for Army Lessons Learned (CALL), "JMRC Trends," (PowerPoint Presentation, CALL, Fort Leavenworth, KS), slide 36, reprinted in, "A344 Lessons Learned for S3s and XOs," (Advance Sheet, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS), last modified February 17, 2021, https://call2.army.mil/docs/ctc/docs/A344LL_JMRC_Trends.pdf.
Rory P. O'Brien and Maj. Michael H. Liscano "Decisive-Action Training Environment Preps Lieutenants for Future Operations," U.S. Army, January 14, 2014, https://www.army.mil/article/117921/Decisive_action_training_environment_preps_lieut enants_for_future_operations/#:~:text=The%20decisive%20action%20training%20enviro nment%2C%20or%20DATE%2C%20involves,intricacies%20of%20threats%20woven% 20into%20one%20dynamic%20environment.
HQDA, Appendix C.   
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Training Circular (TC) 7-100.2, Opposing Force Tactics (Washington, DC: Army Publishing Directorate, 2011), 4-7.
112 Ibid., 7-7.
HQDA,[7][8] 
Army Training Network (ATN), "FORSCOM Training Guidance FY21," accessed May 12, 2021, https://atn.army.mil/hqda-commands-trainingguidance/commands-training-guidance.
GovTribe, "1080 -Camouflage and Deception Equipment," accessed October 18, 2020, https://govtribe.com/category/psc/1080-camouflage-and-deceptionequipment#details.
117 i2kDefense, "Military Inflatables Gallery," accessed March 1, 2021, https://i2kmilitary.com/military-inflatables-
gallery/.118  Inflatech, "Inflatable Military Decoys," InflaTech Decoy, accessed March 7, 2021, http://www.inflatechdecoy.com/.
Lubawa, "Dummy Equipment," accessed March 10, 2021, https://www.lubawa.com.pl/en/signature-management-decoys/decoy.
Fibrotex, "Decoys," accessed March 7, 2021, https://fibrotex-tech.com/.
Shape Inflatable, "Inflatable Military Decoy," accessed March 7, 2021, http://www.shapeinflatable.com/inflatable-military-decoy/.
Rusbal, "Decoys," accessed March 7, 2021, http://eng.rusbal.ru/list/40/1/.
Global Defence Technology, "How to hide a tank: Challenger 2 gets digital camouflage," accessed March 2, 2021, https://defence.nridigital.com/global_defence_ technology_mar21/challenger_tank_digital_camouflage.
Latimer, Deception in War, 268.   
HQDA,
[1]
[2]
MAJ Jack Spencer, Jack, "Deception Integration in the US Army," (Master's Thesis, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 1990), 108.
Latimer, Deception in War, 306.   
Brian Dailey and Patrick J. Parker, Soviet Strategic Deception (Lexington:  Lexington Books, 1987)  511.
Ibid., 512.    
Handel, War, Strategy, and Intelligence, 363.   
Whaley, Stratagem Deception and Surprise in War, 50.    
David M.Glantz, Soviet Military Deception in the Second World War  (London: Frank Cass, 1989), 326.    
Whaley, Stratagem Deception and Surprise in War, 53.   
Nicolo Machiavelli, Discourses on Livy (Gardnerville: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 208, https://thefederalistpapers.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/ Discourses-on-Livy.pdf.
Latimer, Deception in War, 283.    
Lloyd, The Art of Military Deception, 161.    
Roger Beaumont, Maskirovka: Soviet Camouflage, Concealment, and Deception (Austin: Center for Strategic Technology, Texas Engineering Experiment Station, Texas A&M University System, 1982), 42.
Whaley, Stratagem Deception and Surprise in War, 38.   
Spencer, "Deception Integration in the US Army," C-2.
Latimer, Deception in War, 303.   
Handel, War, Strategy, and Intelligence, 363.    
Latimer, Deception in War, 306.   
Dailey and Parker, Soviet Strategic Deception, 42.    
Latimer, Deception in War, 260.   
MAJ Morgan Maier, "A Little Masquerade: Russia's Evolving Employment of Maskirovka," (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2016), 9.
Chuck Bartles, Ray Finch, Les Grau, and Kaitlyn Johnson, "The Russian Camouflage Regiment," OE Overwatch 7, no. 10 (November 2017): 20,
Ed Southgate, "All Hot Air Russia Deploys 'Decoy Army' of Inflatable Tanks, Missiles & Fighter Jets to 'Trick the West' Amid Ukraine Tensions," The Sun, April 22, 2021, https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/14730411/russia-inflatable-army/.
Sherman Kent, "CIA Deception Statistics," Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, last modified September 18, 2020, https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/kent-csi/ vol16no4/html/v17i1a05p_0001.htm.
Whaley, Stratagem Deception and Surprise in War, 42.   
Barton Whaley, Prevalence of Guile (Washington, DC: National Intelligence  Council, 2007), 29-35.    
Latimer, Deception in War, 275.   
Anderson and Engstrom, "China's Use of Perception Management and Strategic Deception," 6.
Anderson and Engstrom, "China's Use of Perception Management and Strategic Deception," 11.
HQDA, 
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Field Manual (FM) 5-20, Camouflage (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, June 1940), 31.
HQDA, FM 90-2, Tactical Deception, Appendix A.
Ibid., D-0.
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Army Regulation (AR) 525-21, Tactical Deception (TAC-D) Policy (Including, Camouflage, Countersurveillance, and Concealment) (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1982), 1.
HQDA, Appendix C.   
HQDA, 3.   
Whaley, Stratagem Deception and Surprise in War, 103.   
Latimer, Deception in War, 304.   
Conrad Cane, "The Future of Military Deception Operations," in Weaving the Tangled Web (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Army University Press, 2018), 231.
Handel, War, Strategy, and Intelligence, 335.   
I would like to thank 
Dr. James Greer
LTC LeeAnne Pruitt
LTC
Rafael Linera-Rivera
Mr. Martin Leners
Josh Randall
Dr. Mark Hull
Mr. Jason Ballard
Jonathan Bailey
Command and General Staff College
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
The tactics of guerilla warfare closely reflect the teachings of Sun Tzu and are still followed by the Peoples Liberation Army (PLA) and its government. Dr. Whaley describes a characteristic of the Chinese military that has survived in the Chinese government today:
A characteristic feature of the Chinese style in warfare is the cautious avoidance of battle. Ideally, every effort to gain victory without battle is exhausted before battle is joined, and even then only if the odds are overwhelmingly favorable. The object of this Chinese "tradition of victory through non-violence," as Whitson calls it, is to induce the enemy to capitulate before battle by bribery, treachery, or tricking him into a position that he Since deception is so pervasive in Chinese culture, the conversations surrounding the stratagem can include the military as well as political aspects of their society. The maxims, so intelligently penned by Sun Tzu, are encoded in all aspects of their lives to include their psyche, linguistics, culture, and history. The Chinese acknowledge how necessary the role of deception is to their way of life. The use of strategic deception and perception management is not just meant to affect military affairs, as that is not how the Chinese view this activity. Deception transcends the different facets of its society and often includes lying to its people, media manipulation, statecraft, and military organizations, both in peace and wartime, with a specific focus on causing its target to commit errors in their decision-making. This is layered on top of the strategy of protracted warfare to curate how enemies and other Nations perceive China. 176 F 177 Currently, in 2021, the PLA still values deception, especially in the realm of cyberspace. Although highly adept at using cyberspace to target and influence its adversaries, the Chinese, much like the Russian's, have deep psychological scaring of when they physically confronted the US Army in World War II. This precept leads the Chinese to think that they face the same situation of an inferior force fighting a superior one, just in the cyberspace domain. A current article, published in the Science of Campaigns, recently described how the PLA has continued to incorporate the art of deception:
In Science of Campaigns, an important text for training Chinese commanders in the art of warfare at the operational level (or, for the Chinese, the campaign Zhanyi level), basic principles for warfighting reveal stratagem-laced