# ID: e7e96c63561d40e0bf1d0c8f0bd87816
# Title: Joint Force Quarterly. Number 8, Summer 1995
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1994.0
# Fulltext:
The United States lost many of its first battles in past wars.
The Nation is unlikely, and would be imprudent, to remove itself from the international scene.
There will inevitably be another first battle.
The military has proven that it need not lose that engagement.
The vision, intelligence, and ability to effect changes beyond the scope of those already legislated rest with the Armed Forces.
Their unique capabilities deserve enhancement to guarantee combat effectiveness.
The Joint Staff must complete the metamorphosis initiated by Goldwater-Nichols and capitalize on the technological revolution underway to lead us into the 21 st century.
2 Arden Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen and Prussian War Planning (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1991), p. 57.
3 Walter Goerlitz, History of the German General Staff (New York: Praeger, 1953), pp.
15-49.
4 Goerlitz, History, p. 58.
5 The Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence Directorate (J-6) is working to standardize C 4 I, including command center design.
The Operations Directorate (J-3) is working on standardizing command centers as lead agency for Pentagon renovation as it applies to both NMCC and service operations centers.
MOP 58, JCS Instruction 6212.1, and Command Center Design Handbook (DISA) support standardization as do initiatives for information management being led by the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
6 Interview with Carl H. Builder, U.S. Army War College, April 7, 1994.
He stressed that the parochialism of the Navy and the changes that were evident in the policies of that service when certain communities (for example, submarine, surface warfare, or aviation) were dominant on the service staff.
7 Joint Pub 3-0, Doctrine for Joint Operations (Washington: Government Printing Office, September 9, 1993), p. III-40, considers rehearsals on the operational level with computer-aided simulations.
Joint Pub 3-02.8, Joint Doctrine for Amphibious Operations (Washington: Government Printing Office, October 1992), p. XII-4, references the expanding use of computer simulations to enhance amphibious operations and ensure operational security.
Research is being done that would permit evolutions such as predicting enemy force locations.
8 Builder, Roles and Missions.
9 CJCS, Report on the Roles, Missions, and Functions of the Armed Forces of the United States (Washington: Joint Chiefs of Staff, February 1993), pp.
III-13 through III-15.