# ID: e9098dbbef824234af2ec5f6725aba1e
# Title: Military Innovation in the New Normal
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
After more than a decade of counterinsurgency and stability operations, the strategic security environment is different and the joint force must rebalance military capabilities across the strategic defense framework. However, conflict exists between short-term desires and long-term imperatives. Recent changes in organization and employment by some elements of the joint force, although appearing as a panacea to the next Benghazi-like catastrophe, are merely innovations for innovation's sake and not appropriate adaptations to the environment. If not informed by further study of the last decade of war, misguided innovation focused on mitigating crises and deterring conflict only threatens national security by compromising the military's ability to defeat adversaries decisively when the need arises. This essay argues that emerging organizational and employment trends are an over-reaction to the current security environment stemming from contemporary guidance that puts a premium on innovation, crisis response, and engagement.
This essay argues that emerging organizational and employment trends are an over-reaction to the current security environment stemming from strategic guidance that puts a premium on innovation, crisis response, and engagement. The essay looks at how some emerging initiatives compromise military capabilities by spreading the force too thin, degrading long-term readiness for shortsighted perceived gains. It presents several vulnerabilities stemming from the strategic guidance, its implementation, and misperceptions taken from the last decade. It then offers recommendations to correct the apparent logic fallacies informing the guidance and associated service approaches. Finally, the essay presents alternative options to rebalance the force, including a potentially more appropriate target for innovation other than the joint force.
Chapter 1
Emerging from over a decade of sustained combat operations, the joint force is under pressure to reset for future conflict amidst extreme fiscal limitations. Continually evolving strategic guidance over the last several years highlights the complex, dynamic security issues facing the nation and drives the Department of Defense (DoD) towards rebalancing to meet the demands of this 'new normal' environment. Required to do more with less, the joint force must consider cutting capabilities and capacity while retaining the means and readiness to respond across the spectrum of conflict, all while servicing an ever increasing list of steady state requirements imposed by the geographic combatant commanders (GCC). As expected, for manpower-centric services such as the U.S. Army and Marine Corps, this requires finding ways to protect organizational structure. For technology-centric services like the U.S. Air Force and Navy, it means preserving costly programs like the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF).
With little regard to the potential implications, the 2014 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) directs the joint force to innovate to meet the demands of the future.
Without specific focus, the broad call to innovate became the central theme for the DoD, as if blindly reorganizing the force provides for the requisite capabilities moving forward. 
1
The joint force is vulnerable. Absent clear strategic focus or definable acceptance of risk, and under the pressure of competing demands, the joint force charges willingly forward under misguided pretenses. Clearly, capabilities and capacity must reset and accommodate the realities of the emergent security environment. However, the joint force must reconcile how it incorporates the exigencies of the new normal or risk evolving in potentially hazardous ways. Ultimately, the joint force must resist the urge to innovate for innovations sake and guard against service parochialisms that compartmentalize and degrade essential capabilities and reduce long-term readiness.
Specifically, the Army and Marine Corps must restrain their fervor for relevancy and focus on warfare primacy in their respective domains. An increasingly unstable world needs strong, viable land components whether policy makers and strategists realize it or not. By confusing forward presence with capacity, and ignoring organizational limitations born from misinterpretation of lessons taken over a decade of counterinsurgency warfare in mature theaters, these elements of joint force risk spreading too thin, diverging from conventional warfare primacy, and causing wholesale manpower, training, and equipment innovation for misguided purposes. Continued reorganization and employment of small, fragmented formations in the hope of quelling every potential threat to national interests only risks sending service members into farflung crises undertrained, under armed, and overwhelmed. Conversely, the Air Force and Navy must divorce themselves from the revolution in military affairs mindset and grasp the realities of the environment they face. Winning the clash of wills occurs in the human domain, and unless America engages in another contest for survival, technology better serves enabling other elements of the joint force, not trying to bomb adversaries into submission with surgical precision. This essay highlights the inherent risks in the current joint force innovative direction by first defining the contemporary environment, highlighting key elements of the strategic guidance shaping the joint force, and presenting examples of joint force innovative direction. It then presents the positive and negative aspects of the joint force's approach, highlighting areas of risk that threaten the long-term readiness of the force.
Finally, the essay offers several recommendations to mitigate this risk as the joint force postures for the future.
Where We Are Now Assessing the environment is the first step in understanding the current joint force direction and the factors influencing it. This chapter provides a framework for the environment by analyzing two principle elements. First, it defines the new normal environment and briefly discusses key elements of strategic guidance shaping the joint force. Then it highlights the prevailing strategic outlooks and corresponding innovative initiatives of the service components.
The term 'new normal' increasingly describes the strategic security environment in contemporary military circles. 
1
Several changes in the strategic environment give it a truly 'new' perspective. First, technological advances and the globally integrated economy enable the increased diffusion of technology to non-state actors. This diffusion puts dangerous capabilities into the hands of individuals or groups with significantly fewer limitations governing 
1
their intent in employing them. Unlike traditional states who must carefully consider disincentives for their actions, non-state actors now have access to capabilities traditionally reserved for nation states, with correspondingly few rules to abide by.
Second, the influence of digital technology and increased use of social media plays a role.
It enables communication that can have both positive and negative effects. Its low cost and broad reach enable incidents to transition rapidly from isolated events to transnational issues. Third, increased access to space and the influence of cyber represent two emergent domains gaining significance. Fourth, population expansion, natural resource shortfalls, and other threats to the natural environment add layers of complexity that policy and strategy must consider. 
2
3
4
Overall, the new normal acknowledges traditional realist concerns, but assumes that large-scale conventional combat operations against nation states are not likely in the near future.
5
Charged to innovate and maintain a wide range of capabilities across the spectrum of conflict, the military services took varied approaches. The Army and Marine Corps aggressively focused on innovating towards crisis response and engagement to meet the perceived demands of the new normal environment. Conversely, the Navy and Air Force showed more innovative restraint, instead focusing on defending their high-end, technology-based capabilities that increasingly satiate America's penchant for bloodless military intervention, a belief firmly nested in the revolution in military affairs debate.
The following highlights various aspects of each service's innovative approach.
The U.S. Army Chief of Staff, General Ray Odierno stated in his strategic intent, "the ability to win wars on land remains our reason for being." 
6
7
8
9
10
12
13
Similar to the Army, the Marine Corps also places response and engagement activities at the top of its priority list. 
14
Combined with the intent to maintain approximately one third of the operating forces forward deployed at all times, two other key emerging initiatives frame the Marine Corps' principle steps towards innovation in the new normal. The first innovation is a change in employment practices of Marine Expeditionary Units (MEU) forward deployed on U.S. Naval Amphibious Ready Groups (ARG). 
16
17
18
19
16
18
20
21
22
Consequently, cost saving initiatives actively divest and consolidate programs such as the A-10, U-2, and old versions of the Global Hawk. 
23
24
25
26
27
28
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly Within the guidance and initiatives shaping the joint force, there are varying degrees of risk. At one end of the spectrum are many valuable lessons giving rise to positive change and growth in the force. At the other end, there is great danger in the precedents being set. This chapter introduces the good, the bad, and the ugly sides of the current joint force direction. It begins with highlighting what the joint force is doing right. It then discusses vulnerabilities in the current direction. The chapter concludes with highlighting the worst-case scenario associated with these vulnerabilities.
The good news story is that fundamental goodness exists in understanding the new normal environment, various elements of strategic guidance, and some service initiatives.
For example, new normal considerations such as: the potential for rapidly developing, small scale crisis; the proliferation of technology to non-state actors; the increased likelihood of asymmetrical warfare instead of conventional combat operations; and the role of the cyber domain are all realities the joint force recognizes moving forward.
1
Similarly, institutionalizing these considerations directly strengthens the joint force's ability to organize, prepare, plan, and effectively respond to future requirements.
As articulated in the 2014 QDR, retaining the knowledge and experience gained from over ten years of irregular warfare, while adjusting force structure to avoid costly counterinsurgency operations, is also non-debatable logic.
2
3
Regaining the expeditionary mindset is another valid emerging concept. U.S. Army Chief of Staff, General Ray Odierno, rightly concludes that the Army must be capable of dealing with the spectrum of contingencies without the benefit of the mature theaters of operation that the joint force grew accustomed to over recent years. 
4
5
6
Contrary to the good news, there are several vulnerabilities evident in the current joint force direction. These vulnerabilities exist in the guidance shaping the force, contradictions between the guidance and its implementation, and the significant costs associated with attaining the desired joint force capabilities. These vulnerabilities portend potential, long-term repercussions for national security.
Innovation for Innovation's Sake. The first vulnerability is the overarching approach to innovate presented in the 2014 QDR. The QDR's blanket call to innovate was an irresponsible proposition by strategic leaders. This approach took the easy way out of thinking through the challenges and limitations facing the joint force, by placing the burden on subordinates to find solutions to the increasingly complex problems associated with the emerging security environment.
Senior RAND political scientist Adam Grissom argues that military innovation shares three key elements: innovation involves major changes in organization; is significant in terms of scope and impact; and produces increased effectiveness. 
7
Looking at today's joint force, monitoring and managing adaptation versus innovation becomes critical considering that, "adaptation can, and often does, lead to innovation when multiple adjustments over time gradually lead to the evolution of new means and methods." 10 If current adaptations evolve into innovation that alters the essential capabilities of the U.S. military, the joint force risks being improperly manned, trained, and equipped for the next conflict that threatens vital national interests. For example, inadvertent changes in organization and proficiency in conducting major ground combat operations is a prime consideration the Army and Marine Corps must reconcile. Although unlikely in the near future, large-scale conventional contingencies are not a forgone construct of the past given that nation-states are still the principle governors of international order. 11 This argument is not about not innovating, it is about limiting any sweeping revolutionary change that endangers the joint force's ability to cope with the unknowns of tomorrow effectively.
between strategic guidance and joint force direction represent the second vulnerability.
These contradictions appear in interpretations of the strategic guidance by the joint force and actions taken within the joint force itself. If not resolved, these contradictions perpetuate unhealthy employment precedents that threaten future readiness and reduce overall joint effectiveness by compartmentalizing capabilities of the force.
First, there are elements of the 2010 NSS that apparently fell on deaf ears. The 2010 NSS acknowledges the inherent inability to deter or prevent every possible threat and addresses the requirement to improve resilience in meeting the challenges of tomorrow. 
12
13
14
12 President Barak Obama, 2010 National Security Strategy, (Washington, DC: Government printing office, May 2010), 18. 13 Ibid., 22. The 2010 NSS also calls for strengthening capacity through a more whole of government approach. 
15
16
However, there are also drawbacks with this approach. Over-investment in military capacity development risks compromising other essential public or civil development requirements in partner nations. Further, increasing partner security capacity for internal roles and missions should only occur in support of and upon completion of larger security sector reform or it seriously threatens the framework of civilian control of the military. 
18
15
16
19
In the end, the joint force's proclivity for posturing for an increased array of potential contingencies and assuming the vanguard of capacity building creates unrealistic operational tempo expectations that threaten long-term readiness. Fulfilling more requirements with less capacity, despite strategic guidance warning against such efforts, establishes dangerous precedents. It creates a continual competition for resources that dangerously thins the force. Further, being forward deployed and available makes military response an easier option for policy makers and strategists in dealing with the next perceived threat to national security.
The next contradiction appears in the innovative approach taken within the joint force itself that fundamentally undermines the very nature of 'jointness'. While the Army and Marine Corps posture towards crisis response and increased expeditionary 
19
Based on analysis of service vision and posture statements, the Air Force and Navy essentially focus on deterrence and decisive engagements against major state powers, while offering little substance towards how the joint force wins or deters against the most likely threats of new normal security environment. Securing funding to protect critical strategic combat and deterrence capabilities appears to be the dominant 'innovative' contribution made by both services. The Air Force remains strongly influenced by the revolution in military affairs construct, placing primacy on ordnance delivery and technology over delivering the personnel needed to influence and win in the land domain. 
20
21
24
25
Retooling the Force. The final vulnerability lies in the magnitude of organizational change required to re-tool the joint force and achieve the desired capabilities prescribed by strategic direction. Pursuing emergent trends, such as disaggregated MEUs and deployable, small-scale contingents below major command level, poses numerous challenges. To employ these types of units reliably, the joint force requires substantial renovation in reorganizing, equipping, and training that incurs substantial cost.
Otherwise, the current initiatives produce only limited return while continually eroding the long-term readiness of the force.
Disaggregating units and deploying small, tailored forces necessitates pushing increased responsibility down the chain of command. This emergent operational approach risks failure by not providing the small units with the required knowledge and experience to operate effectively in the dynamic operational environment. Conducting engagement activities and responding to crisis as an independent element of the joint force requires the maturity, experience, training, and resources more normally aligned with SOF detachments. These attributes are not reliably present in the average small units assigned to the general-purpose joint force. For example, the principle unit of deployment in the Marine Corps traditionally was the battalion based on the collective leadership, maturity, experience, staff capacity, and sustainability to handle the wide range of issues and contingencies encountered in a deployed environment. 
26
Employing small teams across the contemporary battle space with a wide range of missions requires enabling them with the skills, maturity, and experience to succeed. Doing so necessitates manpower models provide more senior, experienced personnel in billets across the general purpose force. For example, maneuver companies should adopt a model similar to that of the British Royal Marine Commando units with a major (O-4) company commander and sergeant major (E-9) senior enlisted advisor. 
27
28
The enhanced communication, mobility, and sustainment requirements associated with deploying multiple small elements simultaneously across diverse locations require obvious equipment innovations. Additional skills to perform a wider array of missions outside an individual's primary occupational specialty or unit's principal function incur further costs. Similarly, there is a corresponding capability requirement to aggregate these distributed units rapidly in the event of actual contingency, ideally without compromising steady state operations of other units. Like manpower adjustments, failure to address these fundamental issues now threatens to drive the fiscal cost of these innovative concepts to unacceptable levels later. Based on feedback from recent Marine Corps experimentation with its emergent company landing team (CLT) concept during RIMPAC 2014, the challenges encountered in employing and sustaining these dispersed, small units clearly indicate these concepts require further validation. 
29
30
The 'really' bad news about joint force direction is that the vulnerabilities identified have potentially serious long-term implications. If the Army and Marine Corps charge recklessly down the path of innovation focused on crisis response and engagement, the joint force risks not being ready for major combat operations. Similarly, the precedents being set in the joint force directly enable political and strategic decisions that can drive the nation towards future costly and potentially misguided military interventions.
Odierno, insightfully postulates "preventing conflict is better than reacting to it" and prevention fundamentally requires presence and contact through engagement. 
31
Although maintaining the ability to deter and project power with platforms and systems organic in the U.S. Navy and Air Force, the warfighting capabilities of the Army and RAF also facilitate speed and simplify coordination during contingency response scenarios. However, the concept has drawbacks. Program proponents acknowledge the RAF concept is fundamentally about demonstrating relevancy and protecting force structure and risks decreasing readiness over time. 
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
The issues ultimately plaguing both the Army and Marine Corps are the leadership gaps and personnel shortfalls found in units not deployed, or preparing to deploy, as highlighted by General Dunford, the 36 th Commandant of the Marine Corps, in his recently released planning guidance. 
39
40
The bottom line is that ill-conceived innovation risks the primary land elements of the joint force being unprepared for conventional combat operations. It arguably remains easier for conventional forces to adapt going down the scale of violence in order to meet requirements of security, stability, and crisis response if grounded in solid conventional combat fundamentals. The inverse is not inherently true. Witness the Iraqi Army, which allegedly achieved sufficient security capabilities to enable the withdrawal of U.S. military personnel, but then fractured under pressure from ISIS, a capable, but largely disorganized conventional threat. 
42
39
Innovate,
Adapt,
Win,
6. 40 Ibid.,
7. 41
42
occur. However, enduring civilian resources, such as language proficiency, historical knowledge, and cultural expertise, directly enables acquiring these niche skills as situations require. Conversely, if the military loses the institutional knowledge and proficiency to conduct decisive ground combat operations, there is no one to fill the gap and regaining this proficiency would require substantial blood and treasure.
Another 'Ugly' Issue to Consider. The second critical implication is that the current trend towards small, independent deployments increases the likelihood of joint force intervention in foreign policy matters. Creating a niche force of global constabularies simply makes it easier for policy makers to commit the joint force to operations not essential for survival or vital to national interests. This implication poses two key aspects for consideration. First, the obvious aspect is that increased military intervention risks stretching the joint force further and continuing the erosion of conventional warfighting primacy. The second aspect is the more vital issue. The real danger in increasing the likelihood of military intervention around the globe, even when it starts benignly as building partner capacity, is that the U.S. does not do 'limited war' well.
First, history demonstrates that the U.S. does not fare well in unconventional, limited wars compared to large-scale wars of unlimited proportion. 
43
44
Creating a future joint force, uniquely capable of involving itself in limited scale conflicts and over-reliant on precision munitions and technology, invites problems with significant consequences. U.S. policy and strategy suffer from confusing the enduring nature of war with the unique characteristics of each conflict America fights. This confusion materializes as a conflict between the belief in easy, bloodless victory and the enduring realities of conflict that continually demonstrate that there are no limits on violence for those wholly committed to a cause. 
44
The joint force is not broken or in need of major renovation to meet the challenges of the new normal environment. There are three recommendations for correcting the vulnerabilities and potentially fateful consequences facing the joint force and the future of national defense. First, the joint force must reconcile several logic fallacies influencing current joint force direction. Second, the force should reexamine previous organization and employment capabilities and concepts and adapt them to the contemporary security requirements. This provides a more viable alternative in terms of feasibility, cost, and risk. Finally, innovation should target the policy and strategic planning process in lieu of changing current joint force organization and capabilities.
Winding down from sustained operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, a natural inclination to re-posture the joint force occurred. Instead of returning to traditional business practices of the pre-9/11 era military, several perspectives and lessons taken from Iraq, Afghanistan, and the larger Global War on Terrorism (GWOT) infiltrated political and strategic outlooks and became the key factors shaping the future joint force.
Unfortunately, these factors contain several flawed assessments and conclusions that directly influenced contemporary strategic guidance and emergent joint force initiatives.
The following 'logic fallacies' represent the major flaws to reconsider moving forward.
The Benghazi Fallacy. Within the context of the emerging new normal, perhaps the single most influential factor shaping joint force direction and innovation initiatives was the terrorist attack on the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, Libya in 2012. This attack not only validated assessments of the new normal environment, but the associated accusations aimed at the DoD provided a catalyst that accelerated some military departments towards resetting the force with increased emphasis on crisis response and engagement. The problem is the response by the military following Benghazi was an over-reaction to a politically charged debate, not innovation that filled a capability gap.
From inquiries into Benghazi, it is clear the initial criticisms targeting the military's response during the crisis were ungrounded. Findings indicate that culpability belongs with how threat indicators and security postures were handled by DoS, not with the unfounded allegations that the intelligence community or the DoD prevented or delayed relief efforts. 1 Hindsight also provides insight into how some exploited the incident as an opportunity for political gain, not necessarily concerns for national security. The Republican Party clearly used the Benghazi incident as a political platform targeting the Obama administration and future electoral competitors such as Secretary Hillary Clinton.
Senator Barbara Boxer of California accurately summarizes the scrutiny surrounding Benghazi as a "witch hunt," less concerned about the facts and relevant aspects of the event than turning the situation into a political scandal to exploit. 2 Regardless, the political and strategic climate surrounding the Benghazi incident set in motion several government-wide initiatives that influenced the joint force. For example, DoD and DoS collaboration formally articulated the dynamic threats of the new security environment and immediately developed options to deter and mitigate future 1 U.S. Senate Select Subcommittee on Intelligence, Review of the Terrorist Attacks on U.S. Facilitates in Benghazi, Libya, September 11-12, 2012, U.S. Senate, 113 th Congress (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, January 15, 2014), 9-11, 28-29. 2 Barbara Boxer, "The GOP's Benghazi Witch Hunt," http://www.huffingtonpost.com/sen-barbaraboxer/the-gops-benghazi-witch-h_b_5315857.html (accessed 28 Jan 2015). attacks against U.S. interests. 
3
4
5
6
4
34-36, 42. 7
These criticisms fail to consider that policy and strategy mismatches directed by the highest levels of government, not a poorly organized, trained, and equipped military, assigned forces available to the combatant command. SPMAGTF-CR Africa supported an ever-increasing range of tasks and missions beyond the scope of its original employment. For example, the USAF pararescue unit responsible for personnel recovery re-deployed with no replacement. Consequently, the SPMAGTF-CR assumed several responsibilities of the personnel recovery mission's portfolio. Further, recent experiences also indicate problems with reconstitution once committed to embassies for security augmentation. Ambassadors tend holding SPMAGTF-CR personnel indefinitely despite the existence of increased security capability within DoS. 8 Andrew J. Bacevich, "The Limits of Power: The End of American Exceptionalism," (New York: Holt Paperbacks, 2009), 125-133. 9 James Fallows, "The Tragedy of the American Military," The Atlantic (January/February, 2015). http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/12/the-tragedy-of-the-american-military/383516/ (Accessed January 7, 2015). 10 U.S. Department of Defense, Sustaining Global Leadership: Priorities for 21 st Century Defense, Defense Strategic Guidance (Washington, DC: January 2012). See the president's introduction letter.
drew the nation into over a decade of counterinsurgency and nation building.
Ambassador Bremmer, with Defense Secretary Rumsfield's concurrence, decided against military advice to conduct de-Bathification and disband the Iraqi Army, paving the way for the insurgency to rapidly develop and seriously challenge reconstruction efforts. 
11
Enduring steady state operations in both Iraq and Afghanistan increasingly devolved from brigade, battalion, and company-sized operations in 2003 down to platoon and squad sized operations in 2012. For example, in Afghanistan in 2010-2011, it was not uncommon to find Marine platoon-sized forward operating bases and squad outposts in Helmand Province. Similarly, in some cases battalions and even companies operated across entire provinces, placing substantially increased leadership, planning, and coordination requirements on increasingly junior leaders. 
13
Multiple factors enabled this distributed and decentralized operational approach.
The dominant factor was the maturity of the theater. Specifically, there were refined mission specificity and parameters, access to robust combat enablers, and a highly tuned support infrastructure. Layers of command, control, fire support, and sustainment mechanisms existed that significantly eased the burden on small unit leaders and enabled them to operate as they did. Belief that the general-purpose joint force retains the ability to deploy and operate in the same manner in future austere and ambiguous environments is fundamentally flawed. Yet, in response to demands from geographic combatant commanders, the Army and Marine innovation efforts advocate for this very capability. 
13
Both services advertise small, tailored force deployment options looking to the future.
The Marine Corps' emergent company landing team (CLT) concept and rotational company deployments to the Black Sea and Australia are prime examples of this mindset taking hold. 
14
15
General-purpose force cooperation and interoperability with SOF also occurred at increasing levels and frequencies as operations evolved. Without doubt, full integration between SOF and the general-purpose force had growing pains. What began as a mystery to most, often-leaving one participant moderately enraged by the actions of the other, eventually became a matter of routine business. Each element not only learned to cooperate effectively, but also willingly did so, even seeking the other's participation in joint ventures to cover capability gaps or exploit resource opportunities. In some cases, traditional SOF duties and responsibilities merged with those of the general-purpose force on the ground. As reconstruction efforts got underway, the joint force actively 14 Per the service vision contained in Expeditionary Force 21, company landing teams are conceptually a potential option to serve as the ground combat element for SPMAGTFs. The current posture statement also highlights that the Marine Corps conducts rotational company deployments to Romania and Darwin, Australia principally focused on engagement, demonstrating commitment, and limited crisis response.  In drawing the wrong conclusions from the last decade, the joint force faces danger as Army and Marine Corps initiatives threaten to overwhelm small unit leaders by employing them outside their capabilities. Without the overhead provided by organic command and staff functions, decentralized small unit operations are severely limited.
Efforts to mitigate these concerns include reinforcing small units with enablers to facilitate mission accomplishment while sending only the minimum amount of personnel forward. This approach ignores the simple fact that by layering these capabilities, it quickly outstrips the ability of small unit leaders given their typical limited depth and breadth of experience and training outside their primary areas of expertise. Further, it strips these same niche capabilities away from the larger parent organizations, creating greater capability gaps. Another misguided mitigation measure is the tendency to place senior leaders on top of small units to provide additional supervision, guidance, and decision-making support. Although the forward deployed elements fill these leadership and experience voids, this technique creates a corresponding leadership vacuum in the now 'leaderless' donor units. 
16
In its current form, the general-purpose force is simply not a viable option to generate the additional SOF-like capabilities demanded by the current operational approach and service desires. Despite the increased interoperability and blurring of responsibilities occurring over the last decade, remembering that these distributed and integrated operations occurred as the theaters matured is essential. Failing to rationalize this basic fact risks both the mission and the welfare of the force that deploys outside its capabilities. Without significant investment in organizational restructuring, trying to create additional SOF-like capabilities out of the general-purpose force is a misguided effort, and occurs at the expense of losing conventional capacity. 17
Prior to September 11, 2001, the joint force maintained robust forward presence and multiple capabilities to engage globally and respond to both conventional and humanitarian crises effectively with existing organization and doctrine. All elements of the joint force possessed some form of forward presence in locations from Europe to the 16 Loss incurred by 'donor units' is not a linear, but rather magnified by a factor of two or more given the traditional hierarchy and span of control in military organizations. For example, providing a lieutenant platoon leader to oversee squad activities strips two to three other squads of their commander. 17 In drawing this conclusion, this article does not argue that training foreign militaries is inappropriate for the general-purpose force. The observation only serves to highlight how the lines between conventional and SOF blurred over the last decade and influenced contemporary strategic guidance and operational approaches. The demand signal by combatant commanders for the joint force to participate increasingly in security cooperation activities is a strong indicator that the belief that training indigenous forces is the proprietary responsibility of the special operations community is long gone.
Pacific. These forces represented a commitment to allies, deterred aggression, enabled partner capacity building, and served as sourcing solutions for contingency response options. The Navy and Marine Corps performed similar functions, but with the added flexibility gained from sea basing, by deploying rotational maritime presence patrols using a variety of capabilities from aircraft carriers to amphibious ships. Further, the Army and Marine Corps maintained CONUS-based alert forces ready to fly anywhere at a moment's notice. The joint force even maintained maritime prepositioning squadrons capable of delivering a brigade worth of Army and Marine Corps equipment sets nearly anywhere in the world. This non-inclusive list represents just a few of the options available previously to strategists and operational planners. Therefore, the joint force should focus its efforts towards refining these past practices for crisis response and increased engagement using contemporary insight and technologies instead of pushing innovation for essentially the same baseline security requirements that existed prior to 9/11. This approach should focus more on adaptation than wholesale reengineering to account for changes in the strategic environment (e.g., the rise of non-state actors, transnational influences, and rapidly developing conflict). Doing so is more fiscally and innovatively responsible and retains a longer view towards preserving essential capabilities and structure of the joint force.
Besides adapting viable past joint force employment and organization concepts, leaders should also review the policies and processes governing use of the joint force.
Addressing the doctrine and policies for the global force management process is one option. For example, does the current practice of allocating forces over one year in advance of deployment to geographic combatant commands support the requirements of the rapidly changing, dynamic nature of the new normal environment? 
18
Greater capacity is clearly part of the issue in terms of both aviation and amphibious lift.
However, given the budget environment, process refinement is arguably the more fiscally responsible and realistic option.
If innovation remains the central theme in strategic guidance, then the target of innovation must shift from the joint force to other elements within the national security continuum. Looking holistically, the process for creating and vetting national policy and strategy is more in need of innovation than the joint force. The U.S. tends to focus on strategic factors most convenient for the current political environment, not necessarily those that inform the best policy and strategy decisions for the long-term welfare of the nation. America also continually fails to draw the most useful lessons from history as it looks to the future, once again confusing short-term political agendas with strategic thinking. For example, politics spun Benghazi out of proportion, not true national security concerns, and the result influenced contemporary joint force direction. This paper does not seek to incite a political-military divide debate, merely highlight that there is compelling evidence suggesting that flawed policy and strategy are more of a national vulnerability looking to the future, not the organization and capabilities of the joint force. This paper offers two considerations along this line of thought. First, domestic politics must balance more effectively with foreign policy decisions to keep national interests clearly defined, appropriately resourced, and prioritized. In layman's terms, this means divorcing policy decisions from re-election agendas and doing what is right for the long-term health of the nation. For example, after September 2001, the U.S. became increasingly obsessed with engaging weak states to deter future attacks against the homeland. Do weak states really threaten national interests or survival? Amy Zegart, a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution, presents compelling evidence suggesting that U.S. strategy is distracted from addressing real threats to security by confusing the concept of priorities and blurring the lines between national ideals and interests. 
19
Implementing these policy and strategy innovations is a topic worthy of its own dissertation. However, it arguably begins by re-educating senior policy officials and ends with joint force leaders providing their best military advice to shape the policy objectives and strategies that ultimately govern joint force organization and employment. One method to educate policy makers is to incorporate professional staff personnel into joint war colleges in a similar manner that other governmental organizations attempt to do such as, Department of State (DoS) and the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA). 
20
20
In today's complex environment, a strong, conventionally focused military is the best guarantee for continued national security. Strategy and policy mismatches, not existing joint force capabilities, resulted in the costly military engagements of the last decadethe outcomes of which are still underdetermined. Consequently, the joint force must resist the overt call to innovate blindly and look more closely at historical precedent.
Otherwise, the nation risks structuring the military for a current threat that is not necessarily the gravest or most vital, only to be unprepared when the worst case eventually materializes.
The historical precedent set at the end of the 20 th Century is an excellent example to consider before proceeding towards groundless innovation and potentially causing irreparable harm to the joint force. After the bitter and costly counterinsurgency campaign in Vietnam, the U.S. military did not fundamentally reset itself with a focus on counterinsurgency and partner-nation capacity building. Lessons from Vietnam clearly indicated a gap existed in U.S. operational capability for waging counterinsurgency warfare. Logically, something should have occurred to rectify this gap, especially given the proxy war proclivity occurring under the greater Cold War construct of the time. One may conclude the existence of a viable near peer competitor in the Soviet Union strongly influenced the decision not to innovate after Vietnam. Therefore, instead of fighting the last war, the joint force regained its conventional focus, integrated technological advancements, and remained focused on winning decisively in combat operations. The military did not focus on counterinsurgency or capacity building and delivered impressive results during operations in Panama, Kuwait, and the initial stages of Afghanistan and Iraq. Why does policy and strategy governing the joint force take a different approach today? Do Russia, Iran, and emerging China not represent potential long-term threats requiring viable military capacity to deter and potentially combat? Does enabling partner capacity and responding to small-scale contingencies really provide for sufficient national defense? These questions are valid and require serious attention before the joint force incurs long-term damage.
Analysis of the anticipated future environment and existing joint force capabilities indicates that achieving the desired capabilities required for the new normal does not require wholesale innovation. Taking a more restrained adaptive approach is sufficient, practical, and prudent given the fiscal realities of today. Placing innovation 'center stage' as the joint force prepares for the future, without more specific guidance, risks setting in motion changes that do more potential harm to national security than good while incurring increased cost over the long run to correct, the exact opposite of what the central themes of contemporary guidance seek. Unlike the period between WWI and WWII when the organizational, technical, and strategic rational existed for a host of innovations, the equivalent requirements are not readily present or clearly articulated today. 1 Instead, the joint force confuses adapting to temporary resource limitations with innovative changes in organizational structures and employment methodologies like the Regionally Aligned Forces concept, the Marine SPMAGTF-CR units, and distributed ARG/MEU tendencies. Adapting to the nuanced security concerns and fiscal priorities of today is what the joint force must do, not fundamentally alter the elements of the force principally responsible for decisive combat operations short of nuclear war.
Restraining the urge to innovate is only the first step. Correcting the course and speed of the joint force also requires reassessing past lessons to validate the real capability requirements and gaps looking to the future. This begins with addressing the logic fallacies driving the perceptions and actions that brought the joint force to where it is today. For example, blind acceptance of the Marine Corps initiatives that allegedly fill crisis response capability voids in not advisable. Providing increased embassy security guards and establishing quick reaction forces to enable DoS security posturing is a rational enduring contribution. However, deploying three SPMAGTFs across the globe may be unnecessary and have unintended consequences that ultimately threaten the longterm readiness and capabilities of the joint force.
It is also essential the joint force reassess what military capabilities truly exist and what capabilities are misperceptions from the last war. This implies that the joint force look closely at strategies, capabilities, and doctrine resident in the pre-9/11 era that remain sufficient in meeting the emergent demands of the new normal. The conclusion likely leads the joint force away from innovation and towards adaptation to achieve a more balanced approach in filling the real capability gaps. For example, adjusting funding priorities to generate more strategic airlift and amphibious shipping in the nearterm over F-35s and more Navy destroyers provides the needed flexibility and increased capacity to meet the anticipated dynamic response options of the future. Moving forward, there is only one legitimate target for true innovation. The critical vulnerability facing the joint force lies at the nexus of policy, strategy, and employment of the military instrument of power, not the joint force itself.
A crisis response and engagement-centric military, employed haphazardly with no easily identifiable policy aims, offers little in actually safeguarding US interests. As one author succinctly articulates, "… while forward deployed forces demonstrate the Nation's commitment to its security interests, they are not a panacea for countering aggression…" and that "it is a fallacy to believe that simply being in the region is sufficient to achieve these goals. Instead, it is the ability to respond to aggression or initiate action in support of policy that truly matters."
2
15  
15  
knowledge
knowledge
This page intentionally blank
U.S. Department of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review
2014, (Washington, DC: Washington Printing Office, 2014), Secretary's cover letter.
U.S. Department of Defense, Guidance for Employment of the Force, Redacted Edition (Washington, DC: August 2012), 9.
U.S. Department of the Navy, FY2015 Department of the Navy Posture, Presented by Jonathan Greenert (Washington, DC: March 2014), 4-6. The five subsequent priorities include sustaining forward presence; preserving the means to respond to simultaneous contingencies across two separate regions (this is defined by winning decisively in one while sufficiently holding and/or deterring in the other); ensuring afloat and ashore readiness; sustaining or enhancing asymmetric capabilities; and sustaining the industrial base.
The Navy only tacitly acknowledges current and projected threats informed its direction in determining its strategic approach on page 6 of the CNO's posture statement. There is no substantial recognition of the operational environment articulated in either of the current CNO Sailing Directions or Navigational Plans, the strategic vision documents published by the service chief.
A collaborative document among the U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard, A Cooperative Strategy for 21 st Century Sea Power, published in 2007, articulates the sea service's collective commitment towards evolving and expanding capabilities to meet the demands of the future environment. The strategy discusses several characteristics now referred to as the new normal environment. It specifically emphasizes how sea power influences actions both at sea and ashore by providing the required speed, flexibility, and agility in proximate locations to where the majority of the world's population lives and works. In many ways, the declarative strategy foreshadowed contemporary the strategic assessment and guidance forming the nation's defense framework today.
The 2014 USN posture statement references to the 2015 presidential budget over eighty times throughout the document in articulating Navy readiness and future capabilities.
U.S. Department of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review
2014, (Washington, DC: Washington Printing Office, 2014), 3-7.
Ibid., EXSUM, p. VII.
Early in Afghanistan and Iraq, the joint force assimilated many valuable lessons from cultural missteps with population centric, low intensity combat operations that quickly transitioned into traditional counterinsurgency warfare. The conventionally focused joint force, designed predominantly to combat near pear competitors on the field of battle, fundamentally lacked many of the nuanced language, social, religious, and other cultural sensitivities more akin to SOF units. Adapting in-stride, the joint force rapidly institutionalized cultural awareness and language training in deploying units.
William T. Eliason, "An Interview with Raymond T. Odierno," Joint Forces Quarterly 75 (4th Quarter, 2014): 8-10.
In response to calls from Congress, the Marine Security Guard (MSG) program increased by roughly 1,000 personnel, providing additional manpower support to its diplomatic security mission with DoS. This included the creation of the Marine Special Augmentation Unit (MSAU); a scalable, quick reaction force designed to respond directly to calls from DoS and reinforce posts and/or missions in need.
Embassy security is the responsibility of DoS. The DoD is not the principle agency responsible for security but provides enduring resources to DoS such as Marine security guards and augmentation when requested and approved.
Observations taken during interactions with multiple Royal Marine Commando companies, individually deployed from their parent organizations in a similar fashion to the company landing team concept, demonstrated that the Royal Marine units at large possessed a distinct advantage in the collective maturity, decision-making, and reliability over their U.S. counterparts due to their organizational makeup.
Congressional Budget Office, "Military Personnel," https://www.cbo.gov/taxonomy/term/55/featured(accessed February 13, 2015).
Scott F. Benedict, "A Maritime Warfighting Philosophy," Marine Corps Gazette 98, no. 11 (November 2014): 52.
Amy Zegart, "Stop Drinking the Weak Sauce," Foreign Policy (February 23,
2015). http://foreignpolicy.com/ (accessed February 24, 2015).
See Williamson Murray and Allan R. Millett, Military Innovation in the Interwar Period (New York: Cambridge University Press,
2006).
J.C. Lewis, "Power Projection: Avoidance of war in the Pacific," Marine Corps Gazette 98, no.9 (September 2014):