# ID: e9098dbbef824234af2ec5f6725aba1e
# Title: Military Innovation in the New Normal
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The historical precedent set at the end of the 20 th Century is an excellent example to consider before proceeding towards groundless innovation and potentially causing irreparable harm to the joint force.
After the bitter and costly counterinsurgency campaign in Vietnam, the U.S. military did not fundamentally reset itself with a focus on counterinsurgency and partner-nation capacity building.
Lessons from Vietnam clearly indicated a gap existed in U.S. operational capability for waging counterinsurgency warfare.
Logically, something should have occurred to rectify this gap, especially given the proxy war proclivity occurring under the greater Cold War construct of the time.
One may conclude the existence of a viable near peer competitor in the Soviet Union strongly influenced the decision not to innovate after Vietnam.
Therefore, instead of fighting the last war, the joint force regained its conventional focus, integrated technological advancements, and remained focused on winning decisively in combat operations.
The military did not focus on counterinsurgency or capacity building and delivered impressive results during operations in Panama, Kuwait, and the initial stages of Afghanistan and Iraq.
Why does policy and strategy governing the joint force take a different approach today?
Do Russia, Iran, and emerging China not represent potential long-term threats requiring viable military capacity to deter and potentially combat?
Does enabling partner capacity and responding to small-scale contingencies really provide for sufficient national defense?
These questions are valid and require serious attention before the joint force incurs long-term damage.