# ID: e998d2a3d07e428c82a55ba0839a6a61
# Title: Role of non-strategic nuclear weapons in Russian deterrence
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2022.0
# Fulltext:
This thesis explores the role of non-strategic nuclear weapons (NSNWs) in Russian deterrence. The problem is that in 2022, there is insufficient understanding of Russian nuclear deterrence with Western policy and decision-makers. This thesis aims to increase understanding of the Russian employment of NSNWs. The literature review finds that Russian deterrence differs sharply from Western deterrence: Russian deterrence measures are more flexible and aim to restore equilibrium in the Russian relationship with the West. The analysis shows that the Kremlin employs NSNWs along the entire conflict spectrum, NSNWs have extensive doctrinal battlefield use, and the Russian General Staff integrates them within conventional Russian forces. Russian NSNWs negatively affect deterrence because their concepts for employment differ from the West's. A military conflict between nuclear powers with Western governments insufficiently understanding the role of NSNWs in Russian deterrence carries a significant risk of nuclear escalation.
War appears to be, or threatens to be, not so much a contest of strength as one of endurance, nerve, obstinacy, and pain. It appears to be, and threatens to be, not so much a contest of military strength as a bargaining process-dirty, extortionate, and often quite reluctant bargaining on one side or bothnevertheless a bargaining process.
- Thomas Schelling, Arms and Influence, writing in 1966   In recent years academic attention to the changing nature of the security environment in Western Europe sharply increased. Most notably, the 2014 annexation of Crimea intensified some North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) members' threat perception vis-a-vis Moscow. Additionally, Russian political and military leadership heavily invested in strengthening their armed forces by implementing a series of State Armaments Programmes over the past two decades. A key element of Russian military power comes from their nuclear arsenal, composed of strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons (NSNW). NSNWs are low-yield nuclear weapons "by land, sea, or air forces against opposing forces, supporting installations, or facilities. Such forces may be employed, when authorized by competent authority, to support operations that contribute to the accomplishment of the commander's mission within the theater of operations." 1 Of this class of weaponry, Moscow possesses the largest amount of nuclear warheads and the most diverse delivery systems in the world. They have an estimated 1800 warheads and around 20 different delivery systems. 2 Among these latter are cruise and ballistic missiles, free-fall bombs, depth bombs, and air defense. 
3
4
5
6
3
4
The problem is that there is insufficient understanding of Russian nuclear deterrence with Western policy and decision-makers in the political and military domains. 
7
8
9
10
11
The problem statement and the purpose of this thesis lead to the primary research question: How do differences in Russian and Western perceptions of the employment of NSNW affect deterrence? Three secondary research questions support the primary question: 
8
10
12
12 In Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty NATO members agree "…that an armed attack against one or more of them in Europe or North America shall be considered an attack against them all…," North Atlantic Treaty Organization, The North Atlantic Treaty, last updated April 10, 2019, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/ official_texts_17120.htm.
For reasons of coherence, the definitions of different types of deterrence used in this thesis are derivatives of Mazarrr's definitions:
Deterrence. "The practice of discouraging or restraining someone-in world politics, usually a nation-state-from taking unwanted actions, such as an armed attack." 
13
14
15
16
14 Ibid., 2. 
15
17
18
The research of this thesis adds to the general understanding of how the West deters Russia and vice versa from employing military power against the other. The scope of this general point of departure is threefold. First, this thesis focuses on NATO's eastern flank, mainly on the Baltic Sea region. Russian and NATO's collision of conflicting security interests is the most acute in this region: from a Russian perspective, adversaries surround the exclave Kaliningrad, NATO's expansion in 2004 reached St.
Petersburg, the second most important city in the Russian Federation, and NATO contests the control of shipping routes. Acknowledging that Russian military strategy varies per region, the focus on the Baltic Sea region limits the generalization of the research.
Second, this thesis disregards the economic domain. From a DIME (diplomatic, information, military, economic) perspective, the focus will be on the three components of deterrence: (1) capabilities (military domain), (2) credibility (diplomatic domain), and
(3) communication (information domain). 
19
Last, this thesis uses the West as a baseline for the aim of Russian deterrence.
Indeed, the West is hardly a coherent political entity, and what is commonly called Western nations have significantly distinct national security interests. For example, the Arctic focus of the Norwegian Defense policy differs considerably from France's defense policy on Africa. Nevertheless, for Moscow, the West, first and foremost cemented by NATO, represents a perceived existential threat that must be deterred from further aggression. For this reason and practical purposes, this thesis refers to the West as the focal point of Russian deterrence.
Two limitations negatively affect the research of this thesis. First, much of the data on nuclear weapons is classified. NSNWs play an essential role in Russian Federation's defense policy. As with any defense policy, many elements are not open to the public for research. The design, technology, and doctrine for the employment of NSNW are, to a large extent, state secrets.
Second, this thesis ignores the role of nonnuclear weapons on deterrence-for example, the role of cyber operations. Cyber operations are mainly classified, and there are also no antecedents. Due to the novelty of the domain, there are no instances of battlefield use of cyber operations being capable of affecting command and control, the platform, or the delivery systems for nuclear warheads.
The thesis has three delimitations. First, despite the thesis being a comparative study, Russian deterrence and the role of NSNWs receive the most analytical attention.
That makes it difficult to compare it to Western deterrence and the role of NSNWs.
Nevertheless, the added value to the academic body of knowledge on deterrence and nuclear weapons lies in increasing the understanding of the Russian perspective.
Second, time restraints restrict the number of primary sources that feed the research of this thesis. For this reason, the thesis uses only two Russian journals:
Voennaia Mysl (Military Thought) and Strategicheskaya Stabil'nost (Strategic Stability).
For this thesis, these two suffice because they are influential in Russian military circles and often used in Western books and reports about Russian military thought. Indeed, the former prominent expert on future wars, Slipchenko, said Military Thought "mirrors our military scientific thought." 20 Third, the focus on NSNW locks out strategic nuclear weapons. Arguably, they are more important in Moscow's defense policy because they hedge against existential threats. Nevertheless, the focus on NSNWs is vital because they are an oddity: no other nation places similar importance on NSNWs as the Russian Federation. 
20
This research aims to contribute to the body of knowledge on the nature of Russian nuclear deterrence, specifically on the role and effectiveness of NSNWs as a political tool and a battlefield weapon. The objective is to increase understanding and give foreign policy officers and politicians tools to make policy decisions during times of crisis. In times of crisis, precise and unequivocal strategic communication is critical. 
21
22
There are four key points from the introduction to this thesis. First, the problem is that there is insufficient understanding of Russian nuclear deterrence with Western policy and decision-makers in the political and military domains. More problematic, on the specific topic of Russian NSNWs, a topic Moscow arguably attaches more importance to than Western governments, there is even less understanding. Second, this thesis aims to amend this lack of understanding of the Russian employment of NSNWs. With NSNWs playing a pivotal role in Russian deterrence, their adversaries must understand why. 
23
Chapter 2 explores the development of deterrence theory and contrasts Russian with Western perspectives on deterrence. It concludes with constructing a theoretical framework that will focus the analysis in Chapter 4. Western Deterrence Theory after World War II According to Mazarr, deterrence is "the practice of discouraging or restraining someone-in world politics, usually a nation-state-from taking unwanted actions, such as an armed attack." 
24
25
26
24
25 Jerry W. Knopf, "The Fourth Wave in Deterrence Research," Contemporary Security Policy 31, no. 1 (2010): 1-2. 
26
27
Another interesting contribution to laying the foundation for nuclear deterrence was war simulations by the RAND Corporation. The so-called Cold War Games gave insight into the impact of nuclear weapons on international relations. Interestingly, following Brodie's assertion that the cost of deterrence failing was too high to risk, RAND's Social Sciences Division (SSD) war game resulted in restraint of using nuclear weapons, not the war game of the Mathematical Analytics Division. 
29
The second wave of deterrence theory came in the 1960s and used game theory to research deterrence. Thomas Schelling, in 1966, published  overarching deterrence and compellence. 
30
31
The third wave in the 1970s was in response to the second wave, using empirical case studies to test deterrence theory. Lebow and Stein oppose "rational deterrence theory" from the second wave. They assert that empirical analysis of deterrence shows that "risk-prone gain maximizing initiators-the assumption of almost all theories of deterrence-are relatively uncommon." 32 Although this assumption pertains to research from the second wave, one should not overestimate its comprehensiveness. As Schelling pointedly asserts, "violence, especially war, is a confused and an uncertain activity, highly unpredictable, depending on decisions made by fallible beings organized into 30 Tami Davis Biddle, "Coercion Theory: A Basic Introduction for Practitioners," The Strategist 3, no. 2 (2020): 98. imperfect governments, depending on fallible communications and warning systems and on the untested performance of people and equipment." 
33
The fourth wave and the one Knopf himself rode in 2010, was a response to 9/11 and focussed on deterrence in asymmetric threats emerging out of terrorist networks and rogue states. 
34
35
36
Deterrence theory in the Russian Federation differs markedly from its equivalent in the West, and one cannot categorize it into the same four waves as Western deterrence theory. 
37
33
34
35
36
37
38
Large-scale war "a war between coalitions of states or the largest states of the world community, in which the parties pursue radical military-political goals" Regional war "a war involving several states of the same region, waged by national or coalition armed forces, during which the parties pursue important military-political goals" Local war "a war in which limited militarypolitical goals are pursued, military operations are conducted within the borders of opposing states and which mainly affects the interests of only these states (territorial, economic, political and others)" Armed conflict "an armed clash of a limited scale between states (international armed conflict) or opposing parties within the territory of one state (internal armed conflict)" Military threat "a state of interstate or intrastate relations characterized by a real possibility of a military conflict between the opposing sides, a high degree of readiness of any state (group of states), separatist (terrorist) organizations to use military force (armed violence)" Military danger "the state of interstate or intrastate relations, characterized by a combination of factors that, under certain conditions, can lead to the emergence of a military threat" Source: Michael Kofman, Anya Fink, and Jeffrey Edmonds, "Russian Strategy for Escalation Management: Evolution of Key Concepts," (CNA Research Memorandum, Center for Naval Analyses, Arlington, VA, April 2020), 6, https://www.cna.org/ CNA_files/PDF/DRM-2019-U-022455-1Rev.pdf.
Managing escalation for Moscow is taking measures during peacetime and war to either move or prevent Moscow's relationship with an adversary from going from one category to another. According to Bartosh, the necessity to escalate or de-escalate with deterrence measures comes from the threat that emanates from the United States. In "Deterrence and Coercion in Hybrid Warfare Strategy," he argues that United States' coercion aims to put Russia under external control. The United States put in place a system of forceful coercion, "the main goal of which is the preservation of the militarypolitical and financial-economic military control by the United States as the leader of the West over the system of international relations and the military-political situation." 
41
42
The Russian view on escalation and de-escalation differs from the West's view. In the West, de-escalation of a conflict and, specifically, preventing it from evolving into a military conflict usually is the aim of diplomacy. 
43
44
45
Additionally, Russian escalation management does not divide deterrence conceptually from compellence. 
46
47
45
46
47
In sum, using military measures to manage the level of escalation is an art that Moscow masters to a higher degree than most Western governments. The military provides the Kremlin with more flexible deterrence options.
The second flexibility component in Russian deterrence is continuity along the conflict spectrum. A conflict spectrum is a conceptual categorization of military and nonmilitary activities. The main characteristic "is the level of violence, ranging from peaceful interaction among international actors…to major combat operations/general war. Military forces operate throughout this spectrum." 
48
49
50
55
56
The third component of flexibility in Russian deterrence derives from a high doctrinal and technical conventional-nuclear integration. Doctrinal conventional-nuclear integration, the degree to which military thinking integrates conventional and nuclear capabilities, is much higher than in the West. out to be impossible to keep it from starting the aggression or its continuation by nonnuclear means, then transition to the use of nuclear weapons will be natural and inevitable." 57 This contrasts sharply with Western deterrence. In the West, nuclear escalation is not unavoidable and fundamentally changes the nature of a military conflict. 
58
59
2
65
66
The dual-capable design principle provides the Russian General Staff, the highest military organizational command element within the Russian Armed Forces, with flexible deterrence response options. A conventional precision strike on military battlefield targets and a low-yield nuclear strike on a military airfield can be executed with the same air-launched cruise missile, while these options achieve distinctly different objectives.
Additionally, the Russian dual-capable inventory allows for further flexibility in escalation management. 
67
In contrast, Western countries integrate to a much lesser degree conventional and nuclear forces. First, Western nations have fought limited contingency wars for the past 
65
66
67
68
In sum, Russia derives flexibility in deterrence response measures from a high doctrinal and technical conventional-nuclear integration in their military. In contrast, Western countries integrate these forces to a much lesser degree.
Zero-sum thinking underpins the Russian security paradigm. 
69
69 Rolf Mowatt-Larssen, "The Strategic Balance: A New US-Russian Zero Sum Game," Just Security, October 17, 2016, 1, https://www.justsecurity.org/33635/strategicbalance-u-s-russian-sum-game/. common problems to increase the security of all involved. Podkorytov in Strategic Stability illustrates zero-sum thinking in Russian military thought. His article "Methodological apparatus for forecasting behavior of the military-political leadership of states during the military phase of the conflict" 70 mathematically models conflicts to predict adversarial decision-making. Figure 
3
73
74
72
73
78
Obviously, for NATO, their conventional superiority is not a problem. However, it does become problematic when there is insufficient understanding from the Western perspective of the severity of these Russian security concerns. Indeed, necessity is the mother of invention, or rather, intervention. The Russian political and military leadership might intervene if they feel cornered to the extent that they perceive a military conflict inevitable. Gerasimov's address in 2019 to the Russian Academy of Military Science is an omen.
In sum, a preoccupation with restoring equilibrium with NATO drives strategicheskoe sderzhivanie. It has its roots in the 1990s but still affects current military modernization priorities and planning in the Russian military.
The blurring between offensive and defensive measures is the second element of Russian preoccupation with restoring equilibrium in their relationship with the West. 
79
84
85
86
Three elements provide Moscow with flexible deterrence response options. First, employing the military for escalation management is an art that Moscow masters to a October 1, 2020, https://www.sipri.org/commentary/blog/2020/russias-nuclear-doctrinemoves-focus-non-western-threats. 
84
85 Robert E. Berls, Leon Ratz, and Brian Rose, "Rising Nuclear Dangers: Diverging Views of Strategic Stability," (NTI Paper, Nuclear Threat Initiative, Washington, DC, October 2018): 12, https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/ resrep20035.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A461433af56d0f8ed06ec92382c726d81. higher degree than most Western governments. The military provides the Kremlin with more flexible deterrence options. Second, Russian deterrence measures aim to influence an opponent's decision-making process along the conflict spectrum, from peace on one end to an all-out war on the other end. Last, Russia derives flexibility in deterrence response measures from a high doctrinal and technical conventional-nuclear integration in their military. In contrast, Western countries integrate these forces to a much lesser degree.
Perceived conventional inferiority and the blurring of offensive and defensive measures are two elements of Russian preoccupation with restoring equilibrium in their relationship with the West. Both elements contrast sharply with the way the West views the relationship. The West has a more dichotomous posture towards the difference between offensive and defensive measures. Also, it does not view their conventional military superiority as problematic. Interestingly, the relationship inverted from the Cold War situation with NATO developing the AirLand doctrine in 1982 to compensate for Soviet conventional superiority.
The theoretical framework in Figure 
3
The primary ontological reason for choosing a qualitative research approach is the systematic inquiry into the inherently behavioral phenomenon of deterrence. 
87
The research design is comparative because it compares and contrasts Western and Russian deterrence to determine the role of Russian NSNW. According to Charles Tilly's categorization of comparative studies, this thesis is an individualizing comparison contrasting "a small number of cases in order to grasp the peculiarities of each case." 
88
89
Also, content analysis is suitable for research on communication, and the vital component of deterrence is just that. This thesis draws from grounded theory in that it seeks to develop a rudimental approach to understanding the Russian employment of NSNW. The literature review resulted in a theoretical framework serving as the lens for assigning meaning to their employment.
Time constraint limits the depth of the theoretical framework suggested in Chapter 2 and will limit the understanding of Russian NSNWs presented in Chapter 4.
However, academia must do more research on this vital topic because precise and unequivocal strategic communication is critical in times of crisis. With tensions rising the past decade between NATO and Moscow, the tools to manage immediate deterrence, should it occur, must be readily available.
The type of data comes from primary and secondary sources. The primary sources Both primary and secondary sources provide data that addresses the first three secondary research questions:
1. Does the role of NSNW differ in utility along the conflict spectrum?
2. How does the application on the battlefield differ?
3. What are the differences between Russia and the West in nesting NSNWs in conventional forces?
The process for analyzing the data consists of three steps. The secondary research questions drive the first step: selecting the content. In practice, the selection consists of reading many articles from the three Russian journals and material from the secondary sources and choosing which add value in answering the research questions. Second, the process of coding the selected writings is one of iteration. White and Marsh succinctly describe the way coding for this thesis happened:
As he [the researcher] reads through the documents, he begins to tag key phrases and text segments that correspond to those questions, notes others that seem important but are unexpected, sees similarities in expressing the same concept, and continues iteratively to compare the categories and constructs that emerge through this process with other data and re-reading of the same documents. 
90
Chapter 5 has a specific, separate approach. It addresses how the identified differences affect (immediate) deterrence between Russia and the West. The approach is scenario planning. Drawing from the ideas on scenario planning from Peter Schwartz, Chapter 5 builds four scenarios in which the Russian Federation employs non-strategic nuclear weapons in a situation of immediate deterrence. In 1991, Peter Schwartz published what many consider the seminal work on scenario planning. In The Art of the Long View, 
91
90
91
planning. It presents four scenarios of immediate deterrence between the West and the Russian Federation with the employment of NSNWs.
In the West, only the United States possesses NSNWs, although France has some air-launched delivery systems that share characteristics with NSNWs. 
96
2
97
96
97
Interestingly, all three of these missiles came into service roughly the past decade, indicating a high priority for dual-capable delivery systems by the Russian General Staff.
With a better understanding of the types and amount of NSNWs, the chapter moves to the analysis.
The United States' forward-deployed NSNWs' role in Europe within NATO's security policy is primarily political. Academic literature indicates their role as regional or extended deterrence because they focus on a specific regional adversary: Russia. 
98
Article 39 of the June 14, 2021, Brussels Summit Communique illustrates the political role of NSNWs in Europe. It states that "credible deterrence and defense is essential as a means to prevent conflict and war and will continue to be based on an appropriate mix of nuclear, conventional, and missile defense capabilities." 
99
98 Woolf,
Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons,
20.
states that "a robust deterrence and defense posture strengthens Alliance cohesion." 100 It is an interesting statement because it inverts the means and the end. Logically, an alliance strengthens deterrence posture, not vice versa. Thus, with NSNWs' role being primarily political in the West, their utility is limited to peacetime.
On June 2, 2020, the Kremlin published On the Fundamentals of the State Policy of the Russian Federation in the Field of Nuclear Deterrence. 
101
Russian NSNWs provide the General Staff with a wide array of measures to manage escalation in neutralizing these threats before a military conflict erupts. These measures follow an escalation ladder, with a possible first step being the transportation of nuclear warheads from central storage to operational military units. A second step is deploying operational nuclear-capable military units in the field, either observable or unobservable to NATO and the United States. A third step on the escalation ladder is 100 NATO, "Brussels Summit Communique."
101 Russian Government, On the Fundamentals of the State Policy of the Russian Federation in the Field of Nuclear Deterrence (Moscow, Russia: The Kremlin), accessed February 9, 2022, http://kremlin.ru/acts/bank/45562. contextualizes deterrence measures as part of escalation management, which makes up the Russian deterrence characteristic of flexibility. Indeed, managing escalation implies that the Russian General Staff can either escalate or de-escalate, as long as it aims at deterring the West from continuing on the path of neglecting Russian security interests.
Thus, the academic exercise of debating the existence of the Russian concept of escalating to de-escalate is intellectually challenging but not very useful, considering that Moscow actually can manage escalation accordingly.
In sum, Russian NSNWs provide more flexibility along the conflict spectrum than Western NSNWs even before a formal military conflict starts. However, their utility after the commencement of military hostilities is also greater than in the West, granting an even greater variety of deterrence measures for escalation management. The next part discusses the role of NSNWs in operations.
The history of warfare has never seen the use of NSNWs on the battlefield. The United States' use of nuclear weapons in 1945 on Hiroshima and Nakasaki was strategic: they forced the Japanese to surrender and ended the war in the Pacific. Conceptually, a NSNW with a battlefield design aims to achieve an operational objective. For example, contaminate the battlefield to slow adversarial operational tempo, destroy large concentrations of combat power, or interdict re-supply or a second echelon of maneuver units by striking reception and staging areas.
War on the Rocks, February 2018, https://warontherocks.com/2018/02/nuclear-posturereview-russian-de-escalation-dangerous-solution-nonexistent-problem/.
is the Russian perceived conventional inferiority vis-à-vis NATO. By prioritizing lowyield nuclear delivery systems in force management, Moscow created a more acceptable correlation of forces with the West. Additionally, they provide Moscow escalation management measures after the start of a military conflict with NATO.
Nested in the Russian Military, a Dichotomy in the US On 24 February 2022, the day Russia initiated the 'special military operation' in Ukraine, President Putin warned the West not to interfere, saying "they must know that Russia will respond immediately, and the consequences will be such as you have never seen in your entire history." 118 Many authors and Western media interpreted these words as a threat to use nuclear weapons. Indeed, if they are correct, Putin intended to manage escalation with the West by using threatening words to influence Western decisionmaking and compel the West not to interfere militarily. As events unfold, one might argue Putin was successful: NATO voted against imposing a no-fly zone over Ukraine. 
119
118
119 Simon Lewis and Ingrid Melander, "NATO rejects Ukraine no-fly zone, unhappy Zelenskiy says this means more bombing," Reuters, March 4, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/business/aerospace-defense/nato-meets-ukraine-calls-no-flyzone-hinder-russia-2022-03-04/.
warheads, underscores the Russian integration. In two ways, this reinforces the blurring of offensive and defensive measures, one of the two elements of Russian preoccupation with restoring equilibrium with the West in the theoretical framework.
First, the blurring creates a potential for misinterpretation of strategic communication. From the Russian perspective, the nuclear threat of Putin aims to prevent a local war from escalating into a regional war with NATO, potentially further escalating into a large-scale war. 
120
1
121
120
121
122
123
4
Chapter 3 discusses Peter Schwartz's technique for scenario planning, which this part uses to explore the implication of the answer to the primary research question. In The purpose of analyzing the steps within the framework of this thesis is to develop four scenarios of immediate deterrence between the West and Moscow. Specifically, scenarios in which the Kremlin employs NSNWs. Two caveats are important. First, conducting Schwartz's eight steps for the employment of Russian NSNWs is a thought experiment. Indeed, it is an essay, or in old Middle French essai, which means an experiment or attempt. It does not adhere to the rigidity that usually characterizes scientific work; nevertheless, there is value in the exercise. Brown and   Fehige suggest that "one reason that is often offered is that results of scientific thought experiments may be subjected to further empirical testing." 126 Clearly, within the realm of war and peace, there is value in empirical testing of scenarios involving NSNWs using military exercises as empirical data.
Second, the thought experiment describes possible scenarios in the near future; it does not predict the future. The scenarios involve nuclear war, which most prefer not to think through. Nevertheless, "denial, for example, is the first of the psychological stages that we undergo to protect ourselves from bad news."
127
125
129
1. If only I had known that the Kremlin tried to manage escalation, I might have understood that the detonation was a mere demonstration.
2. If only I had known that the Kremlin felt so militarily inferior to consider using a NSNW to restore the balance on the battlefield.
3. If only I had known that the Kremlin felt threatened to such a degree that they actually believed NATO would execute a decapitating first strike.
Step four is to identify the most important and the most uncertain factor influencing Russian NSNWs use on the battlefield. These will function as the axes of the matrix that create contrast: the scenario drivers. The most important factor is clarity in strategic messaging because conveying the intent behind deterrence measures tends to distort when the relationship between Moscow and the West deteriorates, and tensions soar. The most uncertain factor is the Kremlin's degree of flexibility in response options military's readiness, and have started projecting military power in key areas where both parties feel a decisive battle might happen. Indeed, both adversaries feel military conflict is imminent. Whereas fleshing out scenarios entails an extensive narrative, for this thought experiment, short reflections suffice: Scenario 1: De-escalation
The Kremlin orders nuclear warheads transported from storage to operational units. Tactical missile brigades, bomber squadrons, and navy vessels prepare to receive them.
Simultaneously, Moscow warns NATO to defer from deploying a Tomahawkcapable carrier strike group within 2,500 kilometers, the missile's approximate firing range, of the Kremlin because they fear a decapitating first strike. NATO understands the perceived fear of a first strike among the Russian political and military leadership.
Despite judging it as paranoid, NATO decides to deploy the carrier strike group at 3,500 kilometers from Moscow outside the Tomahawk firing range. Within the atmosphere of imminent war, tensions between Russia and the West slightly decrease.
The Kremlin orders nuclear warheads transported from storage to operational units. Tactical missile brigades, bomber squadrons, and navy vessels prepare to receive them. Simultaneously, Moscow warns NATO to refrain from deploying an additional US Army Corps near the Belarussian border because they fear for the territorial integrity of Kaliningrad and oppose further erosion of their strategic depth. NATO responds that deploying the extra US Army Corps is for defensive purposes only. They blame the war erupting, Moscow fails to convey a timely and coherent message to NATO regarding the intent of their strike. NATO scrambles to respond, mobilizes further, and considers striking back with conventional or nuclear attacks. Deterrence failed. The commencement of the regional war in Western Europe forces states globally to choose sides.
Step seven considers the implications, returning to the focal issue: preventing nuclear exchange between Moscow and the West and the decisions necessary to achieve that objective. Instead of determining the required decisions to prevent nuclear exchange, an impossible enterprise, this part briefly considers the implication of the developed scenarios. First, three out of four scenarios do not result in a nuclear exchange. However, both confusion and escalation carry within them the potential to develop into deterrence fails. Second, even de-escalation involves a degree of nuclear escalation that has not occurred as of the completion of this thesis in May 2022. Thinking through de-escalation better prepares decision-makers for the úndesirable but possible scenario of Russia increasing the operational readiness of its NSNW-forces. Last, deterrence fails will likely involve chaos, the degree of which restricts sounds decision-making. Thinking through possible response options limits this restrictive effect of the initial phase of a war.
Two recommendations for decision-makers, whether politicians dealing with foreign policy or uniformed officers, derive from the analysis of the role of NSNWs in Russian deterrence. First, decisions about military measures vis-à-vis the Kremlin must show a degree of restraint. The Western interventionism over the past decades, which deployed military force beyond NATO territory for various reasons, occurred facing nonnuclear capable adversaries. This expeditionary doctrine for employing forces required the profession of arms to be aggressive and maintain the initiative. However, a more calculating and deliberate posture from uniformed officers fits NATO's eastern flank conditions better. Restraint differs from conceding to adversarial demands. Indeed, Bernard Brodie's 1946 observation rings true again today: "Thus far the chief purpose of our military establishment has been to win wars. From now on its chief purpose must be to avert them." 
130
Security thinking of the current military and political leadership, to a large degree, is shaped by stability operations and nation-building. However, the mechanisms of nuclear deterrence fundamentally differ from the security thinking of the past three decades. As this thesis showed, differences in Russian and Western perceptions of the employment of NSNWs negatively affect deterrence because the outcome of an interaction between parties with fundamental differences carries a risk of being distorted. Indeed, after meeting with Stalin in August 1945, Eisenhower said to reporters that "I see nothing in the future that would prevent Russia and the United States from being the closest possible friends." 131 Understanding the Russian nuclear domain better by increasing expertise reduces the risk of the straw breaking the camel's back in times of escalating tensions. 
130
131 Tim Weiner, "How the US-Soviet Relationship Shaped Eisenhower's Presidency," Literary Hub, September 25, 2020, https://lithub.com/how-the-us-sovietrelationship-shaped-eisenhowers-presidency/.
Recommendations for future research are twofold. First, the impact of emerging hypersonic technology and maneuverable missiles deserves further study. The hypersonic speed of ballistic missiles, commonly understood as flying faster than Mach 5, is nothing new.
132
133
134
According to the US, their purpose is to intercept offensive ballistic missiles launched by rogue states such as Iran. However, Putin believes that is nonsense and views Aegis and Aegis Ashore as a threatening component of NATO's encircling of Russian territory. 
135
No topic comprises a broader range of human emotions than the topic of nuclear weapons. Some believe they bring peace and stability despite destroying two Japanese cities. Some strive to abolish them, believing a nuclear-weapon-free world is the only chance for peace and stability. Likely, the best chance for as little warfare as possible resides between these two extremes. One thing is certain: with modernization high on the priority list of an increasing number of states, nuclear weapons will play a more enunciated role in the deterrence equation in the coming years. If states can not solve this complex equation that weighs the threat perception and the vital security interests of the parties involved, the risk of nuclear escalation increases to the detriment of all. With great-power competition between the United States, China, and Russia intensifying in 2022, one ponders the balancing focal point of this modern-day trinity.
28  
28  
Source: Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, "Tactical Nuclear Weapons," Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 75, no. 5 (2019): 253, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/ 10.1080/00963402.2019.1654273?needAccess=true.
Missile Threat, "9M729," Center for Strategic and International Studies, last updated March 31, 2022, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/ssc-8-novator-9m729/.
Adamsky, "Deterrence a la Russe," 162.
Ibid., 4.   
Catherine Kelleher and Scott Warren, "Getting to Zero Starts Here: Tactical Nuclear Weapons," Arms Control Association, 2022, https://www.armscontrol.org/act/ 2009-10/getting-zero-starts-here-tactical-nuclear-weapons
Rick Zipp, "What  Exactly is a Low-Yield Nuclear Weapon?" Medill News Service (blog), Medill School of Journalism, Northwestern University, February 9, 2018, https://dc.medill.northwestern.edu/blog/2018/02/09/exactly-low-yield-nuclearweapon/#sthash.Cdj4t53c.dpbs
Kristin Ven Bruusgaard, "Russian Strategic Deterrence," Survival 58, no. 4 (2016): 16, https://doi.org/10.1080/00396338.2016.1207945.
Schelling, "Nuclear Strategy," 421.    
Woolf, Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons,
43.
Thomas Schelling, Arms and Influence (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2020), 9.
Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein, "Rational Deterrence Theory: I Think, Therefore I Deter," WorldPolitics 41, no. 2 (1989): 201, https://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~fczagare/PSC%20504/Lebow&Stein.pdf.
Aurelian Ratiu, "Comprehensive Approach in the Full Spectrum of Conflict," (Nicolae Bălcescu Land Forces Academy, 2015): 185, DOI: 10.1515/kbo-2018-0027.
Bruusgaard, "Russian Strategic Deterrence," 17; Adamsky, "Deterrence a la Ruse," 172.
Bruusgaard, "Russian Strategic Deterrence," 18.   
James M. Acton, Is it a Nuke? Pre-launch Ambiguity and Inadvertent Escalation (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2020), 2, https://carnegieendowment.org/files/Acton_NukeorNot_final.pdf.
Redstar, "Vectors of Development of Military Strategy," 2019, http://redstar.ru/vektory-razvitiya-voennoj-strategii/.
Bruusgaard, "Russian Strategic Deterrence," 18.   
Bruusgaard, "Russian Strategic Deterrence," 12.   
Schwartz, The Art of the Long View, 241.
Amanda Macias, "'Height of irresponsibility:' Blinken slams Putin's provocative rhetoric on nuclear weapons," CNBC, March 2, 2022, https://www.cnbc.com/2022/03/02/blinken-slams-putins-provocative-rhetoric-on-nuclearweapons.html.
123 Olivier Knox, "Some Americans (and others) are questioning Putin's mental state," The Washington Post, February 28, 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/ politics/2022/02/28/some-americans-others-are-questioning-putin-mental-
state/.124 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, "NATO's Nuclear Deterrence Policy and Forces."
Schwartz, The Art of the Long View, 36.   
Schwartz, The Art of the Long View, 242.
Schwartz, The Art of the Long View, 242.
Alex Hollings, "Why calling Russia's Kinzhal a 'hypersonic missile' is a stretch," Sandboxx (blog), March 19, 2022, https://www.sandboxx.us/blog/why-callingrussias-kinzhal-a-hypersonic-missile-is-a-stretch/.
  133  Missile Threat, "Avangard," Center for Strategic and International Studies, last updated July 31, 2021, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/
avangard.134  For a great discussion on these challenges, see Center for Strategic and International Studies, "Complex Air Defense: Countering the Hypersonic Missile Threat," February 9, 2022, https://www.csis.org/analysis/complex-air-defensecountering-hypersonic-missile-threat-0.
Andrew Higgins, "On the Edge of a Polish Forest, Where Some of Putin's Darkest Fears Lurk," The New York Times, February 16, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/ 2022/02/16/world/europe/poland-missile-base-russia-ukraine.html.
data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
In deterrence theory, especially when discussing nuclear weapons, academics ask two classes of questions: the first class focuses on ethics. 
93
94
This chapter covered the research design. The approach is qualitative, using elements of content analysis and grounded theory. The primary sources are the Russian military journals Voennaia Mysl and Strategicheskaya Stabil'nost. Secondary sources are reports, articles, and books by Western thinkers studying Russian deterrence. The process used to analyze the data consists of three steps. The first step is selecting the content, the second is coding the selected writings, and the third step is analyzing the results and answering the three secondary research questions. The approach to Chapter 5 is scenario  The delivery systems include ground-launched, sea-launched, and air-launched ballistic and cruise missiles with an approximate 500 to 3,000 kilometers range. 
95
Lumpov and Bagmet's notion of "carrying out deterrent [demonstrative and deescalating] strikes" ties to the current debate in the West on whether Russia has an escalate to de-escalate concept. 
105
106
106
1 Does the role of NSNW differ in utility along the conflict spectrum? Yes, Russian NSNWs provide more flexibility in response options along the conflict spectrum than the rigid role of Western NSNWs.
2 How does the application on the battlefield differ?
The West does not view NSNWs as a battlefield weapon; the Russian General Staff does. Conventional Russian military inferiority vis-à-vis NATO drives this view and further enhances flexibility in response options.
3 What are the differences between Russia and the West in nesting NSNWs in conventional forces?
The Russian forces have a high degree of conventional-nuclear integration; Western forces have a low degree of integration. This contrast reinforces the blurring of offensive and defensive deterrence measures, increasing the risk of miscommunication and misinterpretation between Moscow and the West in times of crisis.
Chapter 5 starts with the answer to the primary research question, enabled by the answer to the three secondary research questions. Step five selects scenario logic. Drawing from this thesis's literature review, the analysis, and the most important and uncertain factor from step four, the matrix in Figure 
7