# ID: e9d2d5d6c1974d61a5abc6a6dbb0efda
# Title: Korean way of war (three kingdoms to the Japanese colonial period: BC 57–AC 1945): based on contrast to Western Europe and China
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
This study started based on the fact that in spite of Korea's long history, it is difficult to determine if Korea has a unique way of war because there is a lack of research on the subject. This study seeks to verify whether there is a unique way of war in Korea and, if so, defines it by contrasting certain characteristics to the ways of war of Western Europe and China. The main research question of this thesis is "Is there a distinct Korean way of war?" Subsidiary research questions are: "What is a way of war?", "What factors contribute to a specific way of war?", "What are the ways of Western Europe and China?", "What are the key differences that characterize the different ways of war?", "If there is a distinct Korean way of war, what is it?", "What are the implications from this research?" This thesis is a comparative case study using descriptions of ways of war of both Western Europe and China as well as proposes a definition for a Korean way of war. They will be analyzed based on eight relevant questions drawn from four evaluation criteria related with four proposed characteristics of a Korean way of war.
15.
Goryeo (918-1392), Joseon (1392-1897), the Korean Empire (1897-1910), the Japanese colonial period (1910-1945) and the Republic of Korea (1945-6th Republic).0 F 1 By all measurable standards, Korea has survived for a long period of time as a nation-state with a unique cultural and national identity.
However, in spite of its long history, it is not readily accepted that Korea has a unique way of war because there is a lack of research on the subject. The overall history of Korea is well chronicled, but research on the subject of warfare in Korea is rather lacking. Moreover, even if the historical data on war were somewhat well organized, there is very limited research on the specific subject of a unique Korean way of war. The study of the subject of war has been done generally by explaining the principles of war or by drawing lessons through various war cases. However, it can be expected that Korea, which has a long history and a history of many wars, possesses a unique way of war influenced by geopolitical factors, religion, national power, ethnic factors, culture, and political system.
This study seeks to determine whether there is a unique way of war in Korea and, if so, explore it by contrasting it to the ways of war of Western Europe and China. In order to confirm whether a country has its own way of war, it should be contrasted with other countries' ways of war. Therefore, it is productive to contrast the Korean way of war against the Chinese way of war, which might have historically influenced Korea. In addition, the Western European way of war has indirectly influenced the modern Korean military, and it is logical to contrast Korea's own way of war to it. Because of the aforementioned reasons, the Korean way of war appears to be ill-defined. This paper strives to remedy that.
This thesis is composed of five chapters. Chapter 1 is the introduction, consisting of the background, organization, research question, significance, assumptions, definitions of key terms, and limitations. In the background section, the purpose and motivation of the study will be explained. In the organization section, the composition of this paper will be addressed. The research question section will explain the questions to be answered by this thesis and will be helpful in framing the research. The significance of this work is its contribution to the overall study of war. In the assumptions section, the focus is on establishing a common definition of the meaning of way of war. Additionally, definitions of key terms will help to provide a consistent understanding by the reader. Finally, the limitations of this study will be addressed.
Chapter 2 is a literature review consisting of the factors that create and define a specific way of war, a review of previous related studies, a review of Korean senior leaders' comments, and the working evaluation criteria. The factors will be helpful to establish evaluation criteria for determining the identity of the Korean way of war. In addition, the review of studies and senior leaders' comments establishes evaluation criteria to answer the question, "Is there a distinct Korean way of war?" Lastly, the overall evaluation criteria, which include analysis of the above factors (contributing to a specific way of war, review of studies, and review of senior leaders' comments), will be defined.
Chapter 3 proposes research methodology, relevant questions, threats to validity, and biases. The factors contributing to a specific way of war and the established evaluation criteria will produce relevant questions for this comparative study.
Comparative studies, historical investigations, and analysis of senior leaders' opinions will be utilized to answer the research questions. In the section of the threats to validity and biases, the risk factors that could lead to a loss of validity are summarized.
Chapter 4 analyzes application of the relevant questions drawn from evaluation criteria and a synopsis of the Korean way of war. In applying the relevant questions, the comparison analysis of the Korean way of war with Western European and Chinese ways of war will help to determine whether Korea has a unique way of war as contrasted to the Western European and Chinese ways of war. Finally, the Korean way of war, based on the analysis of the given assumptions and comparison with each country, will be defined. Chapter 5 will address the conclusion and recommendations. In this section, implications derived from this study, as well as its limitations, will be discussed.
The main research question of this thesis is "Is there a distinct Korean way of war?" Korea has a long history and has had many wars. So, it can be assumed that there may be a common view of warfare that Korea pursued in these various wars. On the other hand, it may be argued that Korea has been influenced by other countries such as China (or in the Twentieth Century, the US), so there is no unique Korean way of war, but rather a hybrid.
The following are subsidiary research questions: "What is a way of war?", "What factors contribute to a specific way of war?", "What are the ways of war of Western Europe and China?", "What are the key differences that characterize the different ways of war?", "If there is a distinct Korean way of war, what is it?", "What are the implications from this research?" In chapter 1, "What is a way of war?" will be addressed in the section of definitions of key terms. "What factors determine the specific way of war?" will be explained in chapter 2. "What are the ways of war of Western Europe and China?", "What are the key differences that characterize the different ways of war?", "If there is a distinct Korean way of war, what is it?" will be stated in chapter 4. "What are the implications from this research?" will be covered in chapter 5. Figure 
1
This research is significant for three main reasons. Most importantly, this research will give readers a chance to explore an unknown area, Korea, on a way of war. It will be helpful to understand the diversity of source materials. Overall the main body of study on ways of war has addressed Western countries. There are also ample studies on the Asian way of war (and much emphasizing China). In contrast, studies on the Korean way of war are rare. Therefore, this study will help fill a research gap.
Second, this research will have meaningfulness with application to understanding the past development and execution of the Korean way of war, if there is a unique Korean way of war. At least, regardless of existence of a unique Korean way of war, this study will provide readers with a good opportunity to see several Korean military thoughts and wars Korea had experienced. To ascertain the unique nuances of a Korean way of war, several Korean wars are dissected and commonalities are identified. It is hoped that this exploration creates a deep understanding of Koreas' past wars known only superficially in the West.
Third, this research has usefulness as a predictive tool of a Korean way of war in the future. This study will play a pioneering role in the understanding of how Korea has fought and will likely fight its wars and the contributing factors like the methodology, bibliography, and the contents. Regardless of the results of this study, someone might inspire some clues for a Korean way of war for the future in questions and discussions of this thesis. Of course, it would be better if this study could define the Korean way of war, which Korea has conducted.
Often, it is assumed that the various historic nations that existed in Korea's history have a common identity in terms of culture and a way of war. It can be argued that the countries in history which existed on the Korean Peninsula have developed their unique culture with their own identities and have adhered to their own unique ways of war. Given that they have lived in the geographical environment of the Korean peninsula and that the ethnic make-up has stayed relatively constant, it can be assumed that all historical Korean nations have cultural and war-fighting commonalities. This is the key assumption of this study.
In addition, even if ideas and technology spread from other countries and were introduced into Korea, the resulting way of war is as unique as its predecessors. For example, invented in Asia, gunpowder spread to the West where its use was incorporated in the Western Way of War. Another example concerns the works and ideas of Carl von Clausewitz and Antoine Henri Jomini, which are vastly different but both highly influenced by Napoleon and his battles. In other words, a way of war does not require originality, but may be the combination of existing concepts into a new and specific one.
As a Korean example, even though Sun Tzu's military insights might have influenced ancient Korean military thought, Korea likely developed its own way of war based on many factors like geography, politics, and national powers.
The key terms that can be confused in the course of this study should be addressed. The key terms are way of war, total war, Korea, and Western Europe. These terms are defined differently by various scholars; therefore, they must be accompanied by operational definitions. Geoffrey Parker believes that the Western way of war is based on five principal foundations: 1) the primacy of technology and discipline; 2) the rapid offensive; 3) the challenge and response dynamic; 4) state finance; and 5) a dominant military tradition.1 F 2
Basil Liddell Hart's The British Way in Warfare, published in 1932 criticized the notion of waging an absolute war and championed the "Indirect Approach".2 F 3 As can be seen from the above examples, the way of war can be understood as a concept that covers the total amount of national power to carry out the war as well as the approach to the objective. To summarize, a nation's way of war includes: first, technology like weapon systems; second, the way of conducting operations; third, the theory and doctrine of the war; fourth, the ideology of war; fifth, the military culture and tradition. Therefore, a proposed definition for a way of war is a combination of philosophy, principles and traditions that are used and displayed in a majority of conflicts in which a nation participates including the decision to go to war, the execution of war, and the consolidation of gains.
Second, the concept of total war will be discussed. The concept of total war to use in this study is very similar to what Erich Ludendorff discussed in his book Der totale Krieg (The total war).3 F 4 Namely, total war means a warfare in which all elements of a nation's national power are mobilized to carry out war rather than to use only military force.4 F 5
Third, the concept of Korea should be defined to address the Korean way of war in this thesis. The nation of Korea may also be considered an ambiguous concept.
However, Korea can be described as a collection of three concepts. Most of all, geopolitically, Korea is a group of the countries that exists on the Korean Peninsula. In addition, as an ethnical concept, Korea is a nation that is composed of a single ethnical nation-state. Lastly, as a historical concept, Korea is a collection of countries which have a shared historic. The Korean nation may be defined as the concept of the countries which have existed since the history of Gojoseon to present-day Korea.
Finally, Western Europe in this thesis means countries that have traditionally been used as sources for research on the Western way of war: Germany, France, and Britain.
Additionally, there are a number of Western European military theorists who have left many works on the Western way of war: Clausewitz, Napoleon, Jomini, and Liddell Hart to name a few.
Since it is politically sensitive and not necessary to address North Korea in this study, it will be excluded. This is why the title has a certain period. The on-going conflict between South Korea and North Korea is politically sensitive, and it seems inappropriate to include North Korea's identity and their way of war in this political environment.
Additionally, North Korean doctrines were heavily influenced by the Soviet Union before and during the Korean War.5 F 6
In order to accomplish the purpose of this study, a method of outlining the histories of the relevant countries with some evaluation criteria is needed. This study is limited by the examples chosen although an effort was made to use examples from different times and regimes.
The historic range of this study will be from Three Kingdoms (Goguryeo, Baekje,   Silla; B.C.57-676) to the Japanese colonial period (1910-1945). There is Korean history prior to Three Kingdoms, but it is hard to analyze the period's historic examples due to scarcity of those studies as well as its accessibility. Also, given that the United States has been an influence on the military of the Republic of Korea from 1945 to present day, this study intentionally omits that time period.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a common awareness through background and discussion, and to provide a framework for the logical analysis of this study. It is meaningful to look at what factors contribute to a way of war in order to analyze whether Korea possesses a unique way of war. The factors that contribute to a way of war help to establish the evaluation criteria and serve as a framework for analyzing other studies and the comments of senior leaders.
Factors contributing to a specific way of war are geography, international relations, national power, ethnic, religion, history, and culture. It is not an exaggeration to say that the factors that contribute to the way of war of a nation are all the areas that affect the survival and prosperity of the nation. However, it is necessary to formalize the framework for the purpose of this study. The factors that contribute to a way of war will explain how a nation forms its own unique way of war.
First, geography is one of the factors contributing to a way of war. Korea is a peninsular nation, with three sides surrounded by the sea and a shared northern border with China. Until maritime navigation was well developed, influences from the Asian continent affected Korea more than influences from the ocean-faring peoples. The perception of geography on ancient Korea is very important. Even before the first half of the Joseon dynasty, the security threat that could come from the ocean was recognized only as pirates from Japan. On the other hand, the area facing the border with China was a very important pathway to the continent as well as an axis to attack the Korean Peninsula. In addition, Korea has mountainous terrain covering 70% of the country, and the northern part has very rugged mountainous terrain, so there are limited avenues of approach for large-scale troop formations. This geographical factor is likely to have led to the belief that Korea could achieve national defense if it defended the northern region well.
Second, international relations are a critical factor that impacted the Korean way of war. Korea has a limited number of neighboring countries they have directly interacted with it due to its geopolitical characteristic. Since Korea is on a peninsula, only China and Japan had a direct linkage in terms of national security in the past. The situation of Korea was different than Germany and France who had many neighboring countries on their periphery. Therefore, if diplomatic relations between China and Japan were well established, it would not be necessary to exercise political influence by using armed forces. In fact, during the Joseon dynasty, Korea established close diplomatic relations with China, and there were no major armed conflicts between them. When Japan invaded Joseon, for example, China's expeditionary forces supported the Joseon dynasty to fight against Japan.
Third, national power has influence on forming a way of war. National power consists of elements of politics, diplomacy, military power, and economy.6 F 
7
0F 11
Fifth, religion is one of the unique characteristics that contribute to the way of war. Korea has recognized Buddhism as a national religion for about 1,000 years since the Three Kingdoms period when Buddhism was preached. Buddhism is a religion that seeks quiet, comfortable, and unwavering awakening as the highest ideal level. Also, during the Joseon dynasty, Confucianism was formulated as the national official religion.
Confucianism was a philosophy as well as a religion in the dynasty. The ultimate goal of Confucianism is to make people good with morality for themselves by self-education. It can be noteworthy that both Confucianism and Buddhism are religions with attributes that are directed toward mankind's inner world.1 3 F 14 These religious attributes have contributed to the formation of a unique culture in Korea. Examples include pursuit of moral things when facing problems, and a tendency to look inside oneself to identify a solution rather than outside.1 4F 15
Sixth, since mankind learns through past experience, history is also a factor that forms the way of war. Through the history of the ancient states that existed on the Korean peninsula, the countries that existed noted successful actions, and tried to improve on situations they deemed disadvantageous. For example, it can be seen throughout history that a country that holds the Han River in the middle of the Korean Peninsula has significant advantage. Therefore, the countries in the history of the Korean peninsula made a great effort to hold the Han River.1 
5 F 16
7 F 18
Seventh, the culture of a nation is a factor that influences the formation of the country 's unique way of war. From ancient times to the Joseon dynasty, Korea had differentiated class systems by status including slavery (Nobi, 노비).1 8F 19 The higher classes did not want to do physical labor and dangerous work, such as things related to armed forces.1 9F 20 There was a phenomenon of concentrating on classy and noble literary and arts, rather than martial arts accompanied by physical labor.2 0F 21 Naturally, when a period of peace persisted, martial arts and national defense would become neglected. This occurred, for example during the second half of the Goryeo dynasty and the Joseon dynasty, which lasted for a relatively long time.
In this section, three kinds of studies are reviewed: Korean way of war, Western European way of war, and Chinese way of war. Reviews of studies addressing the above ways of war will assist readers to identify the flow of the study area and understand deeply the concepts discussed in chapter 4.
Kwonyoung Park (2013) conducted a study on the nexus of history-theorydoctrine in military thought to identify implications for the Republic of Korea Army. 21 F 22   In his thesis, he argues that the military thoughts of Korea had Sang-Mu Spirit (Martialism, 상무정신)2 2 F 23 and Cheongyaippo. However, he focuses on the lack of military thought in Korea instead of ascertaining a Korean way of war.
Gabje Cho (2016)  He claims that when Korea was attacked by an invasion, it used defensive warfare in accordance with its ability, set the battleground on the Korean peninsula to force prolonged supply lines for the enemy, and conduct total war with the military, the government, and the people to save their country.2 4F 25 Although his argument is persuasive, it is not validated academically.
Young-Jun Kim (2009) studied Korean military thought. He addressed the military thoughts of General Eulji Mundeok (Unknown, but in 7C), General Sunsin Lee   (1545-1598), and Seongryoung Ryu (1542-1607), who are very famous military historic figures in Korea.2 5 F 26 However, he only addresses the military thought of several famous Korean figures, and he does not mention the overall characteristics of a Korean way of war.
Military Research Institute of the Korean Army (2012) released a book, titled "Military History of Korea." The book says that Korea has mostly conducted defensive, long-term resistance, and civilian-involved warfare with fortifications and strong points.2 6F 27 In addition, an official in the Joseon dynasty, Yakyong Cheong, insisted that people should construct fortifications for shelters and strong points at important areas and execute long-term resistance operations against an enemy who had limited logistic capability. This is "Minbo defense theory (민보론)" laid out in "Minboui (민보의)", a book of Yakyong Cheong as a national defense strategy.2 7F 28 From these resources, the Korean way of war seems to have characteristics with defensive, responsiveness, total wars, and long-term resistance.
Seongryoung Ryu, another politician in the Joseon dynasty, wrote down the background, progress, and lessons of The Imjin War (임진왜란), the Japanese invasion (1592-1598) in his book, "Jingbirok (징비록)."2 8 F 
29
Reviewing studies on the Western European way of war will provide the theoretical basis for the following comparison. Most of all, the Western military thinkers who studied deeply on war are a very important part of the review of studies on the Western European way of war. Carl von Clausewitz addressed a way of war regarding attack and defense in strategy as well as the relation between politics and military.3 1 F 32   Jomini, another military thinker, influenced modern military affairs by presenting the principles of war in his book, The Art of War (1838). He developed the concept of exterior and interior lines of operation. Additionally, he categorized the types of warfare including offensive and defensive warfare, and he insisted that war against a nation with a united people who have strong will to fight would be the most formidable. To sum the military thought of the aforementioned remarkable figures up, Sun Tzu's ideas focus on overall area of war whereas Mao's ideas address intensively on revolutionary military strategy when one is under unfavorable condition such as when friendly forces are weaker than an enemy. Arguably, Sun Tzu and Mao are the best known military thinkers in Chinese history. Therefore, by going over their military thought, it will be possible to identify the Chinese way of war and contrast the Korean way of war with the Chinese one.
In this section, the thesis will address several Korean senior officers who mentioned on a Korean defense policy which might be related to a Korean way of war or might have some clues about it in the period between the three kingdoms and the Japanese colonial era. At the time of the establishment of the Korean government in 1948, one of the people who had a clear view of Korea's defense policy was the new defense minister, Beomseok Lee. He proclaimed the "Alliance-based National Defense" as a basic premise of defense policy. To cope with the expansion of communist forces, the "Alliance-based National Defense" was to strengthen its military ties with the United States under the Cold War structure, and to build an elite armed forces that was dominated by anti-communism.4 3F 44 He intended to increase deterrence against war that might happen on the Korean Peninsula through diplomatic means within the alliance including the military.
The ministers of defense, who took office following Beomseok Lee, also refer to "Alliance-based National Defense" with the United States in their inaugural addresses. In former ministers of defenses' speeches from the 38th minister of defense, Youngkil Cho, to the 46th minister of defense, Kyungdoo Cheong, they referred to the defense policy based on the Republic of Korea (ROK) and the United States alliance. For example, the 43rd minister of defense, Guanjin Kim, said in his inaugural address that the Korean military should promote a stable and continuous development of the ROK-US alliance.4 
4 F 45
To Pursue a Total War Historically, Koreans pursue a total war. Korea has not been engaged in a war consisting only of professional military from the past. Generally, the people, the government, and the military all became combatants. In addition, all the resources of the nation were put into the war, and the war was perceived as total by the Korean people.
Endurance characterizes the Korean way of war. Korea had designed and planned a long-term war of resistance while preparing for war in terms of strategy. When an enemy invaded the Korean peninsula, Korea conducted a long-term resistance warfare, which meant burning farmland, entering established fortifications, waiting for the enemy's logistics functions to culminate, and attacking the weakened enemy.
Furthermore, Koreans have protested against enemies with the national spirit and patriotism to save the country for a long time. This type of warfare is not limited to just a few examples. It is characterized by the fact that the way of war was politically or strategically planned and had been continued by many centuries.
To Favor Diplomatic Methods over Employment of Military Methods Koreans prefer to use a diplomatic method instead of armed forces. Historically, Korea used diplomatic power more than military power when there was a dispute with other countries or a situation deteriorating national interests. Other countries in the world, of course, would pursue using their armed forces as the last option. However, Korea is distinguished in that diplomacy has been being a big part in a national strategic dimension. It is a result of the big gaps of the relative military power and the national power that could not be overcome with neighboring strong powers.
To verify if there is a distinct Korean way of war, evaluation criteria are required to contrast a proposed Korean way of war to Western European and Chinese way of war.
Evaluation criteria should be necessarily relevant to the four proposed characteristics of a Korean way of war. First, from the characteristic of to pursue Reactive-Defensive posture, it is certain that posture toward war will be useful as evaluation criteria. Second, from the characteristic of to pursue a Total War, comparing mobilized resources of a nation would be meaningful to identify which type of warfare does a nation pursue, such as a total war or a limited war. Third, from the characteristic of Endurance, endurance of the people would be reliable evaluation criteria to contrast the ways of war each other. 
This thesis is a comparative case study. In the following chapter, comparative study will be applied to compare and contrast the ways of war. Based on the relevant questions already established, the ways of war of Western Europe and China will be contrasted to a proposed Korean way of war. In other words, following eight relevant questions drawn from four evaluation criteria will lead the analysis as a structure. In this process, the way of war in each country will be reviewed with prominent military theorists or thinkers as well as history of war. At the end, a Korean way of war will be defined through differentiating with other' way of war. Furthermore, this research utilizes studies of historians and analysts for ascertaining differences between a Korean way of war and other countries' ways of war. Figure 
2
Through these relevant questions, how Western Europe and China as well as Korea have conducted war will be discussed. Third, what extent the country's resources are mobilized toward war is a relevant question of evaluation criteria for how Korea pursues total wars. In history, nations sometimes carry out a total war by putting all the resources of the country into war, and in some cases they have carried out a limited war that uses only professional military force and limited resources. In Korea's case, it has pursued a form of total war and devoted all the resources of the nation to the war from ancient times to the present. This relevant question will be helpful to understand whether a nation pursues the form of total war or limited war in terms of mobilizing the resources of the nation in executing the war. Fourth, how a nation recruits and maintains military forces is another relevant question of evaluation criteria for the mobilized resources of the country. The methods of recruiting and maintaining military forces classify of voluntary, mandatory reserve, mandatory service, and draft. For example, in recent times, the United States and Taiwan have a voluntary service system while the Republic of Korea utilizes the mandatory service system. Comparing the systems will show how a nation mobilize its resources in history, specifically manpower, for waging a war. The fifth relevant question will be how long of a time horizon a nation has been willing to invest in a conflict. Put another way, this means the endurance of the people concerned about war. Most of all, when it comes to the endurance in wars, the criteria will link to the time-based aspect of performing the war. A time horizon a nation has spent for a war according to its strategic vision will give this thesis a good point of view to contrast between the endurance of the countries. Sixth, the will of the people to fight is one of relevant questions of endurance criteria. Korea has been having a relatively weak national power and has been living on the Korean Peninsula for a long period of time as it is located among the strong powers.
There have been many invasions by external countries in history, but the Korean people have endured and, over time, outlasted their invaders. In so doing, they have preserved their unique identity, culture and native lands. In this thesis, the relevant questions to the cases of other countries to see what differences there are will be applied. Seventh, how a nation defines war is will be relevant questions to analyze if favoring diplomatic methods over employment of military methods can be a unique characteristic of the Korean way of war. The relation between diplomatic and the military might exist in the definitions of war which each country defines. In the Korean case, Korea has consistently prioritized diplomacy rather than using force, and has used force as the last resort of policy. Whether this characteristic of Korean way of war can be applied as a unique way of war by contrasting to other countries will be examined. Eighth, the procedure of going to a war is the second relevant question of evaluation criteria which is that Korea utilized diplomatic methods over employment of military methods. Some nations are deliberate to change policy to allow war, so the nation is hard to go to a war. However, some nations adapt a systematic method to go to a war. For example, there are coalition agreements and alliance treaty for the method. Furthermore, a few nations go to a war automatically by extension of policy. Several Western European countries like Britain and France during the colonial period are related examples. The process of going to war will show an aspect of the relationship between diplomacy and military. 
One threat of bias is that this thesis only compares Korea to Western Europe and China, and no other countries. However, because this subject has huge area to research, this thesis will address just the ways of war in two regions which are acknowledged as influential study areas. There are many countries in the world. Those countries also might have their own ways of war. Furthermore, the ways of war may be similar with an estimated Korean way of war. But, it is difficult to contrast to the regions because there is minimal capability to study in other areas such as Middle East and Japan due to language limitations. Even though, the regions have not much resources on the topic in English.
Other reasons are limitations of time and quantity of this paper. Since this study are essential to research many resources, in fact, it is hard to study the two regions. So, the threat to validity should be taken in this thesis, and the limitation will give chances to study those regions to others. CHAPTER 4
In this chapter, based on the relevant questions discussed in the previous chapter, a full-scale analysis will be conducted to find answers to the research questions. For reminder, the evaluation criteria are posture toward wars, mobilized resources of the country, endurance of the people to wars, and relationship between diplomacy and military. Along with those, the relevant questions were developed in chapter 3. The major research questions which are going to deal with in this chapter are "What are the ways of war of Western Europe and China?", "What are the key differences that characterize the different ways of war?", "If there is a distinct Korean way of war, what is it?" "Is there a distinct Korean way of war?" is the main research question. In order to verify whether there is a unique way of war of Korea, it will be individually contrasted the Chinese way of war and the Western European way of war based on the relevant questions established before.
Western European Way of War Relevant Question #1: Posture toward War Historically, practitioners of the Western European way of war pursued a proactive-offensive posture to wars, which is one of the most significant differences with the Korean way of war. Most of all, they used to adapt proactive strategy toward wars in history. For example, Britain deployed their military forces into the Western European continent and fought against Napoleon's troops during Napoleonic Wars even though they had not been invaded directly.4 5F 1 Additionally, Britain proactively involved itself in the wars of the continent once World War I and the World War II began.4 6F 2 As another example, Germany preemptively initiated the Austro-Prussian War in 1866 and the Franco-Prussian War in 1870 in order to achieve and extend their unification.4 7F 3 Also, starting the World War I, they adopted a invaded France as a way of response to the increased crisis in the region.4 
8F 4
In addition, Western European countries take an offensive posture in terms of how to conduct war. Clausewitz put a statement related to this offensive posture in his book, On War: 'The direct annihilation of the enemy's forces must always be the dominant consideration because destruction of the enemy forces is the overriding principle of war.'5 1 F 7 Furthermore, in On War, Clausewitz mentioned that "Pure defense would be completely contrary to the idea of war, since it would mean that only one side was waging it", and "The defensive form of war is not a simple shield, but a shield made up of well-directed blows."5 2F 8 This shows his thought about a concept of defensive and offensive. He emphasizes the importance of offensive considerations even in defensive operations. Obviously, we should note that he does not discard the defense and he contends that the defense is quite valuable and shouldn't be ignored in favor of always being on the offense. As another argument to support this claim, a prominent scholar, Geoffrey parker insisted that the general goal of western strategy almost always remained the total defeat and destruction of the enemy.  The European countries proactively used their military forces to protect neighbor states under an alliance in order to pursue their own countries' national interests. As a relatively recent example, in World War I and World War II, Britain participated abroad in the continental conflict to protect its near abroad and interests.5 8F 14
Recently, the main purpose that Western Europe has militaries could be considered to protect the region. This is because the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the European Union (EU), and the United Nations (UN) have emerged in 20 th century. For example, NATO consists of twenty-nine countries including Britain, France, Germany, Spain, and Italy.5 9 F 15 Western European countries have been protecting the region by forming alliances and coalitions currently. Therefore, as shown in figure 
13
World War I and the World War II trended towards total war. At that time, each country in Western Europe proclaimed mobilization order and put many resources of the country into the wars. This paper, however, focuses on the tendency of what extent the countries have mobilized resources in the various wars that each country has made.
Western European countries have had many limited wars. In the Franco-Prussian War, the Prussians deployed 380,000 men on the French frontier while the French had 224,000 soldiers on the frontier.6 
4 F 20
14
1
16
However, the people of Western European countries showed a remarkable will to keep fighting a war if their countries was in a contingency. For example, in World War I and World War II, the people of Britain, France, and even Germany struggled to protect their national interests such as territory, population, and financial materials. They mobilized many resources of the country and put them into the wars. During the five and seven years, respectively, the people of each country showed their strong willingness to carry out the war. Consequently, the willingness of Western Europeans to keep going a war can be medium as figure 
17
7 F 33
Another prominent military thinker, Jomini, defines war in this context. Jomini argues that war is carried out in accordance with certain scientific principles and presents fundamental principles of war in his book.7 9 F 35 He provided the principles of war as detailed instructions in the commercial product today. And these principles serve as a guideline that should not be overlooked in wars that would take place at any time as a means of policy. Indeed, he summarized the purposes that a country goes to war, and the purposes are so diverse that it implies that a war is carried out by the countries' policies.8 0F 
36
So, as shown in figure 
18
China attacked India due to securing borders in its western sector.8 9 F 45 Additionally, in the Sino-Vietnamese War (1979), China launched an offensive in response to Vietnam's invasion and occupation of Cambodia in 1978 in order to cope with the Soviet Union's efforts to contain China.9 0 F 
46
China's military was used to suppress insurgencies or conduct their own civil wars in the mainland, 2) has been forming neighbor borders and taking initiative in the region through wars against neighboring countries, 3) and on the process, China had lost its initiative in the region by overwhelmingly dominant forces of the Western powers.9 2 F 48
Taken together above, China basically has had military forces to protect its mainland rather than to protect its regional neighbor states. Therefore, the Chinese purpose of having military is located between protect homeland and protect neighbor states in figure 
21
To give another example, in the First Opium War (1839-1842), even though the Qing army consisted of over 200,000 soldiers with around 800,000 men being able to be called for war at the start of the war, they did not mobilize the 800,000 men and did not utilize the huge territory unlike the example of Mao Zedong that followed.9 6F 52 Similarly, in the Korean War (1950-1953), they deployed about 1,350,000 soldiers into the Korean peninsula.9 7F 53 That figure means that a great number of soldiers were mobilized in the Korean War, but it is hard to say that all the national capabilities of China have been put into the war. Thus, the extent of the Chinese resources mobilized toward war is on limitedly in the figure 
22
65
23
As a result of studying the time horizon of major wars that China carried out externally, it was an average of 3.56 years as shown in the table 2. This figure is even lower than the average of 6.56 years of wars that Western European countries had conducted. Surprisingly, this result is in contrast to the long-term war considered a characteristic of Mao Zedong's strategic thought, which is known as the typical Chinese way of war. Mao's concept of "People's War" traditionally relies on protracted conflict.1 10 F 66 Consequently, as shown in table 2, the time horizon spent for the China's wars is the average of 3.56 years and the mark of the relevant question is on 2-4 years in figure 
24
Although Mao's revolutionary strategy makes it seem that a characteristic of the Chinese way of war is long-term warfare, Chinese history does not support this assertion.
In fact, Mao was effective in overthrowing the regime of China, not a victory in a war against other countries.1 12F 68 In order to overthrow the regime of a nation, the shift of the heart and mind of people is the critical factor as Mao argues.1 13 F 69 And it takes a very long time to lead the shift. Therefore, the case of the revolutionary war can be a long-term warfare. However, it is difficult to say that the Chinese way of war pursues such protracted warfare.
Though, the willingness of Chinese people to keep going in a war is not low.
Chinese soldiers carried out war even under very difficult situations. For example, during Relevant Question #8: Procedure for Going to a War China's procedure for going to war is between deliberate change to policy to allow war and systematic as shown in figure 
27
Furthermore, Sun Tzu's The Art of War continues to guide past and current Chinese strategists in utilizing deception, leveraging all aspects of national power, disturbing the enemy's alliances, undermining the enemy's strategy, and the preference for achieving the national goals without using force.1 20 F 
76
23 F 79
Or, their defensive posture seemed likely to be influenced by Buddhism and Confucianism cherishing the value of peace. Although why Korea had pursued the defensive way of war is not a research question in this thesis, it is an interesting point.
Relevant Question #2: Purposes of Having Military according to How a Nation Views Security
It is obvious that Korea's main purpose of having a military is to defend the homeland. First of all, Korea has no history, in the period covered in this thesis, of invading other countries, except for the certain periods (two to three rulers who expanded their territories to the North) in the ancient Goguryeo dynasty.1 25 F 81 Rather, Korea has been invaded many times by China and Japan.
In addition, military system of the Joseon dynasty such as the Jinguan system and Jeseungbanglyag (Victory Strategy, 제승방략) are based on the concept of defending 69 homeland.1 26 F 82 While the Jinguan system was a defense system empowered to local authority, the Jeseungbanglyag was a centralized defense system led by commanders dispatched from the capital with mobilized troops from neighboring regions.1 27F 83 The systems are slightly different, but both systems support the premise that the purpose of having a military is, fundamentally, to defend the homeland as figure 
29
45 F 101
31
The wars Korea has conducted have normally had long time spans as table 
3
32
And such ideological preference is based on Buddhism and Confucianism. There is a guideline in Buddhism's practice that it is a virtue to not to kill, even an ant. This is taught to children by parents and has become part of Korean culture.1 59F 115 Additionally, Confucianism has a basic premise that everyone's character is good.1 6 0F 116 Furthermore, Buddhism and Confucianism both pursue to making the world peaceful by making their followers good humans through self-discipline and by spreading the spirits to others.1 61F 117
Considering that Buddhism and Confucianism have continuously influenced Korean society from the ancient to the present, an ideological preference which pursues peace rather than war is understandable.
This chapter has analyzed the Korean way of war by contrasting it with the ways of other countries based on relevant questions. In connection with the research questions of this study, it can be concluded that Korea has a unique way of war. This conclusion summarizes the results of the analysis and defines the Korean way of war.
There are eight relevant questions derived from chapter 2 and chapter 3: 1) posture toward war; 2) purposes of having military; 3) extent of the country's resources are mobilized toward war; 4) system of recruiting and maintaining military forces;  According to the result of the analysis as figure 
36
CHAPTER 5
This impetus behind this study was that, despite Korea's long history, it was hard to say that Korea has a unique way of war because there is a lack of research on the subject. Within that context, this study has tried to verify whether there is a unique way of war in Korea and explored the Korean way of war through contrast to the ways of war of Western Europe and China.
The main research question of this thesis was "Is there a distinct Korean way of war?" And, the subsidiary research questions were: "What is a way of war?", "What factors contribute to a specific way of war?", "What are the ways of Western Europe and China?", "What are the key differences that characterize the different ways of war?", "If there is a distinct Korean way of war, what is it?", "What are the implications from this research?"
The answers to these questions are summarized below. First, for the subsidiary question, "What is a way of war?", a way of war means a combination of philosophy, principles and traditions that are used and displayed in a majority of conflicts in which a nation participates including the decision to go to war, the execution of war, and the consolidation of gains.
Second, for the question, "What factors contribute to a specific way of war?", there are geography, international relations, national power, ethnic, religion, history, and culture as factors contributing to a specific way of war.
Third, to answer both research questions "What are the ways of Western Europe and China?" and "What are the key differences that characterize the different ways of war?", figure 
36
36
Europe's purpose of having military has been to protect its neighbor states and region, and China's purpose of having military lies between homeland and neighbor states; 3)
while Western European countries and China have usually mobilized their resources limitedly, Korea has mobilized the nation's total resources in wars; 4) while the Western Europe has adopted mandatory service and voluntary systems alternately and China used to utilize mandatory service system as a recruiting and maintaining military forces, Korea has traditionally used a draft system; 5) while the average of a time horizon Western European countries have spent for a war is 6.56 years and China is 3.56 years, Korea has spent an average of 24.67 years to wage a war; 6) while the willingness of Western European and Chinese to keep going a war is medium, the Korean willingness to keep going a war is high; 7) while Western Europe defines a war as a mean of policy and China defines a war as midway between a mean of policy and a nation's rise and fall, Korea manifestly defines a war as a nation's rise and fall; 8) in terms of the procedure of going to a war, while the Western Europe has inclination to a systematic way and China's approach marks on midway between systematic and deliberate change to allow a war, Korea has obviously chosen a way of deliberate change to policy to allow a war.
Source: Created by author using Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki, accessed 19 February 2019.
National Institute of Korean History, Korean History (Seoul, Korea: Ministry of Education and Science Technology,
2009).
National Institute of Korean History, Korean History,50-55.   
Wikipedia, "Scorched Earth," 10 February 2019, accessed 10 February 2019,   
National Institute of Korean History, Korean History, 90-91.
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
purpose of having military is considered as protect neighbor states in the past and as protect region in present. Relevant Question #3: Extent of the Country's Resources Are Mobilized toward War Historically, Western European countries used to minimally mobilize their national resources to conduct a war. Specifically, this means that the countries did not marshal whole populations, financial resources, materials, and total military forces.
Before the 19 th century and during the Napoleonic period, king's armies in Western Europe were based on mercenaries and captains' loyalty toward the kings.6 0 F 16 Additionally, wars were limited from becoming total war because of several elements such as logistics constraints, cost, and size of armies.6 1F 
17
Relevant Question #6: Willingness of People to Keep Going a War Traditionally, countries in Western Europe have a tendency to avoid long-term conflict and pursue short-term conflict by decisive engagements. Theories of Western European military thinkers provide a clue to the validity of this argument. For instance, Helmuth von Moltke and Alfred von Schlieffen who provided the basis for modern German military doctrines pursued a strategy to end the war quickly through decisive engagement, specifically a strategic envelopment, in the war.7 5 F 31 In addition, as already mentioned above, Clausewitz, who influenced military thought throughout Europe, explained that direct annihilation of the enemy's forces by decisive engagements should always be the most dominant consideration.7 6 F 32 This can be interpreted to mean a more rapid termination of the war by annihilating the opponent's combat power rather than prolonging the war. Furthermore, it can be inferred that the tendency of these military foods in poor conditions.1 15F 71 Therefore, the willingness of Chinese people to keep going a war can be on medium mark in figure 
25
26
Fifth, for the question, "What are the implications from this research?", a big implication of this study is the fact that the outcomes of the Korean way of war which Korea has conducted with usually were not successful in terms of keeping sovereignty and peace on the Korean peninsula. Though the Goryeo dynasty desperately resisted against the Yuan dynasty's invasion (1231-1270), the Goryeo dynasty's government finally negotiated with the Yuan's expeditionary troops and sent the future king Wonjong as hostage to the Yuan.1 62 F 
1
The Korea's way of war is unique but is valuable only in limited application. is because the factors contributing the way of war have fundamentally changed. First, modern warfare is carried out beyond the geographical constraints, and peace cannot be guaranteed through only diplomacy with neighboring countries. Second, since the national power of Korea has increased to such an extent that it cannot compare with the past in terms of population and economy, the Korea can exert influence externally over the Korean peninsula. Third, the Korean political system changed from a dynasty to a republic with democracy. Fourth, international relations are not confined to China and Japan as in the past, but are intertwined in complex relationships with countries around the world today. Fifth, in addition to Confucianism and Buddhism in the past, Christianity and Catholicism have also been influential in religion and culture. Sixth, although a minority, other races constitute part of Korean ethnic. Seventh, Korea has enough histories of having been suffered by foreign invasions and the reactive-defensive postures.