# ID: eaf2097950dd4b6cbca9335a03716c7d
# Title: Protecting the status quo: the defense against a Russian color revolution
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
severing the ties between Western democratization efforts and Russian civil society, while Russia's new National Guard strengthens the tie between the Kremlin and the country's internal coercive forces. However, Russia's military has largely not reacted to the threat, and the country's efforts to gain allies against the threat have received only half-hearted support. Overall, Russia's anti-color revolution strategy, if it can be called a strategy, has been executed unevenly across the various ministries; but understanding how Russia perceives and reacts to the threat is essential, especially if Russia uses what it has learned to foment a color revolution in a NATO country. INTRODUCTION Somewhere in a windowless room in the basement of the Pentagon, a group of men and women high-fived themselves for their successful operation to bring down Slobodan Milosevic. 
1
The Russians seem to believe that the United States government was able to plan and execute a campaign of replacing foreign governments with leaders more friendly to the United States. However, anyone with experience working in or with the United States government would likely say that the idea of such a well-orchestrated plan requiring a large amount of interagency cooperation with a consistent and concerted effort made over a period of time spanning almost 15 years is very unlikely. This thesis examines the resulting Russian defensive reaction from the perceived threat that Russia sees in mass protests and their associated color revolutions. 
2
2 The color revolutions, which have also been labeled as electoral revolutions, democratizing elections, or mass protest movements, are generally understood to be non-violent protests as a result of perceived electoral fraud and are labeled as color revolutions because of the color associated with the political opposition. The most well-known color revolutions are the Rose Revolution in Georgia in 2003, the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004, and the Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan in 2005. However, since this thesis will discuss a threat as the Russians perceive it, it will adopt the Russian definition for a color revolution. Using the definition General Gerasimov presented at the 2014 Moscow Conference on International Security, this thesis will accept that a color revolution is a "a form of non-violent change of power in a country by outside manipulation of the protest potential of the population in conjunction with political, economic, humanitarian and other non-military measures." Anthony H. Cordesman, "Russia and the 'Color Revolution': A Russian Military View of a World Destabilized by the U.S. and the West," May 28, 2014, https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/ 140529_Russia_Color_Revolution_Full.pdf.
briefly discusses how non-military steps have been taken to support those forces as well.
Overall, it shows that while Russia has certainly reacted to its perception of the color revolution threat, this reaction can by no means be taken as driven solely by the threat of a color revolution in Russia, or as a specific anti-color revolution strategy that is tightly controlled and coordinated by a single entity in the Kremlin.
After the break-up of the Soviet Union, a time of transition began as the newly created states moved towards more democratic norms. However, while some, like the Baltic states, transitioned quickly to liberal democracy, others clung to more autocratic forms of governance. 
3
4
5
6
7
The threat of a color revolution in Russia was not simply perceived by civilian political leaders. In 2011, General Nikolai Makarov, then the Russian Chief of the General Staff, believed that some countries were using a combination of methods to get rid of unfriendly foreign governments, and he believed that this could be a threat to Russia and its allies. 
9
10
7 Elder.
8 Darya Korsunskaya, "Putin Says Russia Must Prevent 'Color Revolution,'" Reuters, November 20, 2014, http://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-putin-security-idUSKCN0J41J620141120. 9 Ivan Safronov, "Genshtab gotovitsya k voyne" [General Staff Readies Itself for War], Gazeta Kommersant, November 18, 2011, https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/1818296/.
10 Valeriy Gerasimov, "Tsennost' nauki v predvidenii: Novye vyzovy trebuyut perecmyclit' formy i sposoby vedeniya boevykh deystviy" [The Value of Science in Foresight: New Challenges Require Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Conducting Military Operations], Voenno-Promyshlennyy Kur'er, February 27, 2013, http://vpk-news.ru/articles/14632. fall prey to foreign intervention, and sink into a web of chaos, humanitarian catastrophe, and civil war." 11 General Gerasimov goes on to discuss how non-military means have become more important than military ones in obtaining a state's political objectives, and that the United States, in his opinion, had become very good at integrating these military and non-military means in order to quickly develop conditions that have been favorable to the United States and decrease any military advantages the target country may have. In effect, General Gerasimov is implying that the West, and the United States in particular, created the color revolution threat.
The Russian Ministry of Defense (MOD) showcased its perception of the threat when it decided to use the 2014 Moscow Conference on International Security to focus on the threat of and response to color revolutions. 
12
13
16
There is no reason to think that Russia, like the Soviet Union before it, is acting according to a rational actor model. 
17
18
19
Many in the United States would argue that the color revolution threat as the Russians perceive it is not a strategy at all, but simply an example of what Peter Layton describes as opportunism, and that the United States is simply reacting to the environment abroad, changing and evolving its political and military approach according 17 The rational actor model is a model used to understand governmental decision-making that assumes that actions are taken purposefully, that national governments can be analyzed as a singular actor, and that each action taken is carefully selected to address a strategic problem. To argue against the use of the rational actor model in the analysis of decision-making is to say that the above assumptions are not all correct, and this does not imply that a government or actor is acting irrationally. From Graham T. 20 Morton H. Halperin, Priscilla Clapp, and Arnold Kanter, Bureaucratic Politics and Foreign Policy,  2nd ed. (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2006), 25-61.  to a general principle of supporting democracy. 
21
22
23
Shiping Tang defines a security dilemma as a situation where two states act defensively toward one another, and because they cannot be certain of the other's intent, seek to accumulate more power and influence in order to defend themselves. However, because defensive measures can likely also be used in the offensive, they may be perceived as threatening by other side, resulting in each side seeking to take countermeasures against the other's defensive measures. These measures and countermeasures, fears and uncertainties, therefore become reinforcing. 
24
In concluding his 2013 article on modern conflict, General Gerasimov said that no matter what new tactics an enemy may use, and no matter how proficient his forces may be, there is always a counter to his strategy. He says that every force has its vulnerabilities and that there exist the means of frustrating its efforts. 
25
22 Layton, 60.   23 Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton  University Press, 1976), 62-67.  24 Shiping allies. It may also have been a call to learn from what the United States had done in order to use these non-military methods as offensive tools to expand Russian influence and undermine its Western competitors. While Russia's offensive efforts receive the majority of the attention and research, its defensive efforts are important as well if the United States wants to continue to promote more liberal democracies and pro-Western regimes, especially in former communist states. This understanding of Russia's defensive reaction needs to include not only how the Russian security forces are adapting but also why they are adapting in those ways. The Russians are developing new methods to push back against this wave of democratization both at home and abroad, some of which were seen in Kyrgyzstan and Ukraine in 2010. 
26
27
28
This thesis examines the Russian security forces' adaptation to a changing security environment. More specifically, it examines how the Russians are reacting to defend against the threat environment that General Gerasimov has identified. It does so by utilizing questions proposed in "The Effectiveness of Military Organizations," which looks at the issue of military effectiveness by asking questions related to the generation of military power at the political, strategic, operational, and tactical levels. 
29
31
The first section discusses the Russian military's understanding of the threat, examining what elements make up a color revolution and what are the possible defenses needed in response. The second section discusses the major steps that Russia's security 29 Allan R. Millett, Williamson Murray, and Kenneth H. Watman, "The Effectiveness of Military  Organizations," International Security 11, no. 1 (1986): 37-71.  30 Millett, Murray, and Watman, 42.   31 Millett, Murray, and Watman, 50.  forces have taken to more adequately respond to the threat and coordinate the government's efforts. The third section discusses the steps taken by the Russian government to support its security forces in defending against the political opposition and mass protests that generally represent the culmination of a color revolution. A fourth section addresses Russian efforts to establish a forward line of defense against color revolutions by supporting its autocratic allies in the region.
Taken together, these sections show how Russia has developed a reasonable understanding of the threat, but it is an understanding that overestimates the intent of the U.S. government to conduct regime changes and the role of Western democratization efforts in color revolution successes. These sections also show how Russia is working to insulate itself from the Western influences that helped to set the conditions for the color revolution successes. However, the Kremlin continues to place a higher emphasis on the threat than does the Russian MOD, which is evident in the more robust reaction to the color revolutions that is seen coming from the Kremlin.
States and NATO strategy in Europe and what additional questions need to be answered concerning Russia's response to the color revolutions. While understanding Russia's offensive reaction to the Western "strategy" of conducting color revolutions is certainly important, its defensive reaction has something to tell us as well.
In 1974, Soviet General V.K. Konoplev said that the driving force and motivation for foresight are practical application and experience, where foresight is the ability to understand possible innovations in military affairs and the determination of how such innovations can be used in conflict. 
32
Gerasimov. 35
Although it may take some time, militaries do tend to innovate when faced with new threats and in response to their own past failures, and they also tend to innovate in 35 Katherine T. Hinkle, "Russia's Reactions to the Color Revolutions" (Naval Postgraduate School, 2017), https://calhoun.nps.edu/bitstream/handle/10945/52991/17Mar_Hinkle_Katherine.pdf?sequence=1.
response to the experiences of their client states as well. 
36
However, the color revolution threat alone may not be enough to encourage military innovation. Successful innovation likely requires not only the imagination and vision of senior leaders, but also a supportive organizational and military culture. 
37
Organizational resistance to change, perhaps better described as a bureaucratic resistance to change, is something all large militaries must struggle against in order to innovate in response to changing threats and conditions, and there is no reason to think that the large bureaucracy in the MOD would be any different. Bureaucracies work to create order out of a constantly changing world and will act as a brake against changes that upset the current status quo. 
39
41
43
44
Military culture is the "set of beliefs, attitudes, and values within the military establishment that shape collective (shared) preferences of how and when military means should be used to accomplish strategic aim." 
45
49
50
In the United States, it took the pressing demand of fighting counterinsurgencies in both Iraq and Afghanistan to briefly break from a Cold War mentality of conventionally-defined war based upon the use of army divisions as the standard fighting unit to one that prioritized the use of self-sufficient brigade combat teams and special operations forces with an emphasis on fighting asymmetric and irregular threats.
However, with those wars largely over, the United States military's cultural attraction to fighting the force-on-force symmetric fight is returning.
This cultural pull is something with which the Russian military must also contend.
Russia's military culture affects how they think about the threat, and it could restrict what the military sees as acceptable reactions to the threat. While this cultural aversion to nontraditional war may have helped to delay an intellectual response from Russian military thinkers, it has not ultimately stopped that response all together.
The color revolution discussion was not completely absent from public discourse in Russia prior to 2013. The color revolutions in Ukraine, Georgia, and Kyrgyzstan could hardly be ignored, but the emphasis of it as a threat to Russia did seem to be missing. The re-emphasis of the threat after 2012, however, led to a large amount of writing on the topic in military journals and newspapers, and the color revolution threat played a large part in the 2014 Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation.
In December 2014, President Putin signed the most recent Military Doctrine of the Russian 
Federation. 51
The The perceived threat of a Russian color revolution is not just affecting how Russians perceive modern warfare, but has also caused them to re-evaluate directions from which threats might come. While internal dangers have been considered in the past, the 2014 doctrine greatly expanded upon the concept of domestic military dangers. These internal dangers include organizations and people who act to undermine Russia's sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity, or those activities that create ethnic and social tension: a description that can easily be applied to any group of economic or political protesters. Additionally, the doctrine sees as a danger the use of information to influence the Russian people, especially its youth, to turn away from their traditional, spiritual, and patriotic feelings of support to defend the Fatherland. Lastly, the doctrine points to the danger of activities that aim to violently change Russia's constitutional system and that destabilize the country's political and social system. 53 Such a violent change to a constitutional system is essentially how Russians describe the Euromaidan protests in 2013 in Ukraine, calling them an anti-constitutional coup.
Even the external dangers described in the 2014 doctrine were not devoid of references to the non-traditional threats associated with a color revolution. Among these dangers are the use of information technology to undermine Russia's sovereignty and political stability, the overthrow of legitimate governments in states bordering Russia, and the subversive activities of foreign governments' intelligence services. 
54
Kremlin that is even more paranoid about internal instability, social unrest, and the ability of the West to influence Russian society and political culture.
The Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation provides one source of formal doctrine, but to have an impact upon military operations, both formal and informal doctrine are likely to be necessary, where informal doctrine includes journal articles and other unofficial publications, letters, correspondence, and speeches. These pieces of informal doctrine, published by Russian senior military leaders and strategists, are an important source of information and complement the perception of the color revolution threat found in Russia's 2014 military doctrine.
Even 57 Mohamed Bouazizi was a Tunisian street vendor who lit himself on fire in protest after harassment by government officials and the confiscation of his street cart and wares. His self-immolation sparked the protests in Tunisia that then catalyzed the Arab Spring. used to demand and gain political concessions from the government. 
58
When it comes to the specific elements and characteristics of a color revolution, Colonel Kalistratov's discussion in Armeiskiy Sbornik about the various types of modern war hits many of the key aspects. Among the aspects that are relevant to a color revolution are the pre-eminence of non-military means over military ones; a split among the country's political and military elites, which undermines the government's ability to maintain its aura of strength and influence, and subsequently, weakens its control over security forces; a long-term effort to change the populace's perception of the appropriate social contract between a country's government and its citizens; a long-term change to a country's basic principles and values; a decentralized and indirect link between the internal opposition and the external actors supporting them; and the use of an ideological cover, such as democratization and human rights, to justify external intervention. 
59
60
61
62
63
The non-violent nature of color revolutions and the non-military methods used to conduct them largely necessitate non-military defenses against them. Some of these non- military defenses that those writing about the threat have identified include countering foreign media and information globalization, isolating opposition leaders and groups and cutting them off from any foreign financing and media support, and strengthening the patriotic values and will of Russia's youth to support the state against political oppositions. 
65
General Gerasimov on several occasions has spoken about the need for a more well-defined understanding of each ministry's role in national defense and in the use of joint forces in a crisis. 
66
67
68
69
The rise of the color revolution phenomenon in the early 2000s should have been recognized by Russia's military leadership as a threat, and to some degree, it was.
However, the Russian military never suffered a defeat or failure at the hands of a color revolution. Those defeats, such as in Serbia, Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan, were suffered by Russia's allies, and this lack of a defeat may help to explain the Russian military's delayed response to the color revolution threat. Colonel General Leonid Ivashov said that, "[i]n Russia, unfortunately, no one has seriously studied this matter 68 Makhmut Gareyev, "Na 'myagkuyu cily' naydutsya zhestkie otvety" [For 'Soft Power' Hard Answers will be Found].
69 Makhmut Gareyev, "Vyzov prinyat" [Challenge Accepted]"; Makhmut Gareyev, "Posledovatel'no otstaivat' natsional'nye interesy" [Consistently Defending National Interests].
until recently, or commissioned any scientific research reports, or appointed a leading organization to be responsible for preventing such kinds of revolutions and wars." Had such a study been conducted a decade ago, he said, the Maidan Revolution in Ukraine in 2014 may have ended differently. 
70
The obstacles to innovation make it seem more likely for the Russian military to make the threat response fit its existing capabilities than modify its capabilities to meet the threat. However, in the unlikely event that such a conflict should take place in Belarus, for example, Russia's tactics in Syria and the lessons it learns may not be appropriate. Mass political protests in Belarus cannot be solved by Russian jets dropping bombs and Russian tanks rolling down the streets of Minsk, and when the only tool you have is a hammer, every problem looks like a nail.
Even if the Russian military learns the right lessons, it may get in its own way and obstruct any necessary reforms required by its newly acquired knowledge. While Russia, and the Soviet Union before it, has historically focused on foresight, recognizing the changes to war, and coming up with new ideas, it is not very good at implementing those ideas. 
71
72
73
74
Authoritarian regimes must walk a careful line in the suppression of the opposition. As an opposition grows, regimes may be tempted to use more coercive and violent actions to end such growth. However, while letting an opposition movement grow presents risks to the incumbent regime's survival, any use of violence on the part of the regime comes with risks of its own. While incumbent regimes may deem small amounts of violence as necessary in order to maintain its control of power, outright violent repression tends to undercut support for the regime, as seen in Slovakia in 1998, Serbia in 2000, and Ukraine in 2004. 
75
76
77
78
The death of the Soviet Union likewise saw a combination of the unwillingness to act and a violent overreaction to growing opposition and nationalist movements. For example, the Kremlin's willingness to back down and accede the demands of protesters in Kazakhstan in 1986 boosted other nationalist movements in the Soviet Union. 79 Two years later, an inability to prevent clashes between the Armenians and Azerbaijanis and the resulting protests again showed Soviet weakness. 
80
81
79 Martin Edward Malia, The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia, 1917-1991 (New  York: Free Press, 1996), 441. 80 Malia, 441-42.   81 John B. Dunlop, The Rise of Russia and the Fall of the Soviet Empire (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995), 11.
Moscow. These Muscovites protested even in the face of Gorbachev's ban on protests and the threat of force from fifty thousand soldiers. 
82
83
84
It is not surprising that many in the military community believe that Russia's true threats lay outside its borders, but General Yuri Baluyevsky, the former chief of Russia's General Staff, disagrees. He believes that Russia cannot be defeated from outside, but only from inside, and that Russia must be prepared to defend itself from these internal threats. 
85
86
90
91
In its creation, the National Guard took a large amount of responsibility from the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), and it also took around 160,000 personnel from the organization. This number includes 5,200 personnel from the MVD's Special Rapid
Response Team (SOBR) units along with OMON and its 40,000 personnel. 
92
93
95
Collective Rapid Reaction Force in the past, and its new forces may have the training 95 Yulia Taratuta, "Aleksandr Hinshtyeyn: 'Rosgvardiya sozdana ne dlya togo, chtoby ogranichit FSB'" [Aleksandr Hinshtyeyn: 'Rosgvardiya was not created in order to limit the FSB'], Republic, November 18, 2016, https://republic.ru/posts/76194. and experience to better handle issues of public disorder abroad as compared to the capabilities that the MOD can provide. 
96
He commanded the government's bodyguards from 2000-2013, and then became the First Deputy Minister of the Interior until his appointment to the National Guard. With the trusted Zolotov reporting directly to the president, this gives President Putin tight control of the forces necessary to respond to any internal threat to Russia and the continuation of the Putin regime, allowing Putin to safeguard himself from such threats. 
97
98
The National Guard has wasted no time in the assumption of its duties. Quickly after its creation, the National Guard participated in joint exercises with the Russian airborne and Chinese police units, an effort to allow these elements to "figure out how 96 Thomas, Kremlin Kontrol, 26.   97  to work together in the future." 
99
National Guard riot police helped to break up anti-corruption protests in May and June 2017, where thousands of young people participated and hundreds were arrested. 
100
102
Overall, the creation of the Russian National Guard shows the high importance that the Kremlin gives to combatting the threat of internal instability and political protests, and the continued use of force from elements of the MVD and now National Guard in order to control and disperse protests, such as the anti-corruption protests in May and June 2017, show that the government is going to be pro-active about minimizing the threat. This can be contrasted with the MOD's efforts, which have resulted in the creation of the NDMC, but whose lack of additional action shows the low priority that the MOD gives the color revolution threat.
Management of Day-to-Day Activity monitors and manages support for Russia's forces, including coordinating with Russia's non-military federal agencies in order to better synchronize the government's efforts. 
107
108
109
The creation of the NDMC goes a long way to alleviating the Russian government's potential problems of being able to coordinate and synchronize a government response to crisis. However, while the consolidation of internal security forces and creation of the National Guard seems to be directly in response to the government's fear of mass protests, the creation of the NDMC was likely more a reaction to the need to coordinate operations abroad, such as in Ukraine and Syria, or to defend against an external threat, than from the need to defend against any internal threat to the current government.
The MOD has done little to innovate and protect against a color revolution. It has expanded the number of military units designated for peacekeeping, adding an additional brigade and several battalions to its peacekeeping force,
110
There is no indication that the Russian government is prepared to drastically increase the level of violence used to suppress protests and internal instability. It simply appears that the government is prepared to use low levels of violence and coercion as frequently as necessary, and the creation of the National Guard seems to facilitate this quick and efficient use of low levels of violence and coercion, strengthening the Kremlin's control over coercive power in Russia.
Additionally, while the National Guard's creation was likely in part a reaction to Russia's history of revolution, it was not created until after the Arab Spring and the 2011/2012 protests in Moscow, and not until President Putin had been in control of Russia for over 16 years. It is not exactly clear why the National Guard was not created until 2016, but this delay seems to imply that a perceived increase in the danger of a Russian color revolution and upcoming presidential elections may have played a part.
The creation of the National Guard and the NDMC has certainly strengthened President Putin's direct control over the coercive elements of power and his ability to synchronize any government response to a crisis, and it does seem more likely that this control lessens the likelihood that forces such as the National Guard will lack the leadership that will support the government in the face of a large opposition. However, those forces' capabilities to suppress any such opposition, even if improved, are still finite. For example, even though Ukraine's security forces largely stayed neutral during the protests of the Orange Revolution, roughly 100,000 people protested on the first day, which then grew to approximately 500,000 by the third day, and eventually reached a million protesters. 
111
Russia's main coercive elements, its internal and external security forces, cannot be expected to handle the issue of organized political protests on their own. Even when those forces have the will to act, there is only so much that these forces can do to control massive protests. Both the Arab Spring and 2014 Ukrainian protests showed governments' inability to deal with protest movements once they become so large as to overwhelm a country's security apparatus. The protests in Moscow in 2011-2012 were the largest Russia had seen since 1993, but even these protests failed to attract the numbers seen in Kiev in 2004 and 2014 or in protests during the Arab Spring, like those seen in Cairo.
Preventing protests from growing too large is essential to preventing a color revolution, because at some point, no security force can maintain control without the widespread use of violence, and large scale protests often signal that an autocratic regime may "already be playing a losing hand."
112
Bunce and Wolchik argue that, when in conjunction with elections, success is based upon the opposition's ability to follow the electoral model that emerged during the spread of democracy in post-communist states in the 1990s and early 2000s. 
113
114
115
116
121-FZ, more commonly known as the "Foreign Agent Law," came into being. 
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
While the Russian government has worked to suppress elements of civil society that it deems a threat, it has also worked to support groups that either stay out of anything deemed political or that support the Kremlin and its policies. The federal and regional Public Chambers created in 2005 allow government-approved elements of civil society to work with the government and attempt to influence policy. These Public Chambers also provide grants to local organizations, and in 2007 provided roughly $50 million to 1,225 organizations. 
125
126
127
124 "Russian Authorities Ban Khodorkovsky's Organization Open Russia as 'undesirable,'" Amnesty International, April 26, 2017, https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2017/04/russian-authorities-bankhodorkovskys-organization-open-russia-as-undesirable/.
125 Graeme B. 
The concept of diffusion explains how a small protest can grow larger and spread from one city to many other cities, as was seen in the pensioners' protests in 
2005. 128
Russia's media have assisted in the effort to contain the growth of protest movements, whether they be political or economic in nature. It frequently denigrates the motives of the organizations attempting to organize protests, accusing them of working for foreign entities, and greatly underrepresents the amount of support for and size of the protests in order to discourage people from joining. For example, during the pensioners' protest, local television warned residents not to get involved in the protests, accused the protest organizers of being outsiders who took legitimate economic grievances and manipulated the local population into supporting politicized causes, and helped to encourage pro-government counter-protests. 
129
130
131
Passed in conjunction with increased fines for participating in and organizing unauthorized rallies, new laws made event organizers responsible for the actions of their events' attendees. This puts event organizers in a difficult position, because it is impossible to control exactly who attends events, and the organizers are held responsible for the actions even of those unaffiliated with the organizing group. This essentially gives pro-government groups the ability to create legal trouble for opposition organizers. Also, because events are authorized for a maximum number of demonstrators, outside groups who tag along at an event can also create trouble for the organizers. Infractions of either kind can lead to fines and a prohibition for the organizers of such an event to organize another one. 
132
133
134
135
136
The Russian government's actions and the other elements discussed earlier do have the overall effect of decreasing the possibility of a large and organized political opposition movement from developing, and they support the country's security forces in suppressing those that might. However, these actions should not be perceived as a coordinated and well-executed strategy, and their sole purpose should not be thought of as suppressing a color revolution. The government's development of new laws pertaining to civil society is a good example of the lack of a tightly coordinated strategy, while its funding for civil society provides an example of the lack of a singular purpose.
The 2012 Foreign Agents Law was ambiguous as to which organizations would classify as a foreign agent, and it also saw only periodic government interest in enforcing the law. After the law went into effect, many organizations simply refused to register as foreign agents, and the Justice Ministry showed a general disinterest in seeking action against them. In January 2013, the Justice Ministry declared that it could take up to two years to determine the process for declaring an organization to be a foreign agent, and then in February, the ministry decided not to declare either the Levada Center or Golos to be foreign agents. Russia's enforcement of its laws affecting NGOs and its funding of civil society may be a case of the right hand not talking to the left, meaning not all parts of the government are coordinating their efforts to undermine potential support for the political opposition, or it may be that the steps the Russian government has taken do not have the singular purpose of undermining such potential support. Either way, the laws still remain on the books; the Russian government has a much tighter control over the funding of civil society within its borders; and it still has organizations that can help the security forces deter and suppress any large-scale protests.
The government's actions have shown an ability to inhibit the diffusion of protests throughout Russia, but one of the most discussed causes of the color revolutions is the diffusion of ideas and methods not within countries, but from country to country. In order to prevent events abroad from emboldening Russia's internal opposition and increasing the chances of a Russian color revolution, the Russian military needs to support its allies and help those countries prevent color revolutions of their own. This section examines the possibility of Russian support to one of its neighbors in the event of an attempted color revolution and the assistance other CSTO members may provide as well. It also looks at the level of political support that Russia's closest allies have provided in support of Russian actions abroad. It shows that while the mechanisms exist for Russia and the CSTO as a whole to assist its neighbors during an attempted color revolution, CSTO approval for intervention is unlikely, and the CSTO countries are apathetic in their support for Russian intervention abroad.
In order for Russia to more effectively protect stability and autocracy in its geographic neighborhood, Russia must maintain the support of its allies, and the most likely source of such support is the CSTO. Article 2 of the CSTO's founding agreement on collective security states that when a member faces a threat to its security, sovereignty, or territorial integrity, the other member states shall coordinate their response and take steps to eliminate the threat. 
155
156
After the color revolutions of the early 2000s, several CSTO exercises seemed to focus on legitimizing international cooperation to defeat foreign attempts to support a domestic opposition whose goal was regime change. 
158
During the exercises, CSTO units fought an enemy attempting to use popular discontent with an election to overthrow the incumbent government. An exercise the following year, Frontier-2006, had a similar scenario, where in the aftermath of an election, an external force, this time a terrorist organization, was attempting to create an Islamic caliphate in the Central Asian region. Additionally, Frontier-2006 also included a "brown" force that represented a non-CSTO nation state attempting to take advantage of the situation in order to expand its influence in the region. 
159
162
163
171
The level of political support Russia receives from its allies is largely lukewarm, where they refrain from outright defiance of Moscow's wishes but do not put themselves out on a limb in support of their larger neighbor. Russia has been able to get some cooperation concerning the ability to use CSTO forces in response to internal aggression, but has not been able to get full agreement on the ability to use such a force in practice. 
172
173
174
175
Smaller countries are more than willing to participate in exercises sponsored by their larger allies when the financial costs involved for the participating are small compared to the training, support, and sometimes military infrastructure that the larger country provides. For example, the importance of Serbia's participation in Slavic Brotherhood 2015 should not be overstated, since the Serbs provided only one company of soldiers, and Russia shouldered the burden of that company's transportation to and from the event as well as providing the equipment and supplies that the Serbs needed to participate. 
176
177
178
At some level, color revolutions are perceived in both the Russian MOD and the Kremlin to be threats. In speaking about the color revolution threat and the influence foreign organizations such as the U.S.'s National Endowment for Democracy have on internal political conditions in Russia, General Baluyevsky said that he "cannot believe in the altruism and disinterest of the generous American donors. Such funds are only used for brainwashing." 179 His opinion depicts a cultural difference between Russia and the United States, and it may be part of the cause for Russians to see a link between external forces and the color revolution threat where others do not. The Russians link the efforts of Western government agencies, privately-funded foundations, and former military officers as working in common cause to undermine the internal stability of other countries, which has only heightened the urgency for some in Russia to protect against the threat. 180
In the early 2000s, this threat was not taken as seriously in Russia, perhaps because of President Putin's high approval rating and the rising standard of living in Russia, but since the Arab Spring and the 2011/2012 Moscow protests, the color revolution threat has been widely discussed. Those Russians discussing the threat have hit upon most of its elements, such as the use of peaceful protests, the organizing role of domestic civil society with some level of support from foreign organizations, and the role of youth in social movements. Curiously though, while color revolutions are most commonly understood as taking place in conjunction with either presidential or parliamentary elections, only Belsky and Klimenko discuss this connection. This is especially worth noting, because if a Russian color revolution should ever occur, it seems most likely that it would occur in conjunction with a national-level election.
179 Yuri Baluyevsky, "Voyna ne konchaetsya, ona -zamiraet" [War does not end -it Freezes]. 180 One former military officer is COL(R) Robert Helvey, who, while working for the International Republican Institute, helped to train and organize the student youth movement, Otpor, on how to nonviolently oppose the Serbian president at the time, Slobodan Milosevic.
While the color revolution threat seems to be understood reasonably well in Russia, even if there is an overemphasis on the role that the West has played in its development, the reactions from the MOD and the Kremlin have differed. This thesis examined two possible sources that may have affected the MOD's response: bureaucracy and Russian military culture. One of those sources, bureaucracy, also affects the bureaucratic machine that runs the Kremlin, but Russia's military culture may be playing a role in why the MOD's response has been both smaller and slower to develop than other non-military efforts. The Kremlin's non-military efforts to minimize the threat of a color revolution, such as cutting off Russian civil society from sources of foreign funding, were largely carried out in the years immediately after the color revolutions of the early 2000s. This response may have initially satisfied those in the Kremlin that felt most threatened, but the 2011/2012 Moscow protests laid against the backdrop of a Russian economy in decline and the ongoing Arab Spring protests may have convinced many in the Kremlin that a Russian color revolution might actually be possible. This may have been a driving factor for the increased attention paid to the threat starting in 2012. The escalation in the perceived color revolution threat may have also prompted President Putin to push the MOD into at least some sort of reaction, even though the MOD still has yet to make any major changes specifically related to defending against a color revolution.
The NDMC will certainly help Russia coordinate a response to any internal or external crisis, but its creation is more a reaction to the changing nature of war and not specifically because of the color revolution threat. While Russia's military operation in Syria can be seen as an attempt to defend against a color revolution, Russia's intervention did not come until it was clear that Assad would be ousted from power without additional assistance. Likewise, the Russians did not act in Kyrgyzstan in 2010, and they did not act in Ukraine in 2013. In Ukraine, their response only came as a "counterattack" once President Yushchenko had already lost power. Should a serious internal crisis break out in Central Asia or Belarus, it remains to be seen whether or not the effected country would welcome Russian / CSTO assistance, and even if it did, it remains to be seen if Russia would act in time.
In the end, the asymmetry between Russia's military and non-military responses may not matter. Russia's non-military efforts have undercut the ability of any person or organization to create the organized political opposition that would be necessary to seriously challenge President Putin electorally. Even if a group did manage to organize large protests like the ones seen in Moscow in 2011 and 2012, the creation of the National Guard provides the government with a more reliable and effective tool to help prevent such protests' growth. The military, while still very relevant for Russian offensive efforts to change the status quo abroad, has less to do with protecting the current status quo at home. As a spectator to Russia's reaction to the color revolution threat, the West must understand how its democratization efforts in the 1990s and 2000s helped to drive the Russian reaction. This reaction includes Russia's efforts to defend against the threat, and also how Russia is currently using its lessons learned to expand Russian influence.
Further research should look at how Russia's understanding of color revolutions has influenced its non-military efforts in Europe and the Unites States. Additionally, future research should look at what Western countries can learn from Russia's defensive efforts, using that knowledge to strengthen their own defenses against Russian influence in their society, politics, and elections. Such understanding will be essential if Russia ever tries to create its own color revolution.
38 Davidson, "Military Learning and Competing Theories of Change," 11.   39 
38 Davidson, "Military Learning and Competing Theories of Change," 11.   39 
42 Barry R.
42 Barry R.
an organization."
an organization."
though discussions of color revolutions in Russian publications appeared before 2013, General Gerasimov largely began this discussion of color revolutions and the process of creating informal doctrine with respect to color revolutions in his 2013 article. He and others have published their thoughts as they relate to this threat in Russian military journals such as Voenno-Promyshlenyy Kur'er (Military-Industrial Courier), 53 "Voennaya doktrina Rossiyskoy Federatsii" [Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation], 6-7. do topic. Belsky and Klimenko cite previous work to understand the typology of color revolutions (if such a thing could actually exist) and point to Dr. Gene Sharp's From Dictatorship to Democracy: A Conceptual Framework for Liberation as the underlying practical guide to the color revolutions. 55 Dr. Sharp's work was in fact used by Western democracy promoters, especially in Serbia, and in Ukraine during the 2004 Orange Revolution, to educate those opposed to the incumbent government on non-violent methods of political opposition. 56 Aleksandr Bartosh's piece, "Color Revolutions and the Hybrid Wars of the Present," while written from the viewpoint of a Russia consistently under attack from the West, does lay out rather accurately the progression of events during what are traditionally thought of as the color revolutions, the electoral revolutions of the early 2000s. It starts with the creation of an organized political opposition, and then uses a catalyst to encourage public outrage, which in the past has included things such as perceived electoral fraud, the self-immolation of Mohamed Bouazizi, or the violent overreaction of security forces against protesters. 57 Finally, massive political protests are
61
61
Russia's National Guard has assumed a large amount of the security responsibilities inside Russia, and is now tasked to enforce order during emergency situations, combat terrorism and extremism, protect Russia's territorial integrity, protect specially designated sites and infrastructure, enforce domestic arms control, escort special cargo, and work with the police to safeguard public order, which would include controlling and / or dispersing mass protests.
Russia's National Guard has assumed a large amount of the security responsibilities inside Russia, and is now tasked to enforce order during emergency situations, combat terrorism and extremism, protect Russia's territorial integrity, protect specially designated sites and infrastructure, enforce domestic arms control, escort special cargo, and work with the police to safeguard public order, which would include controlling and / or dispersing mass protests.
126 Robert Orttung, "Kremlin Nationalism versus Russia's NGOs," 9.
agents
162 
162 
Many terms are used for these types of governments, such as hybrid regimes, mixed governments, electoral autocracies, etc.
Lincoln A. Mitchell, The Color Revolutions (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2012); Valerie J. Bunce and Sharon L. Wolchik, Defeating Authoritarian Leaders in Postcommunist Countries (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
Graeme Robertson, "Protesting Putinism: The Election Protests of 2011-2012 in Broader Perspective," Problems of Post-Communism
60, no. 2 (2013): 11-23; Hamid Dabashi, The Arab Spring:   The End of Postcolonialism (London: Zed Books, 2012); George Joffé, "The Arab Spring in North Africa: Origins and Prospects," The Journal ofNorth African Studies 16, no. 4 (2011): 507-32.   
Russian Ministry of Defense, 12-25.
Cordesman, "Russia and the 'Color Revolution': A Russian Military View of a World Destabilized by the U.S. and the West," 3.
Edward Meade Earle, ed., Makers of Modern Strategy: Military  Thought from Machiavelli to Hitler (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1943), viii.
Philip P. Pan, "Russia Is Said to Have Fueled Unrest in Kyrgyzstan," Washington Post, April 12, 2010, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/04/11/AR2010041103827.html; Taras
Makhmut Gareyev, "Vyzov prinyat" [Challenge Accepted], Voenno-Promyshlennyy Kur'er, December 24, 2016, http://www.vpk-news.ru/articles/29347; Makhmut Gareyev, "Posledovatel'no otstaivat' natsional'nye interesy" [Consistently Defending National Interests], Voenno-Promyshlennyy Kur'er, January 22, 2014, http://vpk-news.ru/articles/18828.
Cassidy, 49.    
Dima Adamsky, The Culture of Military Innovation: The Impact of Cultural Factors on the Revolution in Military Affairs in Russia, the US, and Israel. (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 2010), 44.
"Voennaya doktrina Rossiyskoy Federatsii" [Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation], December 26, 2014, http://static.kremlin.ru/media/events/files/41d527556bec8deb3530.pdf.
"Voennaya doktrina Rossiyskoy Federatsii" [Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation], 7-8.
"Voennaya doktrina Rossiyskoy Federatsii" [Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation], 5-6.
Anton Marsadov, "'Tsvetnaya kontrrevolyutsiya' poruchena Genshtaby" [A 'Color Counter-Revolution' is being Entrusted to the General Staff].
Aleksandr Goltz, "Rosgvardiya podminaet Genshtab" [The Rosgvardia Tramples on the General Staff].
Bartles, "Russia's Indirect and Asymmetric Methods as a Response to the New Western Way of War," 7.
Bunce and Wolchik, Defeating Authoritarian Leaders in Postcommunist Countries, 140.   
Graeme B. Robertson, The Politics of Protest in Hybrid Regimes: Managing Dissent in Post-Communist Russia (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 172.
Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation, "Information of the Register of NGOs Performing the Functions of a Foreign Agent," Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation, September 1, 2017, http://unro.minjust.ru/NKOForeignAgent.aspx.
Luke Harding, "Russia Orders British Council  Offices to Be Shut down," The Guardian, December 13, 2007, sec. World news, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/dec/13/russia.lukeharding.
Robertson, "Managing Society: Protest, Civil Society, and Regime in Putin's Russia," 541.
Georgy Bovt, "The (Hushed Up) Story of Russia's Trucker Revolt," Intersection, April 14, 2017, http://intersectionproject.eu/article/politics/hushed-story-russias-trucker-revolt.
Miriam Lanskoy and Elspeth Suthers, "Outlawing the Opposition," Journal of Democracy 24, no. 3 (2013): 78.
Olga Churakova and Elena Muhametshina, "Inoctrannye agenti poluchili prezidentskie granti" [Foreign Agents Receive Presidential Grants], Vedomosti, August 1, 2017, https://www.vedomosti.ru/ politics/articles/2017/08/01/727267-inostrannie-agenti-granti.
Anton Marsadov, "'Tsvetnaya kontrrevolyutsiya' poruchena Genshtaby" [A 'Color Counter-Revolution' is being Entrusted to the General Staff].
154 The CSTO is an international security alliance created in 1992. Its current members are Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, and Tajikistan.
Roy Allison, Russia, the West, and Military Intervention, 143.   
Uran Botobekov, "Russia  Wants CSTO Allies to Deploy to Syria," Jamestown Foundation, accessed July 23, 2017, https://jamestown.org/program/russia-wants-csto-allies-deploy-syria/.
official policy or position of the 
Department of Defense
U.S. Government
Two of the characteristics of modern conflict that General Gerasimov noted in 2013 were the rapid pace at which crises develop and the need to integrate both military and non-military means in response. 
103
104
105
The NDMC is essentially an information hub that provides more complete and up-todate information to the nation's leaders while at the same time providing accurate information about the current state of Russia's forces, allowing for quicker decision making.
These duties are split between the NDMC's Center for Combat Management and the Center for Management of Day-to-Day Activity. 
106
164
165
166
While Russia has established the mechanisms to intervene outside its borders on a multilateral basis, its interventions thus far have been done unilaterally. Russia chose not to get CSTO permission for its actions in the Russo-Georgian War in 2008. Perhaps it chose not to because of the delay such CSTO consultations would require, or perhaps it was because of the limitations that CSTO concurrence / participation might place on Russian actions. However, in September 2008, the CSTO countries did condemn 164 Miriam Elder, "Kyrgyzstan Tests Russia's Regional Commitments," Public Radio International, June 15, 2010, https://www.pri.org/stories/2010-06-15/kyrgyzstan-tests-russias-regional-commitments.
165 Miriam Elder.
166 Andrei Makhovsky, "Belarus Leader Raps Russia, May Snub Security Summit," Reuters, April 25, 2010, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-belarus-russia-idUSTRE63O0PT20100425.
Georgia's actions in the lead-up to the conflict. 
167
169