# ID: eb8d8f525d2745589e33b57932c3aa7d
# Title: Strategic Studies Quarterly. Volume 4, Number 4, Winter 2010
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2010.0
# Fulltext:
Three things came to mind while writing "Remembrance of Things Past: The Enduring Value of Nuclear Weapons." 1 First, the intent was to reinvigorate debate within the policy-making community regarding nuclear weapons; second, to introduce the idea of minimum deterrence; 2 and third, to sketch out a force structure suitable for the United States to achieve minimum deterrence. Judging from the attention the article received, we were successful in our first bid, less successful in the second, and largely unsuccessful in our third. 3  Before addressing our critics, it is important to clarify the meaning of "minimum deterrence" and specify how the number 311 was derived.
Minimum deterrence is an argument about states, security, and nuclear weapons. 4  It makes three assumptions. First, minimum deterrence assumes that all states strive to survive; all statesmen want a state to rule. Second, it assumes that nuclear weapons produce political effects; that is, they compel statesmen to behave cautiously in the face of grave danger. This cautiousness produces restraint, which shores up international stability. Third, minimum deterrence assumes that large arsenals buy statesmen little. As in other areas of competition, there comes a point of diminishing returns, and with nuclear weapons that point comes quickly. This presupposes that statesmen are not sensitive to the actual number of nuclear weapons a state may possess. The mere fact that a state may have a nuclear weapon or seek to acquire one is enough to condition them to act cautiously, even in times of crises. As Steve Walt aptly put it, "American policymakers clearly understand the logic of minimum deterrence or they would not be so worried when a state like North Korea or Iran makes a move to join the nuclear club." 5 In other words, they freely recognize that a handful of nuclear weapons in the hands of a hostile country can constrain what we can do to that country. If a small number of weapons can produce such sobriety on our part, why do we need thousands?
A small number of nuclear weapons is all that is needed for states to achieve relative security. Security is always relative, and deterrence is no different. As Bernard Brodie once described it, the effectiveness of
based on alliances. Put another way, alliances might be necessary but they are not always useful. The corollary to this is simple: while extended deterrence might have been our fate, it should not automatically be our policy.
The second charge appears to be more problematic. Presumably, a smaller force would be less efficient and more difficult to maintain than a larger one because a smaller force would result in a smaller industrial base, which means greater dependencies on a relatively small number of suppliers. Theoretically, this is cause for concern, but in reality it is not. The entire nuclear weapons complex has been a government enterprise since the beginning. It currently consists of eight sites that research, develop, produce, procure, assemble, maintain, disassemble, and test the nuclear and nonnuclear components of the arsenal. 24  The production of nuclear weapons requires a very large capital investment and is characterized by the predominance of fixed costs and a single consumer of its products, the US government. Indeed, the same physical plant would be necessary to produce 10 or 1,000 nuclear weapons. This suggests it is a natural monopoly that has been controlled by the government for its entire existence. The supply of delivery vehicles, such as long-range bombers, booster rockets, and SSBNs, however, is subject to the vagaries of the marketplace, as consolidation of the defense industrial base over the past few decades makes clear. 25   Lastly, there is the question of force management. Just how small can a force become until it does not resemble a force at all? That is a difficult question to answer. Certainly, large numbers can lead to organizational competencies and the development of a professional cadre. However, as originally suggested, a small force can also achieve those aims. The Navy's SEALs are selective, well funded, and effective. One might wonder how a nuclear force with similar qualities might look. For starters, it would attract the best candidates. To enhance recruitment, incentives might be offered; bonuses being one, prestige another. The services are expert at managing both, so this should not be too problematic. Nuclear warriors also deserve the best equipment, which gets back to designing, testing, and deploying new systems, if required. Lastly, there is effectiveness. In the nuclear arena, effectiveness is synonymous with security. Once upon a time the Strategic Air Command had a simple imprimatur: "Peace is our profession, deterrence is our mission." Those eight words galvanized American nuclear policy, operations, and security for some 50 years. What
deterrence "must be measured not only in terms of the power it holds at bay, but the incentives to aggression which form the pressure behind that power." 
6
7
If leaders of the big three understand this, others do too, which is why the slow, steady spread of nuclear weapons is likely to continue. Unlike the spread that occurred during the Cold War, however, where the United States and the Soviet Union raced to increase nuclear stockpiles, new nuclear states will mimic the behavior of India, Pakistan, and North Korea and keep their arsenals relatively small. In other words, as the number of nuclear states in the world increases, the actual number of weapons in the world will decrease. Much has been written about deterrence in the post-Cold War world, but this has been overlooked: The age of minimum deterrence has arrived.
Nothing has drawn more attention than the number 311, so it is important to explain how it was derived. 
8
A state does not have to demonstrate a capacity to win a nuclear war to deter one, because the devastating consequences of nuclear war are transparent, well understood, and universally recognized. Reflecting on this, McGeorge Bundy commented, "A decision that would bring even one hydrogen bomb on one city of one's own country would be recognized in advance as a catastrophic blunder; ten bombs on ten cities would be a disaster beyond history; and a hundred bombs on a hundred cities are unthinkable." 
9
10
Even in an age of minimum deterrence, readiness, survivability, and flexibility are vital ingredients of nuclear deterrence, and the nuclear triad appears to be the most effective scheme to achieve those aims. That a small state like Pakistan can achieve deterrence without one does not mean that the United States ought to abandon its. On the contrary, if small states could afford a nuclear triad, they would probably opt for one, because it enhances flexibility and complicates an adversary's task. 
11
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 6 ]   to carry air-launched cruise missiles (ALCM) to give them standoff capability, this is not necessary to ensure a viable triad.
Lastly, the political effect of nuclear weapons does not stem from countervalue or counterforce targeting but from the destructive power of the weapons themselves. 
12
13
14
Apparently, there are several reasons. 
15
16
17
Prior to the arrival of nuclear weapons on the subcontinent, India and Pakistan fought three times. In the summer of 1999, one year after nuclear tests were successfully conducted within both countries, another war erupted in the mountains along the line of control in Kashmir. Yet, the war in Kargil did not escalate beyond small-scale fighting. Why? Nuclear optimists stress the pacifying effect nuclear weapons played in resolving the crisis; pessimists claim both sides got lucky by avoiding nuclear war. 
18
Related to this idea is extended deterrence. Critics contend that a small number of nuclear weapons will prevent the United States from extending its nuclear deterrent to allies and friends who might be threatened by other nuclear states. One might think, "Thank goodness." Throughout the Cold War, America's policy of containment rested squarely on the shoulders of an extended deterrent regime, but that relationship was not always a happy one. 
19
20
21
22
23
The national security environment for the United States, and most other nations, in the coming years will experience a period of dramatic change. These changes have created urgency for transformation within the defense establishment-most particularly in acquisition. Specifically, three forces are driving this need for change: budgetary challenges, changing security requirements, and a changed military environment.
The United States faces several long-term budgetary challenges, and the impact they will have on the domestic economy will directly contribute to the ability of the DoD to modernize and transform for the twenty-first century. Since 9/11 the US defense budget has skyrocketed, reaching around $700 billion in 2010, including "supplementals." Perhaps most important will be the projected rapidly increasing mandatory spending on programs such as Social Security and Medicare as baby boomers age. The US Census Bureau projects that by 2020 the number of people in the US population between the ages of 65 and 84 is expected to rise by nearly 50 percent. Since spending on these programs is directly tied to rising costof-living and health care costs (see fig. 
1
The rising costs of these mandatory entitlement programs, coupled with enduring projected budget deficits and required interest payments on the related debt, will create an inevitable downward pressure on the DoD budget. As Secretary of Defense Robert Gates pointed out, defense budget growth experienced over the last decade is no longer affordable. 
1
Today the United States faces an incredibly broad spectrum of security missions: preparations for potential peer or near-peer competitors, such as China, India, or Russia; missions related to maintaining security against weapons of mass destruction (WMD), including the threats of rogue nuclear states such as North Korea and Iran; and, finally, a wide variety of nontraditional national security challenges such as global pandemics, cyber attacks (including those against the civilian infrastructure), pirates in critical sea lanes, natural disasters, or energy security dilemmas, all of which could require DoD intervention. Importantly, each of these requires not just a military perspective but also a holistic view of security, combining inputs and capabilities from the DoD, State, Homeland Security, the Director of National Intelligence, and others-using both "hard" and "soft" power. The need for such a coordinated multiagency response has resulted in increasing demands for military involvement in new missions. Since none of these concerns can be addressed on a unilateral basis and often require multinational agreements and actions, future security planning must be done on a multiagency and multinational basis.
One important aspect of today's "globalized" world is that advanced technologies and industries have spread worldwide, and in many cases the United States is no longer in the lead. As a result, the nation must be able to take advantage of advanced technologies, wherever they come from, and abandon the assumption that it can be self-sufficient. It is essential to recognize that national security, in the broader context, now includes such issues as the global financial crisis, climate change, and the challenge of global demographics. In early 2009, the director of national intelligence (DNI) stated that worldwide instability from the financial crisis was the "number one national security challenge." 
2
3
4
The DoD's normal way of doing business, taking up to 20 years to develop new weapon systems, is totally incompatible with adversaries using available commercial technologies in new and different ways. It is also incompatible with the 9-18 month cycle of software changes that adversaries take full advantage of for cyber warfare. As a result, there is a real requirement for rapid change. When a combatant commander identifies an "urgent need" for new equipment in the field, the acquisition structure cannot take years to respond. There must be processes and funding in place able to respond in months or less.
The recognition of persistent conflict, as represented by the current wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, means our force planning and equipment planning must assume the need for sustained operations. Persistent missions of stability and reconstruction have now assumed a high priority.
To address this twenty-first-century world of national security, four toplevel changes are required: a restructured National Security Council; a new, holistic national security strategy; a fiscally constrained DoD longterm budget, with matching force structure; and, most important, a major thrust for acquisition reform.
The DoD acquisition system must be significantly improved to achieve greater overall mission effectiveness with significantly fewer dollars. The administration and the Congress are attempting such initiatives with full recognition that there will be enormous resistance to the needed cultural change. This includes changes to the post-9/11 DoD budget explosionthe military and the defense industry are now structured on the assumption that it will be maintained. Essentially, it means changing the historic DoD paradigm, which accepts that "to get higher performance you have to pay more for it." The belief, supported by decades of defense weapons cost growth, has been that we can continue to get higher and higher performance but only at greater and greater individual weapon costs. Yet, commercial electronics and information technologies have dramatically demonstrated the opposite; for example, computers today offer higher and Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 17 ]   higher performance at lower and lower costs through the use of both product and process technology driven by market demand. Change is clearly required in the coming decades, since the national security market demand will require higher and higher performance at lower and lower costs.
To meet the new market demand, the acquisition paradigm of defense goods and services requires dramatic changes. Four essential issues surrounding our interrelated acquisition process must be addressed:
• What goods and services to buy (the requirements process),
• How to buy them (acquisition reform),
• Who acquires them (the acquisition workforce), and
• From whom are the goods and services acquired (the industrial base).
To meet the wide range of challenges within a resource-constrained environment, the United States needs an effective, agile, and affordable joint (i.e., multiservice) military force. It is absolutely necessary to focus on lower-cost systems and services while still achieving the required performance. The focus of twenty-first-century acquisition will include:
• Optimized, net-centric systems-of-systems, necessitating a movement away from the platform-centric thinking of the past to more network-centric thinking. These will be integrated systems-of-systems with large numbers of inexpensive, distributed sensors and shooters, all interlinked with complex, secure command, control, and communication systems.
• The new, holistic view of national security, combined with the projected twenty-first-century threats, will require a more flexible and adaptive force structure and a more balanced allocation of resources designed to address widespread needs. Some examples include improved C3ISR, more unmanned aerial systems, special operations forces, "land warrior" systems, missile defense, and cyber defense.
• New systems must be interoperable with those of other military services in a joint environment, with other US government agency systems, and with our coalition partners. The only way to ensure this is Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 18 ]   to plan and exercise as we will fight-together with our allies, other agencies, and contractors on the battlefield. Today in Iraq and Afghanistan there are well over 200,000 contractors in the war zone, and yet there has been totally inadequate planning, exercising, and education on this likely future mixed force.
To address affordability, we must include cost as a design/military requirement. Cost, in a resource-constrained environment, translates directly into the number of systems that can be bought. One example of what can be done using this approach is the joint direct attack munition (JDAM). For that program, the chief of staff of the Air Force wrote the total requirement on a small piece of paper. The requirement had three elements: (1) "it shall hit the target" (an accuracy requirement), (2) "it should work" (a reliability requirement), and (3) "it should cost under $40,000 each." It currently hits the target, works well, and costs around $17,000 each. It satisfied the military's need not only in accuracy and reliability but also in the quantities required, at an affordable price.
Achieving higher performance--faster and at lower costs--will require significant changes in the overall acquisition process. Major aspects of the changes in how goods are acquired include competition, commercial offthe-shelf (COTS), enterprise-wide information technology (IT), rapid acquisition, spiral development, and continuous improvement.
Competition is a driving force in the US economy and a vital component of efficiency and improved market performance in both the public and private sectors. It has been widely held among economists that competition provides incentives to produce better products faster, at lower costs, and with better quality while focusing more attention on customer needs. Congress recognized the benefits of competition and mandated its use with the Competition in Contracting Act of 1984. From a defense perspective, the mandate is, simply stated, "Competition is very beneficial; maximize its use."
Competition built in from the beginning of a product's or service's acquisition planning is critical to ensure benefits can be harnessed throughout the process. Because of the phased design, development, production, and support requirements for system acquisition, natural cutoff points Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 19 ]   exist where competition can be introduced into the process. Competition is largely accepted at the initiation of development; however, it is often resisted during production, even though it is the key to ensuring a real incentive for contractors to ensure they meet cost, schedule, and performance requirements. The level of net cost savings that can be achieved with competition can be significant and should be encouraged in all its various forms and options. The DoD needs to ensure that funds for dualsource production are available when the development and planning process begins and that the necessary oversight and management structures exist to support a dual-production environment across the services.
Competition during support should also be expanded across DoD programs. There is a potential here to significantly lower the total ownership costs of weapon systems, which can free up needed funds for force modernization. Within the over-$200 billion annual DoD logistics budget, performance improvements are required, and savings potentials are significant.
While most of the federal regulations are written for acquisition of products, services now make up well over 50 percent of DoD purchases, and competition for services is very different from competition for products. Because of the various types of services-ranging from logistics services to security services to food services-and the numerous sources available, agencies and departments within the DoD need to understand the costs, benefits, and differences of each. The benefits from competition for services can be significant, with much flexibility available in exactly how the services are provided and who provides them. The important factor is to provide an incentive for those supplying the services to be efficient and effective.
Contractors who continue to provide increasing performance at continuously lower costs should be rewarded with follow-on contracts. Thus, competition should not be a requirement throughout a program, but simply maintained as a credible option in the event the supplier does not provide continuously higher performance at continuously lower cost. It is the "threat" of competition that is a sufficient incentive to motivate even sole-source suppliers to continuously lower their costs.
Another option is commercial off-the-shelf procurement. There are examples of COTS being used as far back as the 1970s. With the advent of the information age and widespread commercial technological advances, growing DoD emphasis on information systems heralded a shift in acquisition policy that strongly favors the use of COTS products. Considered a Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 20 ]   seminal document in setting recent COTS policy, the "Perry Memo," written by then-secretary of defense William J. Perry, called for the military to increase the purchase of commercial items and systems. 
5
Use of commercial products and services can be especially important at the lower tiers, since developing, manufacturing, and integrating COTS components are within the capability of a much greater number of smaller firms-firms that normally could not overcome the high barriers-to-entry into the defense industry. This has the effect of creating a much broader business base, and this competitive environment will increase innovation as well as help ensure continuous price competition. With commercial firms, it may be most desirable to contract using "other transactions authority," including best commercial practices, rather than unique government requirements. This initiative would help encourage commercial suppliers to do business with the DoD. In many cases, the prime contract will utilize the Federal Acquisition Regulations, but the prime contractor should be encouraged to pass on the contractual terms for "other transactions authorities" when the subcontractors can be commercial suppliers. To gain the full benefits from the use of COTS, program managers need greater funding flexibility, since "color of money" conflicts can create problems. For example, COTS modifications may be bought with procurement dollars but may need some developmental testing. The supplier is not able to use procurement dollars for developmental test and evaluation.
While greater use of COTS will significantly reduce acquisition cycle times, the government should also implement modern, enterprise-wide IT systems. These systems-including logistics, business, personnel, and
finance-should link the government and industry, as appropriate. Although there are many cases of successful private sector business systems transformation, the transformation of DoD's business systems has proven to be very challenging. The DoD still relies on 4,700 stove-piped, nonintegrated, noninteroperable business systems, creating a great deal of inefficiency. These inefficient "legacy" systems were created over the past several decades as organizations within DoD independently developed specialized systems. Each organization used unique processes, objectives, and functions designed to best support their individual mission area. As information systems have evolved, many of these specialized systems have become outdated. Moreover, the lack of data standards, obsolete computer languages, and noninteroperability are frequent causes of errors, redundancy, and growing maintenance costs. For over a decade, the DoD has attempted to integrate new information technologies to improve business management but with limited success.
The same level of success pertains to the rapid acquisition process. Rapid acquisitions take place within a number of ad hoc organizations but are ultimately shackled to the traditional acquisition system. This system is linear, stove-piped, and designed for risk minimization during extended development of technologically sophisticated equipment. Rapid acquisitions are generally of a completely different character-imperfect solutions, required immediately, using currently available technology. This tension will always exist between rapid and deliberate acquisitions. The need for rapid acquisitions is unlikely to decrease. When combatant commanders have an urgent need, there should be an institutionalized process, utilizing available contingent dollars to dramatically reduce the acquisition cycle time. One tool available to help reduce acquisition time is spiral development.
The DoD has historically used a linear acquisition strategy, often referred to as the "waterfall" method. The waterfall method gave military planners the illusion of stability, as firm, "final" requirements would be determined early in the development process. As a result, key development decisions would be made before sufficient knowledge was available to make accurate assessments. Recognizing the benefits of a concept developed by Barry Boehm to improve the software development process, which he called "spiral development," 6 a growing number of senior DoD officials came to believe it should be extended to the acquisition of software-intensive weapon systems and, subsequently, to all weapon systems. In a military context, spiral development is understood as a cyclical development strategy
where a basic capability is rapidly fielded and incremental capability improvements are periodically made in subsequent "blocks." The DoD officially endorsed spiral development as a key implementation process for the preferred evolutionary acquisition strategy in the 2003 version of DoD Instruction 5000.2, Operation of the Defense Acquisition System.
One of spiral development's primary attributes is that it can help ensure a more rapid deployment of weapon systems. Specifically, when systems are developed incrementally and technology is mature enough to be integrated, risk is minimized. As a result, delays in development are reduced, keeping cost growth in check as well. Because spirals are flexible and can be changed as the program progresses, spiral development permits constant refinement over time, allowing the user and the developer to hone in on evolving requirements. Finally, spiral development can help foster a robust defense industrial base. The potential for competition at the beginning of each spiral creates broader opportunity and leads to increased pressures on private industry to be more efficient, while simultaneously encouraging innovation. Although it is DoD policy to utilize spiral development fully in both hardware and software practices, it is still far from common practice.
So, too (unfortunately), is the practice of incentivizing continuous improvement. Contractors must be incentivized to achieve continuous performance improvements at continuously lower costs. The benefits of the lower-cost systems must be shared with contractors through greater use of value-engineering (shared savings) clauses in contracts, as well as through awards of follow-on business when the desired results are achieved.
It must be noted that the acquisition approach of the Obama administration during its first two years has frequently been referred to as a "global war on contractors." An adversarial atmosphere between the government and suppliers has been created by establishing a quota of 33,000 in-sourcing positions, a 10-13 percent mandated reduction in contracted dollars, a Defense Contract Audit Agency practice of withholding 10 percent of the cash payments, an emphasis on fixed-price development contracts, and efforts to cut back defense industry profits. Rather than creating a partnership between buyer and seller to achieve the common objectives of higher performance at lower cost, as in the commercial computer business, just the opposite has occurred. When proper market incentives are presented, such results should be achievable within the defense marketplace. Many of these government initiatives are well intended, but implementation has been carried to an extreme. In the case of the in-sourcing initiative, ample evidence shows that inherently governmental functions in the acquisition workforce have been grossly undervalued, and there is an extreme shortage of government people (particularly at the senior levels) in the contracting community-clearly an inherently governmental function. However, there has been a move within the services to bring a significant portion of their equipment maintenance in house, with the argument that it will save money. In fact, the Air Force has realized an estimated 40-percent cost savings for this move, although Congressional Budget Office analysis states that "over a 20-year period, using military units would cost roughly 90 percent more than using contractors" for this function. 
7
A flexible, responsive, efficient, and effective acquisition program for sophisticated, high-tech goods and services requires "smart buyers." This includes both the quantity and the quality of senior and experienced military and civilian personnel. Unfortunately, in the last decade this requirement has not been met. As the defense budget plummeted in the post-Cold War period of the 1990s, it was natural for the DoD to make significant cuts in the overall acquisition workforce. Then, in the Defense Authorization Act for FY-1996, Congress mandated that the DoD further reduce its acquisition workforce by 25 percent by the end of FY-2000. In total, the acquisition workforce fell from approximately 500,000 to Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 24 ]   around 200,000 (see fig. 
2
8
9
11
The need for hiring people with contracting and management experience into inherently governmental positions is widely recognized by both the Congress and the administration. It is important that these positions be filled with the highest caliber of personnel and that they be given ample training and opportunities for maximum experience. However, it must be recognized that it will take time for these new hires, many of whom are young interns, to develop the necessary experience. Thus, the government should consider special programs for hiring acquisition experts from industry for three-year, term-limited periods, with careful attention to avoiding any conflicts of interest. On the military side, it is also critically important that general officer positions be filled with people who have experience and knowledge in the field to lead the acquisition workforce. Overall, the acquisition personnel function has been grossly undervalued over the last decade, resulting in inefficiencies and even a number of scandals.
The defense industrial base has experienced considerable difficulty in meeting cost, schedule, and performance objectives. It is increasingly isolated from the broader domestic and global economy and is less agile and innovative than necessary. A Defense Science Board (DSB) report on the twenty-first-century defense industry stated: "The last two decades have seen a consolidation of the defense industry around Twentieth Century needs. The next step is DoD leadership in transforming to a Twenty First Century National Security Industrial Structure." 
12
The twenty-first-century industrial base must also be viewed as a global base, where the "best in class" is fully utilized. Globalization offers the Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010
[ 27 ] DoD many benefits. Perhaps most important is the increased use of commercial products, technologies, and services-none of which can be separated from the globalization phenomenon. Moreover, the use of the global industrial base has substantially lowered the cost of selected new systems, system upgrades, and operational support. Foreign sourcing can also provide competition for, and improve innovation in, domestic firms. The DoD cannot turn back the clock on its increased dependence on the global commercial sector without major setbacks in capability.
Leveraging the global industrial base requires changes in US export and import laws and certainly requires ensuring that potential vulnerabilities are explicitly addressed. This is the approach being taken on the joint strike fighter, to be acquired by 11 nations-using the best-in-class equipment available worldwide for all of the subsystems. It is interesting to observe that today every US weapon system has parts from foreign suppliers, and these were selected not because they were the lowest cost but because they were the best performance available. With the global spread of technology and industry, it is important that we think globally in providing the best possible equipment to our fighting forces.
For industries to invest in independent research and development (IR&D) and capital equipment modernization, it is essential they are "healthy" (i.e., profitable). Government contracting personnel often strive to reduce profits rather than working with industry on reducing costs, not acknowledging that profit is a very small percentage of a program's total costs (nominally in the 5-8 percent range, but often even less). The government's primary objective must be to incentivize contractors to continually increase performance while reducing total costs.
In many areas today, the commercial world has more-advanced technology, higher performance, and lower-cost equipment of which the Defense Department must take full advantage. It must consider commercial suppliers of goods and services as part of its industrial base. In fact, the ideal situation is to have suppliers that have integrated commercial and military operations (i.e., "dual use"). Such dual-use operations provide increased volume; thus, not only lowest cost but also the capability for surge in goods or services during wartime. This combined operation does necessitate the waiver of some specialized DoD requirements (e.g., unique cost accounting), but it has huge payoffs for higher performance at lower cost and is certainly worth doing.
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 28 ]   Prime contractors performing system-of-systems integration support functions have an inherent conflict of interest that creates perverse incentives which may benefit the company's bottom line at the expense of the government; for example, in the selection of platforms and subsystems. As the DoD moves toward system-of-systems, it is important it have independent firms capable of doing the systems architecture and systems engineering of the overall system without conflicts of interest. In the past there were large numbers of mid-size, independent firms with this characteristic, but they were largely acquired by prime contractors during the post-Cold War mergers and acquisitions period. Now it is up to the government to recreate that industrial base to support it directly in developing the best possible overall system-of-systems.
To gain the benefits of competition, it is clearly desirable to have multiple firms at all tiers in all critical sectors of the industry as subcontractors and parts suppliers. This becomes particularly important if there is a reduction in the future overall DoD budget. Considerations of future mergers and acquisitions must be reviewed carefully with these objectives in mind.
In the past when non-inherently governmental work was done by government employees and competed between the public and private sectors, the data showed overwhelmingly that the government got higher performance at significantly lower costs, no matter who won the competitions. In fact, the average savings were over 30 percent and, in many cases, significantly higher-even though more than 50 percent of the time, the government won these competitions. 
13
14
15
There has also been a breakdown in government-industry dialog. During the Clinton administration, semiannual meetings were held between a significant number of defense industry CEO's (including small and minority firms) and senior leaders of the DoD; two-way industry-government communications was encouraged. During the Bush administration, these meetings were discontinued. For the industry to fully understand the government's needs and initiatives and the government to fully understand the concerns and needs of the industry, such communication must not only continue at the senior-most levels but also within all areas of specialization. This can be done at the generic level without any conflicts or special contractual considerations, and the results can be made public to allay concerns over fairness or ethics. The government can benefit significantly from such exchanges.
It is critically important throughout the overall acquisition system that there be no conflicts of interests. This became an issue of increasing importance as a result of consolidations in the defense industry in the post-Cold War period. After initial consolidations at the prime contractor level, many firms began vertical acquisitions. In some cases, prime contractors acquired firms that had personnel working directly in government program offices involved in programmatic decisions. On occasion these decisions involved hardware supplied by other divisions of the same prime. Due to their acquisitions of subsystem suppliers, prime contractors were making make-or-buy decisions between their own divisions and competitors when purchasing the "best" subsystems. It is therefore important for the government to have significant visibility into such vertical integration issues-not to decide the make-or-buy choice, but to assure the openness of the process.
Acquisition has reached a critical period. Many even compare it to the period following the launch of Sputnik or the fall of the Berlin Wall. Today, the security world is changing so dramatically that a holistic perspective is clearly required in terms of a multiagency and multinational approach. Moreover, after a decade of solid defense budget growth, which will almost certainly change, many difficult choices and shifts remain. Secretary Gates began that shift with his termination of the F-22 fighter production and cutbacks of the Army's Future Combat System program. However, he has argued for an even greater shift in the balance of resources toward more intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) systems and greater use of unmanned systems and robotics.
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 30 ]   In spite of this dramatically changed national security environment, the controlling acquisition policies, practices, laws, military budgets, and requirement priorities have not been transformed sufficiently to match the needs of this new world. In fact, there is still an emphasis, in many cases, on resetting of the equipment that has been used in Iraq and Afghanistan versus modernization.
To address these challenges, we offer four summary recommendations. First, in an effort to focus the requirements process and improve affordability, the undersecretary of defense (acquisition, technology, & logistics) should mandate that cost be included as a design/military requirement for weapon systems. Second, although the requisite acquisition policies are in place to mandate the consideration of competition and the use of commercial solutions, they are frequently not used effectively. DoD leadership must work to ensure the option of credible competition is present during all phases of acquisition and exercised if the current contractor is not achieving desired performance, cost, and schedule objectives. Also, the use of commercial technologies and services should be maximized through active efforts to remove the many current barriers to their use. Next, the DoD's senior leaders must focus on developing a world-class acquisition workforce in sufficient numbers with the necessary skills and experiences to successfully support defense acquisition in the twenty-first century. Finally, the DoD must foster a defense industry that is flexible, adaptive, agile, innovative, low-cost, high-quality, and satisfies twenty-first-century security needs. To achieve the desired industrial base, it will be necessary to first transform the way the department conducts its business to allow for the effective acquisition, management, and support of complex systems, systems-of-systems, and services required of the nation's capabilitiesbased military forces.
Clearly, adopting these recommendations will be a difficult transition, since what is required from DoD military and civilian employees is a "cultural change." The literature is very clear on what it takes to achieve a cultural change. First, there must be a clear recognition of the need for change (a crisis). The combination of anticipated downward budgetary pressures and acquisition workforce issues creates such a forward-looking crisis. Second, and perhaps most important, is the need for leadership with a vision, a strategy, and an action plan to achieve the required changes. As evidenced by speeches and statements, there is widespread recognition within the Congress and the executive branch of this need for change. The Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 31 ]   question is whether the changes being enacted now and those proposed are the right changes to achieve the desired objectives. Namely, will they satisfy the twenty-first-century needs for higher performance at lower costs with greater agility and speed?
Achieving the desired changes will take political courage and sustained, strong leadership by both the executive and legislative branches working together. The American public, and particularly our fighting men and women, deserve nothing less; the nation's future security depends upon it. It can be done, and the time to start is now.
CAPT Christopher R. Davis  
1
While NATO has grown from a cozy club of 16 nations to a community of 28-welcoming Albania and Croatia into the fold at Strasbourg and Kehl-it is precisely this growth that some perceive as crippling its ability to gain the consensus necessary for decisive action. Declining demographics and the current economic crisis are leading Europeans to prioritize social spending over defense expenditures. Few nations spend anywhere near NATO's informally agreed upon 2 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) on defense. While yesterday's flagship operation was peacekeeping in the nearby Balkans, today's challenge is nation building in farflung Afghanistan. In part as a distraction from its domestic woes-and further complicating the matter-a newly resurgent Russia is increasingly antagonistic towards the Euro-Atlantic partnership. This has created a rift Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 33 ]   between newer NATO affiliates who favor the traditional focus on territorial defense over their long-tenured colleagues' preferences toward preparing for newer, more salient challenges.
All this has led, once again, to calls for the alliance to reinvent itself through a refreshed strategic concept, and in its discernment the alliance will rely upon the collective wisdom of the "group of experts" led by former US ambassador Madeleine K. Albright. 
2
Since the alliance's beginning, strategic concepts have focused almost exclusively on providing the idea, or notion, of how national militaries would align themselves to achieve tangible operational objectives that translate into political gains. The linage of strategic concepts has its roots in "The Strategic Concept for the Defense of the North Atlantic Area" (DC 6/1), dated 6 January 1950 and drafted by the now-defunct North Atlantic Defense Committee (composed of each nation's minister of defense). 
3
4
While describing the alliance's strategy in broad terms, DC 6/1 nonetheless articulated the need to extend territorial defense as far to the east as possible-a clear nod to the unspecified Soviet threat-and delineated specific roles and responsibilities to those best suited. For example, the United States understandably assumed responsibility for providing the Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 34 ]   nuclear shield. At its core, however, DC 6/1 stressed the importance of economic stability and recovery by laying out an economy-of-force approach that assumed a warning sufficient for mass mobilization. This latter assumption had the added benefit of reducing the obligation to maintain a large standing force. The formation of an integrated NATO military structure under the centralized command of GEN Dwight D. Eisenhower led to the next strategic concept.
Drafted by the newly empowered Military Committee and approved in December 1952, MC 3/5 in essence maintained continuity with DC 6/1. While articulating broad principles, these early strategic concepts were short on the detail needed for adequate planning. This necessitated drafting detailed strategic guidance, which set about nesting a subregional approach to defense within a phased concept of operations. 
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
13
As Soviet forces receded from Eastern Europe, the breakup of the Warsaw Pact dramatically altered the security environment. The near elimination of a direct military threat to European sovereignty ushered in a period of deep reflection within the alliance that resulted in the New Strategic Concept (NSC) in 1991. The NSC shifted the focus to crisis response and conflict prevention through dialog and cooperation, calling upon members to increase their use of nonmilitary power to address collective security concerns. 
14
Absent the global restraints imposed by Soviet-American antagonism, however, political and social instability manifested itself in Europe. To counter the resulting insecurity, NATO began acting outside its traditional boundaries in the mid 1990s to thwart threats at their source. 
15
Signed in 1999, NATO's current strategic concept (SC-99) retained a conventional focus but acknowledged the continual spread of unconventional challenges-such as mass migration and organized crime-and the need to keep these threats at a distance. Recognizing that insecurity and instability outside their collective borders could spread and destabilize all European nations, SC-99 focused more intently on "non-Article 5" activities like conflict prevention and crisis management. The aim was to enhance security and stability by dealing proactively with potential crises. 
16
More importantly, SC-99 institutionalized the ongoing formation of cooperative partnerships through multinational dialogue. This occurred on two planes. The first was outside the Euro-Atlantic area, where the alliance created forums for cooperation with states in North Africa (through the Mediterranean Dialog) and in the Middle East (under the auspices of the Istanbul Cooperation Initiative). These venues offered NATO the opportunity to collaborate on regional security issues outside the alliance's traditional purview. The second was closer to home, where the alliance bet that the enticement to join NATO would provide the leverage necessary to nurture the emergence of liberal democracies. While this was not always the case, it nonetheless unilaterally extended a standard membership roadmap to European states before subsequently modifying its Partnership-for-Peace program to accommodate differing social and political proclivities.
Surveying the post-9/11 geopolitical landscape, the United States responded by significantly adjusting its global military posture. While the United States continued to view NATO as an important mechanism for Euro-Atlantic security and cooperation, meeting new threats required an adjustment in US military commitment to Europe. America shifted away for an ensconced heavy force designed for massive armor engagements toward a rotational forward-based force capable of rapid deployment and Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 37 ]   early entry into conflicts beyond Europe. It, in essence, slated Europe to become a secure base for US operations in central and southwest Asia and Africa. 
17
18
Following the signing of SC-99, the alliance experienced three consecutive waves of expansion that first brought the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland into the fold in November 2002. Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia joined at the conclusion of the Prague Summit in March 2004, followed by the aforementioned Albania and Croatia at the most recent summit. For an alliance built on achieving consensus, the addition of each new member increases the risk of paralysis. It is now a near certainty that NATO's open-door policy will close in the face of Ukraine and Georgia-the former due to Russian-instigated political indecision and the latter because of a border dispute with Russia. Regardless of official proclamations to the contrary, NATO has lost its nerve in the face of Russian bellicosity. 
19
The strategic environment that gave rise to SC-99 stands in stark contrast to the one the alliance now inhabits. In an attempt to provide the group of experts with the perspectives of senior NATO military leaders on this new environment, Allied Command Transformation (ACT) commissioned the Multiple Futures Project (MFP). 
20
21
22
Super-empowered individuals now wield asymmetric conventional weapons of hitherto unseen lethality. Melting polar ice caps are exposing new sea lanes and rich natural resources on NATO's northern flank that have polar powers (Russia, Canada, Norway, Denmark, and the United States) jockeying for position. Traditionally representing the alliance's soft underbelly, the Mediterranean waters provide a bulwark against southern threats. Water scarcity, famine, powerful nonstate actors, endemic local conflicts, and globalization all combine to create an impetus for uncontrolled migrations that threaten European stability. Increasing desertification has drawn NATO into the Darfur region where scarce resources led to a nomadic-agrarian clash. The eastern approaches, anchored by Turkey and Greece, present a changing geopolitical landscape with the potential to harbor nontraditional threats ranging from transnational criminal gangs Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 39 ]   to rampant extremism and nuclear-tipped missiles. In addition to regional conflicts, cyber threats-like the denial-of-service attack on Estonia-are increasingly threatening alliance economic security. Energy security, both human and mechanical, is leading NATO to lend a hand in the multinational effort to suppress piracy. Although the geographic sandwiching of the Atlantic between its two North American members and the remaining 26 would appear to ensure a secure western flank, perils from humanitarian disasters, infectious diseases, dwindling fisheries, and terrorism are closing in from all cardinal points.
In the face of an aging population in need of social services and a continental economy in disarray, NATO's European partners increasingly focus inward. Disengagement is evident in their inability or unwillingness to invest sufficiently in defense. While Bulgaria, France, Turkey, Greece, and the UK exceed the defense spending target, Europe overall manages to spend only 1.7 percent of GDP on defense-with half going to personnel expenditures-while the United States devotes 4 percent of its GDP to defense, of which roughly 30 percent covers personnel costs. 
23
24
Within NATO there exist considerable differences in national military capabilities, ranging from ponderous conscripted legacy forces incapable of deployment outside national borders to highly lethal and globally employable militaries. Former Warsaw Pact members that have recently joined NATO-as well as future aspirants-retain Soviet hardware, systems, and doctrine. In most cases, however, the orientation of NATO forcesincluding the United States-remains on symmetrical force-on-force engagements with similarly arrayed adversaries. Furthermore, European nations, in shifting from military conscription to voluntary recruitment, have created smaller militaries-but of increased professionalism. Even so, given European demographics, they will face increased recruitment challenges and retention costs. Paradoxically, widening capabilities disparities cut two ways, either threatening a dysfunctional response to "high end" conventional threats that could doom the alliance's relevance or facilitating a "low end" approach suboptimized to meet today's challenges.
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 40 ]   Reacting to the need to transform its collective capabilities and harmonize diverse national potentials, the alliance created the NATO Response Force (NRF). The aim was to field a conventional combined-arms force capable of employing precision munitions, networked systems, and advanced surveillance systems against a similarly arrayed adversary. In addition to a highly ready force capable of instantaneous action, the NRF was to become the conceptual framework for NATO's military transformation-in essence the paradigm shift necessary to maintain relevance. 
25
NATO binds members to a common cause against a mutual threat; however, as the first Gulf War demonstrated, all allies may not perceive a threat as sufficient to trigger a collective response. In this case, coalitions of members may emerge to address a threat that, while proximate, is technically outside the boundaries of the treaty but salient enough to justify a mutual response for either the sake of efficiency or political legitimacy. NATO's involvement in the Balkans falls into this category, as exemplified in Operation Provide Promise in 1992 where US leadership provided the impetus for the longest humanitarian airlift in history to various Bosnian cities. While the alliance's collective response in the former Yugoslavia began with the gradual escalation of air and maritime operations-including Sharp Guard, Maritime Guard, Deny Flight, Deliberate Force, and Dead Eye-it eventually culminated in Operation Joint Endeavor following the 1995 Bosnian Peace Agreement. This accord capped NATO's response with a protracted ground intervention by the Implementation Force (IFOR) and subsequently by the Stabilization Force (SFOR). 
26
27
The next strategic concept will outline the alliance's purpose and the features of the new security environment. 
28
however, while the group notes chronic shortcomings in the partnership programs, it gives short shrift to correcting past deficiencies. It provides a service, regardless, in not shying away from naming potential adversaries (Iran and North Korea, in particular) and specific recommendations to counter them.
Clearly NATO intends to continue evolving its comprehensive approach. 
29
Differing allied sensitivities result in divergent views on the means necessary for today's threat environment-while the United States tends to prefer hard power, the Europeans generally favor soft. 
30
31
32
33
The United States has been singularly unsuccessful, moreover, in achieving its strategic objectives using high-tech military capabilities in the manpowerintensive conflicts it now confronts-and it is unlikely a collective NATO force organized along the same lines can fare any better. 
34
The form in which collective defense and security are manifest in the new strategic concept has important implications. While the former is traditionally the military's domain and the latter a civilian policing function, their practitioners must work cooperatively to address threats which blur confessional classification. Collective defense against an armed attack is the core task of the alliance-as codified in Article 5. It represents a conventional posture rooted in the primacy of military power and the assumption that the state is the primary actor. In this context, peer militaries represent the national security benchmark. Although it is unlikely the allies will alter Article 5, it is increasingly likely NATO will expand its definition to include a wider array of threats. It is, nevertheless, doubtful the alliance will face off against a regional peer-even if one existed. Collaboration, therefore, will increasingly eclipse confrontation in the alliance's strategic calculus.
While the group of experts advocates maintaining a substrategic nuclear option, the alliance is well served by exiting this business altogether. There is nothing "substrategic" about nuclear weapons. They are strategic in the first order, and the decision on their employment is the sole rightful province of the national leaders that possess them. The implications of their use cut to the core of national survival, and it is a decision over which no Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 44 ]   nation tolerates anything less than complete authority. It is delusional to believe the alliance will ever achieve the consensus necessary to employ nuclear weapons when such discord exists over their mere deployment. Instead of insisting on the inclusion of a wedge issue that will further erode unity, the allies are better served by focusing their limited attention and scarce political capital on countering proliferation and building a missile shield.
The unification and integration of civilian and military capabilities is paramount regardless of whether NATO functions within the context of combat, security, stabilization, reconstruction, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, or counterinsurgency. More weapons do not necessarily equate to more security, and diplomacy is impotent without a military threat. The challenge, as seen in Afghanistan, is how best to achieve equilibrium. This does not imply the existence of a formal division of labor between Europe and the United States-whereby the former delivers soft civilian capabilities essential to build stability and security while the latter focuses on the hard military power necessary to destroy an adversary. Both the European Security Strategy (ESS) and the US National Security Strategy (NSS) call for a blended civil-military response that includes a mix of combat and noncombat capabilities. This balanced approach provides a broad political and practical base for addressing threats, but it requires improved integration of niche civil-military capabilities-and agreements to add any missing abilities to the alliance's portfolio.
In an effort to gain asymmetrical advantage, our adversaries will increasingly blend multiple combinations of capabilities into a type of hybrid warfare that challenges our assumptions about the character of war. 
35
36
• contain and control threats to international security and stability through limiting crisis expansion and facilitating a return to normality;
• preserve the Western political identity and institutions by maintaining open sea, air, and cyber lines of communication; and
• ensure continued economic prosperity through fair and reasonable access to natural resources and global markets.
This represents a broader foundation than articulated by the group of experts; however, like the North Atlantic Treaty itself, these aspirations flexibly bind members to "such action" as each signatory "deems necessary." 
37
While US security is reliant on its capacity to act globally, NATO is but one actor in a globalized world and not a global actor. Some have urged the expansion of NATO into a global alliance, but this will quickly exhaust the Europeans and, in so doing, jeopardize transatlantic security. 
38
39
Washington's leadership and commitment to the Euro-Atlantic pact remains critical to defending the American homeland, gaining market access, supporting kindred liberal democracies, and eliminating weapons of mass destruction. While the United States remains the security provider of last resort, NATO is up to addressing contemporary security concernsbut only under American leadership respectful of the limits of European power. The alliance must regain its central role as a forum for transatlantic security. To achieve this, both the United States and its European partners must commit to a NATO-first policy under which the United States defers from unilateral action and achieves a civil-military balance while respecting a lower level of European ambition. Europe, in turn, must reciprocate with fewer caveats and more capabilities. NATO must return to the principle-laid out in DC 6/1-that national means provide the basis for contributory equity. The European Union, furthermore, must complement NATO while refraining from competing with the alliance.
Global security is dependent on the emergence of peaceful, stable, prosperous, and self-confident democratic societies able to protect civil rights, combat terrorism, and contain illegal immigration. NATO's next strategy, therefore, must focus on integrating newly emancipated nations into a liberal geopolitical order. Direct Western involvement in countering militant fanaticism endemic in Southwest Asia and reviving failed or failing African states is often portrayed as neocolonialism in disguise. This requires NATO, therefore, to shift its focus from providing security directly to building national capacities. This would entail, for example, capacity building in Pakistan and Afghanistan, while working with India and Iran to address their legitimate security concerns. Closer to Western Europe, the alliance must manage Russia's imperialist fade by simultaneously drawing the line against lingering nostalgic ambitions and encouraging more constructive international relationships.
NATO success is dependent on the spread of ideals. The alliance, for example, faces an ideological battle in which al-Qaeda has devolved into an idea that is self-generating extremist affiliates. 
40
tiveness. The institutionalization of strategic communications within NATO requires a shared understanding that results in the creation of lucid policy and doctrine. NATO's next strategic concept must prioritize the development of organizational structures, processes, and human-centric solutions that effectively integrate strategic communications at the tactical and operational levels-where they are missing today.
The alliance has proven a resilient and relevant organization, weathering past crises by adapting itself to changing environments. When its relevance was imperiled by paralysis in dealing with the growing Balkans crisis, NATO fell back on US leadership and UN mandates for the legitimacy and moral turpitude necessary to deal with threats in Europe's backyard. In the process, it undertook its first out-of-area combat deployment to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although the mid-1990s Balkans intervention was only a qualified success, the confidence gained by these groundbreaking operations set the stage for NATO's first combat operation outside of Europe. Less than 10 years later, troops deployed to Afghanistan under the NATO flag, where they continue to conduct stability and security operations in support of the Afghan government. 
41
Properly shaped, the alliance permits the United States to distribute security responsibilities among a broad base of nations that share its commitment to liberal democratic values and global prosperity. Properly managed, the alliance is an important tool for guiding the rise of a multipolar world. NATO's next strategic concept must balance the asymmetric threats of the twenty-first century-terrorist networks, criminal enterprises, and climate change-with eighteenth-century conventional challenges posed by hegemonic nation-states. A successful strategic concept, therefore, will foster readiness, sustainability, and interoperability while offering a range of flexible options that leverage national strengths and direct their contribution to global security. Just as the NRF reaches full operational capability, the alliance must now adopt a more innovative and integrated approach to preparing its future response if it is to remain relevant. It must do this in an increasingly resource-constrained environment and in the face of the growing hybridization of threats. To accomplish this requires overcoming bureaucratic inertia, organizational culture, and national Capt Jacquelyn Schneider, USAF, currently serves as flight commander and mission director at the Misawa Security Operations Center, Misawa AB, Japan. Her military career spans intelligence missions at the tactical, operational, and strategic levels in both Japan and the Republic of Korea. She specializes in intelligence analytical methodologies with a focus on Northeast Asia and nuclear policy. Captain Schneider holds a BA in economics and political science from Columbia University.
Future Korean War Jacquelyn Schneider, Captain, USAF
In late October 1950, with UN forces pushing north toward the Yalu River, Mao Zedong-influenced by the US Navy presence in the Taiwan Straits, Soviet heavy-handedness, and a somewhat altruistic desire to help his fellow Communist comrades-issued the order for China to enter the Korean War. 
1
To avoid repeating the mistakes of the past (or being overly influenced by them), Chinese intentions in a future Korean war must be analyzed, first by exploring how China's interests and capabilities have changed since 1950. Once a divergence from the past has been established, it is then necessary to define concrete actions the United States could take to not only assuage Chinese concerns but to also deter China's entrance into the conflict. Simply put, a modern analysis of any future Korean war must attempt to define China's perceived costs and benefits from involvement and then create solutions through which the United States can influence the values assigned by the Chinese to their political decisions. The final
goal is to convince the Chinese that the cost of intervening militarily for North Korea would be greater than the benefit China could receive by abstaining from the conflict.
Before delving into this analysis, it is important to broach the assumptions upon which this discussion is based. First, this analysis assumes an unprovoked North Korean attack into South Korea. Secondly, the argument assumes that North Korea initiated this unprovoked attack without prior Chinese approval. It is important to understand that this analysis does not discuss regime anarchy, political upheavals, or any other circumstance which would involve humanitarian crises in North Korea.
China today is not the burgeoning bastion of Maoism that entered the Korean War in 1950, nor is the political paradigm the same bipolar schism of interests that so divisively partitioned Korea after World War II. In 1950, on the eve of the Korean War, the People's Republic of China (PRC) was a mere one year old, insecure in both its geopolitical viability and its domestic sustainability-plunging forward on the fumes of Mao's charismatic leadership and the spirit of the communist revolution. It was an infant state which, like all nation-states, was primarily concerned with survival-survival in the face of the US Navy's 7th Fleet, which was protecting remnants of the Chinese Republic exiled to Taiwan; survival in the face of the capitalist forces quickly advancing to the Yalu River; survival in the face of a region alarmingly antagonistic to the Communist Party and cornered by forces creeping in from Japan and the Korean peninsula (and with a Soviet neighbor that was not exactly trustworthy). A wide array of opinions exists on what ultimately pushed China into the Korean War.
Here we'll explore some of the preeminent arguments, to include Mao's personal proclivities toward military romanticism, 
3
Scholars may disagree on what finally pushed Mao into the Korean War, but they can agree that he was the primary arbiter of the final decision. 
4
5
6
Also integral to Mao's reasoning was the relatively new appearance of nuclear bombs on the international scene. Though Stalin and Mao both had an emerging understanding of the power of nuclear weapons to deter states from invading one another, the concept of deterrence was yet to become a codified foreign-policy concept. In 1950, the Soviet Union was a newcomer nuclear state, 
7
8
9
10
11
Stalin made the same assessment as Mao, which helps explain why the Soviet Union took such pains to both extricate itself from blame for the Korean War and to avoid explicitly aiding the North Koreans. The Korean War, which embroiled the United States in costly conflict, diverted US attention from the Soviet Union and provided an opportunity for Stalin to irrevocably divide the United States and China. It also allowed Stalin to divert Mao's attention from Taiwan and avoid Chinese requests for Soviet support to attack Chiang Kai-shek's forces. Stalin knew Mao's forces had no possibility of success if the United States placed its unequivocal support behind Chiang's forces. These motivators explain a significant school of thought, which attempts to explain Mao's final decision to enter the Korean War as a response to extreme pressure from a wily Stalin. 
12
13
14
What may have been the greatest determinant into China's entry into the Korean War was a situation a few thousand miles south in Taiwan. Chiang Kai-shek's forces were seriously impeding the PRC's recognized entrance as an international player. In truth, Mao's primary goal in 1950 was not to support his communist brethren in North Korea but to finally quell his domestic enemies and cement his control of the entire Chinese territories. 
15
16
17
18
19
20
We Chinese people are against the American imperialists because they are against us. They have openly become the arch enemy of the People's Republic of China by supporting the people's enemy, the Chiang Kai-shek clique, by sending a huge fleet to prevent the liberation of the Chinese territory of Taiwan, by repeated air intrusions and strafing and bombing of the Chinese people, by refusing new China a seat in the UN, through intrigues with their satellite nations, by rearing up a fascist power in Japan, and by rearming Japan for the purpose of expanding aggressive war. Is it not just for us to support our friend and neighbor against our enemy? 
21
opportunistic American attack into northeast China. 
22
Is China willing to risk nuclear war with the United States over North Korea? More than likely . . . no. However, a more difficult question may be whether China is willing to risk limited war with the United States over North Korea.
First and foremost, for China to be willing to risk a limited war with the United States, China must be sure the United States would not use its nuclear arsenal. Keir Lieber and Daryl Press argue in their article, "The Nukes We Need," that for the concept of mutually assured destruction (MAD) to work, both parties must be able to credibly support their threat of nuclear force. 
23
24
US-controlled Pacific interests but even the mainland United States (albeit in a limited manner).
We have established the possibility that the Chinese could assess the United States to be nuclearly unwilling. With this foundation, it is important to evaluate the possible circumstances which could lead China to determine that even the repercussions of a limited, conventional war would outweigh the international, domestic, and economic repercussions of abetting the North Koreans in an attack against the South. In homage to East meets West, it is time to introduce Clausewitz to the analysis. It is Clausewitz's argument that "the great uncertainty of all data in war is a peculiar difficulty, because all action must, to a certain extent, be planned in a mere twilight, which in addition not infrequently-like the effect of a fog or moonshine-gives to things exaggerated dimensions and unnatural appearance." 
25
26
Another volatile element in the Northeast Asian security dynamic is the relationship between China and Japan. North Korea's presence as the "bad guy" in Northeast Asia is relatively short in the history of the region. The historical enemy of all countries-from China to South Korea-has in fact been Japan. This enduring legacy of Japan as the colonizer is still salient in Chinese memories. Only five years ago, Chinese citizens took to the street in a mass protest against Japanese history books. Visits to the Yasakuni Shrine by Japanese officials still provide sizeable concern to Chinese and Korean diplomats. And to this day, China and Japan refuse to accept the sovereignty of oil-rich islands located between the two nations. Susan Shirk captures this antipathy in her book Fragile Superpower Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 57 ]   when she quotes a Chinese Internet user as saying, "I would like to donate one month's salary if our army fought against Taiwan. I would like to donate one year's salary if our army fought against America. I would like to donate my life if our army fought against Japan." 27 This animosity is recognized and exploited by the North Koreans, who have spent the last two years of Six Party Talks working to drive a wedge between the Japanese and the region, reminding the region of Japan's imperial past while steadily pushing Japan out of relevance in regional negotiations. A 23 October 2008 article in KCNA (North Korea's official news agency) masterfully articulated North Korea's strategy vis-à-vis Japan, declaring, What Japan is now claiming under the pretext of "nuclear verification" glaringly reveals its present regime's stance toward the DPRK . . . Japan's negative attitude is a deliberate move to hamstring the implementation of the denuclearization of the peninsula . . . Japan can hardly be considered as a party to the six-party talks both in the light of what it has done at the talks so far and the insincere stance taken by it toward the fulfillment of its commitments under the agreement reached at the talks. The countries concerned still remember the hurdles laid by Japan to create complexities in the way of the talks. They are, therefore, cautious about the present Japanese government bringing to light its sinister intention, displeased with the current development. Japan now deserves cool treatment for opposing the new "verification proposal" of the DPRK under the pretext of the "alliance." 
28
A full discussion about China's range of options in a Korean conflict cannot be concluded without discussing Taiwan. However loathe the United States is to link actions on the Korean peninsula with Taiwan, it is historically impossible to completely separate the two issues. As mentioned previously, China's attempts to initially reunify Taiwan with the
PRC were stymied by the Korean War. Would it be possible for China to capitalize on the US focus on Korea to launch a simultaneous amphibious operation to conquer Taiwan? The answer to that question lies in the answer to two additional questions: (1) Does China believe that it could conquer Taiwan with the United States tied up in Korea? and (2) Does China believe that it is worth an offensive attack to reunify Taiwan?
As to the first question, China hosts an impressive array of short-range ballistic missiles and increasingly accurate medium-range ballistic missiles that reside uncomfortably close, across the Taiwan Straits. 
29
30
This brings us to the second question. Does China believe it is worth launching an offensive attack against Taiwan? I find this question to be very difficult for Western (read American) analysts to comprehend. We simply do not have the equivalent to Taiwan in our cultural vernacular. It is hard for us to understand what domestic issue would be so salient it would be worth being declared an international pariah. In many ways, much of the same cost-benefit analysis computed for a Korean scenario would go into analysis of a Taiwan attack. How much would this hurt the Chinese economy? How much would it hinder China's ability to operate in the international community? How much domestic pressure would be put on China to use the Korean conflict to reunify Taiwan? 
31
Today China is more secure in its geopolitical position and domestic survivability than the China of 1950. Though still driven by state survival, China is less concerned with the preservation of communism and more focused on stability to its burgeoning economy and global presence. Despite reluctance to codify its pragmatic focus into clear-cut foreign policy statements, China is no longer preoccupied with the proliferation of "isms" 
32
Perhaps most noticeably, China of 2010 has no Mao. Instead, it has developed a bureaucratic system of governance with individuals who hold key positions but no one leader so charismatic as to control all national objectives. As a result, the possibility of personality-driven decision making is significantly decreased. The need to generate factions of consensus mitigates much of the romanticism endemic in Mao's military choices. Therefore, by removing Mao from the equation, the decision to intervene in a Korean conflict becomes a much more transparent equation of utilities, with a rational balance of domestic and international objectives. Domestically, China is preoccupied with the impact that a Korean conflict might have to its economic and demographic stability. Northeastern China boasts several major industries-including steel, automobile production, and petroleum refining. Its three provinces-Liaoning, Jilin, and Heilongjiang-generate over $413 billion in gross domestic product 
33
34
Add to the Chinese calculus the variable of over 1.5 million ethnic Koreans residing in the northeast region of China, and it leads to a very Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 60 ]   serious Chinese concern. Not only would a large influx of North Korean refugees potentially provide a destabilizing demographic, but there is also the obvious cost of wartime refugee flows of hundreds of thousands to millions of starving North Koreans. The Chinese, who have been loath to provide for North Korean refugees in the past, will be assailed with a massive requirement to provide food, water, medical supplies, and basic housing. Chinese military forces in the region will have to police the porous border, establish rule of law in refugee camps, and mitigate the amount of international involvement in the humanitarian crisis. The Chinese have been preparing for this scenario since the 2006 North Korean nuclear test. Then, reports flooded newspapers worldwide of Chinese fence construction along the Sino-Korean border, implying containment, not involvement. 
35
The effects to the Chinese border area would not be limited to refugee crises or errant bombs. On an environmental level, China could also suffer the repercussion of nuclear, chemical, or biological fallout from North Korea. While these events could occur regardless of Chinese military involvement, the probability they would occur is more likely in a drawn-out guerilla warfare scenario than a Persian Gulf-style US advance through North Korea, partly because a quickly dominated North Korea would have less access to weapons of mass destruction. According to the International Crisis Group and International Institute for Strategic Studies, North Korea may have stockpiled 2,500-5,000 tons of chemical agents 
36
37
Internationally, China is a major nuclear player, interested in asserting regional dominance while also parlaying to international norms in many ways dictated by the United States. The concept of nuclear deterrence is a linchpin in China's strategic defense and would influence its actions in any Korean conflict. Today, China understands the very real possibility of inciting a nuclear war if it were to pit itself against the United States. It also understands its relative inability to compete with the United States in terms of quantity and survivability of intercontinental nuclear strike platforms. Instead, it retains a limited deterrent capability designed to provide regional coverage and prevent territorial aggression. As Lt Gen Li Jijun, vice president of the PLA's Academy of Military Science, said in a 1997 speech, "China's strategy is completely defensive, focused only on deterring." 
38
39
40
41
42
These impressive economic statistics belie the overall repercussions of Chinese involvement in a second Korean War. China's ability to operate in and with multinational institutions like the World Trade Organization is contingent on international support. US displeasure over Chinese action vis-à-vis a Korean conflict would likely translate to blackballing of Chinese goods from major transnational trade agreements and could lead to allied nation sanctions. Furthermore, the impressive US blue water Navy could pose a significant threat to China's tanker-delivered supply of oil-an Achilles' heel to any oil-dependent nation.
Despite the reasons why China will not likely enter a Korean conflict, there are some very concrete actions the United States can take to mitigate reasons why it may. First and foremost, the United States must establish a clear nuclear policy vis-à-vis Chinese involvement. For instance, the United States could, given certain Chinese provocations, respond with a tactical nuclear strike against key infrastructure. Secondly, the United States must demonstrate its capability to pursue conventional deterrents. The 2010 Nuclear Posture Review partially addresses this issue with its explicit promise to strengthen conventional capabilities, to include ballisticmissile defense. 
43
Perhaps the most pragmatic and achievable action that could reduce the chance of Chinese intervention into a Korean conflict would be to establish clear rules of engagement with the Chinese government. This concept, while tactically feasible, is revolutionary in regards to US-Chinese interactions. The US government would have to make the theoretical leap that the Chinese are not default enemies and would find it mutually beneficial to avoid war with the United States. After making this theoretical leap and with the eruption of conflict on the peninsula, the United States would begin coordinating with the Chinese to establish rules of engagement and guidelines to the conflict. Below are some initial recommendations:
1. Establish air, sea, and land buffer zones (or alternately conflict limit lines), beyond which US and Chinese forces will not operate. South Korean forces will be allowed to operate within the unified Korean territory, to include national air and sea boundaries.
2. Assign governance responsibility for refugees along Sino-Korean borders, to include nongovernment organization (NGO) and nationstate roles, responsibilities, and reporting authorities.
3. Delineate procedures through which countries may report violations of rules of engagement.
4. Assign repercussions for violations of the agreed upon rules of engagement.
It is highly unlikely China will want to be perceived either as colluding against the North Koreans or likewise as an ally in efforts against US and South Korean forces. Despite these Chinese concerns, the rules of engagement could still be effective as a secret agreement. Accordingly, the rules of engagement would be followed by all US and allied forces unless the Chinese were found to be supporting the North Koreans.
Because the idea of coordinating rules of warfare with China is a new concept, it would be irresponsible to discuss these rules of engagement without touching on China's possible reaction to proposed rules of engagement. First and foremost, China will likely note the advantage of their position and use that advantage to request information about US and allied countries' tactical operations, to include locations and times of major operations and units tasked in the conflict. As counterintuitive as it might at first seem, divulging a level of information to the Chinese could help establish a rapport without giving the Chinese much more than what Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 64 ]   they would be able to ascertain with their own intelligence resources. Furthermore, information also must be divulged with preconditions. If evidence were to be found of China leaking important tactical information to the North Koreans, the Chinese would lose their privilege to further information (this would be included in the rules of engagement).
As mentioned earlier there is a danger of schisms of regional interests should Japan be pulled into the war. To avoid this regional bifurcation, the United States must first assure Japan of its willingness and ability to defend Japan against North Korean actions. This will be a difficult argument if North Korea has already successfully attacked Japan with ballistic missiles. It will be the job of the United States to clearly explain to Japan its lack of resources or constitutional viability to prosecute targets outside of their international boundaries. Japan must be convinced the use of its air and naval forces is more beneficial in defense of the homeland, in particular, filling the gaps of combat air patrols and naval defenses previously manned by US forces and possibly forward deployed to the Korean peninsula. Japan must also be convinced to limit or refrain from any military actions near islands disputed with the Chinese or around the southern islands, which abut Chinese-claimed economic exclusion zones. If possible, the United States will need to demarcate Japanese and Chinese defense zones. It is important Japan not be included as a component of US allied forces nor be seen as part of the forces engaged in conflict with North Korea. It is highly unlikely China would be willing to sign any statement that included Japan as a member of the US alliance against North Korea.
Rhetorically, the United States must convince the Japanese that hawkish statements, while appealing domestically, could serve as a springboard for Chinese involvement. The Japanese must avoid any references to their history and instead focus their statements on the importance of regional stability and perseverance of the economic dependence of Northeast Asia. In this particular situation, Japan would profit from demurring to the United States, which is historically seen as less of a threat in the region than Japan. 
44
The Way Ahead: Solving the Problem of Regional Imbalance
For years, scholars have asserted that China's need for a North Korean buffer state would lead the PRC to intervene militarily on North Korea's behalf in any future Korean conflict. Though this argument may have lost much of its strength after the demise of the Cold War and the souring of relations between North Korea and China since 2006, it is essential that we address China's fundamental balance of power concerns. Reassuring the Chinese of their continued importance in the region will be pivotal in convincing China's government not to support the North Korean war efforts. Fundamentally, the United States and China have the same interests in Korea-stability on the Korean peninsula. Stability can be achieved by creating a process of reunification, which espouses incremental government change, links North Korean unification with US withdrawal from Korea, and focuses on the creation of a Korean state independent from the United States. China could be convinced that the dissolution of North Korea would not weaken China's influence within Northeast Asia and could at the same time ensure a stable Korean state on Chinese borders.
The change could prove advantageous for decoupling the Taiwan situation from the Korean peninsula. By demonstrating the will to use force, openness in military planning, and gracious collaboration in victory, the United States would demonstrate its inherent trust in China to participate in the region as a stabilizer. It would also highlight the continued US commitment to nuclear and conventional deterrence for its allies. In a game of multiple iterations, a Korean conflict could help the United States and China more advantageously perceive utility and value of each nation's interests and actions in Asia. By building trust between the two players in the Asian region, the probability of provoking conflict becomes less likely. Perversely, if executed properly, a conflict on the Korean peninsula could serve as a stabilizing event in the Pacific region. [ 68 ]
Daryl Morini is an honors student in international relations at the University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. His thesis analyzes the role of NATO in the Russo-Georgian War of August 2008. He has presented at Australian and regional conferences and intends to pursue a PhD in preventive diplomacy and international negotiation. This article is dedicated to Robert and Marguerite Noëllat for their endless support and encouragement.
A Diplomatic Surge in Afghanistan, 2011-14
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) member states and their coalition partners-encompassing some 40 democracies-are not the only players with high stakes in the current war for Afghanistan. Influential players such as Russia, Pakistan, Iran, India, and China all have legitimate interests. 
1
The strife in Afghanistan is variously conceived as an Afghan civil war, an inter-Pashtun ethnic conflict, or an Islamist upheaval. No consensus presently exists on the nature of the conflict in Afghanistan, neither in academic literature nor within NATO-ISAF headquarters. 
2
whose security needs must be met by more complex instruments than the application of military power alone-including reconstruction and development assistance, governance reform, and diplomatic engagement. The Obama administration's call for "a wide-ranging diplomatic strategy to build support for our efforts," which conceives of the Afghan-Pakistani (AFPAK) region not only as a battlefield, but also as a "theater for diplomacy," is a step in the right direction. 
3
This article first explores the pivotal role of interventionism by great powers in perpetuating political violence in Afghanistan during the Soviet-Afghan war (1979-89) and the Afghan civil war of the 1990s. Next, it seeks to convey a detailed picture of the complex web of international relationships and great-power interests currently affecting the coalition's war effort in Afghanistan. Third, it supports the case that Afghanistan's international context is as important as military facts on the ground in providing long-term security for the Afghan state and people. I argue that a more energetic "diplomatic surge" should be a fundamental part of an eventual American and NATO-ISAF military drawdown. If Western troopproviding states are unable or unwilling to assist the Afghan state in the diplomatic realm-once international soldiers and journalists begin returning home-the Afghanis could face the troubling prospect of repeating the tragic historical precedent set by the Soviet Union. Finally, I offer practical policy recommendations on what Western powers and regional partners can do to help Afghanistan reach a lasting political settlement.
From Colonial to Civil Wars At this early stage, we must confront a predictable hurdle. There is an unfortunately widespread historical observation-turned-cliché-dubbed "the mother of all clichés" by Christian Caryl-that all foreign interventions in Afghanistan have been doomed from the start. 
4
5
Since its imperial heyday, Russia has had profound security interests in Central Asia. It was from fear of Russian expansionary designs on its treasured imperial crown jewel-British India-that the United Kingdom ventured into Afghanistan in the first place. 
6
7
8
9
Washington spearheaded the international movement to fund, equip, and train the Afghan Mujahedeen. This was an opportunity "of giving the USSR its Vietnam War," in the words of Zbigniew Brzezinski, to demoralize and bleed the Red Army dry. 
10
11
12
13
14
The addition of pronounced security interests from Europe and the United States since the start of the current intervention in October 2001 only complicated what was already an internationalized civil war in Afghanistan. There is significant evidence to suggest that the US government was planning to dislodge the Taliban from Kabul, by force if necessary, even prior to 9/11. Indeed, Pres. George W. Bush's National Security Council (NSC) had already agreed, one day before the 11 September 2001 attacks, to a program of covertly overthrowing the Taliban if necessary. 
15
16
17
Today, a major regional player which the US-led coalition has little choice but to rely on is the Russian Federation. The direct threat to Russian security posed by an unstable Afghanistan did not end in 1989 but remained to plague the Russian Federation in its fledgling days. A simple formula terrified Pres. Boris Yeltsin and his entourage. Islamic extremism
plus Chechnya, they feared, would result in Muslim separatism and the ultimate breakup of the federation. Although exaggerated by xenophobic nationalists, these fears did have foundations in reality, with both Islamic foreign fighters and finance drifting to Russia's unstable southern borders during the 1990s. This two-pronged attack originated in Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia. 
18
19
By 1999, the official Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation pinpointed interference in Russia's domestic affairs, most notably in Chechnya, by Taliban and other Islamic supporters as "one of the main external threats to Russian security." 
20
21
22
23
[ 73 ] W. Bush in the wake of 9/11. As the first head of state to contact the American president, Putin aligned himself with Bush in the so-called war on terror. In exchange, US criticism toward Russia's treatment of its Chechen separatists became deafeningly silent. 
24
25
26
27
28
29
over 20 years ago, experienced the traumatic deaths of 15,000 Soviet soldiers. 
30
31
For the foreseeable future, Russian cooperation will hinge upon its own strategic considerations-balancing the rhetoric of Russia's derzhavnost' (great-power status) with its Realpolitik interests in Afghanistan. However, judging by the current level of cooperation, we can expect Russia to uphold its quiet but extensive commitment to the coalition's efforts in Afghanistan. Short of a profoundly destabilizing event in NATO-Russian relations, Moscow's interests will prevail over its rhetoric. Admittedly, such an event did occur in August 2008, when the Russo-Georgian war led to NATO freezing its military and diplomatic relations with Russia. The thaw occurred a year later, in June 2009, when both realized the imperiousness of working together in Afghanistan. The message, as NATO secretary-general Jaap de Hoop Scheffer put it, was that "Russia is necessary in the solution for many, many conflicts we see around us unfortunately in this world." 
32
33
34
35
36
37
Here a perplexing question arises. What impeded Pakistan from tackling its own Taliban stronghold of South Waziristan and the other Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) for so long? 
38
39
40
Problematically for coalition forces, the threat of the Indian enemy has become an institutionalized reality, so much so that Pakistani officials have for decades viewed Afghanistan as "something like the vacant lot behind their house." 
41
42
The Pakistani ISI's "tentacles" are suspected to stretch deep into neighboring Afghanistan to this day, but the ISI is infuriated by such suggestions. Pakistan would "have the most to lose from a Taliban victory in Kabul," they counterargue, "because it would inevitably strengthen the Taliban in Pakistan." 
43
44
45
In the zero-sum game of South Asian geostrategy, what is good for Islamabad must be bad for New Delhi. Thus, India has historically Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 77 ]   attempted to deny Pakistan the strategic depth it sought in Afghanistan. According to Kenneth Katzman, "Pakistan is wary that any Afghan government might fall under the influence of India, which Pakistan says is using its diplomatic facilities in Afghanistan to train and recruit anti-Pakistan agents." 
46
9
47
48
The vicious cycle driving India-Pakistan tensions and mistrust has also resulted in Afghanistan becoming caught in the crossfire. It is no exaggeration to claim that Afghanistan's chronic internal crises since 1989 have been fanned by this regional power competition. "Afghanistan," in the words of Robert Kaplan, "has been a prize that Pakistan and India have fought over directly and indirectly for decades." 
49
50
51
Iran is an equally important player in an eventual region-wide Afghan peace agreement. Traditionally, prerevolutionary Iran had enjoyed cordial relations with both Afghanistan and Pakistan. In fact, during the 1970s the Shah's Iran was something of a regional anti-Soviet bulwark and a pro-United States "regional gendarme." 
52
53
There was a prominent ethno-sectarian element to the dispute. Pakistan's Pashtun population, "well-represented in the army and the bureaucracy," felt empathy for the plight of their ethnic neighbors across the Durand Line. 
54
55
56
57
Taliban-with suspected Pakistani backing-murdered Iranian diplomats and journalists in Mazar-i-Sharif. 
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
Finally, the People's Republic of China (PRC) is the last major actor whose increased political involvement would benefit Afghanistan's security. China has historically enjoyed close relations with Pakistan, and hence, antagonistic ones with India. 
65
66
67
Beijing's hedging strategy has resulted in the PRC being, and planning on remaining, "well-positioned to resume its traditional policy of dealing with whichever government is in Kabul." 
68
Beijing does possess vital strategic interests in the region, the most important being Central Asian political stability for its resource security. The PRC follows a strategy of diversifying its energy imports away from the unstable Persian Gulf states, whose resources must travel over the sea lanes of the Indian and Pacific Oceans at high risk of naval interdiction by unfriendly powers. 
69
70
71
72
So what do Tehran, New Delhi, and Beijing have in common? Quite simply, they have a common enemy in the Taliban. But all three states are also wary, to varying degrees, of seeing an indefinite US presence in Central Asia. Hence, what has emerged in recent years is an Iran-India-China axis of sorts, which effectively triangulates the Taliban and confines them to the AFPAK region. 
73
74
The Afghan problem, it seems, almost inevitably comes back to the allimportant role of Pakistan. Because of its porous border with Afghanistan, Pakistan is frustrating coalition efforts to pursue the Taliban and al-Qaeda. Pakistan, in its mutual competition with India, is fueling regional insecurity. Finally, through its asymmetrical disputes with Iran, 
75
76
77
Islamabad also faces more practical problems caused by the continuing conflict in Afghanistan, such as a renewed influx of Afghan refugees. Although close to 2 million have returned from Pakistani camps since 2002, some 300,000 or so remain across the border. Iran faces a similar problem, with up to 1.2 million Afghans living in squalid conditions within its jurisdiction. 
78
79
There is no linear road to success in Afghanistan, but there is nothing inherently "unwinnable" about the Afghan war at the strategic level either. History has not doomed the intervention, but policy choices since 2001-
such as focusing on Iraq at the expense of Afghanistan-have certainly not helped. 
80
81
82
83
84
As of January 2010, the United States seemed to have come around to the idea of a diplomatic surge, lobbying Afghanistan's closest and regional neighbors for support. 
85
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 83 ]   Moscow would struggle trying to sell a second Russian-Afghan war to the public, even if it were portrayed as necessary to defend the security of the Russian Federation. 
86
87
88
Five principal policy recommendations emerge from this discussion. The most immediate US and NATO-ISAF diplomatic goal should be to show recognition where it is due but punish negative behavior where necessary. This would positively encourage international contributions to Afghanistan's security, while assuring these partner states that their interests are being taken into account. For Russia, as an example, this means acting on Moscow's concerns about the Afghan poppy trade. Russian officials have been suggesting for several years that NATO implement an "antidrug security belt" around Afghanistan. 
89
90
91
Concerning Pakistan, coalition governments must encourage Islamabad's potential mediation efforts between the Afghan government and certain reconcilable Taliban elements. 
92
93
94
The other side of the equation is punishing destructive meddling, by both Pakistan and Iran. The former, enticed by American aid, can be threatened with the drying up of economic and technology transfers from
the United States. Should that fail, there is a Plan B, to which we will return. Meanwhile Iran, which has once again been sanctioned by the UN Security Council, may or may not be reconsidering its Janus-faced strategy. On the one hand, Iran's Afghan policy is generally benign, consisting of investing in Afghanistan and drawing the predominantly Shiite Hazaras of western Afghanistan closer to the Iranian economic and political orbit. 
95
96
97
98
99
101
Russia could conceivably pressure Iran to recognize that cooperation, rather than strategic competition, is the best way forward in Afghanistan. President Ahmadinejad was incensed by the Russian participation in the most recent UN sanctions against Tehran's nuclear enrichment program, even threatening one of his few international allies that Moscow could Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 86 ]   soon be joining the long list of Tehran's "historic enemies." 102 Although Moscow is known to tread lightly in offending its Iranian partners, it could feasibly let it be known that threatening Russian (and Chinese) interests in Afghanistan will have consequences-such as losing any chances of purchasing the Russian S-300 defensive missile system, as well as becoming estranged from its great-power sponsors in the Security Council. The current climate in NATO-Russia relations is looking promising, with Russia having strongly reaffirmed the alignment of shared interests in Afghanistan. 
103
104
105
Instead, Russia, Iran, Pakistan, India, China, and the United States should agree to create an ad hoc, consultative mechanism among themselves, plus the Afghan government and moderate antigovernment factions, which could help the Afghans bargain with international arbitration. An idea worth exploring would be the addition of one principal mediating state, preferably a Muslim country with presumed neutrality, such as Malaysia. 
106
tive tradition of supporting competing Afghan proxies on the battlefield. If the interested powers chose to re-embark upon the 1990s policy of freefor-all alliances-exemplified by India reaching out to Iran and Pakistan being supported by China and Saudi Arabia-then this would signal dire news for coalition governments, not to mention for most Afghans. If India, Pakistan, and Iran only competed in a positive-sum game to rebuild Afghanistan's state and public infrastructure, then life would become more joyous, as Stalin enjoyed saying. But that is not the case. A revamped "scramble for Afghanistan" would only make "de facto partition and renewed civil war" an increasingly likely prospect. 
107
A third recommendation toward a regional diplomatic strategy, in the short-to-medium term, is to facilitate a rapprochement between NATO and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). Traditionally, NATO had refused to recognize and establish equal relations with the SCO and the CSTO out of fear of recognizing a de facto Russo-Chinese sphere of influence in Eurasia. As of 2010, however, there were some signals that NATO was considering formalizing links with these two security organizations in its New Strategic Concept. 
108
109
There exists a particularly specious argument that NATO and the United States should jealously guard their privileged roles in Afghanistan, for fear of Kabul drifting into the Russo-Chinese sphere of influence, 110 but this specter is a straw man. Indeed, as Dmitri Trenin and Alexei
Malashenko point out, China and Russia follow two different and often competing positions in Afghanistan, precluding a monolithic SCO bloc policy. 
111
112
113
114
115
117
118
One may object, however, that the likelihood of such positive-sum multilateral involvement in Afghanistan coming so seamlessly to fruition is remote at best. Will not the interests of one or more parties negatively impact upon those of other players? They most likely will. Iran may continue to arm the Taliban. India and Pakistan may prove irreconcilable in pursuing what, objectively, appears to be common interests. An increased Russian military presence in the states surrounding Afghanistan, even for an allegedly "anti-drug security belt," may arouse American, Central Asian, and perhaps even Chinese suspicions of Moscow's alternative motives. Additionally, and despite Western support for Islamabad during the July 2010 floods, increasing NATO-ISAF pressure on Pakistan may encourage that government to perceive itself as "constrained to consider response options." 
120
This matrix presents the key interests and worst-case scenarios of each of the main foreign powers involved in Afghanistan. The fourth column suggests what appears to be-at least on paper-the lowest-common denominator points of consensus, from which a multilateral diplomatic surge could be fashioned. Finally, the fifth recommendation concerns the longer-term objective of assisting Kabul in integrating into its regional system of interstate relations. Afghanistan itself is slowly but surely rising as a regional player. The Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs articulates a vision of a strengthened Afghanistan acting as a bridge between Islam and the West and a model of "Cooperation among Civilizations." 122 Such an outcome is obviously far removed for the time being, but regional peace can only be assured when Afghanistan does become such a metaphorical bridge between powerful neighbors rather than their mutual doormat. How to help Kabul achieve that aim? Most importantly, just as in the military sphere, a diplomatic surge must inevitably end with a handover to the Afghan government when it is ready and able to take the lead role in its own affairs. At the moment, 2014 seems like the most likely date for the endgame of NATO-ISAF's direct military assistance to the government of Afghanistan. 
123
In the near future, however, the foreign intervention in Afghanistan will come to an end. When it does, Washington must let the Afghan state pursue its own foreign policy. The worst which any US president could do in the postconflict stage of the Afghanistan mission would be to attempt to maintain a client-patron relationship à la South Vietnam. If it has not already done so, Washington should discontinue the habit of telephoning Kabul to dictate to the Afghan president what to do or not to do. 
124
The last point brings us full circle. Only with internal stability and security will Afghanistan emerge as a unified and respectable player in regional and world politics. International military assistance will be necessary to prevent a repetition of the Soviet withdrawal, paving the way to a full-fledged civil war. The dilemma facing NATO-ISAF is that a premature disengagement without a clear political-diplomatic solution to the Afghan conflict would risk repeating the Soviet mistake and spark a renewed great-power melee over Afghanistan. 
125
126
Diplomacy is stereotypically viewed as the domain of peaceniks and pacifists. In fact, diplomacy may be more accurately, if paradoxically, defined in Clausewitzian terms as the extension of war by other means. 
127
128
129
130
The attempts under the Obama administration to increase the civilian presence in the international reconstruction and governance efforts in Afghanistan 132 should only be building blocks toward a stronger role for diplomacy in bringing about a favorable outcome to the war. Today's uncertainty and national debates in coalition countries about whether to stay the course in Afghanistan or "suddenly turn off the lights and let the door close behind us," 133 are at least partly due to this lack of strategic vision. 
134
bring a decisive military victory to NATO-ISAF on the ground. A genuine and stable Afghan political reconciliation against the backdrop of a phased withdrawal of troops, from mid 2011 to approximately 2014, will be much more likely with diplomatic backing and participation of Afghanistan's powerful neighbors. 7. The Russian ports in the Black Sea are dependent on Turkey's goodwill, and those in the Baltic and northern Pacific Oceans are not ice free all year round. J. Bruce Amstutz, Afghanistan: The First Five Years of Russian Occupation (Washington: National Defense University, 1986), 3-5.
8. Ibid. 9. Scott McMichael, "The Soviet-Afghan War," in The Military History of the Soviet Union, eds. Robin Higham and Frederick W. Kagan (New York: Palgrave, 2002), 261.
10. Vincent Jauvert, "Oui, la CIA est entrée en Afghanistan avant les Russes," Le Nouvel Observateur (Paris), 15-21 January 1998. 11. To his great surprise, in 1992 Yeltsin was informed that Soviet-era "advisers" had remained behind in Kabul. Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin, The World Was Going Our Way: The KGB and the Battle for the Third World (New York: Basic Books, 2006), 419.
12. This figure includes combatants and civilians. One scholar, M. Hassan Kakar, has accused the occupiers of perpetrating what he termed "genocide" of the local population. The well-researched findings, especially on the Soviet mass killings of noncombatants, are convincing. Soldiers' accounts also detail the unofficial Red Army policy of taking no Afghan prisoners. Kakar, Afghanistan: The Soviet Invasion and the Afghan Response, 1979-1982  unfold on a daily basis. 
6
When a military service evaluates national security policy, weighing its options for cooperation or resistance, its organizational culture acts as a heuristic for informing judgment. Therefore, national security policies consonant with a service's long-standing organizational culture will likely generate cooperation, while a policy inconsistent with the culture's basic assumptions will set the conditions for resistance. Organizational culture constitutes an explanatory variable in shaping service preferences, which then inform the service's decision to cooperate or resist national policy.
To test these claims, this article disaggregates the unitary military actor and assesses cultural factors for an individual service-in this case, the US Air Force. 
7
The classic literature on civil-military relations focuses largely on the essential democratic question of how civilians should control their "armed servants." 8 Samuel Huntington, in his seminal work The Soldier and the State, advises civilian leaders to practice "objective control" by granting wide autonomy to the military. 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
This article gives causal privilege to one of these independent variables-the preference gap-and hypothesizes that a wide divergence of national policy from Air Force culture will set the conditions for shirking, while its convergence will engender working. Although other variables clearly contribute to the working/shirking calculation, they assume sufficiently moderate values in the following cases to sanction a limited focus
on the preference gap and its cultural antecedents. What then is organizational culture, and how could its influence be so pervasive?
The literature teems with competing definitions of organizational culture, each a nuanced variation to a common theme. 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
To answer these questions, this section canvasses Air Force history in search of its artifacts, espoused beliefs, and basic assumptions forged in the fires of external adaptation and internal integration. It surveys historical
and cultural observations from outside works and categorizes the recurring themes into five general assumptions of Air Force culture. This array of assumptions is neither definitive nor universal-clearly, these assumptions do not saturate the thinking of every Airman. They do, however, serve as a useful starting point for a qualitative comparison between a particular policy and Air Force culture.
The most salient dimension of Air Force culture is the service's core connection to technology. As defense analyst Carl Builder frankly suggests, "The Air Force could be said to worship at the altar of technology." 
24
25
26
27
28
29
[ 106 ] operational constituency stunted their adoption into the service. 
30
The following basic assumption therefore informs Air Force organizational culture: The Air Force exists because of technology, and its ongoing superiority is sustained by the ascendance of its technology. While all aircraft have their place in the Air Force mission, the manned airplane is the first among equals.
The technological DNA of the Air Force informs another dimension of its culture: an abiding desire for politically unconstrained, uniquely decisive operations. Forged in the crucible of World War II and amplified by a desire for service autonomy, an unflinching commitment to strategic bombing dominated the early decades of the Air Force. 
31
32
33
34
35
36
the prospect of political constraints' that reduced the decisiveness of air power and surrendered initiative to the enemy." 
37
38
The Air Force's technological core predisposes a forward-looking orientation. As the youngest of the services, born from technological breakthrough, the Air Force "identifies the past with obsolescence, and for the air weapon, obsolescence equates to defeat." 
39
40
The machine-centric nature of the service, coupled with its disparate mission portfolio, tends to create pockets of sub-loyalties within the Air Force. Builder asserts the history of the Air Force is steeped in an individual passion for flying more than an abiding loyalty to the institution. He contends, "The Air Force identifies itself with flying and things that fly; the institution is secondary, it is a means to those things." 
41
42
43
can easily migrate to those machines rather than to the larger institution. Throughout the Air Force's history, "People found themselves in an institution because that was the place to do what they wanted to do-to fly airplanes, to work on rockets, to develop missiles, to learn an interesting or promising trade, etc." 
44
45
The Air Force's diverse mission portfolio contributes to divided loyalties within the service. Former chief of staff of the Air Force Merrill McPeak lamented, "People built loyalties around their commands-intense loyalties in fact-rather than loyalties to air and space power as a whole, to a broader, more comprehensive mission." 
46
47
As the youngest of the military services, and one that fought hard for its organizational autonomy, the Air Force is uniquely self-aware of its institutional legitimacy. During its infancy as an organization, the Air Force's adaptation to its external environment required fierce defense of its turf. Assigning roles and missions among the services spawned fractious debate and bureaucratic wrangling. 
48
49
50
[ 109 ]
This self-aware posture subjects the service to chronic bouts of identity crisis. In 1989, an unpublished white paper entitled "A View of the Air Force Today" circulated throughout the Air Force. Its authors articulated an array of concerns about the state of their service and ultimately concluded, "The Air Force seems to have lost its sense of identity and unique contribution." 
51
52
53
A suitable framework for analyzing case studies is thus in place. Agency theory provides the rational framework for considering interests and incentives, and posits a useful spectrum of working and shirking. Organizational theory reveals the power of culture to shape a military service's interests and preferences within that rational framework. Lastly, this section stipulates five basic assumptions of Air Force culture, suggested by its artifacts and espoused beliefs, and forged in its adaptation to the external environment. The following sections present three case studies of the Air Force between 1990 and 2008, testing the impact of its storied culture on its preferences for national security policy.
The way the war was planned, fought, and brought to a close often had more to do with the culture of the military services, their entrenched concept of warfare, and Powell's abiding philosophy of decisive force than it did with the Iraqis or the tangled politics of the Middle East.
The Generals' War (1995)
[ 110 ]
Politically and militarily, Operation Desert Storm appears to be a triumphant declaration of the right way to fight a war. From Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on 2 August 1990 through the cease-fire on 28 February 1991, the US military marshaled overwhelming force, leveraged superior technology, and achieved the limited political objective of ejecting Iraqi forces from Kuwait. Furthermore, the cooperation between civilian principals and military leaders during the Gulf War has been hailed as an exemplar of sound civil-military relations. A deeper look, however, reveals a far more textured array of civil-military confrontation and policy grappling. 
54
When President Bush convened his National Security Council (NSC) on 2 August 1990, the principals confronted an essential question: whether to draw a defensive line in the sand at the Saudi Arabian border or pursue an offensive strategy to evict Iraqi forces from Kuwait. 
55
56
57
58
59
60
the security and stability of the Persian Gulf region; and protect American lives. 
61
Cutting short a family vacation, Col John Warden, USAF, hastily returned to the Pentagon on 5 August 1990 and began transforming his own theory of war into actual plans. Warden was convinced that the existing planning architecture would not generate a truly strategic and offensive air campaign; he knew the existing US Air Forces Central Command (CENTAF) plan was inherently defensive and its staff would be preoccupied deploying forces to theater. 
62
63
64
Warden and his staff furiously churned out a conceptual plan-dubbed "Instant Thunder"-that bypassed the Iraqi forces massed in Kuwait and targeted centers of gravity in downtown Baghdad instead. Warden believed that after six to nine days of the blistering air campaign, Iraqi leaders would capitulate, thereby obviating the need for an American ground invasion. 
65
66
67
68
Schwarzkopf on 17 August 1990 and then flew to Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, to hand off the plan to CENTAF in-theater. 
69
In early October 1990, a CENTCOM briefing team deployed to Washington to update the principals on their current plans for war. The team presented first to Cheney, Powell, and the JCS on 10 October 1990, and Glosson's robust air campaign clearly impressed the assembled leaders. In fact, Powell had grave concerns that the air plan looked too good-so good, in fact, that the president and his advisors might attempt to follow it. 
70
71
72
74
What role did the Air Force's unique culture play in forging its isolated cooperation with Bush's preferred policy? This section evaluates the extent
to which the Air Force's cultural assumptions aligned with the civilian policy, thereby forming the basis for its unique position. 
75
76
77
Autonomously Decisive. The air campaign was largely a politics-free, kinetic operation that most Airmen viewed as the decisive lead instrument in a war-winning concerto. During the critical planning process, Airmen chose nearly all of the targets and enjoyed wide political latitude. During execution of the plan, the specter of Vietnam-style target selection loomed near, making President Bush and his security team careful to avoid excessive meddling. On the occasions when Air Force leaders did experience political constraints, they chafed under the fetters. 
78
Occupationally Loyal. The evolution of the air campaign followed the tribal affiliations of the Air Force's subcultures. The final product was a hybrid of strategic targeting in Baghdad and robust support to ground operations in the Kuwaiti Theater of Operations-a strategy that allowed Airmen from both the strategic and tactical domains to ply their chosen trade. While this aspect of Air Force organizational culture does not resound as clearly as the others, it nevertheless bears subtle reflection in the final Desert Storm policy.
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010
[ 114 ] Self-Aware. The robust air campaign provided the ideal venue to exorcise the demons of the Air Force identity crisis articulated the year prior. The offensive strategy of Air Force preeminence proved exceptionally attractive to Airmen wanting to assert their place in the military pantheon. By the time the cease-fire was signed, the visible carnage on the "highway of death" cured the plaguing notion that the Air Force had "lost its sense of identity and unique contribution." 
79
The preeminent features of Air Force organizational culture clearly saturate the offensive air campaign of the Gulf War. Through a fortuitous sequence of events, the Air Force as an institution had an opportunity to sculpt a campaign plan in its own image, soaked in its own cultural assumptions. The Air Force's resulting policy preference accorded closely with the civilians' desired offensive policy. This convergence of preferences minimized the preference gap and helped to explain the Air Force's unique posture of working amidst an otherwise resistant military structure.
This case reveals the value of disaggregating the military actor in studying American civil-military relations. Whereas existing treatments of the Gulf War highlight the positions taken by "the military," this analysis confirms that the military services are unique actors who may work at crosspurposes with each other in creating policy. Rooted in their unique histories, the military services have distinct and powerful organizational cultures that inform their appraisal of the national interest. By comparing a proposed national policy with the cultural assumptions of an individual service, policymakers can anticipate unique cooperation or resistance from the military services. In the case of the Gulf War, the civilians' preferred policy correlated squarely with the cultural assumptions of the Air Force, creating an island of cooperation in a sea of resistance.
As 1998 winds to a close, few can claim to have predicted in 1991 that overwhelming victory would lead to such tattered laurels. devolved into a protracted cat-and-mouse skirmish with Saddam Hussein. Having proved its ability to purchase political results at low cost, the Air Force became the policy instrument of choice in the years that followed. The employment of airpower, however, often ran counter to the cultural assumptions of the service, creating more frustration than satisfaction among Airmen.
Over the life span of Operations Northern and Southern Watch (ONW and OSW, respectively), the United States flew over 265,000 sorties in the south and more than 122,500 sorties in the northern tier of Iraq. 
80
81
82
83
84
85
While the Desert Storm case study shows the value of analyzing an individual service, this case demonstrates that working and shirking are not binary absolutes but rather opposite ends of a behavioral spectrum. Unlike Desert Storm, in which clear cultural alignment spawned unique working, the decade of armed overwatch reveals mixed cultural alignment and a blend of both working and shirking. Furthermore, this case highlights a grassroots civil-military phenomenon made possible by the protracted season of the containment policy. While several administrations of Air Force leaders did their best to make containment work, symptoms of shirking bubbled up from lower echelons of the force. Over time, resistance at the individual level swelled into service-wide resistance to a culturally distasteful policy.
The national policy of containing the Iraqi regime through airpower spanned more than 10 years and three presidential administrations. 
86
the ongoing value of the inescapable policy. "Our policy of containment," noted former congressman Lee Hamilton, "with all its limitations and frustrations, has achieved the vital interests of the United States." 
87
88
89
Technology-Centered. The long decade of flying constabulary missions over Iraq was not the technological showcase that ODS had been.
Nevertheless, the perpetual operations afforded ample opportunities to introduce new technologies like remotely piloted Predator drones. 
90
Autonomously Decisive. Airpower in ONW and OSW was clearly not used offensively, overwhelmingly, and with minimal political interference. Instead, by the very nature of protracted enforcement, the mission required inherently defensive operations with sporadic kinetic engagements designed not to overwhelm but to punish, hemmed in by extensive political sensitivities. The Air Force wants to be autonomously decisive, but the political environment hampered its autonomy, and enforcing the status quo meant there was nothing to decide. This defensive policy involved targets picked by Washington principals, punitive responses chaperoned by complex rules of engagement, and strike missions hamstrung by the political sensitivities of host nations like Turkey, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia.
In stark contrast to the autonomously decisive ethos of the Air Force, the policy grated at the service's core.
Future-Oriented. In his written testimony to the Senate Armed Services Committee in March 1999, Air Force chief of staff (CSAF) Gen Michael Ryan quoted Air Force legend Billy Mitchell: "In the development of air power, one has to look ahead and not backward and figure out what is going to happen, not too much what has happened." 
91
Occupationally Loyal. The frustrations of constant deployments to an unsatisfying mission spurred Airmen-namely pilots-to leave the service and ply their trade elsewhere. While many pilots chose to leave the service for perfectly honorable reasons, the overall exodus of skilled aviators suggests that loyalty to the Air Force institution and its mission was a contingent one.
In fact, leaving the service to fly for an airline was a culturally accepted choice. General Ryan reflected, "It's not their fault they are leaving. Maybe it's our fault"-suggesting the Air Force bore some responsibility for not providing a suitably satisfying means for national defense. 
92
93
94
Self-Aware. The decade of containment over the Iraqi desert did little to sustain the buoyed self-image restored by ODS. In October 2000, Thomas Ricks reported as follows: "Northern Watch is characteristic of U.S. military missions in the post-Cold War era: it is small-scale, open-
ended and largely ignored by the American people. Even though U.S. warplanes are routinely dropping bombs on a foreign country, it has not been an issue in the presidential election and has hardly been mentioned by the candidates." 
95
Overall, this assessment suggests the national policy of containment was largely-but not purely-at odds with the Air Force's cultural assumptions. While new technologies were introduced into the fight, they were not the shimmering high-tech prizes most central to the Air Force's identity. The no-fly-zone missions gave the Air Force the leading role in providing security for the nation, the region, and the world; but the missions were largely defensive, politically constrained, and reliant on nonheroic cruise missiles. The Air Force had primacy in the current fight, but the exhaustive commitment kept it from posturing for the next fight. Pilots were given ample opportunity to fly, but dissatisfaction with the benign and peripheral mission compelled them to fly elsewhere. Finally, despite the operational rigor of constant deployments and engagements with Iraqi air defenses, Airmen received little credit from the press and the nation at large. Given such varied consistency between the national policy and the Air Force's cultural assumptions, is the service more likely to work or shirk-or something in between?
Throughout the long decade, pockets of cooperation and resistance dappled the Air Force. Senior leaders worked hard to accommodate the demands of a constabulary mission, but individual Airmen deploying for the fifth or sixth time could no longer tolerate the policy's affront to their service culture. Individual resistance metastasized into a collective one, as the all-volunteer force volunteered to leave, altering the mission capability of the service. In this case, the protracted time period altered the conventional civil-military dynamic; instead of military leaders working or shirking a policy on behalf of their service, the reverse was true. The disparity between the policy and Air Force culture required an incubation period for individual symptoms of resistance to develop. When these symptoms reached critical mass across the force, the leaders had no choice but to follow and ask their civilian superiors for relief from the exhausting de-
mands. 
96
We are often asked: How many F-22s does the Air Force need? The answer, of course, depends on what we are being asked to do.
Washington Post, 13 April 2009   What a service buys-or wants to buy-clearly reflects its perceived role in the nation's present and future defense. Cultural assumptions dominate the acquisition process, exerting a gravitational pull toward core programs and repelling peripheral ones. Morton Halperin, an experienced scholar of bureaucracy, observes: "An organization struggles hardest for the capabilities which it views as necessary to the essence of the organization." 
97
After the procurement holiday of the 1990s, the Air Force sought to recapitalize its aging fleet, pursuing new tankers, helicopters, RPAs, and fighters. While every program endured scrutiny, no aircraft provoked more fractious debate than the F-22 Raptor, the Air Force's premier fighter. By 2008, these debates escalated to a fever pitch as the pursuit of more Raptors clashed violently with Secretary of Defense Robert Gates' stated priorities. Crusading to put the Pentagon on a wartime footing, Gates pushed the services to buy systems relevant to irregular war, which he viewed as the "most likely and lethal scenarios" for both the present and future US military. 
98
99
The F-22 and the Predator both provide an iconic comparison-and one that reveals the cultural roots of civil-military conflict. 
100
Air Force secretary Michael Wynne and chief of staff Gen T. Michael Moseley were ostensibly fired in June 2008 for their "lack of effective oversight" in the nuclear enterprise, 101 nearly all commentators agreed that the irreconcilable debate over the F-22 contributed in part to Gates' decision. 
102
If organizational culture is the essential variable in forming a service's preference, the five primary assumptions of Air Force culture should echo very differently between the F-22 and the Predator. This section explores the relative consonance between Air Force culture and the core ethos of these two major weapon systems.
Technology-Centered. Both the F-22 and the RPA manifest leadingedge technologies that are vital to the Air Force mission. Air Force culture, however, exhibits a preference for embodied platforms that permit warriorflyers to ride technology into battle. Consequently, the F-22 is the apotheosis of Air Force technological achievement: a single fighter pilot employing radar-evading stealth to gather intelligence, shoot down enemy fighters, and drop precision-guided bombs. An RPA, conversely, boasts an advanced array of technology, but its remotely piloted nature consigns it to second-tier status within the bureaucracy and culture.
Autonomously Decisive. Throughout its history, the Air Force has prized its independent contribution to the joint fight. Although many RPAs are now equipped with a kinetic strike capability, their core mission is to support the joint fight by providing real-time ISR. The F-22, however, sets the gold standard for autonomy and decisiveness. Beyond the obvious capabilities of air superiority and precision bombing, even the Raptor's capacity for ISR is autonomously decisive-as one Air Force colonel described: "There are environments [with] advanced defensive systems . . . where [only] the F-22 can go in and operate. And, by virtue of being there, it can collect information that's of great value to a lot of other users." 104 Future-Oriented. In many respects, the debate between the F-22 and the RPA was a proxy war in the meta-clash over the future of Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010
[ 121 ] American defense. Were the irregular wars in Iraq and Afghanistan harbingers or aberrations? Secretary Gates clearly believed that irregular conflict merited the nation's focus and funding, while Air Force leaders surveyed a different horizon. In testimony to Congress, General Moseley warned, "As a service chief, I'm worried about tomorrow. Beyond Iraq and Afghanistan, there are storm clouds on the horizon, troubling global trends that will bring friction, competition and conflict, and will no doubt involve potential adversaries who have gone to school on American airpower these last 17 years." 105 Within the larger debate about America's future, the F-22 embodied the Air Force's commitment to future preparedness.
Occupationally Loyal. From 1982 until 2008, fighter pilots led the Air Force as its chief of staff-Moseley was the ninth in a string of fighter generals. Strikingly, the F-22 is the culmination of plans originally drafted in 1981. 
106
107
Self-Aware. The Air Force's desire for preeminence, particularly in major combat, generally supersedes any satisfaction derived from supporting ground operations in land-centric irregular war. The F-22 and the RPA, therefore, represent contrasting poles of autonomy and support-the F-22 is inherently independent and decisive, while an RPA most often supports a ground commander. Furthermore, all four services are flooding the skies with a teeming armada of unmanned aircraft, but the F-22 comprises a unique capability for the Air Force. The Raptor thus enhances the Air Force's self-styled raison d'être, while RPAs confer no such distinction.
As an embodied technology, boasting a unique capacity for autonomously decisive operations and nurtured by 26 years of fighter-pilot patronage, the F-22 is a central icon of Air Force culture. The Air Force's impassioned pursuit of more Raptors, despite clear civilian guidance to the contrary, comes then as little surprise. 
The total number of F-22s the Air Force planned to buy was a moving target, tumbling down with the Berlin Wall from 750 to 648, then 442, 333, and 271. 
108
109
In October 2007, General Moseley and Secretary Wynne testified before the House Armed Services Committee, restating their firm requirement for 381 Raptors. 
111
112
114
117
Later, in March 2008, Secretary Gates started beating his own familiar drum-support for the current conflicts. Frustrated with the Pentagon's sluggish support for the present instead of the future, Gates lamented: "In ISR, it was business as usual. I really pushed the Army and the Air Forceparticularly the Air Force-and I intend to keep pushing because the unmet need is huge." 118 Despite the Air Force's efforts to meet the secretary's intent, Gates remained unimpressed: "I'm not satisfied that anybody in the Pentagon is doing enough to put us on a path where we have adequate resources for this." 
119
120
121
122
125
The ongoing conflict between Gates, Moseley, and Wynne climaxed the following month in a surprising subplot. After two high-profile mistakes in the Air Force's handling of nuclear weapons, Gates commissioned ADM Kirkland Donald to investigate the service and its nuclear protocols. 
127
128
Despite Gates' public assurances to the contrary, 
129
132
[ 125 ]
Gates' nomination to replace Moseley confirmed the cultural undercurrents of the civil-military conflict. Gen Norton Schwartz, a mobility and special operations pilot, replaced Moseley as chief of staff, ending the 26year reign of the fighter generals. The dour implications for the F-22 were inescapable; a chief of staff with a background in special operations, leading a chastened service, was unlikely to charge the same bull that had gored his predecessor. 
133
134
135
Agency theory posits the civil-military relationship as a strategic interaction of civilian principals and military agents responding to material incentives. In this case, the Air Force's deeply rooted culture privileged the F-22 Raptor, prompting tireless advocacy despite resistance from its civilian principals. The preference gap became sufficiently wide that the Air Force shirked the civilian policy and steadfastly trumpeted its ongoing requirement for 381 F-22s. 
136
[ 126 ] judges it." 137 Perhaps one day the country will wish it had 380 F-22s-but such speculation is largely irrelevant. In a democracy, the "civilians have a right to be wrong." 138
Civilian principals and military agents share a common interest in pursuing healthy civil-military relations. Grounded in democratic theory, each party benefits from knowing both what its role should be as well as the meaningful incentives that motivate the other. For civilian principals, this study exposes the illusion of the military as a unitary actor by highlighting the causal impact of organizational culture. In the aggregate, military service members certainly share common characteristics that differentiate them from the civilian public. In the gritty sphere of policy, however, military leaders from different services are not fungible assets. Admirals have reached their positions by thriving within the naval culture, while Air Force generals have grown up thinking like Airmen. The services have markedly distinct cultures that shape their perception of the national security environment.
Consequently, understanding the unique service cultures can improve the creation of viable policy, clarify communication, and help civilians anticipate where pockets of resistance or cooperation are likely to arise. Civilians face no danger of an imminent coup but should recognize that policies inconsistent with the cultural assumptions of a particular service will likely engender hedging or foot-dragging from that service. As this study has shown, the organizational culture of a military service plays a dominant role in shaping its interests and preferences, which in turn inform its calculation of working or shirking the civilian policy.
For military members, this study suggests the value of understanding the origin of one's preferences. Airmen advocating an air-centric position should understand their conclusions may be staked down in cultural assumptions, not anchored in absolute truth. By exposing the tacit assumptions of service culture, military members can recognize the service-colored glasses that naturally color their world. Airmen, Soldiers, Sailors, and Marines could then articulate a service position with rigor and humility, aware of the unproven assumptions animating their ideas. Humility of perspective is all the more essential in a civil-military exchange. While the military has a duty to provide expert counsel, a civilmilitary debate of principals and agents is inherently an "unequal dialogue." 
139
A common refrain of nuclear hawks is that other countries do not endorse Obama's vision of nuclear disarmament. This is simply not true. The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT)-which the five NWSs (China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States) ratified in 1970-mandates these countries to work toward eliminating nuclear weapons. Article VI states, "Each of the Parties to the Treaty undertakes to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament, and on a Treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control."
The debate for the past 40 years has centered on finding the practical steps necessary to achieve this vision. At the 2010 NPT review conference, the NWSs explicitly reconfirmed their continued commitment. 
1
"Modernization" is a bad word that fails to communicate effectively. Sometimes modernization means replacing aging equipment with a new but mostly equivalent version. This could more accurately be called maintenance of a country's nuclear arsenal. Sometimes it means developing qualitatively new capabilities. This could more accurately be called an upgrade. It usually serves only to obfuscate the real issues, because the term is used in different ways by different people. For this reason the New America Foundation's Dr. Jeffery Lewis dubbed modernization the "M-word" and recommends people stop using it altogether. 
2
Not all modernizations of nuclear weapons are equally threatening. Nuclear weapons have both a nuclear component, called the "physics package," and many nonnuclear components. Nonnuclear components can be part of the warhead, the delivery mechanism, or the launch mechanism (airplane or submarine). need for a test detonation, thus making them less controversial. The JASON group is a panel of independent nuclear experts commissioned by the Department of Energy to evaluate the necessity of the RRW. The report concluded that the RRW program was unneeded; the currently used Lifetime Extension Program (LEP) was sufficient to certify the US arsenal indefinitely. 
3
4
When nuclear hawks talk about other countries' modernizations, what they really mean is the deployment of new delivery systems. But the United States is modernizing its delivery systems in this way as well. For all countries, including the United States, this is the routine replacement of aging equipment and would more accurately be called maintaining nuclear arsenals. Calling these replacements modernization blurs the distinction between nuclear and nonnuclear components. Dr. Costanzo uses the ambiguous M-word to apply different standards to the US program and those of other NWSs. Using the same standard of modernizing only the delivery systems, we find similar programs in all countries.
Dr. Costanzo claims modest, routine improvements in foreign nucleararmed ballistic-missile submarine (SSBN) programs show that other NWSs are not as serious as the United States about reducing nuclear stockpiles. He fails to compare other countries' modernizations to those of the United States, which are much more extensive. The four other NWSs are simply replacing aging equipment that is already obsolete when compared to the US fleet. Take Russia as an example; unlike the United States, it does not constantly have an SSBN on patrol. Russians do not see a continuous at-sea deterrent as vital to their defense now that the Cold War has ended. 
5
6
The United States intends to maintain this technological lead. It has started the design process for the Ohio replacement SSBNs and has already awarded contracts to Electric Boat and Newport News Shipyard. 
7
8
The last point to make on the M-word is how the United States is modernizing its nuclear production complex. According to a White House fact sheet on the New START, "The President requested $7 billion in FY 2011 for stockpile sustainment and infrastructure investments, a nearly 10% increase over FY 2010. . . . The Administration intends to invest $80 billion in the next decade to sustain and modernize the nuclear weapons complex." 
9
10
11
12
13
[ 138 ] powers to conclude that the United States is serious about a long-term reduction in nuclear weapons while we are modernizing our infrastructure so dramatically.
Based on the fact the United States is modernizing as much if not more than other NWSs, military commanders should stop making the M-word comparison. The American emphasis on modernization undermines our antiproliferation efforts, which should form the heart of nuclear security policy in the twenty-first century.
To best infer a country's attitude toward nuclear disarmament, we must look at the international treaties it has ratified. The role of these treaties is unfortunately often overlooked. For a country to ratify a treaty means it has the overwhelming support of its leaders. A treaty "enters into force" and becomes legally binding only after all parties to the treaty have ratified it. 
14
The NPT entered into force in 1970 and is often called the "grand bargain." Article VI of the NPT mandates that NWSs continually work toward eliminating their nuclear weapons, and in exchange Article II prohibits nonnuclear weapons states (NNWS) from acquiring them. This is the only political tool that the United States has to stem the proliferation of nuclear weapons to rogue states such as Iran. If the NWSs do not continue to make progress on this track, then the NNWSs will conclude the treaty is meaningless, withdraw from the treaty, and build their own weapons. We have already seen this happen with North Korea, and many people fear this will happen soon with Iran. Many states (e.g., Iran) have refused the International Atomic Energy Agency's (IAEA) Additional Protocol for more-intrusive inspections for this reason. These states can be expected to oppose any future nonproliferation efforts until the NWSs have made significant progress toward disarming. No one has proposed a way to satisfy the NNWSs if the NWSs cannot eliminate their stockpiles. More so than any other country, the United States is seen as "violating the spirit" of the NPT for its lack of progress toward disarmament and its policies which sometimes encourage proliferation to "friendly" states. At the 2010 NPT review conference, each of the NWSs reaffirmed its commitment to eliminating nuclear weapons. The 2010 conference was widely seen as a major success in comparison to the failed 2000 and 2005 conferences, and this is widely attributed to President Obama's renewed efforts to honor our obligation to eliminate nuclear weapons. It is also worth noting that the indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995 would not have been achieved without convincing the NNWSs that the NWSs were serious about their commitment to disarm. This was achieved by the simultaneous effort to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. The NNWSs currently feel betrayed that the CTBT has not yet entered into force, and the United States is largely to blame for this.
The CTBT provides an excellent test case to show that other NWSs have reduced their reliance on nuclear weapons. The United Kingdom, France, and all 15 former Soviet republics, including Russia, have ratified the treaty, but the US Senate declined to ratify it in 1999. 
15
16
17
18
In reality, the United States has consistently dragged its feet in terms of international treaties that would reduce the world's dependence on nuclear weapons. The Obama administration has had to severely cripple its Prague vision for nuclear disarmament based on domestic politics. Ratifying the New START is seen as an essential first step toward reducing American dependence on nuclear weapons. Currently, support for the treaty is divided largely along partisan lines, and there is some doubt Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010
[ 140 ] as to whether the New START will be ratified. Nuclear modernization and missile defense are seen in the international community as undermining Obama's vision; however, they have been required to gain the necessary support for the New START. The Senate ratification resolution makes these links explicit. It states, "The United States is committed to proceeding with a robust stockpile stewardship program, and to maintaining and modernizing the nuclear weapons production capabilities and capacities." It has three full paragraphs describing missile defense, concluding that the "unilateral statement by the Russian Federation on missile defense does not impose a legal obligation on the United States." These statements were added to appease nuclear hawks both in and out of the military. Based on the perceived need for these concessions, it will be difficult for foreign observers to conclude that the United States is really serious about nuclear reductions. How can a country that increased its spending on nuclear infrastructure by 13.4 percent be serious about getting rid of that infrastructure? Furthermore, the United States does not have the best track record with regards to nonproliferation. For example, it deploys nuclear weapons under NATO command in five European countries. Many NNWSs see this nuclear weapons sharing program as a direct violation of Article I of the NPT, which states, "Each nuclear-weapon State Party to the Treaty undertakes not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or control over such weapons or explosive devices." In 2006, the United States traded nuclear technology to India, seriously threatening the NPT's long-term viability. 
19
20
21
22
[ 141 ]
Finally, the war in Iraq, the only war ever to have been declared to stop proliferation, may have inadvertently led to the two most recent proliferation crises. North Korea has consistently cited this as the cause of its withdrawal from the NPT and resumption of plutonium production and bomb development. There is widespread concern that Iran will soon do the same, for similar reasons.
These American gaffes are in stark contrast to the nonproliferation successes of other states. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine inherited some 3,000 strategic and many more substrategic nuclear weapons. By 1996 these weapons had all been transferred to Russia. 
23
The United States' inability to reduce its dependence on nuclear weapons due to domestic politics and its many nuclear faux pas in the international community have given it a reputation for violating the spirit of the NPT.
That other countries are deploying new nuclear delivery systems is not a concern, because they are simply replacing aging parts. The United States is doing the same thing. So what are the legitimate concerns? One comes to mind immediately: How will other countries take US disarmament seriously when its modernization plans and past treaty experience tell them it will be relying on nuclear weapons long into the future? The United States must take a sober look not at other countries' nuclear policies but at its own. This will mean making concessions to other countries and addressing their legitimate concerns. Achieving US security does not require expanding US nuclear hegemony.
A fissile material cutoff treaty (FMCT) is widely seen as the next necessary step on the road to disarmament. The FMCT would prevent the production of new weapons-grade uranium or plutonium via a system of international inspections. This would modestly limit US nuclear capabilities but in exchange would greatly reduce the risk of proliferation. If past experience is any indicator, the United States will have difficulty ratifying the treaty because the nuclear establishment will be un- willing to make this concession. 
24
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010
[ 147 ] helped bring about the Cold War's end by behaving as if Kennan's prophecy would never come true. 
5
Thompson acknowledges that his family ties to Nitze gave him both access and insights that an outsider could never have. "Had I never known Nitze, I might have begun with the preconception that he was the hard-line demon so often portrayed in modern Cold War histories." 
7
8
9
10
11
12
[ 148 ] with his Soviet counterpart at Reykjavik in 1986, the Reagan-Gorbachev summit that set in motion the beginning of the end of the Cold War.
But what of the others, the diplomats and military officers whose names are unknown to even the most conscientious historians? It is hard to imagine, given the headlines of the last few years, that obscurity could ever be the fate of Amb. Ryan Crocker and Gen David Petraeus, but who today can identify Gen Lucius Clay, military governor of the US zone of occupied Germany (OMGUS), or his civilian successor as high commissioner of that zone (HICOG), John J. McCloy? Also forgotten is Robert Murphy, Eisenhower and Clay's foreign policy adviser (POLAD), a Foreign Service officer who spent much of his career as a "diplomat among warriors" (the title of Murphy's autobiography). They are, indeed, in Weisbrode's words, "footnotes to footnotes," 
13
Together on the ground in Germany in 1945, the two groups were not naturally compatible, and the struggles in recent years to achieve interagency unity of effort in Iraq and Afghanistan would be familiar to them. Then, as now, State was playing catch-up: Before the war, there was no established German Desk or corps of experts, and most of the bureau's talent gravitated to France. During the war, of course, the State Department drew on the few German specialists it had to plan for the aftermath, although, again, most of the initiative for running German affairs rested elsewhere, primarily in the War Department. . . .
[The diplomats assigned to Murphy's POLAD office had a] relationship with the [military] occupation authorities, and to their bosses in State, [that] was complex and often tense. Clay was known to disdain diplomats and to go out of his way to exclude them from decisions. But the bias never seemed to apply to the individual diplomats with whom he worked . . . nor were they known to put Clay's staff on the defensive or to seek to under cut him. 
14
15
16
[ 149 ] tactical tasks "collectively and anonymously, less as conquerors than as subtle missionaries." 
17
Washington Rules: America's Path to Permanent War by Andrew J. Bacevich.
Metropolitan Books, 2010, 286 pp., $25.00.
It was given to Edward Gibbon, sitting "musing amid the ruins of the Capitol, while the barefooted friars were singing vespers in the temple of Jupiter," to conceive the decline and fall of the Roman Empire. Two centuries later Army colonel Andrew Bacevich, standing by the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin in 1989, experienced an epiphany revealing to him that America's benign leadership in the world was pernicious malarkey. The soldier turned polemicist invites readers to share his "education," as he chronicles the decline and fall of an "evil empire," America.
According to Bacevich, two beliefs comprise our post-World War II national security "credo:" the United States should lead and transform the world, and America's activist role should rely on hard power, not suasion. This credo entails a "sacred trinity" of operational military precepts: global military presence, global power projection, and global interventionism. Four dogmas underlie the "catechism of American statecraft:" the world must be reshaped to avert chaos; the United States will prescribe and enforce the global order; America will define the principles of that order; and except for a few recalcitrants, everyone accepts this reality. He portrays two chief "evil empire" builders, Allen Dulles (CIA) and Gen Curtis LeMay (SAC), as establishing the "yin and yang of the new National Security State." President Obama has brought no real change we can believe in, for no president dares question the "Washington consensus." In fact, it matters not who holds political office. American politics is merely "theater."
The Kennedy administration used "flexible response" to provide options for conventional war fighting and unconventional special operations. The result was a Vietnam War "to sustain the Washington consensus" and a campaign of "statesponsored terrorism" to topple the Castro regime. Presidents Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and Bill Clinton collaborated to shed the constraints of the Vietnam era, pursuing global interventionism under the guise of "forward deployment" of troops, the Navy's mission of sea control, and "America's far-flung empire of bases" to strike targets wherever Washington imagines demons. The bungling of the Iraq and Afghan wars gave rise to the doctrine of counterinsurgency (COIN) to repackage the "sacred trinity."
In characteristically self-righteous, demeaning language, Bacevich derides COIN as a fraud ("lots of foam, but not much beer"), designed to give leaders the illusion of control over chaotic warfare. COIN ("social work with guns") was hawked with slick marketing by Gen David Petraeus, an "ambitious soldier" with a "courtier's" manner, and his "lobby" of supporters, such as John Nagl Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010
[ 151 ] of the Center for a New American Security, while Generals Petraeus and McChrystal basked in a "revived cult of generalship"-"Prince Stanley heir to King David."
Inspired by the wisdom of his sages (George Kennan, Sen. J. William Fulbright, Christopher Lasch, and Martin Luther "come home, America" King), Bacevich proffers readers an alternative "isolationist credo." First, the purpose of the US military is not to remake the world but to defend America's "most vital interests" (undefined). Second, the US military belongs at home in America! What it would do here Bacevich does not say; patrol Washington's Metro system to make it safe? Hence, the United States should scuttle its overseas bases and get out of the Persian Gulf (al-Qaeda's goal) and Central Asia. Elsewhere ["Let Europe Be Europe: Why the United States Must Withdraw from NATO," Foreign Policy (March/April 2010), 71-72], Bacevich has argued that America should ditch NATO and let Europe fend for itself. That leaves a major US regional presence only in East Asia, but scrapping US sea power and force projection would remove that distraction from "cultivating our own garden." Finally, Bacevich would allow the use of force only as a last resort and in self-defense. Yet, why would anyone much care about an island fortress America?
Bacevich's caricature of America is shared by Richard Immerman's Empire for Liberty [Princeton University Press, 2010, 6], a term he calls an "oxymoron" because in creating its imperium, the United States oppressed peoples and did "evil in the name of good." In The Frugal Superpower [(New York: Public Affairs, 2010), 53], Michael Mandelbaum views the coming retrenchment of America's global leadership far differently. He explains how economic constraints will curtail America's post-World War II role. The world will suffer the baleful results of a United States with too little power. "Since World War II," Mandelbaum writes, "the United States play(ed) a major, constructive, and historically unprecedented role in the world," bringing peace and prosperity to much of the globe. Mandelbaum foresees dim prospects for a world with a cash-strapped Uncle Sam: "One thing worse than an America that is too strong, the world will learn, is an America that is too weak" (p. 194).
The age of austerity and a domestically focused America has arrived. For the sake of perspective, it is important to recognize that US defense spending represents less than 4 percent of GDP and less than 20 percent of the federal budget, far less than in recent decades. Since the end of the Cold War and the Persian Gulf War, our armed forces shrank from 2.1 million personnel in 1989 to 1.3 million in 1999; the Army decreased from 769,000 soldiers to 479,000, resulting in an overstretched force. From a 1,000-ship Navy in President Kennedy's time, after the fall of the Soviet Union the fleet numbered 466 ships. By 2001 it fell to 316; currently, it stands at 285 ships. In years ahead the fleet will likely contract to 237 ships, 25 percent less than the fleet the Navy judges necessary to execute its missions. This is not a picture of robust power projection.
Nevertheless, in a May speech at the Eisenhower Library, Defense Secretary Gates cited President Obama's invocation of Eisenhower's counsel to maintain spending "balance in and among national programs." Gates stated that the splurge of military spending cannot continue as it has, doubling in the last decade: "The gusher has been turned off, and will stay off for a good period of time." The president signaled a domestic refocus in his speech on the end of combat operations in Iraq, declaring "our most urgent task is to restore our economy."
Bacevich does not see the ground shifting before his eyes because he is a "Johnny one-note:" "Amerika." A "jaded governing class," he rails, manipulates a nation of hedonists afflicted with a desiccated "civic culture" to perpetuate the "Washington consensus" leading to perdition. Our institutions are dysfunctional. Elections do not matter. Leaders and citizens alike are morally bankrupt. A pox on all your houses! Bacevich's isolationism would be a risible anachronism, if it were not so dangerous, now that he has achieved media celebrity as a talking "expert" on world affairs. His excoriation of nearly everyone as obtuse or corrupt and his historically discredited prescription for national salvation reflect the irresponsibility of an academic unburdened with making the difficult choices and compromises that are the essence of statecraft in the world as it exists. One wonders why he wrote this book.
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 48 ] caveatsNotes 1. 6. Norman Friedman, The Fifty-Year War: Conflict and Strategy in the Cold War (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2000), 223-24. 7. Ibid., 194-95. 8. Pedlow, ed., NATO Strategy Documents, 186-96. 9. Ibid., xviii-xix. 10. Russell F. Weigley, The American Way of War (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1973), 448. 11. Ibid., xxiv. 12. Lawrence Freedman, "The First Two Generations of Nuclear Strategists," in Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed., Peter Paret (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1886), 743-46. 13. Pedlow, NATO Strategy Documents, 349-55. 14. Heads of State and Government, The Alliance's New Strategic Concept (Rome: North Atlantic Council, 1991), 2-6. 15. G. J. Gilmore, "Rumsfeld: Transformation Moving NATO into the 21st Century," US Department of Defense, 13 October 2004, http://osd.dtic.mil/news/Oct2004 /n10132004_2004101305.html. 16. Heads of State and Government, The Alliance's New Strategic Concept, (Washington: North Atlantic Council, 1999), 5-12. 17. Ryan Henry, "Transforming the U.S. Global Defense Posture," Naval War College Review 59, no. 2 (Spring 2006): 25-26. 18. Gilmore, "Rumsfeld." 19. "NATO General: Russia Seeks to Weaken U.S., West," Reuters, 25 March 2009. 20. Multiple Futures Project: Navigating Towards 2030, Final Report (Norfolk: Allied 23. Ilana Bet-El, "Is Cash the Best Form of Defense?" EuropeanVoice.com in English, 5-9 March 2009, 10. 24. US Census Bureau, "International Database," http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/idb /tables.html. Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 49 ] 31. Gustav Lindstrom, EU-US Burdensharing: Who Does What? Chaillot Paper no. 82 (Paris: European Union Institute for Security Studies, 2005), 18. 32. Zachary Selden, "Stabilization and Democratization: Renewing the Transatlantic Alliance," Parameters (Winter 2007/08): 85-97. 33. Jeffrey Simon, NATO's Uncertain Future: Is Demography Destiny? Strategic Forum no. 236 (Washington: INSS, October 2008), 3-4. 34. Christopher M. Schnaubelt, "Whither the RMA?" Parameters (Autumn 2007): 103-4. 35. Frank G. Hoffman, Hybrid Threats: Reconceptualizing the Evolving Character of Modern Conflict, Strategic Forum no. 240 (Washington: INSS, April 2009), 5. 36. Brooke Smith-Windsor, Hasten Slowly: NATO's Effects-Based and Comprehensive Approach to Operations, NATO Defense College (NDC) Research Paper no. 38 (Rome: NDC, July 2008), 5-8. 37. NATO 2020, 7-8. 38. Zbigniew Brzezinski, "An Agenda for NATO: Toward a Global Security Web," Foreign Affairs 88, no. 5 (September/October 2009): 20. 39. Klaus Naumann, "Security without the United States? Europe's Perception of NATO," Strategic Studies Quarterly 3, no. 3 (Fall 2009): 56-57. 40. Maleha Lodhi, The Future of Pakistan-US Relations: Opportunities and Challenges, Special Report (Washington: INSS, April 2009), 3. 41. R. Synovitz, "Afghanistan: NATO Takes over ISAF Command amid Calls for Expansion," Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 50 ]
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 102 ]
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 123 ]
on
Strategic Studies Quarterly ♦ Winter 2010 [ 136 ]
John Coffey, PhDFairfax, Virginia
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
[ 101 ]
The author wishes to thank Maj Tony Carr, Dr. Stephen Chiabotti, Dr. Damon Coletta, Dr. James Forsyth, and Dr. Elizabeth Stanley for their substantive comments and suggestions for improving this article. Maj Jeff Donnithorne holds a BSE degree in civil engineering from Duke University, a master's degree in organizational science from George Washington University, and is a graduate of the Air Force School of Advanced Air and Space Studies. He served operationally as a weapons system officer in the F-15E Strike Eagle and is currently pursuing a PhD in international relations at Georgetown University.
Air Force Culture and American Civil-Military Relations
Jeff Donnithorne, Major, USAF
If war is an extension of politics by other means, 
1
While civil-military relations in the United States are generally healthy, military and civilian policymakers do not always agree on the proper means to secure their common ends. Even the best of civil-military relationships must endure a messy hybrid of cooperation and resistance between principal stakeholders. A military that believes in and submits to civilian control is still a military that harbors its own interests.
But what are the origins of military self-interest? Is it useful to assume that these massive organizations simply crave more money, autonomy, and prestige? 
2
3
4
5
Since 9/11, a new generation of American military officers and diplomats has had to take on the threefold task that faced their predecessors in the Truman and Eisenhower years: understanding a radically changed strategic context, defining a strategy for the United States in that new context, and implementing that strategy to secure American interests and advance American values. Nearly a decade after the attacks on New York City and the Pentagon, today's majors and lieutenant colonels are in the same position as the field grade officers of 60 years ago. In the fall of 1950, as the Chinese crossed the Yalu and General Eisenhower arrived in Paris as the first SACEUR, midcareer US diplomats and their uniformed counterparts found that they represented a different country than the one that had commissioned them as junior officers only a decade before. America's role in the world had changed, and by 1950 the assumptions of American foreign and defense policy in the 1930s served those officers no better than the as- sumptions of the 1990s serve the officers of today.
Nicholas Thompson and Kenneth Weisbrode have written insightful books about the men (mainly) who overthrew those assumptions, developed a strategy to deal with the Cold War, and implemented that strategy for 40 years.
Thompson tells the story of his grandfather, Paul Nitze, and of George Kennan, whose 1947 "X" article in Foreign Affairs gave to US foreign policy the wordcontainment-that would describe Washington's approach to the Soviet Union for the next four decades. Containment meant many things over those 40 years to various American administrations (hence, the plural in the title of John Lewis Gaddis' classic 1982 history, Strategies of Containment), but one aspect remained constant: the centrality of Europe and the transatlantic relationship. That is the focus of Weisbrode's book, a history of EUR, the State Department's Bureau of European Affairs.
EUR, the "mother bureau," had within its purview much of the Northern Hemisphere, from Vancouver to Vladivostok. Its desks included Canada (as a NATO member) and the Soviet Union, the alliance's protagonist extraordinaire. But its focus was Germany. The German wars, hot and cold, preoccupied Europe for well over a century, from 1870 to 1990; and after the sinking of the Lusitania in 1915, they preoccupied the United States, too, for 75 years. The small cadre of EUR's "German hands" had watched Europe succumb to the dictators in the 1930s. But it was the next generation that played the crucial role in American foreign and defense policy after 1945. They were the founding fathers of "pol-mil," the intertwining of American diplomacy and the projection of American military power overseas, specifically to NATO Europe.
The Cold War corresponded almost exactly with their adult working lives. Born circa 1920, they were in 1950 young men "who came to Europe either as military or civilian agents of the [US] occupation [of Germany], along with another group of roughly the same age . . . that provided legal, economic, and other forms of technical advice to the occupation authorities." 
1
2
3
[Foreign Service] Officers like [future ambassador Jonathan] Dean were posted in small villages and charged with everything from helping to get the sewer systems to work, to hunting down Nazi officials, to keeping watch on the political activities of local Communists. The impact such power and authority had on these young officers-many just out of the war and serving in their first posts-cannot be emphasized too heavily. . . . They had, after all, helped to convert the largest country at the heart of Europe into a loyal, democratic, and prosperous American ally. There seemed little else they could not accomplish. They were, therefore, a supremely confident and even idealistic group of people. 
4
Weisbrode, as a young intern at the Atlantic Council in the early 1990s, came to know many members of the Marshall Plan/Occupation generation in retirement and is, as he admits, an unabashed admirer of their work, accomplishments, and commitment to public service. He is an Atlanticist-perhaps the last of the breed. But his personal admiration and affection for his subjects in no way colors the story he tells. The book began life as his Harvard dissertation, directed by the late Prof. Ernest May and Profs. Waldo Heinrichs and Akira Iriye. It is thoroughly researched and beautifully written.
Thompson has also written a beautiful book. He tells the story of the Cold War through the dual biographies of Nitze and Kennan, one of Weisbrode's EUR hands for the first 20 years of his career and the founding director of the State Department's Policy Planning Staff under Secretary George Marshall. Nitze came into the department sideways, via Wall Street and the US Strategic Bombing Survey, which had taken him to the ruins of Hiroshima in 1945. First Kennan's deputy, he succeeded him as head of Policy Planning at a crucial moment in 1949-50, bracketed by the Soviets' detonation of an atomic bomb and the invasion of South Korea by the North.
Kennan provided the name for the Truman administration's emerging approach to the USSR, but Nitze in NSC-68 recommended the arms buildup that became the chief characteristic of containment as practiced by every US president from Truman to Reagan. Two generations of Cold War policy practitioners grew up aligning themselves with Kennan, the dove, or Nitze, the hawk; and the two men argued with each other for 50 years over how best to implement the policy largely rejected by the man who had named it. Thompson believes that Kennan's ideas and methods were not practical and could do little to help solve day to day problems. He could not, for example, have been an effective arms negotiator. Nonetheless, he played a crucial role, both in framing the conflict and then serving as his nation's conscience as those horrifying weapons hypnotized the superpowers more and more. Kennan, the outsider, accurately foresaw how the Cold War would play out. Nitze, the insider,
Strategic Studies Quarterly (SSQ) is the senior United States Air Forcesponsored journal fostering intellectual enrichment for national and international security professionals. SSQ provides a forum for critically examining, informing, and debating national and international security matters. Contributions to SSQ will explore strategic issues of current and continuing interest to the US Air Force, the larger defense community, and our international partners.
The views and opinions expressed or implied in the SSQ are those of the authors and should not be construed as carrying the official sanction of the United States Air Force, the Department of Defense, Air Education and Training Command, Air University, or other agencies or departments of the US government.
The SSQ considers scholarly articles between 5,000 and 15,000 words from United States and international authors. Please send your submission in Microsoft Word format via e-mail or regular mail (hard copy and a CD) to: e-mail: strategicstudiesquarterly@maxwell.af.mil
Managing 