# ID: ec84ed03fc404d97b77b1f070bc47a78
# Title: Swarming Autonomous Unmanned Aerial Systems
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
Swarming is a tactic long employed by military forces to offset military advantages by leveraging emergent technologies. This monograph explores the potential for the employment of swarming on the modern battlefield. The development and operationalization of autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and emergent technologies have increased the versatility and lethality of swarm UAVs. Successful integration of this technology into the US military operations requires theory, operational concepts, and tactics that the military has yet to construct. Adversaries of the United States continue to make advances in the use of semi-autonomous and autonomous weapon systems that are quickly reducing the technological gap currently held by the US military. As such, this monograph suggests that the Department of Defense needs to make greater efforts in prioritizing the employment of swarming autonomous UAVs.
It is not possible fully to separate the art and science of war from technology; they are too tightly bound in with each other and stand too closely alongside each other in their very strong and unbreakable mutual effects.
-General Mac Schwarte, Technik des Kriegswesens (Leipzig, 1913)   The 2017 Slaughterbots, a film produced by students at the University of California Berkeley, warns of the rapid development of military technologies. In the film, a fictitious company develops an armed microdrone capable of executing precision strikes against preprogrammed targets utilizing artificial intelligence, facial recognition technologies, and tactical sensors. In the film, the industrial sponsor of this technology makes the claim that this technology marks the transition to a new age of warfare, making nuclear weapons obsolete as the tiny robots provide a scalable weapon of mass destruction that is precise, effective, efficient, and, most importantly, unstoppable. 1 Although Slaughterbots is a science fiction dystopia intended to propagate anti-autonomous lethal weapons rhetoric, the film illustrates the potential capability of automated weapon system swarms and the effects capable of combining technologies that are currently available for military use. The concept of using unmanned aerial autonomous weapons to eliminate targets is not only realistic but a reality. Countries like China, Israel, and Russia currently invest in the research and technology necessary to produce and employ autonomous weapons systems, in particular autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), as part of their military arsenal. 
2
2 US Naval War College, "Autonomous Weapon Systems Brief: Lt. Col. Jeffrey S. Thurnher: Legal Implications of AWS," YouTube, June 05, 2013, accessed March 26, 2018, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=muQFmY8HvUA.  and Syria (ISIS) search for new methods deliver lethal strikes such as the utilization of low cost drones to attack their opponents. 
3
Viewers throughout the world can already see the effects of airstrikes enabled by semiautonomous UAVs, like the Predator, in Iraq, Afghanistan, Yemen, and other countries. The implications of developing and harnessing weapons systems which combine current and emergent technologies have caused such concern that in 2015, renowned scientist Stephen Hawking, artificial intelligence researcher Stuart Russell, and other scientists signed an open letter to the United Nations requesting the ban of autonomous weapons systems designed for lethal purposes.
In this letter, scientists refer to autonomous weapon systems as the "third revolution in warfare" after gunpowder and nuclear weapons. The letter discusses the moral, ethical, and physical risks posed by these weapons and the necessity to ban such capability. In addition to simple, easy to use and produce characteristics of UAV technology, manufacturers can produce these weapons at a fraction of the cost of nuclear weapons with scalable and accurate effects. Swarming autonomous weapon systems could potentially be the next weapons of mass destruction, scalable in size and effectiveness as well as efficiently reliable. 
4
5
The time for the US military to develop ways to offset an adversary's technological advantage by employing and defending against swarming autonomous UAVs is now. The technologies to conduct swarm attacks already exist and could pose significant challenges in the very near future. This technology is cheap and available to many non-state actors as well as state adversaries that could employ a swarm of autonomous UAVs against any US formation overseas or over a populated area within the United States homeland. These attacks, similar to the January 2018 Syrian rebel drone attack against a Russian airbase in Syria, could potentially constitute high yield, low risk operations that would significantly alter the balance of technological superiority traditionally held by the US military. 
6
As other nations currently pursue semiautonomous and autonomous weapons and the capability to swarm, the US Army should have a more concerted approach to develop a doctrinal framework to employ and defend against swarming autonomous weapons systems to maintain global military supremacy. Furthermore, both the development of this doctrine and consideration of the effects of swarms of autonomous UAVs on the battlefield lead to the discussion of shaping the requirements for autonomous and semi-autonomous weapon systems. Unmanned autonomous technology, combined with swarming tactics, could harness a critical advantage to US military leaders in an operational fight both offensively and defensively. Swarming autonomous UAVs could provide a division commander with opportunities to achieve and exploit success on the battlefield by simultaneously shaping the deep fight, countering adversarial initiatives, collecting intelligence, and aiding target identification. Additionally, the employment of these weapon systems could enable greater coordination, survivability, intelligence, and speed required to overwhelm the adversary in all contested domains.
To provide context as to how this technology can assist commanders achieve and exploit success at the operational level, an understanding of swarming theory assists military practitioners with a fundamental concept for employment and integration of technology at the tactical and operational level. An examination of historical uses of swarming tactics reveals the impact and effects that swarming has had on the battlefield and demonstrates the potential for future use. A review of the historical employment of UAVs exhibits the modern evolution and progression of the concept of military swarming. Lastly, a consideration of emergent technologies and swarming concepts aids military practitioners in assessing the planned implementation of emergent technologies, the timeline associated with these programs, and the frameworks constructed by the Department of Defense (DoD) to procure and integrate these systems.
Considering these lines of research informs commanders on the efforts needed to employ and maximize the capability of these weapons on the battlefield to maintain an operational advantage.
It is not enough for theory to describe and analyze, it must itself be an event in the universe it describes.
-Jean Baudrillard, "Why Theory?", The Ecstasy of Communication In today's complex world full of numerous technological advancements and information systems, swarming stands as an emergent concept that provides a means to cope and, potentially, thrive in it. To fully understand how swarm technologies can impact the battlefield, it is important, firstly, to generally understand what a swarm is and, secondly, to understand its origins and theory for potential use in the military. Understanding this contextual background provides a foundation for the military practitioner to explore swarming's potential in cross-domain disciplines. This understanding further enables the exploration of potential uses and applications for the US Army to couple technological advances and swarm theory to gain an operational advantage on the battlefield.
A swarm is a network formed by groups of individuals that engage in an activity benefitting the group as a whole by relying on the interactions between individuals and their environment. A key feature of a swarm is decentralized or distributed control to ensure the cohesion of the swarm is never lost. 
7
Swarming is a complex behavior commonly observed in social animals such as a flock of birds, a herd of gazelles, a school of fish, and a pack of wolves. These animals perform simple tasks that, when conducted in a sequence, form a coordinated motion that provides an evolutionary advantage in the survival of the species. Stigmergy, a self-organization behavior exhibited by these animals, underlies the cooperative behavior, coordinated motion, and division of labor exhibited by these animals. For example, flocks of ducks fly in a V-shaped formation to improve aerodynamic efficiency, ensuring all members of the flock survive migration. Schools of fish also demonstrate similar complex behaviors of simple, coordinated motions. This behavior in fish is a self-defense mechanism, an anti-predator adaptation that serves as cover and concealment. The school of fish forms large swarms that can seem to be a larger animal, providing the individual fish with a hydrodynamic advantage to evade potential predators. This coordinated motion allows a school of fish an ability to change shapes in an effort to confuse the attacking predators. 
8
Advanced technologies, decentralized networks, complex social relationships, and an infinite amount of information make adaptation and interacting within the environment difficult. Some theorists like Antoine Bousquet, Everett C. Dolman, and Peter Singer suggest that swarming logic is a helpful and efficient way to react, navigate, and adapt to the chaotic and complex environment today's technological advances and social requirements have imposed. 9
Similar to the actions of social animals in nature to use swarming behavior to survive, humans also demonstrate swarming techniques. An example of natural swarming pertains to feeding the population of New York City. No single entity controls or requests food for New York City.
Instead, requisitions, shipments, and the concept of supply and demand explain why the population of the city continues to have food readily available for consumption. Numerous individuals, performing simple actions in a concerted effort with little hierarchical control, seemingly solve this complex problem. Another example is the self-organization of crowds, rallies, or protests. While leaders initiate the activities of smaller bodies, these small bodies can grow exponentially with no further direct interaction between leaders and observant individuals who respond to the stimulus of the crowd. 
10
Additionally, swarming transcends domains from physical to air, sea, space and cyber. Swarming can be either a natural or acted upon behavior that helps individuals to survive in a complex environment. Examples of human swarming are just as apparent now that humans rely on artificially networked systems and broadband internet, achieving coordinated actions from large groups of people. 11 While social media serves as the most popular form of human swarming and the exchange of ideas, the use of all-points bulletins and the Amber Alert system also provide examples of using networked systems to organize human activity for a single purpose. Swarming behavior is the simplest, most effective and efficient way in interact to a complex and chaotic environment. Author Yaneer Bar-Yam states that the more complicated and larger the system is, the interactions and relationships between individuals become simpler. 
12
Nature provides valuable insights as to how the military can use swarming. Collaborative and anti-predatory swarming emulates principles of offensive maneuvers and divisions of labor that resemble shaping and decisive operations. These operations center on the principle that simple interactions between individuals and appropriate reactions to local information or environment will improve the chances of survival for the entire group.
Theorists John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt claim that swarming tactics are the next step in warfare. Swarming, however, has been a military tactic used throughout history. Armies used large numbers of personnel to conduct multi-directional and repetitive attacks to overwhelm and defeat an opponent. Arquilla and Ronfeldt define swarming as a way of war as a systematic approach to attack an opponent with interconnected units pulsing fire or force from all directions simultaneously. 
13
15
16
In the past, armies employed swarming techniques to offset advantages in numbers and sometimes weaponry. Arquilla and Ronfeldt draw three types of swarming from nature that they believe would be helpful for the military: blanketing, hunting like packs, and mobbing.
Blanketing refers to the covering or claiming of territory by a large swarm foraging outside the hive or nest. Arquilla suggests that this swarming technique describes the actions of units patrolling an area and massing to destroy any threats within the area. Another form of organization is hunting in packs, like wolves and hyenas. Packs travel in semi-dispersed formations and come together to target a herd, attack the weakened members, and again disperse.
Guerilla warfare demonstrated by the Spanish guerrillas against the French during the Napoleonic War or by the Communist Chinese in Mao's "Peoples War" demonstrates this applicability. The German U-Boat campaign of WWII provides another example of the wartime application of hunting in packs. Arquilla describes the third form of swarming as "mobbing" to describe the overwhelming massing of people focused on a single objective. An example of mobbing in warfare is the Chinese deployment of the volunteer force used to push back the American advance during the Korean War. However, with the exception of the U-boat example, these examples represent swarming with a direct correlation to human swarming. Like Arquilla and Ronfeldt, modern military theorists suggest that swarming applied for military use can win wars by providing the capability to offset any technological advantage and effectively operate in a complex environment against a capable adversary.
17
As human swarming denotes risk of high casualties, the application of swarming techniques as it applies to the employment of technology is a more feasible application of the theory. Animal swarming behavior inspired the heuristic model that made unmanned aerial system swarms a reality. The characteristics of cooperative behavior, coordinated motion, and division of labor are a result of stigmergy, a self-organization behavior that robotic engineers and artificial intelligence researchers wanted to replicate with robotic and autonomous systems. The autonomous systems operate on three governing rules: cohesion, separation, and alignment that, allows the individual units to fly together without crashing onto each other. 
18
Considering technological advances such as smartphone technology, global positioning system (GPS), and artificial intelligence along with the miniaturization of UAVs also make swarming a capability the US military can exploit to maintain its global military supremacy. The US military continues to conduct research and set conditions to fight future wars, attempting to conduct warfare with more autonomous weapon systems to maximize effects and minimize risk to the warfighter on the battlefield. As technology advances and modes of threat change, so should the theories of how to defeat such emergent and potentially disruptive technologies and threats. Swarming in the battlefield using small autonomous weapon systems will require a new army doctrine. Modern military theorists take into consideration the technological advancements and couple them with swarming tactics to propose new theories on how the military should employ a swarm of autonomous UAVs.
Paul Scharre defines swarm warfare as "the combination of highly decentralized nature of melee combat with the mobility of maneuver and a high degree of organization and cohesion, allowing a large number of individual elements to fight collectively." 
19
20
22
23
22
23
Hambling lists the capabilities of swarm UAVs in three categories: offensive, defensive, and intelligence support. Offensively, a swarm of UAVs can leave an enemy unit vulnerable by destroying the radars, missile launchers, and any other key systems required to defend itself.
Defensively, a swarm can form a protective barrier to defend against physical and electromagnetic attacks. Lastly, Hambling discusses the efficiency that swarm UAVs provide for intelligence collection and target identification, exacting more precision and efficiency than using just one UAV. Hambling suggests these capabilities provide a clear advantage on the battlefield for the military leaders that can figure out how to employ this technological capability effectively.
Hambling, like Scharre, suggests that the US military should develop a doctrine for the employment of swarm UAVs in order to sustain its technological and military advantage over other technology-seeking states such as China and Russia. Hambling suggests that military leaders do not have enough trust on the reliability and effectiveness of swarm robotics to develop a doctrine for unmanned warfare. Hambling states that swarming UAVs have the potential to change the battlefield geometry and the conduct of war; therefore, the US military should seek to employ this technology as soon as possible. 
24
24
25
26
27
To understand the past and to judge the present is to foresee the future.
-JFC Fuller at the Royal United Service Institute's Chesney Gold Medal in 1919
According to John Arquilla, the evolution of warfare consists of four methods of attack: Although the German air forces arguably had better equipment than did the outnumbered British, the RAF deterred German invasion of the British Isles. 
31
Battle of Britain. 
32
31
32 Ibid.
provided intelligence from multiple sources that enabled the British Fighter Command to develop great situational awareness and therefore, avoid surprise by the Luftwaffe. 
33
34
Once the German Luftwaffe identified the desired target and launched a formation of bombers, British radar stations identified the German bombers. The RAF then sent out planes from widely dispersed air bases to counter and destroy the German bombers. 
35
33
34
35
Multiple British squadrons' fighters worked together in the air to conduct swarming attacks against the German bombers. The British fighters massed to attack the Luftwaffe's bomber formation from the front and the flanks causing catastrophic damage to the Luftwaffe's bombers.
Then, British fighters disengaged and scattered to avoid destruction in detail. The RAF inflicted major damage on the Luftwaffe's bomber formations and denied the Germans the ability to set the necessary conditions to invade England. 
36
37
36
37
38
In 1939, Germany deployed submarines in a dispersed fashion covering a wide area across the Atlantic looking to destroy convoys of Allies' transport ships and destroyers.
Identifying a convoy, the U-boats attacked from multiple directions until they destroyed the targeted convoy. Then, the submarines dispersed, only coming together again when another target presented itself. 
39
40
Command and rest of the pack. The U-boat wolfpack would then assemble near the targeted convoy and navigate at full speed to a firing position to fire four torpedoes before disengaging and surfacing to reload and reattack. Like the RAF in the Battle of Britain, the U-boats had a decentralized command and control system. Each U-boat commander attacked the target without coordinating with a higher command for approval that would have only decreased its effectiveness and speed. The U-boat wolfpack tactics are an example of swarming that was effective mainly due to the ability to gain better situational awareness, disseminate information via radio to coordinate and synchronize an attack on a desired target at the right time and location, and the U-boat's elusiveness. The U-boats were successful until 1943 when the Allies used 
39
40
aircraft armed with radar to identify the location and depth of the U-boats, taking away the German offsetting the advantage of stealth and situational awareness. 
41
42
43
41
42
44
45
The US Navy employed the first unmanned aircraft during World War II. Initially used as target practice for anti-aircraft gunners, the Navy armed these radio-controlled platforms and used them as an early version of precision-guided munitions during the Battle of Guadalcanal. 
46
The Vietnam War was the first technologically intensive conflict where the US military utilized UAVs extensively. 
49
51
52
53
54
55
UAVs provided a way to gather intelligence on the enemy's technological capabilities and to test counter-measures without risk to human life. 
56
57
After the Vietnam War, the US military's interest for unmanned flight technology waned due to budget cuts and competition with more versatile weapon systems such as the F-15 fighter jet. 58 54 Blom, Unmanned Aerial Systems, 63. 
55
56
57
58
In 1971, Ryan Aeronautical Company sold the UCAV to Israel. 
59
60
In the early 1990s, technological advancements in satellites and global positioning systems bolstered Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) linkages that could offer beyond the horizon capabilities. 
61
62
63
64
65
67
68
The US Army also bought a version of the Predator, the MQ-1C Grey Eagle, to serve as an operational-level armed surveillance asset. 
69
The US military and NATO partners also use mini-UAVs such as the RQ-11 Raven and the 66 Fred Kaplan, "The First Drone Strike," Slate Magazine, September 12, 2016, accessed November 20, 2017, http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/the_next_20/2016/09/a_histo-ry_of_the_armed_drone.html 68 Mike Fowler, "The Future of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles," Global Security and Intelligence Studies 1, no. 1 (2015): 1-13, accessed October 31, 2017, http://digitalcommons.apus.edu/-gsis/vol1/-iss1/3. 
69 Hambling,
Swarm Troopers,
53.
70
72
According to David Hambling, these mini-UAVs are the "smallest and smartest weapon yet." 
73
70
71 Patrick M. Miller, Mini, Micro, and Swarming Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: A Baseline Study (Washington, DC: Library of Congress, 2006), 1. 
72 Hambling,
Swarm Troopers,
185. 73 Ibid.,
152,
210.
From the unmanned aircraft of World War II to the newest models of UAVs currently in the US Army inventory, the contributions of these platforms have increased the Army's ability to gather intelligence, establish communications nodes in austere environments, and destroy enemy targets. These tasks have bolstered situational awareness and extended the operational reach of US forces, adding both tactical and operational value in conflict. With the continued development of electronic and networking capabilities, the importance of these assets will exponentially increase, serving to further expand the effectiveness of US forces on the battlefield.
The emerging technology with the greatest current capacity to have strategic effect is the unmanned aerial vehicle.
In 1957, Ernst Junger was the first to imagine the concept of a swarm of robots. In his science fiction novel The Glass Bees, Junger described a swarm of robotic bees that crosspollinated flowers to ensure the survival of an ecosystem. From this novel originated the idea that swarms of robots, unmanned aerial vehicles, and semi-autonomous and autonomous systems could have viable legitimacy in serving a purpose in both military and commercial world interests. 
74
75 Joseph Foster, "Swarming Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs): Extending Marine Aviation Ground Task Force Communications Using UAVS" (monograph, Monterey, CA: Naval Postgraduate School, 2015), 39. While Junger's novel described a technology far beyond the technological capabilities of his time, the technology described is now within reach. Swarm drone development is a project currently assigned to the Strategic Capabilities Office, a sub department of the Pentagon's Third Offset Strategy Office. The third Offset Strategy attempts to leverage America's technological edge by developing new ideas of application in an attempt to maintain dominance against potential adversaries. 76 In that pursuit, the DoD has developed technologies that promise to close the technological gap between science fiction and reality. Examples of the DoD's technologies demonstrate that semi-autonomous and autonomous swarming UAVs have applicability on the modern battlefield and could serve as combat multipliers if properly coupled with the appropriate tasks, doctrine, and strategy. These technologies could provide the United States with a technological advantage over potential adversaries. 
77
77
78 Hambling,
Swarm Troopers,
189.
79
80
81
82
83
84
The LOCUST experiments also demonstrated that swarms of autonomous weapon systems are effective offensive, defensive, and reconnaissance platforms. The swarming drones used in the experiment demonstrated a capability to overwhelm simulated adversaries, destroying radars, missile launchers, and other key defensive systems. Conversely, in a defensive role, 
82
83 Hambling,
Swarm Troopers,
190
84
87
The miniaturization of UAVs and UGS along with the implementation of artificial intelligence has the potential to provide redundant communications, ISR, and navigation assistance in degraded or contested environments. The artificial intelligence element enables each agent of a swarm to interact with each other and respond to their environment collectively, providing increased coverage, persistence, and duration of ISR over a larger area while sharing information back to the command post to increase situational awareness. 91 90 US Army Training and Doctrine Command, The US Army Robotic and Autonomous Systems Strategy (Fort Eustis, VA: Government Printing Office, 2017), i, 1-2, 6. 
91
The far-term phase described by the RAS, anticipated for 2031 to 2040, aims to increase situational awareness by employing swarming UAVs in support of close combat maneuver forces. The Army plans to deliver swarms of fully autonomous UAVs by using simple shipping containers and special-purpose platforms to launch the UAVs similar to the tube-based launcher used in the LOCUST program. 
92
93
94
95
While the DoD guidance and platforms like the OFFSET systems demonstrate an understanding of the potential impact of swarms of semi-autonomous and autonomous UAVs in the future of warfare, the speed at which these emergent technologies continue to evolve outdistances the development of integration and tactics. However, DARPA and other DoD agencies continue to strive to generate swarm tactics, evaluate the effectiveness of those tactics, and integrate these systems into the force. With the further development of concepts to integrate these technologies, "new scalable, dynamic capabilities" could help the US military maintain a technological edge on the battlefield. 
97
In determining the operational implications of UAS swarming technology, the significance and potential military application of emergent technologies are great. At the operational level, current platforms, as well as systems currently under testing, have the capability to shape the battlefield to an extent greater than ever before. The question becomes not if, but when will autonomous swarms be employed on the battlefield and by whom. New advancements of autonomous weapon systems could allow tactical and operational commanders to utilize swarming UAVs to achieve advantage and exploit success on the battlefield. The employment of these weapon systems will enable greater coordination, intelligence gathering, and targeting to overwhelm the adversary across the width and breadth of a theater of operations.
The application of the swarming tactic to achieve military effects is not revolutionary.
Swarming is a natural phenomenon that has presented itself as a military tactic since the dawn of 
81
Paul Scharre, "Why You Shouldn't Fear 'Slaughterbots'," IEEE Spectrum, December 22, 2017,  accessed January 12, 2018, https://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/military-robots/why-youshouldnt-fear-slaughterbots.
4 "Open Letter on Autonomous Weapons," Future of Life Institute, July 28, 2015, accessed January 13, 2018, https://futureoflife.org/open-letter-autonomous-weapons/
.5  New America Foundation, "Machines That Kill: Will We Rely on Autonomous Weapons," YouTube, March 02, 2015, accessed March 27, 2018, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g2P1KaQ4AC4.
Raf Sanchez, 2018
David Hambling, Swarm Troopers: How Small Drones Will Conquer the World (Lexington, KY:  Archangel Ink, 2015), 186.
Joao Hespanha and Francis Doyle, III, "Bio-Inspired Network Science," in Bio-Inspired Innovation and National Security (Washington, DC: United States National Defense University, 2010), 281-290.
Dan Gettinger, "What You Need to Know About Drone Swarms," Center for the Study of the Drone, December 28, 2014, accessed March 27, 2018, http://dronecenter.bard.edu/what-you-need-to-knowabout-drone-swarms/.
  16  Arquilla and Ronfeldt, Swarming and the Future of MilitaryConflict, 21, 23.   
John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, Swarming and the Future of Military Conflict, (Santa  Monica, CA: RAND, 2000), 25-27.
Hespanha and Doyle," 288.   
Paul Scharre, "Unleash the Swarm: The Future of Warfare," War on the Rocks, March 04,
2015 ,  accessed August 20, 2017, https://warontherocks.com/2015/03/unleash-the-swarm-the-future-of-warfare/. 20 Ibid.
P.W. Singer, Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution and Conflict in the Twenty-First Century, 234-235; Ronan Doare et. al, Robots on the Battlefield: Contemporary Issues and Implications for the Future (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2014), xx.
Irving Lachow, The Upside and Downside of Swarming Drones, published online 28 February 2017, accessed on 15 November 2017, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00963402.2017.1290879.
Laurent Beaudoin et al., "Potential Threats of UAS Swarms and the Countermeasures Need," ResearchGate, March 16, 2015, accessed November 15, 2017, https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01132236/document.
Arquilla and Ronfeldt, Swarming and the Future of Conflict, 7, 36.    
Ibid., 29.    
Edwards, Swarming and the Future of Warfare,[209][210][211][212] 
Adam J.Boyd and Michael Kimball. "The Future Operating Environment and the Third Offset," in Closer Than You Think: The Implications of the Third Offset Strategy for the US Army (Carlisle Barracks, PA: US Army War College Press, 2017), 7-10.
US Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Concept for Robotic and Autonomous Systems (JCRAS), 11.
US Department of Defense, Directive 3000.09, Autonomy in Weapon Systems (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017), 12.
Caroline Rees, "DARPA Launches OFFSET Swarm Tactics Program for Unmanned Vehicles," http://www.unmannedsystemstechnology.com/2016/12/darpa-launches-offset-swarm-tactics-programunmanned-vehicles/.
  96  Ibid.
Caroline Rees, "DARPA Launches OFFSET Swarm Tactics Program for Unmanned Vehicles," http://www.unmannedsystemstechnology.com/2016/12/darpa-launches-offset-swarm-tactics-programunmanned-vehicles/.
I would like to extend my appreciation to 
Dr. G. Scott Gorman
COL Jeffrey S. Davis