# ID: ed89f980e2bc4c0ebf3c86eb3ca08c4a
# Title: On the Mid-and Long-Term Threat to the US Ground Combatant
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2000.0
# Fulltext:
Is global instability the primary source of present and future threats?
At the dawn of the 21 century, the global situation remains in a state of flux.
The emergence of a competitor superpower to the United States has yet to make its appearance.
A growing number of the developing nations-shed of the last vestiges of empire-still tend to define international respect in terms of the possession of nuclear weapons.
The fracturing of Eastern Europe, resultant from the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, has yet to play itself out in terms of former Soviet satellites seeking integration in Western economic or military alliances-albeit that some satellites have already engaged the West in a positive manner.
This instability bodes both good and ill for United States military forces While Russia has seemingly declined as a military threat to the West, the castoff nations of its former empire have on occasion become the sites of ethnic cleansing.
In short, United States superpower status can and likely will draw us into trouble spots.
More often than not, such responses tend to take the form of ground forces sent to stop or prevent violence by the imposition of superior force Outside of Europe, ruling elites in the Middle East, South-West Asia, and China all seemingly possess power aspirations that could well bring them-or others-into conflict with United States national interests.
In summary, it is probable that the years 2005 through 2020 will chronicle the continuance of a dangerously unstable world-one in which the U.S. ground combatant must be able to cope and operate effectively.