# ID: ee9a0e98764c4891bbde318463c4efeb
# Title: Geostrategic Net Estimate
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: nan
# Fulltext:
This issue of Parameters features talent from across the US Army War College. It is arranged thematically based on four major research areas critical to US security: geostrategic net estimate, geostrategic forecasting, leadership and innovation, and applied strategic art. Opening this issue, though, is a Special Commentary by Isaiah Wilson III and Scott Smitson entitled "The Compound Security Dilemma: Threats at the Nexus of War and Peace." The authors argue the nature of today's threats poses a compound security dilemma that demands nothing less than compound security solutions capable of embracing the contemporary multipolar ecosystem and its competitive dynamics.
The first research area, Geostrategic Net Estimate, showcases two contributions. John Deni's "The United States and the Transatlantic Relationship" analyzes the major political and economic variables that will affect America's relationship with Europe over the next two to four years. Looking at the Indo-Pacific region, "INDOPACOM through 2030" by Nathan Freier and John Schaus outlines the role the US Army can play in addressing the strategic changes underway in Asia and the Pacific region. The US Army, the authors believe, can have a transformational effect on the Joint Force approach to military capacities of key strategic partners within the region.
Our second forum, Geostrategic Forecasting, offers three essays. In "Future Warfare: Weaponizing Critical Infrastructure," Carol Evans alerts us to the fact that hybrid warfare now includes ways in which America's adversaries are weaponizing critical infrastructureparticularly energy, transportation, information, communications, and the industrial base-to undermine the defense postures of NATO and the United States. In "The Politics of Oath-Taking," Marybeth Ulrich seeks to raise the awareness of the responsibility oath-takers, both political and professional, have in upholding the Constitution. In "Designing Military Strategies under Uncertainty," G. K. Cunningham offers suggestions for crafting curriculum for professional military education that considers the wicked problems of contemporary international security when establishing contextual frameworks for strategy.
The third research area, Leadership and Innovation, includes three articles. Steven Metz's "The Future of Strategic Leadership" suggests contemporary strategic leaders have yet to transcend twentieth-century, industrial-age leadership models to develop the entrepreneurialleadership skills necessary to meet twenty-first century challenges. Anthony Pfaff's "Military Ethics below the Threshold of War" describes a novel ethic for the use of military power that will introduce new norms associated with escalation, reprisal, and risk, increasing permissible uses of force while limiting their scope. Michael Lynch's "Army Modernization in the 21st Century" maintains the US Army is learning important lessons from the failure of its future combat system a decade ago. TOC 4 Parameters 50(2) Summer 2020
Our final forum, Applied Strategic Art, also consists of three contributions. In "Winning the Narrative War," Samantha Taylor and Amanda Cronkhite examine policy narratives of Presidents George H. W. Bush and William J. (Bill) Clinton to reveal the fragility of messaging and how consistency in framing foreign policy initiatives is crucial to maintaining public support. In "Integrated Campaigning in the Pacific, 1918-1948," Earl Catagnus Jr. and Jonathan Klug reveal the historical underpinnings of two critical Joint Staff documents, the Joint Concept for Integrated Campaigning and Joint Doctrine Note 1-19, Competition Continuum. Finally, in "Origins of US Army Strategic Landpower," John Bonin argues the core competencies the US Army demonstrated in World War II remain vital in today's national security environment.
T oday's tumultuous global security environment is best characterized as one of contagious, disruptive changeconverging, transregional, compound security threats, a pathological weakening of nation-states, and arguably a breakdown of the Western liberal order itself. A variety of security threats driven by cultural, political, and historical forces have combined in ways that have fundamentally altered the character of threat and the environment of global geopolitical competition, confronting US policymakers with a compound security dilemma heretofore unacknowledged. Traditional security concerns have now merged with human health and security issues due to the interconnected nature of our twenty-first century world, as painfully exemplified by the current pandemic. Foreign policy concerns have acquired a keen domestic focus while domestic policy concerns have received global attention.
The policies of a revanchist Russia, continuing conflicts in Syria and Iraq, and instability in Venezuela all provide compelling, geographically diverse, and comprehensive examples of the compound security threats faced by the United States today. Accordingly, US strategists need a theory and analytics-informed network model that can highlight the nexes between drivers of instability, horizontally and vertically and between ecosystems. By describing compound security threats, the underlying compound security dilemma that generates these threats, the resulting policy puzzles, and by providing several examples, we offer the requisite foundations for a theory with significant utility for military strategy and force planning today and tomorrow. This special commentary is prerequisite and preamble to a larger, subsequent research theory-building project focused on further development and testing of the general governing dynamics of the compound security dilemma. 
The coronavirus provides a window into understanding the compound threats of today. At the time of this writing, the United States still confronts this deadly adversary, one that flouts accepted international laws and conventions regarding warfare and human security protections. This adversary has already achieved mass societal disruption at an alarming speed. Within three months this enemy inflicted over 152,000 casualties (confirmed cases) resulting in over 5,700 deaths globally. 
1
2
1
The combination-or more accurately compounding-of global dynamics such as wealth disparities, widening wealth and inequality gaps, instabilities and unpredictabilities in the global economic market, and global climate change (to varying degrees, artifacts of globalization) have resulted in what strategic forecasters have described as an environment of "constant tension between greater interdependence and intensifying competition" for increasingly scarce material and high-value resources. 
3
In combination these environmental dynamics are the first, most fundamental and consequential of the major drivers of disruptive change shaping today's global security environment and place new stresses on the long-standing liberal international system. Behavioral changes in international relations caused by these changes reflect an ongoing shift from a balance-of-power model of geopolitical competition to one of instability and unpredictability. In essence this shift marks a return to pre-World War I geo-mercantilism with "beggar-thy-neighbor" behaviors that foster go-it-alone and do-it-your-own-way approaches to solving security dilemmas. 
4
5
This brings us to the issue of the threats themselves. In many respects these threats are more daunting than those of the Cold War. Historian Walter Russell Mead described the changed character of geopolitical competition in this way:
Sometime in 2013, we reached a new stage in world history. A coalition of great powers has long sought to overturn the post-Cold War Eurasian settlement that the United States and its allies imposed after 1990; in the second half of 2013 that coalition began to gain ground. . . . The big three challengers-Russia, China and Iran-all hate, fear and resent the current state of Eurasia. The balance of power it enshrines thwarts their ambitions; the norms and values it promotes pose deadly threats to their current regimes. . . . increasingly, they think they have found a way to challenge and ultimately to change the way global politics work. 
6
The term compounded refers to the increased interactioninterconnectedness and collision-of otherwise once separate policy issues, reflecting a new, post-Cold War (and now post-9/11) international security environment. 
7
The security dilemma of the twentieth century international environment-defined primarily by physical, material-based security threats of a military (martial) nature-has now given way to a new twenty-first century security dilemma, the compound security dilemma. 
8
A number of core dynamics govern this compound security dilemma. First, shocks in one traditionally distinct public policy sector such as economics have cascading effects on other sectors also related to human security. With little or no warning, a matter of oil supply and demand can turn into a regional or worldwide security concern, even predatory conflict. The competition for energy is a clear example of this compound security dilemma. Competition for energy supplies will continue to dominate the economic landscape during the next 30 years and growth in world energy demand is likely to rise annually by between 1.5 and 3.1 percent. This trend is likely to result in highly competitive pricing and the continued enrichment and economic progress, as well as predation, of producer countries including Russia and Iran. 
9
The new compound security dilemma questions the foundational logic of the traditional security dilemma while also calling for an entirely new governing logic. It thus raises central questions of scale and legitimacy regarding preferred unilateral policy approaches over multilateral options (from an instrumental solvency as well as ideational sovereignty standpoint).
Another governing dynamic of the compound security dilemma is the tragedy of scales problem. In the past, policy treatment approaches to planning, decision-making, and implementation were designed and optimized toward efficiency metrics, calibrated around responsemitigate-recovery public policy standard operating processes and procedures. The contagion qualities of compound security threats, however, outgrow and outpace traditional policy prescriptions given their exponential growth characteristics.
An additional feature of the compound security dilemma is the interaction effect at play between simultaneous and overlapping 8. John H. Herz, "Idealist Internationalism and the Security Dilemma," World Politics 2, no. 2 (1950): 157-180, https://doi.org/10.2307/2009187. 9. DCDC, Global Strategic Trends.
TOC 10 Parameters 50(2) Summer 2020 sources of instability. The manifestations of these threats derive their character from this interaction between variables; the effect is (at least) multiplicative not additive in nature (see table 
1
Russia now leads a systematic assault on Western democracies and the international system founded on Western liberal values. Putin's Russia aims to subvert Western democracies internally, spread anti-NATO and anti-European Union sentiment, and undermine the rules-based liberal international order. Russia's revanchist tendencies and expansionism are most easily seen in its physical military presence along the traditional and historically vital nexus of its territorial and ethno-cultural near abroad. As the 1990s and 2000s witnessed a Western liberal states' expansionism in various forms, including an expanded NATO eastward and southward, the 2010s and teens watched a precipitous spread of a Russian sphere of influence westward and southward. Russia's recent involvement in the Syrian conflict can be seen as a continuance of this trajectory. The two geostrategic pathways are clearly moving in counterpoising directions leading to an inevitable, though not necessarily obvious, clash, possibly an epochal one.
For years, Russia has worked to gain influence in southeast Europe, first and foremost using Serbia, later Kosovo, and more recently Bosnia, as footholds to establish friendly pockets on a hostile continent at a historical geopolitical pivot that sits along a major civilizational fault line. Russia has violated the borders of nearby nations and seeks to shatter
Wilson and Smitson 11   NATO and change European and Middle East security and economic structures to its favor. The use of emerging technologies to discredit and subvert democratic processes is concern enough but when this behavior is coupled with Russia's expanding and modernizing nuclear arsenal, the challenge is clear. 
10
On June 9, 2014, the self-declared Islamic State breached and erased the international boundary separating Syria and Iraq, making the crises in Syria and in Iraq compound into one so-called Syraq. The vital national security interests of the United States did not necessarily fall within one or both nation-states, rather it fell across their nexus. Syraq as such is not simply a civil war. It is a compound war-a composite of at least three wars and possibly a fourth. The first is the Syrian Civil War in which Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, using primarily conventional forces, has brutally murdered hundreds of thousands of Syrian people. 
11
Arguably there is a fourth war in which the major combatants are weaponizing refugees by causing mass migration into southern Europe, metastasizing a threat to NATO member states in southern Europe and to the internal stability of the EU. This crisis is a form of war that many still fail to see as such; it is precisely a continuation of politics by other means with vectored, forced migrations aimed at overburdening and eventually "breaking the nations" of Europe. 
12
13
Venezuela is also faced with a worsening economic crisis beyond the effects being created by the current US sanctions regime. As the COVID-19 pandemic has taken hold bringing economic activity to a halt across the globe, an oil price war has unfolded-a byproduct of the failure by Saudi Arabia and Russia to come to a mutual collective agreement on supply cuts, resulting in an oversupplied market. The resulting drop in oil prices carries potentially dire implications for oil-exporting Latin American economies, several of which rely on oil revenues for substantial shares of their budgets.
The crisis in Venezuela is driving the largest exodus of refugees in recent history in Latin America-almost 4.5 million as accounted for the by the United Nations in May. 
14
15
Finally, the instability of Venezuela also has geostrategic implications for the United States. Already a major platform of influence prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, Venezuela is the lens through which Russia and China continue to prioritize their efforts in Latin America.
While China continues to use its Belt and Road Initiative to gain access and influence throughout the region, China has also heavily invested in critical infrastructure, establishing "dual use" ports at key geostrategic 12. Robert Cooper, The Breaking of Nations: Order and Chaos in the Twenty-First Century (New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 2003). 13. Geoff Dyer, "NATO Accuses Russia of 'Weaponising' Immigrants," Financial Times, March 1, 2016, https://www.ft.com/content/76a52430-dfe1-11e5-b67fa61732c1d025.
14. "Venezuela Situation," United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, accessed May 4, 2020, https://www.unhcr.org/en-us/venezuela-emergency.html. 15. Dany Bahar and Meagan Dooley, Venezuela Refugee Crisis to Become the Largest and Most Underfunded in Modern History, Brookings, December 9, 2019, https://www.brookings.edu/blog /up-front/2019/12/09/venezuela-refugee-crisis-to-become-the-largest-and-most-underfunded-in -modern-history/.
Wilson and Smitson 13 choke points including Panama. 
16
17
18
Our current systems and methods of calculating risks and force requirements do not fully nor adequately account for these "compounding" dynamics. As a result, our determinations of risk and force requirements are anemic, setting conditions for a "too little . . . too 16. Don Giolzetti, "China's Front Door to America's Backyard: China's Rising Influence in Panama is a Case Study of Its Ambitions in Latin America," Diplomat, June 28, 2019, https:// thediplomat.com/2019/06/chinas-front-door-to-americas-backyard/. TOC late . . . and not enough for long enough" approach to global transregional threats to national and hegemonic interests. 
19
In short America can no longer go it alone, nor should it. As the cases discussed illustrate, the United States has a power problem consisting of three components: (1) insufficient power, type, and kind; (2) insufficient capacity to produce, maintain, and sustain the power required to meet contemporary missions; and (3) insufficient capability to convert power available (on hand or in production) into effective policies and strategies. Again, the anemic public policy handling of the COVID-19 pandemic is a sad testimonial to these facts. The United States has reached the limits of its fungible power, at least from a perspective of single-select instrumental or unilateral choice.
America remains an exceptional nation in terms of its relative capabilities and capacity to rival nation-states and in its ability to project power globally. But like a boxer replete with years of experience and a reach that outdistances younger, less-experienced competitors, the "tale of the tape" for the United States today might read: "great reach, but poor endurance in the latter rounds." America retains the ability to reach anywhere and everywhere, but frequently with the wrong kind of instrument and too little of the right-fitting solution set. America often arrives too late to prevent, contain, or mitigate today's compound security threats or does not sustain the longevity needed for effective regimens. All told, this is a worrisome combination. There is a point of diminishing returns that all great powers must face in relation to their ability to expand, manage, and govern imperial dominions. As historian Paul Kennedy noted: Nations project their military power according to their economic resources and in defense of their broad economic interests. But, the cost of projecting that military power is more than even the largest economies can afford indefinitely, especially when new technologies and new centers of production shift economic power away from established Great Powers-hence the rise and fall of nations. 
20
choice is unilateralism and self-help, the risk calculations of such choices must be measured against the changed and changing environment. In an era where that environment-foreign and domestic-is governed more by a new compound security dilemma, the risk of continuing to choose public policies of unilateral self-help will prove beyond the calculus of risks itself-more the stuff of a gamble.
So what might come of an "America First" foreign policy? History provides examples of the consequences of adopting purely transactional approaches: uncertainty, strategic mis-signals and misreads, and illiberal solutions and outcomes that while perhaps instrumentally beneficial and successful in achieving and securing short-range strategic goals, wind up being devoid of a moral footing of the kind needed to secure lasting, durable, legitimate peace and stability in the longer run.
Compound security threats represent a change in the character, scope, and scale of challenges to our common defense and public welfare. While hybridity is certainly part of the equation, it is not all of it. The compounded nature of today's and tomorrow's threats dramatically alters our public policy and force planning, sizing, and shaping calculations and algorithms.
As former US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, speaking to US troops in Kuwait in December 2004 said, "'you go to war with the army you have, not the army you might want or wish to have at a later time.'" 
21
Addressing these failures will require our entire national security enterprise to come to grips with a recurring set of behaviors that cuts across our checkered performance against compound threats:
• The phenomenon and paradox within the social constructions of the meanings of war and peace, the issues of security and nonsecurity, and the tendency to win a war but to lose the intended peace, as evidenced by our decades-long anabasis in Iraq • The false distinction between national security and human security issues, as demonstrated by US-led military-humanitarian interventions in the 1990s, which addressed only symptoms but not root causes (Somalia, Kosovo, Haiti) • The persistence of chronic, civil-societal, government-society structural inequalities that go un-or under-addressed for many reasons yet remain the common denominator of rebellions, Furthermore, as Amitai Etzioni, author of From Empire to Community: A New Approach to International Relations (2004), once reminded us, "Whether one is highly critical of the American global projection of power or celebrates that the United States has accepted that it is destined to bring order and liberty to the world. . . . [The question is:] Where do we go from here?" 
22
Our new equation will require novel frameworks and mental models by which the United States, as part of a global effort, can plan, lead, and organize solutions to compound security threats. A theory and an analytics-informed, multilayer, network model (see figure 
2
I n the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic and in light of ongoing security challenges from Russia and elsewhere, how will the transatlantic security environment evolve in the next few years? This question is a critical one for American policymakers. The magnitude and scope of transatlantic trade in goods and services, the commitment to common values such as democracy and the rule of law, and shared geopolitical interests within and beyond the transatlantic region make America's relationship with Europe of vital interest to the United States.
Continuing Russian military provocations in northeastern Europe, Moscow's efforts to undermine democracy and intergovernmental institutions, foreign fighters from the Islamic State, China's increasingly exploitative behavior in Europe, and waves of migrants from Africa and the Middle East, however, threaten Europe's stability and security and hence American vital interests. Magnifying these challenges is the economic disaster generated by the COVID-19 pandemic, which is likely to be the worst global contraction since the Great Depression. This brief article will unpack for policymakers what these challenges may mean for transatlantic security in the coming two to four years. To accomplish this, the article will first outline the current state of play in European security arguing a kind of equilibrium has been achieved over the last two years, in contrast with the mid-2010s when the European security environment was in great flux. Nonetheless, as the second section of this article points out, several ongoing and emerging challenges combined to create an unsteadiness in European security at the beginning of this new decade. Whether those challenges remain relatively manageable or erupt into crises will depend on the primary drivers of security in Europe, which are identified in the third section of this article. Finally, the article outlines potential alternative short-term futures in Europe, drawing out some prospective outcomes and implications.
In some respects, Europe has entered a security stasis over the last two years particularly in contrast to the 2014-16 period and especially with regard to the most acute security threats confronting Europenamely, Russian aggression and international terrorism. This security stasis was mostly the result of two key factors. First, most North Atlantic Treaty Organization member states implemented a series of budgetary, force posture, readiness, and modernization initiatives intended both to reverse years of steadily declining defense budgets, on average, and to begin correcting the deficit of territorial defense capability and capacity across Europe. 
1
2
Despite this progress, there remains a security unsteadiness in Europe today stemming from several threats and challenges. The first is continued destabilizing Russian provocations in, near, and over Europe. 
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
How these threats evolve will depend in large measure on several key drivers of security and stability in Europe, primarily the economic slowdown created by the COVID-19 pandemic. The contraction in global economic activity threatens to be the worst since the Great Depression. 
12
The second driver of security in Europe in the short run is Moscow's strategy of undermining the transatlantic relationship, destabilizing European politics, and dominating Russia's immediate neighbors, primarily rooted in Russia's persistent conflation of territory with security. 
13
The third most important driver is the American relationship with Europe in terms of security and trade. President Trump has a mixed track record with NATO despite expressing support for the Alliance at the December 2019 leaders' meeting in London and even though his own National Security Strateg y embraces NATO as an invaluable advantage. 
14
15
overturning decades of bipartisan support for European integration, and he has threatened to impose tariffs on a wide array of European goods. 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
The sixth and final short-term driver of European security is France's ongoing economic reform effort. Emmanuel Macron-a relative newcomer to politics-was elected to the presidency in mid-2017 on the promise of a dramatic shakeup of the French economy. Since then he has struggled to implement what outside experts and economists have long acknowledged are fundamental, structural flaws in the French economic model. 
23
To safeguard its interests in Europe and beyond, the United States' grand strategic objective regarding Europe has long been to prevent a single, protectionist power from dominating the continent. Secondarily, Washington also desires European partners capable of and willing to defend common interests and values at home and abroad. Pursuit of these goals could be frustrated in the next two to four years, depending on the various drivers identified in the preceding section and how they affect the ability of European allies to manage the challenges posed by Russia, terrorism, China, and migration.
The most positive scenario might include the following outcomes over the next two to four years:
1. Russia calculates that fiscal and political costs of regularly violating the sovereignty of its neighbors, maintaining its support for the separatist war in Ukraine, and pursuing sociopolitical instability in Europe and North America through media and cyber manipulation Obviously, the scenarios outlined above are speculative and any number of permutations between and beyond the two scenarios are possible. Nonetheless, it is clear events in Europe will have significant implications for US national security and defense policy. Policymakers in Washington cannot fully control the transatlantic security drivers but having an awareness of those drivers and their potential implications can help the United States to mitigate the worst-case outcomes. C hina's advantages in anti-access/area-denial will require novel US warfighting solutions going forward. 
1
For nearly 20 years, the US military focused to a fault on irregular wars with nonstate actors in Afghanistan, Iraq, and more broadly the Global War on Terror. During that time, the Department of Defense prioritized counterinsurgency, counterterrorism, and nation building in its strategy, concepts, plans, and readiness. The post-9/11 wars were perhaps the most disruptive for the US Army. The Army shouldered the wars' principal burdens. 
3
As the United States fought insurgents and terrorists, China developed hypercompetitive approaches focused on outflanking US interests and, if necessary, defeating US forces in the Indo-Pacific region. To date, China's hypercompetitive methods have confounded traditional US approaches to competition, deterrence, and warfighting. 
4
The 2018 National Defense Strateg y (NDS 18) recognizes an imperative for wholesale Joint transformation to meet the challenge of great power rivalry. 
5
The Army recently adopted the concept of multidomain operations as its contribution to great power rivalry. 
6
While the military was away in the Middle East, a fundamental threat to American power emerged in the Indo-Pacific region. 
7
8
Freier and Schaus 29 transformation, and gray-zone activism. 
9
The method, scope, and pace of China's approach to countering the United States and the essential character of an American response is most accurately described as hypercompetition. 
10
11
US adaptation to hypercompetitive great power rivalry started late and has only recently begun to take root. Most notably over the past three years, the 2017 National Security Strateg y and NDS 18 offered clear guidance that the United States should prioritize great power rivalry in strategy, plans, acquisition, and employment of military capabilities and methods. A byproduct of the two Trump administration strategies is official identification of China as the United States' pacing military threat. 
12
The commander of INDOPACOM succinctly described a key aspect of change in the Indo-Pacific military dynamic during a 2019 Senate Armed Services Committee hearing: "we speak frequently about the erosion of our advantage . . . which is really the case here. China has seriously eroded that quantitative advantage-the number of assets that they have-but they're also eroding that qualitative advantage." 
13
In this more comprehensive view, the United States is dangerously out of position conceptually and physically, and as a result also out of position with regard to deployed forces and capabilities for long-term hypercompetition with China. This reality exacerbates the theater-wide erosion of advantage. It limits military options available to Joint Force commanders. It also simplifies the decision-making calculus of Chinese political and military leadership.
NDS 18 and institutional Army strategy both note the importance of developing and experimenting with innovative operating concepts. 
14
15
16
At present there are two Joint warfighting concepts under development by separate US headquarters or staffs and at least six independent service-specific operational concepts in various stages of development. Army multidomain operations is among them. While all these efforts are potentially value-added, the effect of multiple uncoordinated and, at times, competing concept development efforts threatens Joint unity of effort. Further, without strong senior-leader oversight, new Joint concepts are vulnerable to suboptimal compromise favoring service interests over emerging Joint operational requirements.
The regional posture of the United States is concentrated in northeast Asia, predicated on discredited assumptions of military advantage and positioned for the efficient prosecution of a second Korean war. It is not a forward posture conducive to effective hypercompetition orin extremis-transition to conflict with a hostile China. Substantial advances in the number and quality of China's precision-guided munitions-delivered from land, air, and sea-by themselves may nullify the deterrent effect of an American military heavily concentrated on large bases in Japan, Korea, Guam, and the Hawaiian Islands.
Likewise in the event of increased tensions or conflict, China enjoys strategic depth, internal or heavily protected lines of communication, and the ability to employ and maneuver critical assets with the benefit of relative sanctuary. But US and partner forces positioned in theater are within reach of China's substantial precision weapons inventory and would be in immediate danger. Furthermore, US and allied surge and sustainment forces pushed from the United States and other regions would be under persistent threat as they attempted to reinforce forwarddeployed forces. 
17
US Joint Forces currently lack the capability for the kind of largescale, widely distributed "all-domain" operations essential to give China pause in escalating regional tensions or to defeat the People's Liberation Army (PLA) in armed hostilities. 
18
For the Army specifically, delivery of lethal and nonlethal multidomain effects and ground combat are favored at the expense of Joint-enabling capabilities essential to an agile and distributed theater Joint Force. 
19
20
The operational demand for more distributed Joint operations within the INDOPACOM area of operations will expose the folly of a suboptimized Joint approach, uncoordinated service concepts, and persistent neglect of the enabling functions upon which successful Joint operations rely. Continued disadvantages in concepts, physical posture, and capabilities will increasingly constrain or deny the ability of US Joint Forces to hypercompete, especially when confronted with escalation from China.
A new hypercompetitive theater approach that is biased for action is the most appropriate way ahead. This approach implies transforming theater design across Joint functions and service components while actively hypercompeting for and exploiting transient advantages. US Joint Forces should pursue longer-lead, high-risk, high-reward technological advancements. They cannot, however, necessarily rely on them for decisive effect over the near-to midterm. Across the Joint Force, the earliest wins will likely emerge not from breakthrough technological change but from innovative and novel operational concepts, task organization, mission tailoring, and physical posture.
Consistent with NDS 18, a transformed INDOPACOM theater design should prioritize change to regain the strategic initiative. With initiative, the Joint Force can expand the competitive space to complicate rival decision-making and restore and maintain the favorable military balance. 
21
Initiative, nurtured by deliberate choices in the application of resources and effort, allows the Joint Force to identify and exploit hypercompetitive opportunities as they emerge. This initiative starts in the persistent campaigning that should inevitably occur in the gray space short of armed conflict. As the Department of Defense works to develop and consolidate around a new Joint warfighting concept, an essential component of persistent campaigning is refocusing and repurposing Joint and service-level priorities to maximize operational and theaterstrategic impact. We suggest the Army is central to such a change. 
Freier and Schaus 33
Real Joint transformation in INDOPACOM can come when one service embraces the job of enabling Joint multi-or all-domain operations. This transformation is the Army's greatest value proposition in the INDOPACOM theater over the next decade as it relates to the US-China rivalry. Toward this end, the Army can contribute most effectively to a transformed Joint theater design by adopting four transformational roles:
• the Army as the grid
• the Army as the enabler
• the Army as the multidomain warfighter
• the Army as the capability and capacity generator 
22
The Army as the enabler calls for a Joint-focused Army transformation specific to INDOPACOM in mission command, sustainment, protection, movement, and intelligence (and information) to animate the grid. This transformation requires a persistent small-unit, multifunctional Army presence prepared to activate clusters, hubs, and nodes to meet Joint operational demands. It further requires missiontailored Army forces to task organize and operate in distributed fashion well below the brigade level.
The Army as the multidomain warfighter sees the Army-led fielding of a land-based, multidomain warfighting capability with theaterwide presence and reach in concert with sister services and foreign partners. Army and sister service multidomain capabilities and concepts should be inspired by and integrated into a unified Joint multidomain theater concept.
The Army as the capability and capacity generator leverages a significant asymmetric US advantage-a strong network of regional allies and partners-to enhance traditional ground-force competencies and expand complementary multidomain capability. In this regard, Army forces-within a unified Joint concept-can be a catalyst for fielding a combined land-based, multidomain warfighting network that draws on the unique strengths and competencies of US partners.
The Army is currently focused on its roles of multidomain warfighter and capability and capacity generator in INDOPACOM. 
23
Thriving in hypercompetition first requires the United States to recognize and commit to engaging in it. A hypercompetitive US approach to INDOPACOM requires agile, disruptive, and mutually reinforcing Joint and Service theater designs. This point is not lost on China, but it remains conspicuously underdeveloped in US strategic calculations.
The Army is currently well positioned to take the first steps in inspiring essential Joint transformation by creating a flexible, scalable, and dynamic theater design biased first for distributed Joint theater enabling. This bias also implies commitment to establishing the physical grid essential to the enabling function. The grid and enabling functions combined will require innovative reconfiguration and employment of Army mission command, protection, sustainment, movement, and intelligence (and information) capabilities. As it becomes a reality, transformed Army theater design should help signal enduring US commitment to the region, expand options available to Joint Force commanders, and help them complicate rival planning and decision-making.
Success cannot be the result of good fortune or providence in INDOPACOM. 
24
Professor Nathan Freier, associate professor of National Security Studies at the Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War College, focuses on defense and military strategy and policy development, and strategic net and risk assessment. ABSTRACT: Adversaries are actively targeting US and NATO critical infrastructure, particularly energy, transportation, information, communications, and the defense industrial base sectors to undermine military capability, readiness, and force projection. In some cases, adversaries are penetrating the critical infrastructure of the United States and our allies to identify vulnerabilities for later exploitation, and in others critical infrastructure is being weaponized by Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea as a form of hybrid warfare.
T he West's adversaries are using critical infrastructure (CI) as a weapon of choice in three domains. 
1
2
The linkage between critical infrastructure as an instrument of hybrid warfare has been on open display in Georgia and the Ukraine where a Russian cyberarmy, closely affiliated with the Kremlin, has systematically attacked almost every sector of Ukraine's infrastructure for the past five years. 
3
Governments and cyberexperts attribute these cyberattacks to a Russian group known as Sandworm, which deployed its BlackEnergy malware to penetrate specialized computer architectures used for remotely managing physical industrial equipment and control systems. What most worried these cyberexperts was Sandworm had already targeted NATO networks and had compromised the computers of American and European electric and water utility companies with the same Trojan malware. This malware provided hackers with enough control to induce blackouts on American soil. As one cyberforensic expert forewarned: "An adversary that had already targeted American energy utilities had crossed the line and taken down a power grid [in the Ukraine]. It was an imminent threat to the United States." 
4
The upshot is European countries, particularly Germany, and NATO writ large are attuned to the vulnerabilities associated with their dependency on Russian gas and oil supplies. Europe could not survive 30 days without Russian gas in the winter, and its vulnerabilities will only increase with Nord Stream coming online. Certain NATO countries such as Germany are more dependent on Russian energy supplies, leading President Trump at the 2018 NATO Summit in Brussels to tweet, "What good is NATO if Germany is paying Russia billions of dollars for gas and energy?" 
5
Hackers (New York: Doubleday, 2019), 53.
5. Donald Trump (@Donald Trump), "What good is NATO if Germany is paying Russia billions of dollars for gas and energy?" Twitter, July 11, 2018, 10:07AM, https://twitter.com /realdonaldtrump/status/1017093020783710209?lang=en.
Evans 37
In March 2018, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Department of Homeland Security confirmed Russian government hacker teams had actively "targeted government entities and multiple U.S. CI sectors, including the energy, nuclear, commercial facilities, water, aviation, and critical manufacturing sectors." 
6
7
8
The game changer for today, however, is that with cyberspace and the merging of CI with information and communications technologies, our adversaries no longer require kinetic solutions and direct military confrontation with the United States. Rather as one senior DoD official conceded, "the smart thing to do is to maneuver around those forces, attack the critical infrastructure, the facilities here in the United States on which we depend to deploy, operate and sustain our forces abroad." 
9
10
"China, in particular, has made it a national goal to acquire foreign technologies to advance its economy and to modernize its military. . . . It is comprehensively targeting advanced US technologies and the people, the information, businesses and research institutions that underpin them." 
12
Initiated in 2015, Beijing's Made in China 2025 industrial policy directs Chinese technological development in important dual-use areas: artificial intelligence, quantum computing, robotics, aerospace, autonomous and new energy vehicles, communications, and other emerging industries. China analysts have focused largely on the government's illicit means to acquire these technologies through espionage, cyberoperations, evasion of US export control restrictions, and through coercive intellectual property sharing requirements for foreign companies investing in the Chinese market. Less attention has been paid to Beijing's "Go Out" strategy of promoting Chinese stateowned and private sector champions to invest overseas, particularly in the United States and Europe, in key defense industrial base sectors. Outward foreign investments and acquisitions have been assisted by Beijing-backed investment vehicles, such as the China Investment Corporation and massive sovereign wealth funds. 
13
The response by the Trump administration to Huawei has been swift and decisive. It has banned Huawei from all federal contracts for telecommunications equipment and services, and US government contractors are prohibited from doing business with Huawei as well. 
14
Concerned about the larger implications of Chinese investments and other adversarial activities involving the US defense industry base infrastructure, Congress passed the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 2018 as part of the larger National Defense Authorization Act of 2019. This legislation expands the powers of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States to prevent foreign adversaries from gaining control of defense industrial infrastructure assets. 
15
16
17
18
19
Arguably, Chinese Belt and Road Initiative investments in Europe are part of a deliberate strategy by Beijing to target economically weaker NATO members to draw them into China's orbit. Indeed, this strategy appears to be having some success. Hungary and Greece sought to block any direct reference to China in an EU statement regarding the ruling by the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague that struck down the People's Republic of China's legal claims in the South China Sea. 
20
21
Evans 41 EU regulation establishing a framework for screening foreign direct investments in critical infrastructure and technologies. This new regulation is due to come into full effect in November 2020. 
22
Beginning in 2005, the DoD initiated an enterprise-wide Defense Critical Infrastructure Program which focused on identifying key defense infrastructure assets and developing guidelines and procedures for their protection. 
23
24
25
The targeting of civilian infrastructure as part of Russia's hybrid warfare in Ukraine further spurred NATO efforts, in cooperation with the EU, to enhance critical infrastructure resiliency through developing baseline requirements for measuring and improving civil preparedness. 
26
The use of critical infrastructure as a weapon by our adversaries has received little attention in international security circles. As discussed previously, CI can be used as an instrument of hybrid warfare among weaker states such as Ukraine and against superpowers such as the United States. Whether through the use of cyberattacks against a country's infrastructure, or more covertly through surveillance and penetration, or via acquisitions and direct foreign investment, targeting of critical infrastructure enables our adversaries to shape and control vital defense industry base infrastructure upon which US and NATO militaries rely.
The Politics of Oath-Taking ABSTRACT: Political and professional oath-takers are obliged to abide by their oaths. But their understanding of this obligation and the associated civil-military relations norms is uneven. This article distinguishes between political and professional oath-takers and examines how each should fulfill its obligations to uphold the Constitution.
L ieutenant Colonel Alexander Vindman, in his opening statement during the House impeachment hearings, said, "I am a patriot, and it is my sacred duty and honor to advance and defend OUR country, irrespective of party or politics." 
1
2
In response, this article maintains military officers who testify against the commander in chief in settings such as an impeachment hearing do not violate the apolitical professional norm even if the president explicitly prohibits such testimony. In fact, officers who appear on the basis of legal congressional subpoenas uphold their oaths to support and defend the Constitution and preserve the constitutional powers of their second and coequal civilian master, Congress. Such nonpartisan actions support the checks and balances fundamental to the American democratic process, essential to the preservation of democratic institutions. 
America's founders authored a blueprint for a political system Edward Corwin famously stated was "an invitation to struggle." 
3
4
5
6
7
Ulrich 45 individual leader or even the state but to a particular form of democratic government, or rules of the game, which the Constitution established. Consequently, participating in any action that undermines constitutional norms violates the oath of commissioning, the oath of federal office holders, and the trust inherent in the civil-military bargain between the military, the political leadership, and the people.
Loyalty oaths were the only normative tool inserted into the Founders' democratic playbook. They are an important component of the civil-military norms derived from traditions and practices developed over time to supplement and reinforce the constitutional rules explicitly stated in the Constitution. 
8
In fall 2019, the United States House of Representatives investigated allegations President Donald Trump made the provision of military aid to Ukraine contingent on the Ukrainian government announcing it was investigating his chief political rival, former vice president and presidential candidate Joe Biden. 
9
10
Political oath-takers are political actors elected to their offices or appointed by elected officials to pursue a particular policy agenda. The president, political appointees in the administration, and members of Congress are examples of political oath-takers. Professional oath-takers hold their positions regardless of the political party in power. In the realm of policy development and implementation, military actors, as professional oath-takers, provide nonpartisan subject matter expertise and institutional know-how to political actors. Indeed, civil-military relations theory argues military actors' professional status stems from TOC political actors' reliance on their uniquely acquired military expertise. Regardless of affiliation professional oath-takers are required to remain nonpartisan in the performance of their duties. This apolitical ethic serves as a sort of shield protecting the professional oath-takers from allegations their motives are self-serving, political, or in some way unpatriotic.
Military actors have a privileged voice in the national discourse because of their perceived unique expertise and the elevated status of the military institution in society. 
11
12
13
14
15
The Ukraine scandal revealed a political climate where political oath-takers were caught up in the polarization of the times, which limited the objective functioning of the checks and balances so fundamental to American democracy. The scandal also highlighted the role oaths played in motivating some participants to adhere to professional norms developed in their experience as national security professionals. The next section presents the examples of a former military officer and an active military officer who honored their oaths while participating in the impeachment inquiry.
William Taylor graduated from West Point in 1969 and went to war as an infantry officer in the 101st Airborne Division. He remained in government service for the next 50 years as a military officer, Department of Energy employee, Senate staffer, and Foreign Service Officer. A diplomat at the center of the Ukraine inquiry, his media profiles invariably include the term "patriot" and link his military service to his integrity 
Ulrich 47 and commitment to American ideals. 
16
Taylor testified before the House impeachment inquiry despite White House orders not to cooperate. His opening statement made his motivation clear. Taylor was concerned the strategically important US-Ukraine relationship "was being fundamentally undermined by an irregular, informal channel of US policy-making and by the withholding of vital security assistance for domestic political reasons." 
17
18
19
20
Commissioned in 1999 as an Army infantry officer, Vindman is a combat veteran who was wounded in Iraq in 2004. He subsequently became a Eurasian foreign area officer and was assigned to the National Security Council staff. 
21
22
I have a deep appreciation for American values and ideals and the power of freedom. I am a patriot, and it is my sacred duty and honor to advance and defend OUR country, irrespective of party or politics. For over twenty years as an active duty United States military officer and diplomat, I have served this country in a nonpartisan manner, and have done so with the utmost respect and professionalism for both Republican and Democratic administrations. 
23
Yet some questioned his patriotism and adherence to civil-military relations norms. An active duty officer stationed at the Pentagon likened Vindman's appearance before the committee in uniform to "the Army pushing a coup." 
24
25
26
27
Such criticism failed to acknowledge Vindman's accountability to Congress to respond to lawful subpoenas and to offer testimony as a fact witness. In addition, his advice as a professional military expert on national security processes and policies in question was also relevant. Indeed, as a military professional, he had a professional responsibility to share expert knowledge that would enable members of Congress to make political judgments that were theirs uniquely to make. Vindman also acted to preserve the office of the president by supporting Congress' constitutional remedy to hold individuals who abuse the office accountable through the impeachment power.
Other observers lauded Vindman's decision to testify before the House impeachment inquiry citing the unique professional ethic of military oath-takers. Former assistant secretary of defense Evelyn Farkas noted: "Military officers stress the duty to speak out and report up the chain if they see something awry. This is something that we don't drill into civilians. But in the military they are not expected to resign but to speak up the chain." 
28
29
This article has has discussed the need for new norms in civilmilitary relations theory, obligating citizens entrusted with positions of national responsibility to uphold oaths they take to the Constitution of the United States. The case considered-the Ukraine scandal and the subsequent impeachment inquiry-simply asked, to what extent does the traditional apolitical civil-military relations norm require or forbid the involvement of military officers in such activities as testifying in an impeachment hearing? Exploration of constitutional foundations and civil-military norms found that appearing before congressional committees carrying out their constitutional powers of impeachment does not violate civilmilitary relations norms. On the contrary, such acts are consistent with the primary civil-military norm of professional militaries to remain subordinate to civilian control, in this case the control of Congress using its constitutional power of impeachment to investigate the president. Such acts preserve the powers of Congress and protect the office of the president from office-holders who might abuse their power. Professional oath-takers commit themselves to putting America first in terms of preserving its democratic institutions. Political oath-takers take the same oath. But in the current political climate many value their partisan 28. MSNBC, "Army Officer Who Heard Trump's Ukraine Call Voiced His Concerns to Superiors," The Last Word with Lawrence O'Donnell, MSNBC, October 28, 2019, https://www.msnbc .com/the-last-word/watch/army-officer-who-heard-trump-s-ukraine-call-voiced-his-concerns-to -superiors-72223301604.
29. Tiana Lowe, "Vindman is a Patriot, Not a Ukrainian Spy," Washington Examiner, October 29, 2019, https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/opinion/vindman-is-a-patriot-not-a-ukrainian-spy.
TOC 50 Parameters 50(2) Summer 2020 identification over their oaths. Their fellow citizens are taking note; many are grateful, but others are critical due to a narrower understanding of democratic and civil-military relations norms.
Effective practices may include better socialization into the meaning of the oath similar to the military's tradition of making the readministration of the oath the center of promotion ceremonies. More robust education in professional military education highlighting the fact that the executive and Congress are coequal branches would help to dispel the prevailing view that loyalty to the president trumps the professional responsibility to appear before Congress.
Benjamin Franklin, when asked what sort of government the delegates to the Constitutional Convention of 1787 had created, replied, "a republic, if you can keep it." 
30
31
U ncertainty remains as inevitable today as it was when Carl von Clausewitz discussed "'the fog of war'" two centuries ago. 
1
2
3
In the operating environment of the twenty-first century, social, political, economic, historical, and geographic factors constitute complex, ever-adapting open systems. 
4
5
As national interests among major powers diverge, an escalating terror threat, continued instability in fragile states, the wider availability of lethal, long-range weapons systems, and the stress of expanding environmental degradations will disrupt societies and increase the risk of conflict. 
6
The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff's futures assessment, Joint Operating Environment 2035, is equally certain about uncertainty concluding, "these conditions illustrate contested norms and persistent disorder in the future security environment." 
7
Despite the likelihood of imprecision if not complete blunder, strategic planners must consider and incorporate these prognostications in order to link military campaigning to national strategy effectively so strategy anticipates national policy outcomes. Clausewitz stated 
Cunningham 53 firmly that primarily, "it is clear that war should never be thought of as something autonomous but always as an instrument of policy; otherwise, the entire history of war would contradict us." 
9
10
1
11
12
Often the soldier's favored means of local transportation, the heavy-lift helicopter, is the only means available to deliver aid and supplies to the sites of large-scale natural disasters where great swaths of infrastructure and utilities no longer exist. These contingencies, too, must be anticipated and planned for with as much energy and precision as combat operations.
Often strategic thinking is viewed as abstract reflection on strategiclevel products or actions. Thucydides, Sun Tzu, Kautilya, Machiavelli, Clausewitz, Jomini, Mao Zedong, and others have their advocates. 
13
14
15
Cunningham 55
plentiful. It is a relatively facile thing to identify likely major adversaries; it is quite another to develop practical plans and orders for countering their influence and deterring or defeating their aggression.
The National Security Strateg y of 2017, for example, presents 99 priority actions across the whole of government. But these priority actions are not compared against each other or associated with resource constraints or operational feasibility. The National Security Strateg y addresses outcomes and strategic goals but offers little with regard to resource allocations, fiscal constraints, or military effort, forces, or processes to be set against potential threats. It is aspirational in nature and relates little specific planning guidance.
While grand strategy is academically appealing, in practice military commanders and planners cannot luxuriate in theories and lofty strategic concepts. The contemplation of operational design as described earlier is a useful methodology to employ to this pragmatic end, but the requisite framing is often a troublesome enterprise. Strategic guidance is quite often difficult to obtain, much less understand. Further, William E. Rapp argues persuasively that it is psychologically, culturally, and even structurally difficult to communicate across the civilian and military divide that characterizes strategy formulation at national strategic levels. 
16
Arthur F. Lykke Jr.'s model of military strategy as national security supported by a three-legged stool provides a time-tested heuristic that has become a basic paradigm within current planning. While it has its detractors, the ends, ways, and means model is ingrained in US doctrine. 
17
18
2
19
20
21
Exacerbating the challenges of understanding national strategy as strategic direction are the difficulties associated with the constraints of limited forces and capabilities. Approaches which rigidly follow predetermined, assigned geographic theaters or which consolidate globe-spanning functions will be inadequate to confront, deter, or defeat adversaries who adroitly integrate and employ military and nonmilitary power at times of their own choosing. To meet this contemporary challenge, the concept of global integration was introduced in the 2016 National Military Strateg y and further elaborated two years later as a planning principle in the chairman's instruction on the Joint Strategic Planning System:
Global integration is the arrangement of cohesive Joint Force actions in time, space, and purpose, executed as a whole to address transregional, 
Cunningham 57 multi-functional challenges across all domains. It is a top-down, iterative process that integrates planning, prioritizes resources, and assesses progress toward strategic objectives. Global integration ends include enhanced senior leader decision making, strategically integrated worldwide operations, and a balanced and lethal future Joint Force. 
22
Operational design methodology provides a conceptual approach to problem solving well-suited to connecting national strategic policy guidance with theater strategy policy. The design process begins with understanding the strategic direction. Yet this step has typically been very difficult to do given the difference between national or grand strategy and military strategy as a framework for operational art. But the linkage is essential if military design is to produce ends that accomplish the policy objectives mandated by the need to sustain national interests in the face of dedicated opposition from sophisticated adversaries. 
23
Specifically with regard to strategy comprehension and formulation, the chairman's Officer Professional Military Education Policy (OPMEP) aligns national-and theater-level strategy to senior-level education for Joint officers-predominantly in grades O-5 and O-6-and equivalent international officers and US civilians for service at strategic levels, with an emphasis on Joint operations. 
24
25
First, institutions for Joint professional military education should give themselves a frank azimuth check to determine they are in fact accomplishing the objectives set forth by the chairman for these toplevel schools. The tendency appears to be drifting from meeting those requirements to familiarization with theorists and national policy as grand strategy. The OPMEP clearly states these requirements are matters of federal law, not preference, and include not only national security strategy but "planning at all levels of war . . . [including] theater strategy and campaigning, joint planning processes and systems . . . [and]  joint, interagency, and multinational capabilities and the integration of those capabilities." 
26
Second, Joint professional military education must both capitalize on and foster relationships based on existing alliances and coalitions. The OPMEP points out that international officers are intended recipients of US Joint professional military education at senior levels, a policy in keeping with Tami Davis Biddle's recommendation: "military students in particular ought to have every opportunity to learn to see their world through lenses other than their own. Cultural awareness and cultural literacy are essential to politics and to strategy." 
27
Third, curriculum relating to Joint planning must embrace global integration with enthusiasm and incorporate interagency and multinational partners as a matter of routine. 
28
29
30
31
Cunningham 59
The United States should embrace innovative and comprehensive military theater and functional strategies. These should reflect widely conceived, thoroughly coordinated campaign planning that capitalizes on existing alliances and coalitions, builds partnership capacity, and enthusiastically embraces global integration.
In a pervasive atmosphere of uncertainty, a professional military will need to change to accept complexity and risk, rely on adaptability, and embrace innovation. Educators, especially those responsible for the development of courses and curricula, should respond to this need by taking an approach to teaching that itself is less structured and more holistic.
If Joint professional military education is to seriously concentrate on the development of adaptive, innovative, chaos-tolerant leaders "capable of thriving at the speed of war," then course design and curricular development must model the creativity and analysis we expect to produce. 
32
C lausewitz famously noted that war has an enduring nature and a changing character. The same holds for strategic military leadership-it intermixes both consistency and change. The changing character of strategic leadership implies traditional methods for developing strategic leaders and exercising strategic leadership may no longer be adequate. Like their forebears, tomorrow's strategic leaders must assure their organizations are effective at core warfighting functions, whether defeating enemies, maintaining security, or supporting other organizations. They must create and sustain effective, ethical organizational cultures. And they must think horizontally-integrating diverse activities and organizations-and vertically-planning for the long-term future and considering second-and third-order effects-while addressing near-term issues and challenges. These are the components of the enduring nature of strategic leadership.
But much is changing. The evolutionary forces shaping strategic leadership are powerful, intense, and complex, suggesting traditional methods for developing strategic leaders and exercising strategic leadership may no longer be adequate. It is impossible to predict precisely what attributes and capabilities will be most important in the coming decades but it is possible-and important-to identify likely ones. One way to do this is to take the major trends underway in the strategic environment and assess how they might require changes to the character of strategic leadership, conceptualizing this in the three interconnected realms of sustainment of security (strategic leadership's outward-looking function), organizational design, and organizational culture and ethic.
Imagine the commander of a future combatant command-or whatever integrated, multinational, dispersed, networked, public/private security organization replaces today's combatant commands. She or he must deal with conventional enemies and the need to deter or defeat TOC 62 Parameters 50(2) Summer 2020 them in combat but also face nonstate adversaries exploiting what is called the "weaponization of everything." 1 "Modern technology," as Benjamin Wittes and Gabriella Blum write, "enables individuals to wield the destructive power of states." 
2
3
This future commander will be surrounded by and part of revolutionary advancements in biology and bioengineering, neurologic enhancement, nanotechnology, advanced material sciences, quantum computing, artificial intelligence, robotics, and additive manufacturing. 
4
5
6
intelligence then constantly reassessing and revising it. The skill to do this will be vital, perhaps even decisive.
Dynamic narrative shaping will be critically important for future strategic leaders. Since war is waged for political objectives, it is ultimately psychological; what matters most is not how many of the enemy are killed or how many targets destroyed but how audiences understand and react to military actions. In a strategic environment characterized by a profusion of information, highly fluid ideas and beliefs, intricate connectivity, and intense, global transparency, the psychological component of military action will be even more important than in the past. "The only outcome of military action that ultimately matters," Brad Dewees wrote, "occurs at the cognitive level-at the level where adversaries perceive and give meaning to actions taken against them." 7 Or as P. W. Singer and Emerson Brookings put it: "What determines the outcome is not mastery of the facts, but rather a back-and-forth battle of psychological, political and (increasingly) algorithmic manipulation. Everything is now transparent, yet the truth can be easily obscured." 
8
9
10
11
In the past most strategic military leaders-at least American oneswere the stewards of the organizations they commanded rather than their creators. They might make some incremental changes or improvements but in most cases did not have to create new organizations from scratch or totally rebuild an existing organization. The pace and extent of change suggests those days are past: future strategic leaders will need to be the creators and revolutionizers of organizations, entrepreneurs rather than simply stewards. As with many aspects of life, technology will be the locomotive, defining the possible.
For instance, strategic military leaders have long relied on staff work and their own judgment to make decisions. But as information expands, leaders of all kinds increasingly will use data-based, technologically enhanced analytics. Effective strategic leaders cannot simply depend on staff to tell them what they need to know but must have a working knowledge of the analytical processes and the information that feeds decisions. While strategic leaders may not themselves be experts on the design of artificial intelligence, they must be "aware of the significance, capabilities, and risks associated with algorithms." 
12
Future strategic leaders will no longer face a shortage of vital information but will struggle with its profusion. As James Mancillas writes: "One of the principal challenges of today's military leader is managing the ever-increasing flow of information available to them. The ease and low cost of collecting, storing, and communicating has resulted in a supply of data that exceeds the cognitive capacity of most humans." 
13
"Nothing breeds complacency like success," writes Charles O'Reilly of the Stanford Graduate School of Business, "the point for maximum strategic paranoia is when you are at the top of your game." 
14
15
Metz 65 change, incremental adaptation and improvement will be necessary but not sufficient.
There is a saying that in war "speed kills." Soon this dictum will apply not only to the maneuver of forces but also to organizational adaptation. Admittedly, innovation has long been a component of strategic leadership from the redesign of tactical formations by Alexander the Great, Maurice of Nassau, Gustavus Adolphus and Napoleon, to the nineteenth-century development of general staffs and professional military education, through the twentieth century's combined arms warfare on both land and sea. But most often innovation was a response to failure or defeat or to a fear of failure or defeat. In the future, disruption, innovation, and entrepreneurship must be constant and preemptive rather than reactive. As soon as an organization is functioning at a high level, strategic leaders must begin redesign.
Traditionally, strategic leaders in the US military also approached culture and ethics from the perspective of stewardship rather than entrepreneurship. Rarely were organizations completely broken, so strategic leaders focused on sustaining what worked and fixing what was not. As with organizational design, future strategic leaders will need to be disrupters of culture and ethics, innovators and entrepreneurs, "empathetic crafter[s] of culture" as General Stanley McChrystal, US Army retired put it. 
16
It is to impossible know exactly what ethical challenges will be most pressing in the coming decades, but is possible to identify candidates. Take, for instance, the political and informational context of strategy. In previous decades there were only a few authoritative sources of information for the public-three television networks, a few major news magazines, a handful of major newspapers, and an array of influential journals of opinion. Reliance on a limited number of carefully edited information sources pushed political discourse and ideas toward the middle; this allowed compromise and consensus building. Now the information environment is very different. There are thousands, perhaps millions, of sources but few indicators of reliability. Young people in particular do not rely on traditional media sources for information so the traditional media, with its emphasis on balance, fact-checking, and careful editorial control, does not reach them. 
17
TOC 66 Parameters 50(2) Summer 2020 kluge of political discourse and entertainment. How an idea is packaged matters as much, sometimes more, than its content. Infotainers shape the national narrative as much as professional journalists, policy experts, or elected officials.
The profusion of information also contributes to the fracturing of consensus and hyperpartisanship, pushing political positions away from the middle and toward the ideological poles. It increases hostility toward people and organizations on a different end of the partisan spectrum, creating a climate of intense political tribalism. Politics today is treated less like a process for reconciling diverse positions and reaching consensus than war by other means. Compromise is treated as a loss and no one wants to lose.
Hyperpartisanship and the politicization of security policy already create intense ethical dilemmas for military strategic leaders and are shaking the foundation of American civil-military relations. This situation is likely to escalate. Will it be incumbent on future military strategic leaders to tailor their advice to the ideological biases and proclivities of the political leader they are presenting it to? Must strategic advice be shaped by political tribalism? Can military strategic leaders be above or outside of this tribalism? Will uniformed leaders have to propose military options they know can be completed in one presidential administration since the next one is likely to reverse it? Must future strategic advice be entertaining so political leaders will remember it? Future strategic leaders will also face immense ethical challenges deciding how to use new technology like artificial intelligence and the human-technology interface. Even now movements to limit or ban things like "killer robots" are gaining strength. 
18
19
In the twentieth century, successful strategic leaders were like the titans of industry, managing increasingly large enterprises and increasingly complex endeavors. Winning often meant bringing the most resources to bear at the appropriate time and place. Particularly in the American way of war, logistics were decisive. Henry Ford or John D. Rockefeller probably would have been good strategic leaders while George Catlett Marshall or Dwight D. Eisenhower could have founded or led massive corporations. But future strategic leaders will need to be more like cutting-edge entrepreneurs, out-innovating and out-adapting adversaries.
Defeating the armed forces of enemies may be necessary but not sufficient as future strategic leaders struggle to sustain security in an interconnected environment with the weaponization of everything, where destroying and destabilizing are easy but sustaining security, hard. Building an organizational culture that is both effective and ethical will be challenging; success, short-lived. The process of reinvention and innovation will be constant. What works today, whether an organization, an ethic, a process, or a concept, may not work tomorrow.
To prepare for this future, the US military must institutionalize disruption, innovation, and entrepreneurship, creating organizational cultures based on rapid, persistent adaptation. It must develop campaigns of learning to identify both best practices and potential pitfalls in organizational disruption, innovation, and entrepreneurship. The military must integrate disruption, innovation, and entrepreneurship deep into its educational systems, teaching and testing for them, failing those who cannot thrive. It must constantly experiment with new strategic concepts and organizational forms.
As the military develops and promotes strategic leaders, it must test and select for skill at dynamic narrative-shaping. And the military must undertake even more robust partnerships and exchanges with the private sector, possibly even making such exchanges a requirement for leadership positions much like joint assignments. The US military's method for identifying, developing, and empowering strategic leaders has not adjusted to the onrushing change in the strategic, political, and informational environment, nor has it focused on the skill sets strategic leaders will need in coming decades. Now it must-time is short. ABSTRACT: The future of military ethics will be profoundly affected by competition below the level of war. Such competition de-emphasizes military force while expanding permissions on the ways and means militaries employ to shape enemy interests. This resulting new ethic will introduce norms associated with escalation, reprisal, and risk that will increase permissible uses of force while limiting their scope.
T he ongoing violent exchanges between Iran, its proxies, and the United States bring into stark relief the legal and ethical challenges associated with the use of force below the threshold of war. Driven by developments in technology and doctrine, state and nonstate actors are finding more space to compete, often using military force but avoiding an all-out war. But as the inconclusive debate regarding the moral and legal legitimacy of the ongoing tit-for-tat exchange between the United States and Iran continues-including the strike in Iraq that killed dozens of Kata'ib Hezbollah (KH) members, KH leader Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, and Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Quds Force Commander Qasem Soleimani-much regarding the character of this competition is not clearly covered by the current norms of warfare. 
1
TOC 70 Parameters 50(2) Summer 2020 and jus in bello-to address when actors are permitted to resort to force and what limits on such force there should be.
Sean McFate, in The New Rules of War, writes, "conventional war is dead." 
2
3
4
5
6
Determining the evolution of these norms is the purpose of jus ad vim, a term Michael Walzer coined in 2006 when he raised the concern that without such norms governing force below the threshold of war, war itself would be more likely as limited attacks could set off a wider escalation. 
7
While the law enforcement model is obviously preferable, it requires effective governance and a monopoly on the use of force. Where those conditions do not exist, one may be permitted to loosen restrictions on force but must at the same time avoid depressing the peacetime standard for human rights to the war time standard. 
8
9
If anonymity is the weapon of choice then proxies are one way of achieving it. Even when anonymity is not possible, proxies, as Iranian reliance on them suggests, are an effective means of transferring risk and lowering one's costs while imposing them on others. 
10
11
12
A second precedent establishing standards for effective control arises from the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia's findings regarding the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) Army's use of proxies against Bosnia and Herzegovina. Here they found the FRY was responsible for the Bosnian Serb Army (VRS) because the FRY had transferred officers to serve in the VRS, paid their salaries, had the same military objectives, provided financial and logistical support, and "directed and supervised the activities and operations of the VRS," effectively giving them "overall control." 
13
14
15
Whatever one thinks about the legality of the US air strikes targeting Soleimani and KH leadership, attacks by Iranian proxies that provoked them clearly broke international law. While the administration's maximum pressure policy has dramatically impacted the Iranian economy, it does not justify an armed response. 
16
17
18
19
20
The difficulty here is these alternatives are often ineffective. The United States could have taken Iran to court for its role in the December 27 attack, but as the discussion regarding proxies indicates, it is not likely Iran would have been held responsible. The United States could also have tried nonviolent means to impose greater costs on Tehran, but given the already stringent sanctions Iran is under, it is not clear this course of action would be any more effective. This point suggests as adversaries increasingly engage in illegal behavior, there may be room for limited peacetime reprisals. As Walzer argues: "Reprisal is a practice carried over from the war convention to the world of 'peacetime,' because it provides an appropriately limited form of military action. It is better to defend the limits than to try to abolish the practice." 
21
Of course, a primary reason peacetime reprisals are illegal is the risk of escalation. Managing escalation requires having a plan for escalation dominance prior to initiating any competitive act, violent or nonviolent. As Herman Kahn notes, escalation dominance goes to the side that "fears eruption the least," or at least is the side best able to bear the cost should the conflict escalate. 
22
(2) an off-ramp that gives an adversary a less costly but acceptable option other than continued escalation; and (3) a consensus among key allies and partners regarding the legitimacy of one's response.
The operative word in the first condition is "demonstrated." It is not sufficient that one is able to bear the cost of further violence better than the adversary. The adversary also has to believe this to be the case. Military capability, of course, is important to demonstrating such capability. But it is just as important one demonstrate resolve as well. While there are numerous ways to do this, broad international support for one's cause can help to underscore the strength of the commitment. Thus, it makes sense to cultivate such support on an ongoing basis.
A good off-ramp is a clear policy statement giving the adversary something it can do that will avoid further retaliation-an alternative representing a lower cost than continued escalation. If conditions for escalation termination represent existential costs to an adversary then it has no reason not to continue the violence. Accordingly, off-ramps that undermine an actor's ability to govern or essentially disarm it will not likely be effective, which is why Secretary of State Mike Pompeo's twelve demands for Iran, including abandoning its nuclear program, ending its development of ballistic missiles, and ceasing its use of proxies, are not an effective off-ramp. It is not that the United States should not pursue these goals relative to Iran. It is just that those conditions are, at least in Tehran's perspective, equivalent to surrender and would make then vulnerable to regional adversaries such as Saudi Arabia. Consequently, when in an escalatory cycle, actors have to offer something else. In this case, it seems Iran was the one who found the off-ramp for the United States, temporarily at least. By striking back in a way that avoided fatalities it appeared, at least, to acknowledge the United States' redline regarding fatal attacks on US personnel while avoiding the appearance of backing down, which would have likely undermined the regime's domestic credibility. As Iran's renewed attacks have demonstrated, however, escalation termination is not the same as conflict termination. In competition, sometimes the practical if not ethical thing to do is limit violence, especially when that violence risks harms to civilians.
Both conditions suggest the importance of ensuring international support for one's actions. To the extent escalation entails political isolation, one increases one's costs to oneself while at the same limiting the resources available to find alternatives to continued escalation. The former is more a practical concern but the latter is ethical. The strike that killed Soleimani received widespread condemnation, even from European partners. 
23
Technologies such as cyber, artificial intelligence, robotics, and additive manufacturing among others are also going to impact the character of competition. 
24
25
Second, the proliferation of these technologies risks destabilizing the international order. As Margaret Kosal points out, "new technological 23. "World Reacts to Killing of Iran's Qassem Soleimani," Euronews, January 3, 2020, https:// www.euronews.com/2020/01/03/a-declaration-of-war-and-an-escalation-the-world-reacts-tosoleimani-killing. 24 
Pfaff 75 developments have become accessible and relatively inexpensive to a larger number of nations and within the grasp of nonstate actors: advanced technology is no longer the domain of the few." 
26
Third, while risk of physical harm may be reduced to near zero, the risk of psychological harms may increase and in unexpected ways. While studies have observed mental trauma associated with autonomous technologies, this can range unpredictably from desensitization and moral disengagement to trauma and moral injury. 
27
28
It should now be apparent what the broad contours of the resulting normative environment for competition would look like. From a practical perspective, low-cost measures that transfer risk and avoid attribution will proliferate, expanding targets to include those normally proscribed by international law. From a moral perspective, employing such measures will still be subject to conditions such as just cause, proportionality, reasonable chance for success, and last resort.
In doing so, any resulting ethic will make coercive measures, including the use of force, more permissive while limiting its scope. This ethic will prioritize nonlethal over lethal alternatives, and where lethal force is used, demand a higher standard for success and a much lower tolerance for civilian harm. These measures represent an alternative to war; therefore, actors will be morally required to take measures to avoid escalation. 
29
There is no bright line between competition and armed conflict. So while the military, political, and economic tools available to actors yield utility in either setting, the differences in ends competition and armed conflict represent differences in how these tools should be used both from a practical and ethical perspective. This last point is important. While the ethical does not follow the practical, the practical certainly shapes, in conjunction with a society's values and ideals, how the ethical gets put into practice.
Army Modernization in the 21st Century ABSTRACT: Harsh lessons from the failure of the US Army's future combat system a decade ago continue to haunt Army modernization efforts today. The advent of Army Futures Command and changes to the modernization and acquisitions process signal progress toward exorcising these ghosts of the past, enabling the Army to work with rather than against industry as it formulates its future combat systems requirements.
T he failure of the US Army's future combat systems 
(FCS)
The ghost of FCS haunts Army modernization and provides a cautionary tale for innovators and futurists. The FCS program, the largest planned modernization program in Army history, planned 18 separate systems integrated by a wireless network in a brigade structure and operating under emerging doctrine. The program aimed to provide weapons, individual computer systems, manned and unmanned vehicles, and a sensor suite. All vehicles would be transportable by C-130 and would be "more lethal, survivable, deployable, and sustainable than existing heavy combat systems." 
2
3
4
5
6
General Eric Shinseki's vision of the Army unveiled in October 1999, required the capability to deploy a brigade anywhere in the world in 96 hours with a full division on the ground in 120 hours, and five divisions in 30 days. 
7
8
Lynch 79 finish decisively." 
9
10
As the pace of technological change has accelerated, the Army has sought to take advantage of new, emergent, and possible technology, always looking for the "leap ahead." The FCS project manager identified 31 critical technology elements whose readiness determined the system's effectiveness. A technology readiness assessment in 2003 found significant problems, neither new nor unexpected. 
11
12
13
A RAND Corporation study of FCS in 2012 determined, "technical development must be rooted in exploratory basic science and advanced development programs validated by early and realistic field experimentation with real products, and not in SDD [Systems Development and Demonstration] phases of major acquisition programs." 
14
An artificially accelerated timeline driven by the desire to jumpstart transformation became a primary cause of the FCS system failure. In 2001, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld pressured the Army to modernize and adapt to emerging threats, reduce the logistics infrastructure, increase lethality, and speed deployment time. The term revolution in military affairs distinguished the effort from previous evolutionary changes of the 1990s. 
15
16
The Army seems to be in a golden period now with the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan winding down and no new near-term threats. The 2018 National Defense Strateg y articulates, "long-term strategic competitions with China and Russia are the principal priorities . . . because of the magnitude of the threats" and the potential for them to increase in the future. 
17
• The US Army's budget remains flat with reduced spending power over time. • Demand for Army forces remains relatively constant.
• Research and development matures in time to make significant improvements in Army capabilities by 2035. • Adversary modernization programs stay on their currently estimated trajectories in terms of capability levels and timelines. 
18
• Fiscal year (FY)2020 to FY2022: Begin initial fielding of the cross-functional teams' signature efforts. • FY2023 to FY2025: Adapt formations and organizational designs to incorporate the modernized equipment required for MDO. 
The role of Army Futures Command as a modernization headquarters allows the Army to consolidate and focus modernization and acquisition efforts; its initial development has proceeded with an eye toward correcting past failures, merging all technological research, modernization, and capability development processes into one command to better focus those efforts. Six priorities drive the Army's equipment modernization strategy: long-range precision fires, next-generation combat vehicles, future vertical lift, networks, air and missile defense, and soldier lethality. 
20
21
1
With the failure of FCS still fresh in the Army's consciousness, Secretary of the Army Ryan McCarthy challenged the modernization community to "fail early, fail cheap." 
22
23
25
In addition to the age-old vehicle weight problem, height became a challenge. Recent combat experience shows ground clearance enhances land mine survivability. Industry leaders warned the Army that some requirements 
Lynch 83
were unattainable and requested modifications. The Army subsequently removed the requirement to transport a full nine-soldier infantry squad-the original purpose of the vehicle. The objective requirement called for a 50mm cannon with a 30mm acceptable as an interim. With an added Modular Active Protection System, the vehicle was required to defeat rocket-propelled grenades, missiles, and long-rod penetrators. 
26
Soldier survivability and vehicle reliability were compromised in order to achieve impossible standards. Part of this survivability lies in the potential to take soldiers out of it completely, hence optionally manned, but the vehicle would still be remotely controlled by soldiers. Bidders had roughly six months to produce a working prototype for testing. 
27
28
In April 2020, the Army unveiled a new and innovative approach to designing the OMFV. It began by soliciting ideas from industry, first on what vendors found difficult about the initial request for proposals, and then requested recommendations for how to revise OMFV development. 
29
2
30
• Phase 1 (FY2020 to FY2021): Develop and refine OMFV acquisition and ontracting strategies • Phase 2 (FY2022 to FY2023): Preliminary design • Phase 3 (FY2023 to FY2024): Detailed design • Phase 4 (FY2024 to FY2027): Prototype build and test
• Phase 5 (FY2027 to FY2030): Production and fielding 
31
32
33
34
Despite evidence of good news, the original request for proposals process revealed a potential problem between the modernization and acquisition communities. GAO had previously identified a lack of formal coordination procedures between Futures Command and the Assistant Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology), despite early attempts at aligning the processes. 
35
Lynch 85 media outlets reported that after Bradley manufacturer BAE Systems Land & Armaments dropped out of the OMFV competition, the Army disqualified Raytheon Rheinmetall Land Systems for not shipping the prototype shipped from Germany in time. Army Futures Command had insisted at the time that the process must stick to the schedule, but the acquisition community favored an extension. Restarting the process has reset the clock to zero but the Army needs better coordination between the modernization and acquisition communities. 
36
Failure is the ghost in the Army modernization machine but one that can be exorcised. The new modernization strategy has changed the nature of the machine, and Army Futures Command is the deus ex machina, providing a unified infrastructure with which to conduct a new, coherent, reasonable modernization strategy. The Army frequently uses the phrase "lessons learned," but very often the lessons are only gathered rather than learned. The recent restart of the OMFV indicates the Army might finally be learning the harsh lessons taught by the FCS experience. If those lessons truly have been learned and the experiences passed on to the rest of the modernization enterprise, the Army need no longer fear the ghosts in the machine. B e it Roosevelt and infamy, Kennedy and Pax Americana, or Reagan and a wall that needed tearing down, framing a policy narrative with the right words can be critical to the legacy of a president. 
1
Frames are subtle changes in language that can have dramatic impacts on public opinion by focusing attention on certain, select aspects 1. Jeffrey K. Tulis, The Rhetorical Presidency (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987).
TOC 88 Parameters 50(2) Summer 2020 of an event or issue. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
When the Gulf War began in August 1990, Bush condemned the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait calling it a "blatant use of military aggression TOC applied StrateGic art Taylor and Cronkhite 89 and violation of the UN [United Nations] Charter." 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
In November, Bush adjusted his narrative to gain support for military intervention, building upon the existing framing to justify the use of force. Bush emphasized lessons learned from World War II, repeatedly drawing analogies between Saddam Hussein and Adolf Hitler and emphasizing the world could not appease aggressors. 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
In addition to establishing the policy narrative for the Gulf War, Bush also established the narrative for the Haitian coup that ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in September 1991. From the beginning Bush stated the United States was "worried about Haiti" and supported the "restoration of the democratically elected government to Haiti." 
23
29
30
31
32
33
Nonetheless, he failed to outline specifically what US interests or mission objectives were. For example, Clinton first talked about Haiti being in the United States' backyard, then walked back this messaging. 
34
35
36
37
38
39
A successful presidential policy narrative rallies domestic and international support behind a policy decision. A strong narrative successfully framed helps coalesce support for a policy and quiets potential counternarratives. But such narratives and frames must remain agile-media and communications theory reveal a presidential narrative cannot be presented and then left alone. A successful narrative and frame, repeated with some frequency, keeps the event relevant for the public.
These two case studies provide the following three insights: • Whenever possible, a president should establish a narrative early.
This timing is important for new initiatives or events and for efforts to redirect an existing policy narrative-the sooner an administration publicizes its version of events or policy position, the better chance a message has of gaining traction. • The success of the narrative depends on how well an administration conveys the relevancy of the issue in question. Presidents employing consistent, sustained phraseology are more likely to beget success than presidents using inconsistent, contradictory, or confusing language. • A successful frame evolves with the situation but has consistent foundations, and allows a president to establish national interests and objectives. During the Gulf War, Bush established US interests early and did not change them. Clinton did not do this-the administration's narrative regarding US strategic interest in Haiti morphed multiple times.
Every administration faces messaging and optics problems. While no one case can provide comprehensive instructions for all occasions, executives would be well-served to study the messaging strategies of Bush and Clinton in the examples above, one of successful control of a presidential policy narrative and the other, a mishandling of the same. T he Joint Concept for Integrated Campaigning ( JCIC) and the Joint Doctrine Note (JDN) 1-19, Competition Continuum, are a return to a more traditional American strategic approach where, in times of peace, military power was applied mostly to advance economic interests. 
1
A wide range of national security challenges face the United States-confronting near-peer adversaries, containing rogue states, and defeating nonstate, transnational terrorist and criminal organizations, posing a significant dilemma for American national security leaders. 
2
3
The historical antecedents for integrated campaigning are much older than the relatively recent Cold War period. Prior to World War II, gray zone conflict was a natural part of the operating environment, ambiguous strategic guidance and shifting policies were the norm, interagency collaboration was expected, officers routinely performed diplomatic functions to include negotiating treaties, and it was understood that economic progress was usually the underlying motive behind most foreign policy.
Securing the industrial base, particularly its labor force, technological innovations, and manufacturing capacity, was essential for maintaining American hegemony. At its core, this approach was conceptually Hamiltonian and reflective of Edward Meade Earle's influential essay, "Adam Smith, Alexander Hamilton, Friedrich List: The Economic Foundations of Military Power." 
4
5
For the United States, the interwar years ended abruptly with the Japanese raid on Pearl Harbor, which shocked and incensed the American people. The next day, President Roosevelt made his iconic "Day of Infamy" speech, to which Congress responded by declaring war on Imperial Japan. 
10
11
12
As the fortunes of Europe and the United Kingdom waned, however, the United States sought to maintain Great Britain as a bulwark against the Axis powers, creating the lend-lease program and then system, which increasingly helped Britain while reducing competition with Britain. 
13
Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Nationalist China, and the Soviet Union. 
14
15
16
17
18
The two American theater commanders worked to defeat Imperial Japan by forcing its unconditional surrender and changing its militaristic nature while CBI remained a supporting theater. 
19
Just as US cooperation with its Allies changed over the course of the war, so did US competition with its Allies. The JDN 1-19 includes specific definitions of three activities in competition below armed conflict: enhance, manage, and delay. For example, America enhanced its position at Britain's expense as Great Britain took wartime loans and gave up influence and bases in the Western Hemisphere. 
20
21
The unexpected speed of the Japanese surrender after the atomic bombs were dropped in August 1945 caused immediate and massive 
American cooperation, competition, and conflict in the twentieth century in the Pacific demonstrate the JCIC and JDN 1-19 have deep historical roots. Traditionally, the underlying reason America exercised its military strength short of war was to bolster the other elements of national power, chiefly economic power. Military force was adjunct and even subordinated to diplomatic and economic action. Naval and military commanders inherently understood this and waged integrated campaigns to secure national interests in concert with other government agencies, Allies, and partners.
Before 1941, naval and military commanders simultaneously executed campaigns of cooperation and competition throughout the contested Pacific region. They did this all while working for, with, and through various agencies like the State Department as well as communicating and coordinating with private entities such as news reporters and Christian missionaries. During World War II, they created campaign plans that were sent to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for approval, integrated into a global strategy, and executed across three different theaters of operations. After the war, these same commanders confronted great power adversaries, administered occupied governments, and competed throughout the region below the level of armed conflict.
As a result of its growth and prestige as the Cold War progressed, the US military became overly focused on purely military matters. Senior military and political leaders perceived effective strategy was the ability to enhance capabilities to deter war. If war did come, then a successful strategy was winning enough battles to win that war. When the Soviet Union fell, this condition only worsened. The current National Security Strateg y and National Defense Strateg y make this strategic focus anathema. TOC national, multinational and joint power on land. 
5
The National Defense Act of 1920 specifically charged the War Department and the Army General Staff with overall mobilization planning and preparation in the event of war and remained unchanged until 1947. 
6
7
The Army followed doctrine in Field Manual (FM) 100-15, Field Service Regulations: Larger Units, which called for Army theater commanders to be directly responsible for both administration and combat within their assigned theaters. 
8
9
Under Generals Dwight D. Eisenhower and Douglas MacArthur, ETO and FE were extremely large and concerned with sequel planning 
Bonin 105 including the occupation of Axis countries. 
10
11
12
While the Victory Plan of 1941 envisioned an Army requiring some 6 million ground and service personnel with 215 ground combat divisions, the Army never fielded that many divisions because of the nondivisional support required. 
13
14
15
The efficacy of the American tank-infantry-artillery team, of methods of air-ground co-operation, of the regimental combat team and combat command concepts, and of the "lean" division with attachments provided as needed . . . the general excellence of American arms and equipment, the ability to motorize infantry divisions on short notice-all these had been demonstrated and proved long before. 
16
Combined arms maneuvers conducted by US Army forces grew in tactical excellence as the war continued and provided the winning margin in applying landpower to defeat the Axis powers in four major theaters of operations. After overcoming initial inexperience in North Africa, II Corps demonstrated combined arms armored and mechanized excellence as it defeated the Germans and Italians in Tunisia. 
18
19
20
21
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt gave the US Army the lead conducting military government in 1942. In the ETO and MTO, the Army conducted wide-area security by providing the occupation and military government forces to secure the peace in North Africa, Italy, France, and Germany after maneuver units had defeated the Axis forces. The 12th Army Group established the Fifteenth Army after June 1944
in ETO to relieve other units of mopping-up duties and to conduct occupation and other operations in conjunction with French forces against bypassed German units. 
22
23
24
The US Army set and maintained multiple theaters of operations through the theater armies and their Services of Supply branch. Under General Brehon B. Somervell, the ASF totaled over two million soldiers and civilians by 1945. It provided logistical support and procured most of the supplies and equipment for the AGF, AAF, and substantial numbers of Allied and Marine divisions. 
25
26
27
28
As the war progressed, the Army created numerous new units to meet particular operational requirements. Army special operations forces for World War II included six Ranger battalions for special assault missions; the joint US-Canadian, First Special Service Force for operations in Italy; the 5307th Composite Unit (Provisional) for longrange penetrations in Burma; and other special reconnaissance units such as Alaskan and Alamo Scouts. Although the Office of Strategic Services formed in 1942 was an independent government agency growing to over thirteen thousand personnel, its larger military units were recruited from, manned by, and under the command of Army personnel. 
29
30
31
32
33
34
Multinational. Besides fielding 89 divisions, the US Army supported security cooperation for Allies. The Army provided equipment and supplies, mostly under the Lend-Lease Act, for 60 Russian divisions (PGC), 36 Nationalist Chinese divisions (CBI), 12 French divisions (MTO/ETO), and 1 Brazilian division (MTO). In addition, the Army provided significant numbers of combat advisers, down to the battalion level, to the Nationalist Chinese, and advisers to the regimental level to the French and Brazilian divisions. 
35
Joint. Since AAF remained part of the US Army, ASF provided an estimated 167,257 personnel in direct support of AAF. 
36
37
38
39
The US Army of World War II demonstrated the value of strategic landpower on a global scale. After the fall of the Philippines, the US Army never failed a strategic mission during the war. These missions included protecting the homeland; mobilizing, training, and equipping over ten million soldiers; setting, maintaining, and then dismantling six major theaters of operations; maneuvering on land to defeat three major enemies; building the atomic bomb; occupying, governing, and returning defeated countries to the community of nations; and humanely conducting detention operations for our captured enemies. Consequently, the Army demonstrated all current core competencies in its application of strategic landpower during World War II. Today the Army must retain its capability to perform these same core competencies as the global nature and requirement for the Army to provide true strategic landpower in conjunction with other services and allies still remains.
The Agency's Russia analysis and was Vice President Dick Cheney's adviser on Russia. Savvy and insightful, he contravenes the conventional wisdom calling for increased pressure on Vladimir Putin and the Kremlin for its disruptive activities in US elections, Europe, and other places. In an excellent new book, The Russia Trap, he lays out a clear history of modern Russian relations with the West, explaining how tensions escalated after the collapse of the Soviet Union, where we are headed, and the grave risks the current trajectory poses.
He begins with a proposal: The United States and Russia are fighting an undeclared virtual war. It is not a cold war between two ideological adversaries but a shadow war in which the two nations are competing for strategic advantage without direct use of military force. While the United States pioneered the use of soft power, Moscow has learned fast.
The weapons include cybersabotage, cyberespionage, and cyberinfluence. These confluent tactics, he argues, create escalating spirals of aggression and suspicion. In a networked, globalized world in which digital networks, national economies, media systems, and nuclear command and control systems are all linked together in some way, it is difficult to limit damage inflicted from any of these cyber weapons. The potential consequences of these attacks could range from armed hostilities to nuclear war.
Beebe's strength has always been as an analyst and grand strategist. One of his keenest skills lies in his ability to see how the other side thinks and acts. He recognizes America's agenda looks different in the eyes of Moscow. The Russian government "sees 'instability and destabilization' as the defining characteristic of US foreign policy" (27). In this view, Russia is a victim, not a perpetrator, of disruption and the United States has brought disorder, not prosperity.
He traces the history of US-Russia relations over the last three decades, from Kosovo to the Arab Spring-Libya and Syria. As relations have evolved-perhaps more accurately, devolved-the United States and Russia each views itself as engaged in legitimate, defensive, and benign actions, while the other engages in the opposite. These attitudes reinforce one another, deepening mistrust and eliminating important brakes on escalatory spirals. Americans dismiss Russian objections to an eastward expansion of NATO or efforts to foster democracy in Russia. Russia, Beebe argues, feels threatened by NATO and sees activities like the National Endowment for Democracy as fostering sentiment in Russia intended to ignite regime change. Beebe feels the nations are experiencing brake failure. The Cold War was fought over a set of rules that imposed vital restraint. Today's shadow war lacks them. The US withdrawal from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty has intensified suspicions, and the Kremlin rejects as implausible the explanation that the US focus is Iran, rather than exploiting a perceived Russian vulnerability. Problems with other strategic arms control agreements deepen the challenge.
Russian meddling in the 2016 US election raised emotions to a new high. Washington responded with tough sanctions aimed at squeezing Russia into submission. In Beebe's view, that strategy is doomed and more likely to make the Kremlin more aggressive.
He discusses a scenario that could trigger all-out war, closely tied to a plausible rendering of current events; it is a nightmare scenario. Beebe also offers a series of initiatives to absorb shocks wrought by security tensions. He defines these as surprise developments that diverge suddenly and sharply from the trends preceding them. As examples, he cites the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the 2008 financial crisis, and the Arab Spring. The challenges are not linear. We must recognize this and build resilience into the system to achieve stability. Solutions Beebe proposes include resilience through more frequent and open personal communication between officials. Critical infrastructure requires technical resilience. Informal understandings such as those following the Cuban missile crisis are vital. He argues we need to look beyond our relations with Russia, incorporating them into mutually beneficial strategies, such as checkmating Chinese expansion.
Beebe knows his subject. He has thought long and hard about the challenges US-Russia tensions pose. He understands the escalatory risks and argues cogently for practical approaches that lower tensions and reduce the risk of accident or strategic miscalculation leading to war. The Russia Trap is a must read. It is well written, informing, enlightening, and provides a needed perspective that lights the road ahead to strength and stability. W restling with the underlying elements of theory-picking it apart and refashioning it to describe the issues we face today-can be a challenge for military members engaged in the day-to-day rigors of a career in the armed forces.
Fortunately, Eric Fleury's On Absolute War provides a compelling example of how to think deeply about the underlying logic of military theory and its application to contemporary problems. Initially, based on the title and the table of contents, I was expecting to find terrorism explained with well-known Clausewitz quotes. I could not have been more mistaken. Fleury digs thoroughly into theory-specifically the basic logic of Clausewitz's On War, including its purpose and application-and then uses it to fashion his own concept which he then applies to the underlying drivers and dynamics of terrorism as a method of warfare, creating a general theory of terrorism. I was exceedingly skeptical at first but by the end, On Absolute War convinced me of the merits of Fleury's approach.
Using the structure of On War as a model, On Absolute War begins with a dialectical comparison of terrorism and conventional warfare, which includes a more nuanced look at the former through the assessment of terrorism as practiced by both state and nonstate actors. Through case studies he explains the dynamics of terrorism and its inherent goal of perpetual escalation, militarizing all sides to a conflict in a manner that approaches absolute war as described by Clausewitz. Finally, Fleury grafts the Clausewitzian concept of battle onto terrorism demonstrating how a theory of terrorism can describe the relationship between the state and its citizens under this form of warfare.
What is so impressive about On Absolute War is its nuance and understated breakthroughs. Fleury undoubtedly understands On War better than most, going beyond the surface of Clausewitz's work into what drove the development of his theory and the logic behind it. He recognizes and uses techniques that make On War a relevant to military art and science to this day. In addition to adopting a dialectic approach, Fleury focuses on key elements of the Clausewitzian theory such as the permanent interplay of human nature and historical evolution. By understanding these elements, Fleury is able to progress beyond simply applying Clausewitzian phrases or surface-level ideas to his own work, and instead engages the underlying theory as it relates to terrorism in order to ascertain something wholly new. In the process, he advances beyond the analysis of the last few decades, which "have precluded a more fundamental examination of how to understand the nature of war between such dissimilar combatants"-terrorist and conventional forces (2). Fleury determines that we "must reevaluate the nature of the conflict itself, not just revise its tactics" (5).
The most innovative and thought-provoking concept in Fleury's work is the idea that "terrorism is an attempt to approximate a condition of absolute war in reality as much as possible" that strives to bypass "traditional limits of warfare, especially friction and reciprocity," to coerce all actors to escalate their actions, and thereby create ever more militarized communities on all sides, ultimately aiming to "reorient . . . loyalties around the architects of the campaign" (5). Contrary to traditional military perspectives on absolute war-that it includes nuclear weapons and threatens the end of humankind-the nuanced and analytical approach Fleury uses to make such a case for terrorism is quite masterful. Despite its many strengths, On Absolute War is not perfect. While Fleury's overall assessment of the motivations behind the Global War on Terror, and his descriptions of approaches taken in its prosecution are well summarized, he somewhat mischaracterizes the counterand anti-terrorism policy continuum from the Bush to the Obama administrations. While the former certainly viewed a campaign against terrorism as global, and the commitment as total, the latter fundamentally changed its focus and approach, attempting to back away from and solve challenges created by the former. Small details like these are almost inconsequential, however, given the intellectual innovation and insight gained throughout the rest of the book.
On Absolute War is my top recommendation for 2019. On Absolute War presents a strong theoretical and intellectual framework for planners, strategists, and decision makers in the national security realm. Thinkers, planners, and strategists-even those not interested in terrorism-stand to gain valuable insight into how to dissect, reformulate, create, and write about military theory. Fleury has provided not only an insightful general theory for terrorism, but guidance on engaging with theory in general. K ara Dixon Vuic's second book, The Girls Next Door: Bringing the Home Front to the Front Lines, should have been written ages ago, yet it is well-timed to make a meaningful impact on the field today. Both academic and analytical, this serious yet accessible and expertly written book centers on the physical and emotional experiences of the women who volunteered to work in wartime troop support programs and whose service as historical agents and important actors in a broader story might have been marginalized or absent from other accounts.
Vuic captures and preserves the unique voices and stories of these women and presents a straightforward and compelling case for the careful study of people who move in and around military circles in wartime. She offers critical analysis, avoids jargon and theory-laden discursive passages, and makes it clear through her construction and analysis that she is well attuned to more academic concerns.
While war accounts often center on male combat experiences, The Girls Next Door focuses on women and their service to the nation during war. The book rounds out the reader's understanding of women's wartime work when accounts of these official recreation and entertainment responsibilities are considered alongside studies of women laboring in wartime industrial jobs and serving in uniform. Vuic connects conceptual ideas about the home front and the battlefront-these women were employed in programs specifically designed to "domesticate the military environment," and these "recreation programs variously sought to combat prostitution, remind soldiers of their mothers or sweethearts, and symbolize a supportive American home front" (1).
Take a moment to reread the program goals: it is a whiplash-inducing set of expectations for young women to navigate. Their tensions are palpable throughout the book: be wholesome and pretty, but not too pretty. Be friendly and available, but not too available. Remind them (simultaneously?) of their mother and their sweetheart at home. Make friends but do not become too attached-some of them are going to die. Work, travel abroad, and be independent, but move and live under strict constraints to protect your safety. Boost soldier morale and bear the burden of men's emotions and experiences of war, but do not let your vulnerabilities show.
Vuic expertly walks readers through these complexities, bringing challenges to the forefront and embedding them within her deeper analysis of social and cultural changes in the United States-especially regarding race, gender roles, and sexuality-that affected both the institutional role of these women and their recreation and entertainment work experiences. She also clearly recognizes that these women, while working within structural and institutional constraints, sometimes changed and subverted the instrumental institutional aims and exercised agency to shape and interpret their experiences.
Vuic moves chronologically through the twentieth century, beginning roughly with the First World War and culminating with an examination of the Persian Gulf War in 1991. The Second World War merits two chapters, one of which examines the unique challenges of race, colonialism, and exoticism in the Pacific and China-Burma-India theaters. In the epilogue, Vuic offers a brief speculative commentary on how women as entertainers and morale/recreation workers factor into twenty-first-century American military engagements.
Vuic's choice to organize each chapter with a different format and thrust, depending on the most relevant analytical categories and sources, is refreshing. The chapters stand well on their own and do not feel forced into an artificial structure, although I did find myself occasionally wishing for a deeper dive on the institutional side: How were women selected, trained, equipped, funded, supervised, and evaluated? How did differences in these patterns affect experiences and expectations? By the end of the book, one point is crystal clear: women are not peripheral to military history or to the history of war more broadly. Gender and sexuality are central to these fields. Further, historians of women and of gender should also make the careful study of military and wartime contexts central to their work. By focusing on women who were employed in official entertainment and recreation work, Vuic clearly proves military history, the history of war and society, women's history, and the history of gender and sexuality are intertwined. Her spot-on epilogue highlights the challenges arising as women have become fully integrated members of the military profession: "Organizations that held up women as symbols of both wholesome and sexualized ideals placed them in untenable and often dangerous situations. And, recreation and entertainment programs that offered women as antidotes to the military suggested that they had no place in it" (271).
Contemporary military leaders of gender-integrated units who want to understand more clearly how complex ideas about gender roles, sexuality, masculinity, femininity, and domesticity have operated within the military sphere should add The Girls Next Door to their reading lists. It is more important than ever for members of the twenty-firstcentury US armed forces to understand the military's historical pattern of reinforcing binary and traditionally conservative gender roles and create a new organizational culture that welcomes and includes women as full members.
TOC
18
18
15. Michael Birnbaum and Philip Rucker, "At NATO, Trump Claims Allies Make New Defense Spending Commitments after He Upends Summit," Washington Post, July 12, 2018, https://www. washingtonpost.com/; and Julian E. Barnes and Helene Cooper, "Trump Discussed Pulling US from NATO, Aides Say Amid New Concerns over Russia," New York Times, January 14, 2019, https://nyti.ms/2HaZZrK.
12. Military Technology Transfer: Threats, Impacts, and Solutions for the Department of Defense: Hearing before the House Armed Services Committee, 115th Cong. (June 21, 2018) (statement of Kari A. Bingen, Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence), https://armedservices.house.gov /hearings?ID=FAC043FA-B7E9-4E08-A2A7-226F7DA5D8F8.63. 13. White House Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy, How China's Economic Aggression Threatens the Technologies and Intellectual Property of the United States and the World (Washington, DC: White House Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy, June 2018).
20. Erik Brattberg and Etienne Soula, "Europe's Emerging Approach to China's Belt and Road Initiative," (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, October 19, 2018), https://carnegieendowment.org/2018/10/19 /europe-s-emerging-approach-to-china-s-belt-and-road-initiative-pub-77536. 21. Lucrezia Poggetti cited in Peter Frankopan, The New Silk Roads: The Present and Future of the World (New York: Alfred Knopf, 2019), 172.
2. See Marybeth Ulrich, "Civil-Military Relations Norms and Democracy: What Every Citizen Should Know," in Blurred Lines: Examining Civil-Military Relations in an Increasingly Complex World, ed. Lionel Beehner and Charles Jacoby (Oxford: Oxford University Press, forthcoming).
10. "User Clip: John McLaughlin: Thank God for the Deep State," from U.S. Intelligence and Election Security, aired October 30, 2019, on C-SPAN2, https://www.c-span.org/video/?c4826847 /user-clip-john-mclaughlin-god-deep-state.
26
26
8. Ceri Parker, "Global Agenda: 8 Predictions for the World in 2030," Wo r l d Economic For um, November 12, 2016, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016 /11/8-predictions-for-the-world-in-2030.
18. Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument with Historical Illustrations, 5th ed. (New York: Basic Books, 2015), 207; and Nicholas Fotion, "Reprisals," in An Encyclopedia of War and Ethics, ed. Donald Arthur Wells (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1996), 410-12. 19. Christine Gray, International Law and the Use of Force, 3rd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 150-1. 20. Noam Lubell, Extraterritorial Use of Force against Non-State Actors (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 10.
29
29
5. Trybula, Big 5, 11, 26, 41, 51, 58. 6. Pernin, Future Combat Systems, 9. 7. Pernin, Future Combat Systems, 9. 8. Pernin, Future Combat Systems, 16, 55-57.
25. Ashley Tressel, "Army Releases Final RFP for OMFV," Inside Defense, March 29, 2019.
27. Freedberg Jr., "NGCV: Hard Choices." 28. Freedberg Jr., "Can the Army Convince Congress It's Learned from FCS?" Breaking Defense, March 16, 2020. 29. HQDA, "Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV) Market Survey," SAM.gov, https:// beta.sam.gov/opp/37a6d32f8ef34272bd94c8340f05dd41/view. 30. National Advanced Mobility Consortium (NAMC), Industry Day Narrative for Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (Ann Arbor, MI: NAMC, April 9, 2020), 6.
20. Dear, Oxford Companion, 297-98, 787, 790, 677-83. 21. Costello, Pacific War, 536-38; Murray and Millet, War to Be Won, 521-22; and Spector, Eagle against the Sun, 324-79. TOC applied StrateGic art
8. War Department, Field Service Regulations, Larger Units, FM 100-15 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, June 29, 1942), 4-6, 49-51. 9. Ray S. Cline, Washington Command Post: The Operations Division (Washington, DC: US Army CMH, 1951), 290, 373-81.
This article is drawn from a larger publication by the author. Carol V. Evans, "The Economic Drivers Reshaping the International Security Landscape," in A Changing World Order? Implications for the Security Environment, ed. William G. Braun, Stéfanie von Hlatky, and Kim Richard Nossal (Kingston, ON: Centre for International and Defense Policy, 2020).
Andy Greenberg, "How an Entire Nation Became Russia's Test Lab for Cyberwar," Wired, June 20, 2017, https://wired.com/story/russian-hackers-attack-ukraine/.
Kim Zetter, "Inside the Cunning, Unprecedented Hack of Ukraine's Power Grid," Wired, March 3, 2016, https://www.wired.com/2016/03/inside-cunning-unprecedented-hack -ukraines-power-grid/.TOC
TOC 82 Parameters 50 (2) Summer 2020
This cancellation also set off alarm bells throughout the defense media and Congress, both questioning whether this was not just the latest in a long string of Army modernization and acquisition failures-a valid question given the Army's recent history. 
Taylor and Cronkhite 91 crisis. 
24
25
26
Similar to Bush, Clinton's policy narrative discussed the US preference for restoring democracy in Haiti and returning Aristide to power, as well as US efforts to support international negotiations toward these ends. Clinton's narrative however, referred to the US "commitment" and "determination" to restore democracy to Haiti, whereas Bush only said "worried" or "supported," without committing the country to any solution to the Haitian crisis. 
27
28
In overcoming Bush's hands-off narrative to gain public support for his own more interventionist policy, Clinton faced an uphill battle after seeming to (at first) accept Bush's more laissez-faire policy. Establishing a foreign policy narrative is hard; changing one is even harder. Further, Clinton did not deliver his Haiti narrative frequently or consistently, mentioning Haiti on average three days per month throughout 1993.
Throughout the middle to late 1800s, Americans sought new trading partners and relatively untouched markets. 
6
Adding these new territories to other Pacific territories such as Hawaii and Wake Island provided the bases that naval officer and historian Alfred Thayer Mahan so adamantly argued the US Navy required to project power. In 1903, President Theodore Roosevelt declared the "Mediterranean era died with the discovery of America," and "the Pacific era, destined to be the greatest of all, is just at its dawn." 
7
Following the Boxer Rebellion in 1901 in China, the US Army, Navy, and Marine Corps maintained garrisons and ships at strategic locations along critical waterways, rail lines, and internationally controlled sections of cities. Their tactical mission was to protect American lives and property, but their strategic objective was to maintain the Open Door policy in China and enhance American influence throughout the region. American commanders worked closely with and sometimes under the direct control of State Department officials. American naval officers became naturally at ease operating within this complex environment. In a 1922 Naval War College lecture, Rear Admiral H. S. Sharp explained, "the life experience of a naval officer is a broadening one," specifically in the "practical matter of international affairs and foreign people" where their duties, and, more importantly, individual professional responsibility, often called upon them to act as diplomats, negotiators, law and treaty enforcers, and peacekeepers. 
8
The JCIC and JDN 1-19 provide a blueprint for military leaders to return to a more traditional American strategic approach to employing military force in times of peace.
Earl J. Catagnus Jr. ABSTRACT: During World War II, the Army demonstrated the core competencies outlined in Army Doctrine Publication 1, The Army, in its application of strategic landpower. The Army of today must retain its capability to perform these core competenciesthe requirement for the Army to provide true strategic landpower in conjunction with other services, partners, and allies is as critical today as it was then.
S eventy-five years ago, the US Army completed the destruction of its World War II enemies on land. While it received tremendous support from the air, sea, and Allies, I agree with Professor Russell Weigley's assertion: "At the close of World War II, the United States Army was the mightiest in the world. . . . In every theater the American Army had faced enemies long trained in war and had speedily overcame them." 
1
While the Army has long used the term landpower to describe the capabilities it provides the nation, it only officially defined landpower in 2005. 
2
3
4
Core competencies are intended to express clearly how the Army contributes to national defense and joint operations. These competencies are: prompt and sustained land combat; combined arms operations including combined arms maneuver, wide area security, armored and mechanized operations, and airborne and air assault operations; special operations; set and sustain the theater for the Joint Force; and integrate
Reviewed by Frank Jones, professor of security studies, US Army War College N early thirty years have passed since Douglas Kinnard published
The Certain Trumpet: Maxwell Taylor and the American Experience in Vietnam. Kinnard, a retired Army brigadier general and later professor of political science, was no stranger to Taylor. He served on Taylor's personal staff when Taylor was Army chief of staff, and spent hours interviewing him. Now Ingo Trauschweizer, an Ohio University history professor, offers a different portrait of Taylor-one long overdue.
In this well-researched book, Trauschweizer provides a balanced and meticulous appraisal of Taylor's career from 1945 until the general's death in 1987. This perspective advances our understanding of Taylor through the author's adroit use of archives, high-quality secondary sources published since the 1990s and, most notably, declassified information Kinnard did not have access to in the 1980s.
As Trauschweizer highlights in the introduction, Taylor's detractors are legion. They viewed him as a ruthless, mendacious, manipulative micromanager or worse. Yet when he died, obituary writers and politicians lionized him, citing his long service to the nation and brilliant career. He remains an extraordinary example of an American leader in the twentieth century-soldier, presidential adviser, diplomat, business executive, and public intellectual. Trauschweizer brings each of these roles into view with clarity, using speeches, articles, and Taylor's books to flesh out this accomplished officer's strategic thinking and judgment.
These last two points are unmistakable in the chapters on Taylor's stint as West Point superintendent, and, even more impressively, as Commanding General of the Eighth Army in South Korea and Commanding General, US Forces Far East. As superintendent, Taylor brought a different emphasis to the US Military Academy's curriculum, one that contemporary officers, regardless of rank, should heed: the ability to think critically, communicate clearly, and employ military history for leadership development. These strategic leader competencies are visible in Taylor himself. His ability to use popular magazines and elite journals such as Foreign Affairs to discuss world events and the Army's missions is an important element of Trauschweizer's intellectual biography. Taylor understood the military instrument of power encompassed more than the use of force. His 1948 Kermit Roosevelt Lecture, delivered two years before NSC-68, is a testament to his prescience and comprehension of the military strategy needed for the Atomic Age. His command of US forces in West Berlin (1949-51), an island in a sea of Soviet power during a period of intense hostility on America's Cold War front lines, was masterful. Trauschweizer underscores how Taylor used the instruments of national power in this assignment and the economic instrument in particular, working with his chief economist to make the Marshall Plan a reality, rebuilding war-torn Berlin. Trauschweizer's discussion of Taylor's guiding hand to implement the Korean War armistice and postwar activities buttresses the argument that Taylor was a strategist of high order who understood the criticality of aligning ends, ways, and means.
Equally important, Trauschweizer underscores Taylor's assessment of World War II-it was not simply the attainment of victory. More broadly, Taylor recognized the war as an imperative for mobilizing the American public in support of national interests, policy objectives, and the US military. He grasped that the role of the military leader is to improve relations with civilians, both political leaders and American society, especially in a military dependent on conscription.
Taylor's faith in the indispensable role of the infantryman was never far from his mind as he attempted to organize the Army for the atomic battlefield as chief of staff. The disagreements between President Dwight D. Eisenhower and Taylor resulted from differing strategic visions, but as the author points out neither Eisenhower nor Army Secretary Robert Stevens had Taylor as their first pick for chief. Despite this fraught association, and the friction it created, Taylor's wise stewardship at a time of major transition in strategy, coupled with budget battles with a president determined to cut defense spending and service turf fights, should not be dismissed. Taylor's thinking about deterrence and operations below the nuclear threshold is valuable and relevant, worthy of study by today's strategists.
Yet Taylor is recalled as the Kennedy administration's doyen. His book The Uncertain Trumpet transfixed the president-here was a general with new thinking. Taylor's first assignment for JFK was a bureaucratic labor-assessing what went wrong with the Bay of Pigs invasion of Castro's Cuba, a catastrophic failure and political embarrassment. Taylor's advice and the trust he engendered with Kennedy led to his appointment as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 1962, a position he held into the Lyndon Johnson presidency. Johnson found Taylor's counsel similarly valuable and made him ambassador to South Vietnam as America's entry into the war was in play.
Like so many among the "Best and Brightest," Taylor's legacy is tainted by Vietnam. He bears responsibility for that fiasco, which he acknowledged publicly years later. Perhaps his optimism about achieving US policy objectives was unrealistic, but he had an affliction common among those who fought in World War II-they had difficulty understanding their North Vietnamese adversary, perhaps out of hubris and cultural insensitivity. Likewise, Taylor's ignorance of the workings of the North Vietnamese Central Committee, vital to assessing strategic risk, was endemic in the US government. But even more fundamental, US leaders could not reframe the environment. Here Taylor's critical thinking skills, the unerring judgment Eisenhower lauded him for in Crusade in Europe, failed him abysmally.
Kinnard ends his book by contending Taylor is a transitional figure, the link between "heroic generals" of World War II and "managerial generals" of the postwar period. Trauschweizer's book presents sufficient evidence to suggest a third group. Taylor was ahead of his time, a forerunner of a new school, the politico-military general, fulfilled in such figures as Lieutenant General Brent Scowcroft and General Colin Powell-generals endowed with the expertise and aptitude to move proficiently between the civilian and military realms as presidential agents and policy entrepreneurs. This conclusion may be Trauschweizer's most significant contribution to the study of civil-military relations in the post-Goldwater-Nichols era. To summarize the military operation that took place that day, soldiers from Charlie Company, 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry Regiment of the 11th Brigade of the 23rd Infantry Division-known as the Americal Division-were ordered to enter several hamlets and eliminate, destroy, kill, or any one of several verbs soldiers understood to mean destroying everything that lived in the village. An artillery barrage would precede the operation since it was supposedly market day, and the soldiers were told there would be no noncombatants in the area, and anyone there would be either Viet Cong (VC) or VC sympathizers. The 48th National Liberation Front battalion was known to be operating in the area, and while soldiers differed in subsequent interviews as to what they were ordered to do, there was unanimity in the understanding that all persons and livestock were to be destroyed, and that they would probably receive resistance from the VC in the area. They encountered none. After four hours, over 500 elderly men, women, and children lay dead.
Jones documents not only the actions of March 16, 1968, but also how Charlie Company engaged the enemy in previous weeks without ever seeing them. In particular, members of 1st Platoon knew VC soldiers had skinned alive an American soldier, and many members of the platoon had heard the soldier's agonizing cries throughout the night. Lieutenant William Calley of 1st Platoon had reportedly noted his men's response was, "you had to kill" (29). The extent to which revenge was the motivating factor is part of the mystery associated with the My Lai massacre.
Jones examined the depositions of many soldiers involved in the operation and writes of rampant sexual assault and the horrific murder of women and children. His words create a difficult narrative to read, especially for combat veterans of any war. Perhaps the most revolting picture of the more than forty-two presented in the book is one captioned "Lunch break a few feet from a pile of bodies." The picture shows no apparent security cordon, just five soldiers relaxing after killing hundreds of noncombatants.
Jones discusses the heroes of My Lai, particularly helicopter pilot Warrant Officer Hugh Thompson and door gunner Specialist Lawrence Colburn who confronted Calley and threatened to shoot American soldiers if the killing did not stop. These men provided the most details of the massacre prior to the formal investigation. The Army cover-up and lengthy trials are major parts of the book, with the author providing a very balanced look at the way the evidence linked the failures of leadership to those connected, including Calley, and those acquitted, including Captain Ernest Medina.
My Lai is the most complete and well-documented published account of the massacre, one highly applicable to military leaders who may be confronted with decisions about ordering men and women into combat situations or in handling such information after war crimes are alleged. My Lai should be read by active duty military personnel who may have to engage enemy soldiers and make decisions about who are noncombatants-at My Lai every person the soldiers encountered was a noncombatant. Jones has done a great service to the field of military history and Vietnam War scholarship with this very fine book. Hanson convincingly counters the allegation of "soft soldiers" by demonstrating that commanders worked hard to train their units in the months prior to the June 1950 incursion. He frequently cites-and substantiates-factors impeding their efforts: undermanning, personnel turnover, frequent commander rotation, lack of noncommissioned officers, deficient equipment, and ineffective training areas. Division strengths were limited to 12,500 of 18,900 authorized for financial reasons. Infantry regiments were short one battalion of three authorized, and their artillery battalions were likewise deficient in one of three batteries.
Army units in Japan remained an occupying force until early spring of 1949, then transitioned to a defense of Japan mission, the primary threat being the Soviet Union lurking not too distantly to the north of Hokkaido. The mission should have been fair preparation for repelling a North Korean attack a little over a year later, but volatility in the ranks meant any training done other than at the individual level had a short halflife. Attempts at collective training, by necessity, had to await individual preparation as seventeen weeks of pre-deployment basic training during World War II had been cut by more than half to eight weeks by the late 1940s. And some soldiers arrived with less. Little wonder that Eighth Army established its own basic training programs while subordinate units were responsible for instilling branch-specific skills as, Hanson relates, none of the latter training was provided stateside prior to a new soldier's arrival in Japan. It was a shortcoming redressed only in July 1950, the month following North Korea's invasion.
Hanson is particularly critical of post-World War II officer assignment policies in which leaders were assigned to command positions with little if any attention given to previous experience. He condemns "the assignment of patently unqualified officers to maneuver unit command billets for their retirement tours . . . as one of the most damaging policies implemented by the U.S. Army between 1945 and 1950" (37). The judgment may have value, but limiting his observation to maneuver commands alone-a constraint that generally characterizes the book as a whole-undervalues branch and combined arms expertise so fundamental to the success of the US Army in World War II.
Recent veterans of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan will find some of Hanson's insights all too familiar. Relying on civilians for vehicle maintenance in Japan due to manpower shortages meant those skills were later lacking on the Korean peninsula, particularly given the 24/7 requirements of combat. Those involved in more recent conflicts in the Middle East and Central Asia likely felt a similar sting when contractors TOC 122 Parameters 50(2) Summer 2020 who provided maintenance for key systems could not or would not deploy forward. Veterans whose careers include Vietnam will likewise shake their heads at Hanson's observation that "punching command tickets" was behind the overly rapid turnover among battalion and regimental leaders. The 31st Infantry Regiment, 7th Infantry Division had three commanders within eleven months when a new colonel assumed command in the opening days of February 1950. Hanson regrettably again allows objectivity to slip here, concluding-without citing a justification-that "The assignment of non-infantry officers to command infantry battalions . . . can only be described as the exacting of revenge by bureaucratic agents uncomfortable with their own contributions to national defense during World War II" (113).
Hanson's work would have benefited from more strategic context. Hanson does take "Lightning Joe" Collins and General Omar Bradley to task for not demanding more in the way of support from the administration and Congress. But he underestimates the impact of ongoing fiscal wrestling among DoD Joint Chiefs facing a never-beforeseen era of atomic weapons.
Ultimately, this analysis of how four infantry regiments struggled to overcome severe handicaps to prepare themselves for war provides insights otherwise unavailable in other histories. Hanson's point, that despite very significant initial setbacks these units were fundamental to slowing and eventually halting the North Korean advance is well taken. The first units to cross the Sea of Japan fought and failed to stop South Korea's invaders in the war's opening weeks. Yet in the weeks to follow, these units would be part of the tide that washed northward once again to regain the territory lost, and then some. This book puts the challenges faced by these men in context showing that the months leading up to those initial setbacks included tough training and too little support from the command structure. Hanson's work does much to set the record straight in terms of the real reason those opening weeks progressed as they did, while reminding US political and senior military leaders how decisions made in illusionary periods of peace come home to roost when the illusion dissipates. 
Submissions must not be available on the internet or be under consideration with other publishers until the author receives notification the submission will not be published or until the work is published through the US Army War College Press.
• Monographs. 20,000 words (15,000-word main text, 5,000 words in the foreword and executive summary) Nongraduates, retired graduates, and the general public may subscribe through the Government Publishing Office (GPO).
Address Changes: Submit address changes for unpaid subscriptions to the Parameters office by e-mail or phone. For paid subscriptions, submit address changes to the GPO (bookstore.gpo.gov).
Reprint Requests: For permission to reprint articles, contact the Parameters editorial office by e-mail or phone. Be prepared to provide the article's title, author's name, publication date, intended use, quantity, and means of distribution.
We invite reader commentaries on articles appearing in Parameters. Not all commentaries can be published. For those that are, the author of the article will be invited to provide a reply. For additional information, visit the website listed above.
The US Army War College enhances national and global security by developing ideas and educating US and international leaders to serve and lead at the strategic-enterprise level.
Our graduates are intellectually prepared to preserve peace, deter aggression, compete below the threshold of armed conflict, and achieve victory in war; with a special focus on landpower. Concurrently, it is our duty to the Army to also act as a "think factory" for commanders and civilian leaders at the strategic level worldwide and routinely engage in discourse and debate on ground forces' role in achieving national security objectives.
The Strategic Studies Institute publishes national security and strategic research and analysis to influence policy debate and bridge the gap between military and academia.
The Center for Strategic Leadership develops senior leaders and supports the strategic needs of the Army by educating senior military and civilian leaders on landpower at the operational and strategic levels, developing expert knowledge and solutions for the operating and generating force, and conducting research activities, strategic exercises, and strategic communication.
The Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute provides subject matter expertise, technical review, and writing expertise to agencies that develop stability operations concepts and doctrines.
The School of Strategic Landpower develops strategic leaders by providing a strong foundation of wisdom grounded in mastery of the profession of arms, and by serving as a crucible for educating future leaders in the analysis, evaluation, and refinement of professional expertise in war, strategy, operations, national security, resource management, and responsible command. 