# ID: eea0680964304a2ca527fe87ade556e7
# Title: Clausewitz's Trinity: Dead or Alive?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2013.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information.
This monograph contemporizes Clausewitz's Trinity by replacing policy with the more general concept of ideology, thus demonstrating a clear means to establish the Trinity's relevance for twenty-first century warfare. To illustrate the argument, one case study each from the nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first centuries illustrates the role of ideology's in each conflict, and shows how this term can replace "policy" in the traditional Clausewitzian trinity, broadening the theorist's own ideological view of nationalism and state policy to the more general concept of ideology and its various applications that serve essentially the same role as policy in practice.
iii ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This monograph is based on a genuine interest and fascination with General Carl von Clausewitz; specifically, his meta-theoretical concept, the Trinity. This is a fascination I share with Dr. Mark Calhoun, to whom I owe much thanks. Not only did Dr. Calhoun serve as my monograph director with great distinction, he also very much encouraged me to pursue this topic to begin with. Furthermore, Dr. Calhoun provided invaluable feedback and suggestions for both editing, further research, and construction of the monograph's argument.
As always, a military officer is nothing without his family. My lovely wife, Rikke, and         War is more than a true chameleon that slightly adapts its characteristics to the given case. As a total phenomenon its dominant tendencies always make war a remarkable trinity -composed of primordial violence, hatred, and enmity, which are to be regarded as a blind natural force; of the play of chance and probability within which the creative spirit is free to roam; and of its element of subordination, as an instrument of policy, which makes it subject to reason alone.
-Carl von Clausewitz, On War Introduction Prussian Carl von Clausewitz's meta-theoretical concept known as the Trinity has the potential to serve as an analytical vehicle to understand war in both a historical and contemporary context. An inherent historical misconception, however, restrains the Trinity from reaching its full potential. One of the three elements, policy, refers directly to the form of government represented by the nation state. 1 Thus, critics argue, the Trinity's only relevance exists in state on state warfare. Clausewitz possessed a highly sophisticated mind and it seems unlikely to many that he meant to constrain his theory to the nation-state model of governance. In fact, many scholars have argued for the relevance of his theory in non-state situations. Nevertheless, he lacked the ability to articulate his thoughts in a contemporarily acceptable way, leaving his theory open for criticism, particularly by specialists in irregular or guerilla war. 2 1 The Trinity's three elements are: (1) primordial violence and enmity, (2) chance and probability, and (3) an element of subordination, as an instrument of policy, which makes it subject to reason alone. Carl von Clausewitz, On War, edited and translated by Michael Howard and Peter Paret, 1984 ed. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976/1984), 89. See also figure 
1
2 Mary Kaldor, New and Old Wars (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999), 13-30; John Keegan, A History of Warfare (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1993), 23-28; Martin van Creveld, The Transformation of War (New York: The Free Press, 1991), 35-42; Bart Schuurman, "Clausewitz and the "New Wars" Scholars," Parameters XXXX, no. 2; Christopher Bassford, "Teaching the Clausewitzian Trinity, A fairly simple solution exists that can solve this conundrum -although it has so far gone unnoticed by any of Clausewitz's modern-day interpreters or critics. By replacing the term "policy" with the more general concept of "ideology," one can update Clausewitz's Trinity so that it can reach its full potential. Ideology, as a more abstract and general concept than policy, can serve the purpose Clausewitz intended for that part of the Trinity while avoiding the problem of confining it to a specific era or form of warfare.
Clausewitz has acquired numerous personas since the publication in 1832 of On War, his masterwork of military theory: universal and timeless military genius; outdated and self-absorbed nineteenth century relic; father of modern military thinking and theory; or the main source of contemporary operational art. Historians, social scientists, strategists, and international relations theorists alike compete to distinguish themselves as a champion of translating, interpreting, and understanding Clausewitz. Some seek to prove his eternal relevance, while others attempt to deprive Clausewitz of his legendary status -that of a military theorist possessing timeless relevance to all aspects of the phenomenon of war. For twenty-first century military practitioners reading Clausewitz's magnum opus (Vom Kriege in the original German, or On War in English) the obvious issue is his theory's relevance for today's military operations. 
3
inculcating Clausewitz and viewing his writings as a central element of the curriculum for field grade officers, operational level planners, commanders, and future general officers. 
4
5
6
Those who serve in the military, particularly combat veterans, usually have a deep respect and appreciation for the historical and contextual origin of the military profession as they honor the sacrifices made by their predecessors. Inevitably, though, the irreversible effect and nature of combat tends to stimulate military practitioners to focus on theories and principles that possess relevance to the application of military force in their own time. Clausewitz did not attempt to derive a prescriptive theory of warfare; he sought to identify universal truths about the phenomenon of war even as he emphasized its ever-changing and unpredictable nature. 
7
5
6
8
9
Historian Christopher Bassford described the Trinity as the transcending meta-theory tying Clausewitz's theories and concepts into a meaningful whole. Consequently, it remains one of the most debated elements of Clausewitz's theory and, certainly, one element worthy of study for any contemporary military practitioner. 
10
1
theorist von Bulow and Swiss theorist Jomini, for such generalisations and entanglements. Clausewitz, On War, 134-36. The above shown figure is also known as the "Primary Trinity" as it is the actual text from On War.
11
12
2
15
13
14 Hew Strachan and Andreas Herberg-Rothe, eds., Clausewitz in the Twenty-First Century (Oxford: Oxford University Press,2007), v-vii. 
15
Clausewitz referred to as the "Trinity" -meta-theory, or those things that one should consider when theorizing about war -represents such a broad concept that all of the aforementioned translations have some utility and some flaws. One could even add synonyms such as "astounding," "astonishing," or "shocking" to the list. It might seem that Bassford's "fascinating" best captures the essence of a purely theoretical approach to studying the meta-theory of war, and would therefore best serve the purposes of this study. To the military practitioner, though, it is often necessary to approach war with a more unemotional and critical view. Therefore, regarding the argument presented here, which of the Trinity's many prefixes one might choose has no significant bearing on the final analysis and conclusion.
The intensity of the debate over just this one point illustrates the amount of intellectual energy that experts tend to expend on analysis of Clausewitz's Trinity. On one hand, it attracts much negative attention and is one of the elements of his theory most often criticized by experts.
Specifically, these critics point out the role of policy in the Trinity as a weakness. Policy, they argue, relates directly and exclusively to nation states, which therefore renders the Trinity irrelevant in modern, often irregular, wars that involve both non-state and state actors. 
16
Clausewitz, even though he wrote an empirically relevant and abstract theory of war, fell victim to a personal bias that he could not completely overcome in his lifetime. 17 His worldview sat squarely within the frame of nationalism, as he lived during the height of the Westphalian state system. Furthermore, Clausewitz's nationalist tendency originated from his desire to see Prussia regain its former status as a major power after its embarrassing defeat by Napoleon at Jena and Auerstadt, his own subsequent capture by the French, and Napoleon's subsequent dismantling of the Prussian government and imposition of French rule. 
18
19
20
17
19
Echevarria,
Clausewitz and Contemporary War,
84. 20 Echevarria,
Clausewitz and Contemporary War,
[84]
[85]
[86]
[87]
[88]
[89]
[90]
[91]
[92]
[93]
[94]
[95]
[96]
[97]
[98]
[99]
[100]
[101]
21
Historian John Keegan pointed out that war often more directly serves as an expression of culture than politics, since culture as a concept encompasses far more than policy or politics. Specifically, Keegan asserted that:
Clausewitz was a man of his times, a child of the Enlightenment, a contemporary of the German Romantics, an intellectual, a practical reformer, a man of action, a critic of his society and a passionate believer in the necessity for it to change. He was a keen observer of the present and a devotee of the future. Where he failed was in seeing how deeply rooted he was in his own past, the past of the professional officer class of a centralized European state. Had his mind been furnished with just one extra intellectual dimension -and it was already a very sophisticated mind indeed -he might have been able to perceive that war embraces much more than politics: that it is always an expression of culture, often a determinant of cultural forms, in some societies the culture itself. 
22
The Merriam-Webster Dictionary lists two relevant definitions of culture: (1) the integrated pattern of human knowledge, belief, and behavior that depends upon the capacity for learning and transmitting knowledge to succeeding generations, and (2) the customary beliefs, social forms, and material traits of a racial, religious, or social group. 
23
21
22
23
24
25
26
In many conflicts throughout history, religion served as either the cause or the justification for going to war. The Arab conquests in the seventh and eighth century stemmed chiefly from a desire to expand the Islamic Caliphate. Likewise, the Crusades of the eleventh to thirteenth centuries shared the common goal of restoring Christian access to the holy city of Jerusalem and other key religious sites in the region. The eighty year-long Dutch rebellion against the Spanish crown began in 1566 as a clash between the protestant Dutch and the catholic Spaniards. The Thirty Years War (1618-1648), a series of the most devastating wars in European history, also consisted generally of a series of conflicts between Protestants and Catholics. 
27
Especially at the individual level, soldiers often derive much of their personal motivation and courage from their faith. Similarly, religion continues to emerge as a causal factor in twenty-first century conflicts. Nevertheless, religion does not possess the general applicability or universality necessary to make it a complete and satisfactory replacement for policy in Clausewitz's Trinity.
By contrast, the concept of ideology takes on a more fundamental, time-specific yet general character. To humans, ideologies map the political and social world. Different ideologies offer competing interpretations of the perceived reality and construct a pattern or structure that humans use to interpret events. 
28
29
In this effort, de Tracy pursued a specific form of knowledge very much in line with the Enlightenment ideals of precise, scientific inquiries into every aspect of human activity. 30 Thus, ideology serves as the fundamental origin of the ideas that drive a specific group or society. It follows, then, that a group or society's basic ideas derive from many sources -including, for example, both culture and religion. Hitler's particular interpretation of history and his deep-seated racial biases, for example, served as the foundation of Nazi ideology, which dominated the actions, and in some cases the beliefs of an entire population for more than a decade. 
31
Supporting this line of argument, the Dutch historian Bart Shuurman in commenting on the Trinity's practical application on the twenty-first century global war on terrorism, suggests: …the primary trinity might entice a researcher to look beyond terrorism's violent aspect toward the perpetrator's rational or instrumental motives. Combined, these approaches to the problem of international terrorism may contribute significantly to a more nuanced understanding of asymmetric opponents, foregoing the unhelpful tendency to portray such groups as irrational fanatics and looking instead toward what factors drive people to such extremes. 
32
33
One should consider the possibility that Clausewitz himself knew and accepted this assertion as true, only lacking the language to express the ideas clearly in On War. The German historian Carl Schmitt, in deliberating on the concept of the partisan, points out that only the political character of the party (the word partisan derives from party) as opposed to the state, can integrate active combatants totally. 
34
33
34 Carl Schmitt, Theory of the Partisan (New York, NY: Telos Press Publishing, 2007), 14-16. 
35
It seems clear that Clausewitz did not mean the uncontrollable forces of primordial violence, hatred, and enmity, but rather referred to a more governable force. Clausewitz went on to state" the courage of the individuals facing imminent battle is decisive, especially in the best of all wars, when a people on its own soil are led to fight for freedom and independence." 36 Again, the notion of leadership and organization for a higher purpose leads one to question the idea that Clausewitz exclusively referred to the irrational element of the trinity. On the other hand, the concept of policy lacks sufficient explanatory power to define clearly the motivation driving a nation to defend itself. It seems peculiar, then, that Clausewitz did not expand the concept of policy into a more inclusive and general one. Perhaps Clausewitz did in fact understand that the rational element of the trinity went beyond policy, but that contemporary scholars would simply reject such a notion as inconceivable, given the all-encompassing grip of nationalism on the people of his era. Even had he tried, Clausewitz probably could not have convinced his fellow scholars and military practitioners that the nation state was not the only source of policy regarding decisions about waging war, or motivation for fighting wars. Thus, even if he understood its excessive specificity, Clausewitz would have understood that policy was the concept most likely to gain the approval of the community of experts reflecting on military theory. 37 Ideology, or a similar concept, simply did not exist as objective, classifiable knowledge in early nineteenth century -and among academics, the ability to classify knowledge and associate it with a specific branch of academia held great sway. 
38
36
37
Clausewitz. 39
40
41
42
39
40
41
42
Theory, to include meta-theory, should possess validity independent of time and space and demonstrate empirical relevance by holding true when tested against a variety of historical examples. In addition, theory should consist of a set of statements that reflect a commonly understood meaning among a group of relevant experts, to allow at least for common understanding, if not consensus. 
43
44
45
46
Analysis of several case studies demonstrates the validity of this modification to the trinity, highlights its explanatory value, and reveals both the implications of this adjustment for military practitioners and areas for further research.
As argued above, by replacing "policy" with the more general concept of "ideology," one can update Clausewitz's Trinity so that it can serve as a useful tool for theorizing on warfare throughout the full spectrum. This brief introduction to the manner in which the following analysis will prove this thesis serves as a methodological roadmap.
To modify a meta-theoretical concept by replacing one element with another, it is essential to understand both the original concept -in this case, Clausewitz's Trinity -and the concept one seek to impose on the meta-theory. The introduction and historical background sections serves that purpose. However, it remains necessary to demonstrate the validity and usefulness of modifying Clausewitz's Trinity as suggested, by replacing "Policy" with "Ideology."
The following historical case study narratives serve as the foundation for analyzing the relevance and validity of the modified Trinity for today's military practitioners. To present a relevant and credible basis for the analysis, the case study narratives follow a fundamental pattern common to each. This involves a discussion of each case's historical background and context.
Then, the focus shifts to the specific manifestation of the ideologies relevant in each case. Finally, the narrative explores how the ideologies involved affected the conduct of warfare in each specific case.
The cases epitomize war across the spectrum of conflict and time. The first, a representation of Clausewitz's own time, is the case of the Spanish insurrection against Napoleon Bonaparte's France in early nineteenth century. The case shows how the Spanish successfully organized themselves around several different ideologies to reject the revolutionary French invaders. The second case, a representation of twentieth century state on state warfare, describes the fighting in the U.S. war against Japan in the Pacific Theatre of Operations during World War II. This case shows the heavy impact of the Japanese ideology on the fighting that took place in that theater. The last case, which represents twenty-first century asymmetric warfare, is the international community's Global War on Terror spearheaded by the United States. The case focuses on the implications of Islamist military ideology's impact on the conduct of war in operations in Afghanistan. Subsequently, the analysis of the transcending trends present in the cases shows how, by replacing policy with ideology, one can analyze warfare independent of time by way of the modified Trinity, and what implications the modified Trinity has for the operational level planner.
The Prussian general and military theorist Carl von Clausewitz (1780-1831) is one of the most influential military theorists in history. 
47
47
Finally, Book Eight offers insight regarding how to plan and prepare for future wars. Among Clausewitz's most noteworthy accomplishments is the ability to link the tactical and strategic levels of war to political purpose and objectives. This enables the reader to create a meaningful context for each engagement and to plan for successive engagements accordingly.
Similarly, Clausewitz criticizes the notion of commanders seeking absolute maxims unlocking the secret of warfare as a math problem. Rather, war is the unforeseeable game of strong wills, emotions, chance, and the genius commander's decisive hand. Three revolutionary revelations, which he acquired over time, informed Clausewitz's work. First he realized, based on own experiences and historical evidence, that the way armed forces are raised, organized, and funded are a consequence of the state it represents. Additionally, states consist of a complex system of political, social, and economic structures equally shaped by individual people and history.
Clausewitz also came to understand that war does not conform to a set of simple rules applied in a closed system. Clausewitz realized that chance played a much greater role in warfare than recognized by military theorists so far. Finally, Clausewitz saw war as a political tool and understood that political purpose must guide the armed forces. This realization enabled Clausewitz to link tactics to strategy, and strategy to policy. 
48
49
50
As any other military theorist, Clausewitz was a product of his own time and experience.
The Westphalian Peace and subsequently the Westphalian state system dominated European politics in late eighteenth early nineteenth century. The state was the only actor on the international stage and states were, until the French Revolution in 1789, almost all ruled by monarchs. Prussia was no exception. Clausewitz viewed the international system as a web of interests, sometimes interdependent and sometimes conflicting. Peace was a temporary expression of balance in the system, whereas war resulted when an imbalance arose between 
49
50
51
52
Inspired by the Newtonian scientific revolution, military theorists in France and Prussia also pursued an approach to warfare based on logic and reason. 
53
54
51
52
53
55
56
57
58
56
57
Numerous distinguished scholars have attempted to unlock the almost mythical truth to Clausewitz's universe. Some tend to downplay Clausewitz's significance, while others, to paraphrase Michael Howard, both read and expect more of Clausewitz than he himself intended to give. 
59
60
61
59 Clausewitz,
On War,
44. 60 Ibid.,
[85]
[86]
[87]
[88]
[89]
101,
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
To the operational level planner -the military practitioner -the Trinity serves a more practical purpose. It provides an important mental model for understanding and affecting the contemporary operational environment. One can find contemporary examples of such attempts in operational approaches to the war in Iraq, like the concepts depicted on General David Petraeus' "Anaconda Slide" -a representation of the strategic approach to combat Al Que'da in Iraq in 2008 (see figure 
4
The Napoleonic Wars: The Spanish Insurrection In 1789, the French Revolution transformed the foundation of warfare. Subsequently Napoleon's utilization of the entire French nation's resources initially gave the French emperor a decisive advantage over his European competitors. Eventually, Napoleonic evolutions prompted France's opponents to reform their social and military systems giving way for modern warfare. 
62
63
64
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
Simultaneously, unrest at the Spanish court led Napoleon to believe that he could conquer Spain as easily as Portugal. Underestimating other forces at play, Napoleon believed that he only needed to unseat the current Spanish monarchy, replacing it with a weak government and thereby leaving the country defenseless. After completing a significant military invasion of Spain, coupled with a diplomatic move to split the Spanish royal family, Napoleon secured strategic 
65
66
67
69
70
Despite this initial French victory, their brutality inspired the rest of the population to rise against the foreign conquerors, and the province of Austria in northern Spain quickly declared war on France. Other provinces soon followed, leading to what historians now call the Peninsular War. 
71
69
70
71
War,
[11]
[12]
Britt,
The Wars of Napoleon,
[84]
[85]
1813
The Iberian theater, to the outside spectator, was a mix of regular troops, irregular insurgents, and civilians defending their way of life. 73 Spanish provinces fielded five regular armies and though a revolutionary government was established, it did not exercise centralized control over them. By this period in history, Spain possessed low-quality regular armies and provincial militia formations. 
74
75
76
77
In similar fashion, the Spain's irregular forces or guerillas forced France to disperse soldiers throughout the Peninsula. After suffering many defeats, the Spanish people abandoned regular warfare as a decisive means to combat the French, looking instead to the Spanish revolutionary government for a solution. This revolutionary government called upon the people to "… show a renewed martial vigor, aided by a novel system of war unknown to military tacticians. 
73 Dempsey, Albuera 1811, 19-20. 74
75
76 John Lawrence Tone, The Fatal Knot (Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press, 1994), 4. 
77
It is necessary to counter these 'warriors on a large scale' with war on a small scale, with guerrillas and more guerrillas." 78 Eventually, even though all regions of Spain fostered guerrillas, the Northern regions generated the most tenacious guerrilla forces and the toughest irregular fighting took place there. 
79
80
81
78
79
80
81
82
The Spanish population had a long tradition of discontent with its monarchical government, and this general discontent increased in ferocity under King Joseph. 
83
84
85
86
82
83
84
35-36, 56-61, 73-77, 78, 124-27. 85
87
88
89
The Spanish guerillas and people fought ferociously for their country, which ultimately enabled the depleted Spanish and Portuguese Armies, assisted by the British, to defeat Napoleon's forces and end the French occupation.
World War II: The Pacific Theater of Operations When the Imperial Japanese Navy and Air Force attacked Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, America's declaration of war against Japan, followed shortly by Germany's declaration of war against America transformed the war in Europe into a full scale World War. The Pacific 
87
88
89
Theater consisted primarily of a confrontation between the Western Allies (the United States and the United Kingdom) and Japan. 
90
91
92
93
90
91
Combat and Culture,
93
94
5
95
95
The United States and the United Kingdom built on these pre-war tensions and racial bias to 
96
97
98
Japanese ideology had long challenged the notion of Western supremacy; historically the Japanese people viewed themselves as the master race. In the summer of 1941 the Japanese Government, published The Way of The Subject, an ideological publication that continued the indoctrination of the Japanese population. The Way of The Subject described an ideal image of the Japanese people, nation, and race. Furthermore, it portrayed Western history as the history of conquest, self-gratification, and racist repression of the rest of the world. It portrayed Westerners as valueless, bloodthirsty aggressors and arrogant colonials who exploited Asian peoples from India to Indochina and the Philippines. This justified Japan's deliberate invasion of Western colonies throughout Asia in an attempt to establish economic independence and create a Pan-Asian empire freed from the yoke of Western domination. The Japanese willingly shouldered the responsibility to lead this effort, seeing themselves as supreme among the Asian races. The Japanese emperor and government sought to establish their people as the ruling class in Asia 97 Dower, War without Mercy, 9. 
98 Dower,
War without Mercy,
[27]
[28]
[29]
Lynn,
Battle. A History of Combat and Culture,
223.
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
110
108
European power, Great Britain, intervened. 119 Subsequently, European powers conquered most of North Africa. 
120
120
121
122
123
124
When defining extremist Islamist ideology, one must first define the group in question.
Generalizing about Arabs as a whole, or Islam as a religion lacks the contextual specificity necessary to say anything useful or broadly applicable. 
125
126
127
To understand militant Islamists' ideology, one must go beyond history and colonization, however traumatic a role it plays in Muslim consciousness. Militant Islamists believe that Islam, as the latest and truest revelation of God's will, is meant for all of humanity. This means that all people must follow the teachings of the Quran before humanity can create the perfect society in the eyes of God. Furthermore, God has given the umma, the society of true Muslims, the responsibility of leading humankind. The Muslims therefore have a duty to share that divine truth 
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
130
131
132
Muslim lands, followed by removal of the false Muslim leaders, establishment of a new Caliphate, and ultimately global conquest to convert the rest of the world into true believers. 
133
134
135
136
The preceding analysis demonstrates that by replacing the term "policy" with the more general concept of "ideology" in Clausewitz's Trinity, one can update it so that it can reach its full potential -particularly with respect to modern application of what many interpreters see as an outdated theory. Ideology, as a more abstract and general concept than policy, can serve the purpose Clausewitz intended for that part of the Trinity while avoiding the problem of confining it to a specific era, form of warfare, or method of government. Three case studies, one each from the nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first centuries demonstrate the various ways in which ideology affects the conduct of war.
In Spain, a popular uprising emerged in defiance of the official Spanish policy of cooperation with Napoleon. The guerillas' locally rooted ideologies -however diverse -and strong affiliation with the Catholic Church provided the necessary impetus to resist the French occupation forces. Ideologically rather than politically motivated, the Spanish people rose to face the seemingly overwhelming and, until then, consistently victorious French empire. Even though both the Spanish regulars and locally raised guerilla forces suffered many defeats at the hands of the French, they persevered and eventually wore down the French.
More than a century later, ideologically motivated Japanese and American soldiers committed horrendous atrocities because they engaged in a particularly brutal form of war with a decidedly racist ideological nature. The source for motivation, again, lay far beyond mere politics or political reasoning. It stemmed instead from both the Japanese and the American soldiers' thorough ideological indoctrination. Whether based on Japan's self-image as the master race forged in the cauldron of state Shintoism, or America's view of the Japanese as a subhuman, inferior people who did not deserve the human rights afforded to members of Western society, this indoctrination led soldiers on both sides to fight using means and with a degree of hatred not witnessed anywhere Western nations faced each other in battle during WWII. This indoctrination involved such powerful effects that it led Japanese soldiers and pilots to commit suicide rather than surrender to the Allied forces in the Pacific theater of war, or turn themselves and their equipment into living IEDs, hoping only to kill as many of their enemy as possible when they died. Only in one other region did WWII exhibit such a brutal and deadly nature -the equally ideologically motivated Eastern Front where the Nazis and the Soviets each scarified tens of millions and committed horrible atrocities in the effort to annihilate each other.
In the Global War on Terror, the West faces a seemingly unfamiliar enemy. The enemy is not a state and lacks any traditional form of organization. This enemy also does not use traditional methods or weapons, and most importantly its militants fight for reasons almost beyond Westerner's ability to grasp. To find that reason, one must study the militant Islamist's ideology. This ideology drives the militant Islamists and provides meaning, motivation, and purpose to the individual. The reason why the Islamic extremist fights, and the manner in which he does so, resists explanation through any policy, written or unwritten. Instead, one must identify the foundation of their determination and the source of their ideas: ideology. As all three case studies demonstrate, policy cannot on its own provide an explanation for what motivates people to fight in examples as diverse as the three described above. Only the one common factor between those three cases can -ideology. While Clausewitz wrote from the perspective of an ideology himself, he drew his ideology from the same source as all of his contemporary military theorists: nationalism. In the case studies above, ideology, not nationalism, serves as the source of motivation. Hence, the three case demonstrate the validity of this study's thesis: the more general term "ideology" can serve as a replacement for the rational element -"policy"-in Clausewitz's Trinity.
This paper seeks to provide practical usefulness to the military practitioner. Any utility to the historian, theorist, or social scientist is therefore merely incidental. Thus, it seems prudent to show the practical implications and applicability of the foregoing analysis. After all, military theory only serves a useful purpose to the military practitioner if one can apply it in the conduct of war. At the U.S. Army's School of Advanced Military Studies, the military and civilian faculty educate military planners; American officers, civilian employees of various government agencies, and officers from partner nations. As a primary outcome of SAMS, the graduate and military planner must possess the ability to conduct conceptual and detailed planning using the Army Design Methodology (ADM) and the Army's Military Decision Making Process (MDMP) as two primary components of the operations process (see figure 
6
138
139
140
7
141
Clausewitz, On War, 89; Carl von Clausewitz, "Vom Kriege," http://www.clausewitz.com/readings/VomKriege1832/TOC.htm (accessed 8 December, 2012).
Clausewitz, On War,[75][76][77][78][79][80][81][82][83][84][85][86][87][88][89]; Clausewitz critizied his contemporaries, Prussian
Clausewitz, On War, 132.    
Ibid., 141.    
Schuurman, "Clausewitz and the "New Wars" Scholars," 92.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, edited and translated by Michael Howard and Peter  Paret, 1984 ed. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976), 89.
Creveld, The Transformation of War,[35][36][37][38][39][40][41][42] Keegan, A History of Warfare,[1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12] 
Kaldor, New and Old Wars,[13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23][24][25][26][27][28][29][30] Keegan, A History of Warfare,[23][24][25][26][27][28] Creveld, The  Transformation of War,[35][36][37][38][39][40][41][42] 
Violent behavior, for example, is a result of personal experience and deliberate choices, which can vary from person to person in the same situation. See RichardRhodes, Masters of  Death, ed. ` (New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf, 2002), 19-27.    
Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures (New York, NY: Basic Books, 1973), 5.   
John A. Lynn, Battle. A History of Combat and Culture (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2008), xiii-xxvi.
Robert M. Citino, The German Way of War (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2005), 4-5.
Michael Freeden, Ideology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), 2-3.
Merriam-Webster, " Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language," 1123.
Freeden, Ideology,[3][4] 
History primarily refers to German Romanticism, Prussian defeats by Napoleon, and World War I. For Hitler's racial and anti-Semetic ideas seeAdolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, trans.  Murphy James (London: Hurst and Blanckett Ldt., 1925/1939), Vol. II, ch. I. All in all Nazi ideology dominated Germany for less that 25 years.
According to Echevarria, objective knowledge was what Clausewitz attempted to capture in On War.Echevarria, Clausewitz and Contemporary War, 3.   
This concept was not novel, though. Other military theorists and practitioners such as Machiavelli and Napoleon had made the same assertion. SeeHeuser, Reading Clausewitz,[44][45] 
An Imperial Army document from the summer of 1942, for example, divided the nationalities of Asia into "master races,"s," "friendly races," and "guest races," reserving the position of undisputed leadership for the "Yamato race."Dower, War without Mercy, 8.
Ibid.,[6][7]. Despite the narrative, Pan-Asian unity remained a myth. Japanese oppressive behavior earned them more Asian enemies than followers.
As an example of the ideology permeating down through the military organization, see Field-Marshal Viscount Slim, Defeat into Victory (London: Cassell & Company Limited, 1956), 337; Eugene Bondurant Sledge, With the Old Breed. At Peleliu and Okinawa (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981), 182, 221; Gerhard L. Weinberg, A World at Arms (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 847-58.
Dower, War without Mercy,[20][21] 
Giangreco, Hell to Pay,[15][16] 
Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Compilation of Usama Bin LadinStatements  1994
-January 2004
Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Compilation of Usama Bin Ladin Statements 1994 -January 2004 13-28; The term "Fatwa" is technical, judicial term for a legal opinion or ruling on a point of law.Lewis, The Crises of Islam, 140.
See Bruse Hoffman, Inside Terrorism (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2006), 81-83.
Habeck, Knowing the Enemy,[12][13][14][15] Hoffman, Inside Terrorism,[89][90][91][92][93][94][95][96][97][98][99][100][101] 
These include: Right to equality, freedom from discrimination, right to life, liberty and personal security, freedom from slavery, freedom from torture and degrading treatment, right to recognition as a person before the law, right to equality before the law, right to remedy by capable judges, freedom from arbitrary arrest and exile right to fair public hearing, right to be considered innocent until proven guilty, freedom from interference with privacy, family, home and correspondence, right to free movement, right to protection in another country, right to a nationality and the freedom to change it, right to marriage and family, right to own property, freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of opinion and information, right to peaceful assembly and association, right to participate in government and elections, right to social security, right to desirable work and to join trade unions, right to rest and leisure, right to adequate living standard, right to education, right to participate in the cultural life of community, right to a social order, responsibilities to the community, freedom from interference in these human rights. See United Nations, "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights," http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/index.shtml(accessed February 17, 2013).
See for exampleThucydides, The Landmark Thucydides. (New York, NY: Touchstone,  1996), 43; Clausewitz, On War, 177; Colin S.Gray, War, Peace and International Relations  (London: Routledge, 2007), 1-14.
Hoffman, Inside Terrorism, 93.   
The operations process consists of plan, prepare, execute, and assess. Embedded in the operations process is the commander's primary activities; understand, visualize, describe, direct, lead, and assess.
Clausewitz, On War,[88][89] 
Ibid., 87.   
U.S. Army, ADRP 5-0, The Operations Process, (Washington D.C.: U.S.Army,  2012), 1-1-1-15.
ADP 3-0, 1.
Clausewitz, On War, 85, 89, 
these depict specific processes like "framing," "visual modeling," and "narrative construction." 
142
8
144
142 ADRP 5-0, 2-4-2-5. 
143
144
145
The planner can use this knowledge to clarify the narrative, the visual models, and the operational approach.
A more detailed study of this potentially useful implementation of the modified Clausewitzian Trinity as part of the Army's conceptual and detailed planning should test the infrastructure, physical environment, and time, also known as PMESII-PT. Mission variables include mission, enemy, troops, terrain, time, and civilian considerations, also known as METT-TC. Each variable further encompass sub variables. Civilian considerations, for example, include areas, structures, capabilities, organizations, people, and events, also known as ASCOPE. See ADRP 5-0, 1-7-1-8. potential and clarify the method of its implementation, leading to its inclusion in the next iteration of U.S. Army operational doctrine. Then, finally, Clausewitz's Trinity could achieve its true potential as a tool not just for writing and understanding theory, but also for guiding the actions of the military planner and practitioner.