# ID: f001c7ff26ad4febb8b7fbaf32efc161
# Title: Robust Analysis of Critical Factors for Cannon Artillery Lethality and Survivability in Peer Conflict
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
After more than 19 years of fighting insurgencies in the global war on terrorism, the Marine Corps has found itself inadequately prepared to address a high-end fight against a peer threat. Guided by the Commandants Planning Guidance and Force Design 2030, the Marine Corps is currently undergoing aggressive organizational change to evolve into a more disruptive force within the context of great-power competition.
With responsibilities spanning the globe and spectrum of conflict, the Marine Corps aims to field and equip a force capable of integrating with the U.S. Navy to deter evolving threats, specifically using China as the premier pacing threat. The premise assumed by the Marine Corps is that by designing a force using China as the pacing threat, the force can scale to any assigned responsibility across the range of military operations.
The Commandants Planning Guidance and Force Design 2030 place a large emphasis on rocket-delivered anti-ship fires. An increase of rocket artillery batteries from seven to 21 is planned to expand deterrence capability, ensure access in a challenging antiaccess and area denial environment, and increase the probability of naval campaign success. In a fiscally constrained environment with finite resources, a planned divestment in cannon batteries from 21 to five parallels this focus on rocket delivered fires.
Cannon artillery is the longest-range fires asset that is capable of offering persistent, all weather fire support. If cannon artillery were to be removed completely, one echelon lower than rocket delivered artillery is an M252 81mm mortar. The retention of cannon artillery, although reduced, can be improved to offer tactical maneuver-based offensive and defensive firepower to Marines across the contingent range of military operations that the Marine Corps may be called upon to address. Furthermore, by modernizing the cannon artillery force during a period of divestment, legacy institutional knowledge of cannon artillery can be retained and focused rather than atrophy. To enable force scalability, improvements must be made to retained cannon artillery.
Of the two great power competitors, Russia presents the most formidable artillery threat. While China serves as an appropriate service pacing threat due to its economic and xviii technological base, Russia maintains the most capable and practiced fires community.
Similar to how the Marine Corps assumes a force developed to counter the high-end Chinese fight will scale to lower spectrum conflict, this thesis assumes that an artillery force capable of countering the most sophisticated and challenging artillery threat will scale to threats around the globe.
This thesis explores which equipment and tactics, techniques, and procedures and changing positions infrequently. These TTP decisions are mutually exclusive, and the author assumes that the commander desires to balance these priorities. The TTP decision tree derived in experiment three is validated in experiment four and is determined to be appropriate in determining TTPs predicated on the operational capabilities of the employed unit.
xxi Ultimately, the findings of this study are that the equipment currently fielded by USMC artillery battalions is largely in line with the most significant factors for lethality and survivability, specifically 155mm caliber and sufficient range capability. However, significant changes to current TTPs are necessary for force protection and mission success.
The single most critical change that the Marine Corps can influence is adopting a more segmented and distributed employment of cannon artillery. Beyond employment method, the TTPs used should be determined by operational capability. Finally, although beyond the scope of future USMC cannon constructs, it is found that the inclusion of an MLRS capability by an adversary increases casualties for both sides. Therefore, MLRS should be designated as a high-value target and prioritized for targeting.
While this thesis does conclude that segmented and distributed battery operations are critical for cannon artillery lethality and survivability, logistics and command and control complexity are beyond the scope of this study. The author recommends that further analysis be conducted to examine the feasibility of increased dispersion in three ways. 
A.
As good as we are today, we will need to be even better tomorrow to maintain our warfighting overmatch. We will achieve this through the strength of our innovation, ingenuity, and willingness to continually adapt to and initiate changes in the operating environment to affect the behavior of real-world pacing threats.
-General David H. Berger, CMC (USMC 2019)
After Base Operations (EABO) and stand-in forces coupled with a strategic realignment with the Navy are critical to the desired end state of effective deterrence and persistence and are heavily emphasized. To accomplish this, an aggressive force redesign is being implemented.
The With responsibilities spanning the globe and spectrum of conflict, the CPG and FD30 aim to build a force with adequate capabilities to address a high-end fight. The premise assumed by the Marine Corps is that by designing a force using China as the premier pacing threat, the force can scale to any assigned responsibility across the range of military operations 
(Berger and Evans 2020)
Mark F. Cancian, a senior advisor in the International Security Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, concludes that the lack of hedging means that the Marine Corps will not field the broad set of capabilities it has in the past. It will be poorly structured to fight the kind of campaigns that it had to fight in Korea, Vietnam, and Iraq. The history of the last 70 years has been that the United States deters great power conflict and fights regional and stability conflicts…The Marine Corps might plan to defer these conflicts to the Army, but that has not worked in the past. Army forces have been too small to keep the Marine Corps out of sustained ground combat. 
(Cancian 2020)
The challenge of designing a Marine Corps capable of addressing both the Chinese pacing threat and concurrent responsibilities in a fiscally constrained environment is not trivial. Adding to the complexity of the problem is the question of how a great-power conflict may emerge. At the extreme end of the spectrum is the most dangerous course of action-high-intensity war between the United States and a peer threat. The more likely course of action is a series of proxy wars and insurgencies incited by China or Russia 
(Vrolyk 2019)
Regardless of the form of future conflict, the Marine Corps force is being designed to counter the most dangerous course of action. If the assumption of scalability is to hold true, then capabilities must be retained or developed that will foster success proportionally.
The CPG and FD30 place a large emphasis on rocket-delivered anti-ship fires. An increase of rocket artillery batteries from seven to 21 is planned to expand deterrence capability, ensure access in a challenging anti-access and area denial (A2/AD) environment, and increase probability of naval campaign success. In a fiscally constrained environment with finite resources, a planned divestment in cannon batteries from 21 to five parallels this focus on rocket delivered fires (USMC 2020).
A rocket-artillery based force optimized to create a swath of mutually contested space will promote access in an A2/AD environment. However, long-range anti-ship missiles do not scale in economy of force. A multi-million-dollar anti-ship missile is unlikely to be utilized against a land-based threat to personnel. If cannon artillery were to be removed completely, one echelon lower than rocket delivered artillery is an 81mm mortar. The retention of cannon artillery, although reduced, can be improved to offer tactical maneuver-based offensive and defensive firepower to Marines across the contingent range of military operations that the Marine Corps may be called upon to address. Furthermore, by modernizing the cannon artillery force during a period of divestment, legacy institutional knowledge of cannon artillery can be retained and focused rather than atrophy. To enable force scalability, improvements must be made to retained cannon artillery.
Of the two great power competitors, Russia presents the most formidable artillery threat. While China serves as an appropriate service pacing threat due to its economic and technological base, Russia maintains the most capable and practiced fires community.
Similar to how the Marine Corps assumes a force developed to counter the high-end Chinese fight will scale to lower spectrum conflict, this thesis assumes that an artillery force capable of countering the most sophisticated and challenging artillery threat will scale to threats around the globe. Results and insights gained through analysis of the Russian threat can be evaluated for effective integration into the Pacific theater, enabling a cannon artillery force that is capable of successful operations against all potential adversaries.
This study seeks to identify factors and interactions which are critical to USMC cannon artillery success in a Russia counterbattery scenario. Success is defined by the following Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs):
• Lethality: The destruction of 50% of adversary artillery forces.
• Survivability: Friendly artillery units remain combat capable for future operations following the termination of the simulation (no more than 50% casualties sustained).
Both equipment and tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) are evaluated against the MOEs. The following questions are answered through simulation and analysis:
• Which equipment factors are most critical to success in a counterbattery fire scenario?
• Which TTP factors are most critical to success in a counterbattery fire scenario?
• Can cannon artillery succeed by operating within enemy threat rings?
Using open-source weapons data and TTPs, a scenario is built using Map Aware Non-Uniform Automata (MANA) 
(McIntosh et al. 2007
Later chapters discuss factors to be considered, levels to be evaluated, the MANA simulation environment and scenario, and DOE construction.
Data are generated and collected through simulation, with insights solidified through analysis using the statistical analysis software JMP (SAS 2021). These insights are compared to current TTPs and equipment in order to offer suggestions to modernization efforts and inputs to future wargames.
Chapter II presents a literature review of the artillery process, USMC and Russian artillery, employment considerations, factors to be evaluated, and previous research that informs this study.
Chapter III introduces the tactical scenario, conceptual model, modeling environment, and computer model.
Chapter IV defines the factors to be evaluated, presents the location within the computer model in which each factor is affected, and establishes an incremental experiment methodology.
Chapter V discusses the construction of efficient DOEs for each experiment and concludes with a brief discussion about the significance of efficient DOE to computational run time and explanatory information acquired.
Chapter VI presents analysis on each experiment, progressively drawing insights into equipment and TTP factor significance, factor interactions, and TTP decisions to support a more capable cannon artillery force.
Chapter VII summarizes the findings from analysis and draws final conclusions into the most critical factors for cannon artillery lethality and survivability in a counterbattery fight against a peer adversary. Recommendations for future analytic work are presented, and suggestions for extending findings through USMC wargaming and experimentation are discussed.
This chapter provides a summary of the artillery process, a review of USMC and Russian artillery, a recent vignette of Russian fires employment, and definition of broad factors that are evaluated in this thesis, drawing insight and context from reports and studies.
The mission of the Field Artillery is to destroy, neutralize, or suppress the enemy by cannon, rocket, and missile fires and to help integrate all fire support assets into combined arms operations.
-MCWP 3-16.4 (USMC 2016a)
The execution of artillery operations requires three general synergistic components:
target acquisition, weapon systems, and command and control (C2) systems. By Marine Corps convention, "target acquisition is detecting, identifying, and locating a target in sufficient detail to effectively employ munitions. The weapon systems provide the means to engage the target. The C2 systems provide the required facilities, equipment, communications, and personnel that enable the commander to plan, direct, and control fires" (USMC 2016a, p. 1-1).
Historically, forward observers (FOs) have acted as the primary target acquisition agency. When an FO detects a target, they generate and transmit a Call for Fire (CFF). The CFF is transmitted to the Fire Support Coordination Center (FSCC) for deconfliction and prioritization. The FSCC forwards the request for fires to an appropriate firing agency Fire Direction Center (FDC). The FDC calculates a ballistic firing solution, selects munitions and the quantity of projectiles to fire, and transmits firing data to the gunline. The gunline applies technical firing data and fires at the target according to instructions given by the FDC. Upon effects assessment, the FO either terminates the fire mission, adjusts fires, or calls for a repeated mission.
The process from target acquisition to effective munition effect is referred to as the kill chain. Various countries and uniform services possess different acquisition platforms, weapons systems, and communication architecture and technology. These various agencies also employ differing tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs). When taken in summation, these various aspects affect the speed of the kill chain and the method by which artillery is employed on the battlefield. Figure 
1
There has long been a desire and incentive to increase the range of cannon artillery systems. This is largely a hold-over capability requirement from the last 19 years of the Global War on Terrorism. The Marine Corps enjoyed the benefits of air superiority and stable fire base operations. These variables created an environment that necessitated and promoted increased range and accuracy. GPS-guided munitions provided increased accuracy and base bleed projectiles provided a range increase without significant modification to the intrinsic cannon range. Despite this desire for range, peer and near-peer adversaries can currently outrange our cannons, and their targeting cycle and tactical employment can overwhelm existing operating concepts 
(Gordon et al. 2019)
The M777A2 lightweight 155mm towed howitzer currently fielded by the Marine Corps has long relative range, but emplacement and displacement times are lengthy, and the cannon can only be moved with the heavy Medium Tactical Vehicle Replacement (MTVR). These slower displacement times equate to an environment where unmasking (firing resulting in successful adversary counterbattery radar target acquisition) results in counterbattery fires that out-cycle current abilities to displace. Additionally, current Marine
Corps tactics of consolidated battery sized elements leave a significant portion of available firepower vulnerable to a single massed strike.
The desire for range and rapid emplacement and displacement times are at conflict.
As seen in Figure 
2
Technological advances have aimed to reduce weight and increase range, most seen in the progression from the M198 to M777A2. Although weight has been decreased significantly, the prime mover for the M777A2 remains the MTVR. The powerful, albeit heavy, MTVR is often retrofitted with armor and a troop carrier, further increasing dimension and weight. The M777A2/MTVR pair is a sizable couple, proving challenging to rapidly embark, transport, and employ.
While helo-inserted artillery raids are technically possible, the loss of the prime mover renders inserted artillery incapable of movement until aircraft are able to extract. In a contested environment with active radar, artillery raids under the current construct are high risk and largely infeasible.
Self-propelled artillery cannons reside on a vehicle chassis or are developed as a whole system vehicle. The primary benefit of a self-propelled system is the ability to transport as a single unit, significantly decreasing emplacement and displacement time.
Traditionally, the Marine Corps has resisted self-propelled artillery systems due to their inherent weight additions. Exceedingly heavy systems prove challenging for an expeditionary and amphibious force to employ. For example, unconstrained by expeditionary weight restrictions, the U.S. Army currently fields the armor protected 155mm M109A6 Paladin. Matching the caliber and range of the M777A2, it weighs 63,352 lbs. compared to the M777A2 at 9,100 lbs. (Jane's 2016, 2020a).
With a planned divestment in cannon batteries from 21 to five, an accurate assessment of the near-future organization is not possible. The Marine Corps currently maintains four artillery regiments (three active, one reserve). Although not accurate to current organizational levels, the traditional organization establishes three battalions per regiment. Each battalion consists of three firing batteries with six towed howitzers per battery. Each echelon of cannon artillery unit conventionally supports a higher echelon infantry unit-an artillery regiment supports a division, an artillery battalion supports an infantry regiment, and an artillery battery supports an infantry battalion.
While the U.S. commonly refers to artillery as the "King of Battle," the Russian military emphatically declares artillery to be the "God of War." Russia utilizes long range indirect fires as its main effort, hinging its bid for success on rapid and integrated target acquisition methodologies. The Russian concept of operations "consists of the capability to deliver devastating indirect fires, while maintaining stand off from their enemy, and protecting their own forces through the use of ADA (air defense artillery) and Electronic Warfare (EW). Once adequate fires have been delivered, ground forces begin to maneuver, preferably with an armored element to secure time and space for indirect fire and protection platforms to move forward and begin the cycle again" (United States Army [USA] 2016, p. 12).
To emphasize the significance that the adversary places on artillery, a Fort
Leavenworth based Foreign Military Studies Office report concluded its study of Russian artillery fires with the following:
Precision fires have their place and quick destruction of high-threat targets is optimum for survival, but the Russians have not abandoned their use of massed artillery. Massed artillery not only destroys-it produces paralysis and psychic terror. 'The experience of modern wars and armed conflicts shows that artillery is still the god of war. Airstrikes cannot replace massed artillery fire. And the most effective way to protect your troops from enemy artillery is to destroy that artillery with counterbattery fire, when enemy artillery positions are detected and instantly suppressed.' So, the Russians plan to improve their reconnaissance-fire system while retaining their ability to dominate the battlefield through massed artillery fire. 
(Grau and Bartles 2018)
(Grau and Bartles 2016)
While Russia maintains towed artillery, the preferred broad weapon system of choice is the heavy self-propelled howitzer and self-propelled Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS). This preference supports the practiced concept of maneuver by fire.
Russia is currently field testing the new 2S35 Koalitsiya-SV 152mm self-propelled howitzer which is projected to enter service in 2021. With a rocket-assisted range of 70km
and an automatic loading firing rate of 16 rounds per minute, the 2S35 doubles the range of the M777A2 and triples the rate of fire 
(Janes 2020b
Russian forces operate in brigades. Each brigade consists of one MLRS battalion and two self-propelled artillery battalions. The MLRS Battalion consists of three batteries, each with six BM-21 "Grad" 122mm launchers (18 total). Each self-propelled howitzer battalion consists of three batteries, each with six 2S19 Msta-S 152mm self-propelled howitzers (18 guns/battalion, 36 guns/brigade). Figure 
3
Adapted from The Russian Way of War 
(Grau and Bartles 2016, p. 234-236)
Figure 
3
The Battalion Tactical Group (BTG) forms the basis of the Russian combined arms force. Comprised of brigade forces, the flexible BTG is task-organized for a specific mission set. Inherent in every configurable BTG is a heavy contingent of artillery.
Under the cover of darkness on the morning of 11 July 2014, a large Ukrainian force of mechanized vehicles assembled to prepare for an early morning offensive against Russian forces near Zelenopillya along the Ukrainian-Russian border. At 0430 as final preparations were being made, all radio communications were lost and multiple drones were heard overhead. Just minutes later, an intense Russian artillery barrage killed 30
Ukrainian soldiers and destroyed two mechanized battalion's worth of equipment 
(Fox 2017)
This recent example of the Russian kill-chain at work provides context to the challenge presented by the Russian threat. In the Zelenopillya attack, Russian forces used cyber capabilities to identify approximate Ukrainian force positions, UAV capabilities to refine target locations, EW capabilities to disrupt communications, and mass fires to destroy a large swath of territory 
(Fox 2017)
Zelenopillya was unique in the fact that Russia unveiled its Reconnaissance-Fire system in depth. The Russian Reconnaissance-Fire system is an integrated system of reconnaissance drones, cyber capabilities, Integrated Air Defense System (IADS), and long-range mass strike capability that produces a highly efficient kill-chain with devastating effects 
(Grau and Bartles 2018)
(Fox and Rossow 2017)
While Russia does have formidable precision strike capability, it continues to prefer mass over precision. One paper that examined the Reconnaissance-Fire system concludes that "Russian artillery units will expend far more conventional rounds than expensive, high-precision rounds" 
(Grau and Bartles 2018)
(Grau and Bartles 2018)
Insight gained into the Russian kill-chain from the Zelenopillya attack coupled with the knowledge that Russian units prefer to mass fires and make evasive survivability moves lends perspective to what the Marine Corps may have to contend with.
In this section, the author introduces seven broad equipment and TTP based factor families that are influential in cannon artillery performance.
Marine cannon artillery is conventionally employed in consolidated battery-sized elements. In consolidated battery operations, six-gun batteries are employed as the smallest tactical unit. The benefits of operating in this manner are a more robust local security, central battery C2, key billet holder centralization, and battalion level operational control.
Disadvantages include physical proximity of firing pieces, higher levels of communications emissions, and large proportion of assets incapable of fire when not fire capable (FIRECAP). Higher levels of communication's emissions increase probability of detection, physical proximity renders units vulnerable to mass strike, and the decision to displace the battery removes availability of a significant amount of assets from the battlefield for a period of time.
Split battery operations are considered based on the tactical situation. In split battery employment, the traditional six-gun battery disperses into two, three-gun platoons with organic platoon FDCs. These platoons operate geographically separated from each other. This increases C2 complexity and decreases local security capability, but units are hedged against single mass strike annihilation and can displace sequentially, maintaining FIRECAP as the sister unit is moving.
geographically separated from the other guns of the battery. All battery guns are controlled by the battery FDC, also geographically separated. Distributed operations represent the most complex C2 of all employment methods, but the geographic separation of all pieces offers the highest survivability among employment options. Local security is extremely lacking in distributed operations, with individual pieces possessing few assets with which to organically defend itself. A recent study which examined employment options found that simulated distributed operations resulted in a 70% higher probability of victory compared to consolidated battery operations (Turk 2020).
Time in position refers to the time spent occupied in a position after firing.
Increasingly capable artillery reconnaissance systems present a dilemma between the decision to displace upon firing to increase survivability against the desire to remain FIRECAP. Prior to unmasking by firing, a unit can be located by a forward observer, UAV, or EW. Every round fired from a position has a possibility of being detected by counterbattery radar. Regardless of how a unit is targeted, once the adversary kill chain is initiated, rounds could impact the position within a short period of time.
Remaining in a position keeps that unit FIRECAP and responsive. The size of the unit firing also factors into the adversary decision to counterfire. If the unit is small, a mass strike may not be advisable from a risk perspective. By unmasking their own fire units in a counterbattery strike, the adversary opens itself up to counterbattery fire from previously undetected units.
While it may seem intuitive that the best way to ensure survivability is to fire and immediately displace, this course of action results in a decrease in FIRECAP units, and this may significantly affect the battlefield. Additionally, immediate displacement only increases survivability if the unit is able to clear the area before counterbattery rounds impact. One study found that frequent movement reduces risk at the expense of reduced lethality, and recommends remaining occupied after firing in order to produce lethal effects 
(Shim 2017)
Measured in rounds per minute, rate of fire is affected by method of load and physical gun limitations. Undergoing enormous pressure and heat exchanges, cannon tubes can maintain a rapid rate of fire for a limited amount of time, and a sustained rate of fire thereafter.
The current M777 is a crew loaded howitzer, requiring a load and ram team. To the expense of weight, some artillery systems possess automatic loading systems, reducing crew requirements and permitting a higher rate of fire 
(Gordon et al. 2015)
By utilizing natural concealment such as foliage as well as position improving concealment techniques, Marine artillery decreases its chances of visual detection.
Although visual and radar scattering nets reside in the inventory, placing them over an M777A2 and all battery vehicles is a significant task that slows displacement times dramatically. Effective concealment is not currently widely practiced as the requirement for concealment was not a priority in recent conflicts. A recent RAND report that evaluated U.S. Army artillery requirements for high-end conventional war concludes that "against a powerful opponent such as Russia, cover, concealment, and deception will be essential" 
(Gordon et al. 2019, p. 182)
With an ability to project reconnaissance unencumbered by terrain, Russia utilizes its UAVs to "significantly [supplement] forward observation capabilities, a very important technological development for an artillery-centric post-Soviet army" 
(Grau and Bartles 2018)
Emplacement consists of all actions required from the occupation of a position to the capability to fire. Conversely, displacement consists of all actions from being FIRECAP to movement out of a position. The desire for rapid emplacements and displacements are twofold: to decrease time when fires are not available and to increase survivability.
A unit is unable to provide responsive fires when it is displacing, transiting, and emplacing. By shortening the time required to emplace and displace, a unit is able to establish itself as a more persistent asset. If a unit is able to displace faster than the adversary kill chain can produce effects on its position, then survivability is increased.
One study that conducted an analysis of alternative artillery systems for the Marine Corps concluded that "until the M777 is replaced with an independently mobile artillery system, training and readiness standards should place a greater emphasis on decreasing emplacement and displacement times, as well as increased use of survivability moves" (Browne 2018).
Ideally, a unit possesses organic range greater to that of its adversary, remaining outside of its threat ring while able to produce effects. As discussed in Chapter 1, an increase in range requires an increase in weight. For a highly mobile expeditionary force with unique transportability requirements, weight is a significant constraint. If unable to achieve range greater than the adversary, TTPs should support survivability and lethality within the range of adversary effects.
Recent joint efforts such as the Long Range Cannon project aim to increase the range of current USMC cannon artillery systems. These efforts include both technological advancements to the M777 as well as improved base bleed, rocket-assisted projectiles (Gaitan-Tovar and Bound 2019). One attractive series of modifications doubles current range. However, this benefit to this range increase is at the expense of an additional 1,000 pounds, six additional feet of cannon tube, and expensive GPS guided projectiles (Military News 2018).
This thesis evaluates range as a primary factor to determine whether increased range is a dominant contributor to success or if Marine artillery units can succeed with reduced range capabilities in exchange for more robust capabilities in areas such as emplacement and displacement speed.
Although different effects are generated by different projectile types, the kinetic strength of the projectile is generally determined by the caliber of the weapon system. A 155mm cannon fires a larger and more powerful round than that of a 105mm cannon. The caliber of the weapons system has implicit constraining effects on the weight and range of the weapons system. The size and relative power of both the 105mm and 155mm projectile is evaluated in this study.
The purpose of the simulation model is to determine which elements of tactics and equipment are most important for survivability and lethality in an air-denied, counterbattery scenario. In this chapter, the researcher develops a theoretical scenario for a post force closure artillery engagement, illustrates the conceptual intent of the model, introduces the chosen modeling environment, and describes the computer simulation.
The following scenario is adapted from RAND RR2124: Army Fires Capabilities for 2025 and Beyond. The researcher emphasizes that the scenario is purely theoretical and is intended for analysis purposes only.
Bolstered by strategic success in Ukraine and favorable testing of international response, Red maintained increasing confidence that a swift incursion into neighboring territory would increase its sphere of influence. Seeking a strategic defeat on NATO, Red developed operational plans to attack, occupy, and isolate the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.  
After gaining access to the Baltic Sea, a Blue Marine Expeditionary Brigade (MEB) conducted an amphibious landing along the western coast of Latvia. Among the assault forces were one cannon artillery battalion. The mission of the Blue cannon artillery battalion is to support the seizure of an improved expeditionary airfield in the vicinity of Riga, Latvia in order to enable follow on MEB force deployment and flexibility of action for the MEB Aviation Combat Element (ACE).
Anticipating the operational value of the expeditionary airfield, Red deployed fires elements of a Brigade Tactical Group (BTG) to establish defensive fires positions. One battalion consisting of two 2S19M2 self-propelled howitzer batteries and one BM21 'Grad'
MLRS battery comprise the defensive fires elements.  
The model intends to explore the interactions between artillery units in a counterbattery scenario. All units unnecessary to this aim are eliminated from consideration. Both Red and Blue have firing units and target acquisition elements unique to their respective force structure and order of battle.
With an air contested environment, artillery is the highest level of fire support available to Red and Blue. Red leverages artillery as its main effort and intends to prevent Blue's advance to seize the airfield. Having assumed defensive positions, Red will prioritize striking Blue's fires assets in order to gain fire superiority. Conversely, Blue prioritizes the seizure of the objective area and will balance forward movement with adequate FIRECAP units in order to respond proactively to Red units acquired or retroactively to fires received by Red.
As Blue approaches the objective area, both Red and Blue attempt to acquire opposing fires assets through UAS. When a target is acquired, a fire mission is generated to attack the target. Counterbattery radar is active on the battlefield, and any missions executed will unmask the firing element, rendering them vulnerable to radar detection. If an unmasked unit is detected by opposing radar, a call for fire is generated and transmitted to available fires elements for engagement. If rounds impact a position, the unit under attack will briefly attempt to gain fire superiority through an increased rate of fire and subsequently conduct an emergency displacement.
Red will remain in defensive positions as long as no incoming fires are received.
Red will conduct emergency displacements to prepared alternate positions if fires are received. Blue will conduct survivability moves toward the objective area if no fire missions are received after a set amount of time. Blue will conduct emergency displacements toward the objective area if fires are received.
This section introduces the modeling environment used in this study and discusses the modeling logic used to create the simulation.
The modeling environment selected for this thesis is Map Aware Non-Uniform Automata (MANA), developed by New Zealand's Defense Technology Agency in 2000.
MANA is a stochastic, agent-based, time-stepped, mission-level modeling environment that excels at tactical level simulation under certain conditions (Lucas 2020).
While high resolution, physics-based models provide high fidelity analysis of certain aspects of weapons systems performance, they generally lack the ability to integrate dynamic personality-driven decisions, situation awareness, and inter-unit communications.
MANA was developed to specifically address these deficiencies 
(McIntosh et al. 2007)
MANA is an accessible modeling environment with a shallow learning curve. A simple graphical user interface (GUI) enables the modeler to construct a mission-level scenario using an intuitive and logical approach. The modeler is able to watch the simulation run with geographical movement and interactions visually displayed.
The stochastic nature of MANA allows for variance in simulation runs based on a pseudorandom seed. Seed values are captured throughout simulation runs, enabling the modeler to identify and play back anomalous outlier outputs, assisting in unique situation and error detection.
Significantly, MANA is easily data farmable. The modeler is able to develop a design of experiments (DOE) of various factors and levels to run the simulation under differing conditions. The ease of DOE integration and modeler control of output statistics allows the modeler to quickly generate insights into factor importance in pursuit of an objective.
In MANA, military units are represented by agents. Agents are organized into groups called squads. Each squad is built to model certain capabilities and assume a certain personality, dictating the manner in which the agents of the squad interact with the terrain and friendly, neutral, and enemy agents. As a squad of agents progresses through the simulation, it can assume various states, triggered by events. Each state is built to have its own personality, which dictates the action and priorities of the squad at that point in time.
Figure 
8
The manner in which a squad progresses through states-and the personalities of those states-dictate how the squad interacts with all aspects of the simulation. By defining many squads, establishing communication links, placing them in appropriate initial locations, establishing waypoints, and imbuing the squads with personalities based on states, a simulation can be built to approximate a tactical, mission-level engagement within the constraints of MANA.
The tactical scenario terrain and geometry of Riga, Latvia are similar to that of Fort  MANA uses a hidden terrain layer which effects agent movement. The modeler defines three key metrics for each color. The terrain layer for this simulation is shown in Figure 
10
Figure 
10
The methods of target acquisition available to Blue and Red are UAS and counterbattery radar. UAS and counterbattery radar operate independently, but have complementary effects. Neither can be targeted nor destroyed by opposing action. This section details the modeling logic of each acquisition method, how the agent is involved in the total schema, and workarounds implemented by the modeler to best approximate realistic employment.
In    
The simulation-state diagram for the Blue firing agent squads is shown in Figure 
13
Second, if at any point the guns receive incoming fires, they will immediately transition into the Squad Shot At state. The rate of fire will be increased in an effort to gain fires superiority. After a set amount of time, the guns will conduct transition into Spare 2 state in order to displace.
Finally, if the guns receive no fire mission or incoming fire within a certain amount of time in Spare 3, then a survivability move is conducted by transitioning into the displacement Spare 2 state.
Regardless of how the guns reached the transition to the displacement Spare 2 state, they will eventually begin to displace. After a certain amount of time displacing, guns will transition into Spare 1, or the movement state. At this time, the guns become 100% concealed and are reduced to Class 2, meaning that they are undetectable to any acquisition effort. In this state, the guns are moving to their next position with a high preponderance to reach the next waypoint. Upon reaching the next position, the guns transition into the Reach Waypoint state, which begins the emplacement.
While emplacing, the guns are Class 2 and not detectable by any acquisition effort.
Due to the air-denied environment and the high value of fires assets to the tactical situation, the modeler assumes that a fire mission will be conducted only after a targeted unit is fully emplaced. Realistically, the earlier a unit receives fires in its emplacement phase, the faster it can displace out of incoming fire. Conversely, if a unit is permitted to become fully emplaced prior to being fired upon, it is significantly more difficult to displace quickly.
Given the risk incurred by unmasking by firing, it is advantageous to wait for a unit to become fully emplaced before an attack. It is for this reason that guns remain Class 2 during emplacements.
Once the emplacement is complete, the guns transition back to Spare 3, and are FIRECAP and awaiting fire missions. For each independent fire agent squad, this closedloop process repeats itself for the duration of the simulation.
In a counterbattery scenario with targets often acquired by counterbattery radar, it is important to note that missions are conducted against a point of origin rather than a visually detected and tracked target. MANA assumes that once detected, a targeted agent can be fired upon with fires automatically adjusted for position. This behavior is counter to the intended point of origin mission with minimal battle damage assessment. To coerce intended point of origin attack, the guns were built to receive fire mission location data as a snapshot-in-time location, which is displayed on an inorganic contact persistence map.
The targets remain on this inorganic contact persistence map for five minutes. This forces the guns to fire upon the point-of-origin without tracking the target if it were to move during the conduct of the mission.
By this logic, a fire mission will be conducted if the guns are in a FIRECAP state and are not processing another mission. If the guns are not in a FIRECAP state, the mission will not be conducted, with one exception. If the guns receive a fire mission when they are not in a FIRECAP state but manage to transition into a FIRECAP state while the target resides on the inorganic contact persistence map, then the mission will be conducted.
The majority of the logic presented for the Blue firing agent squads holds true for  
To identify the factors most important to Blue lethality and survivability, multiple experiments are conducted, each of which provides unique insights. This chapter discusses the location of each factor within the computer model and presents our experiment methodology.
To answer the question of which factors most significantly influence lethality and survivability of cannon artillery in a Russian counterbattery scenario, Chapter II established seven broad factor categories to be evaluated in this thesis. These are  
The five broad equipment-based factors established are rate of fire, range, caliber, emplacement time, and displacement time. Figure 
16
The three broad TTP-based factors established are time in position, camouflage, and employment method. Figure 
17
Camouflage, or the amount of concealment a unit has from UAS detection, is affected in Spare 3, the only state in which a unit is FIRECAP and masked.
The only factor that cannot be controlled by varying a data input to the simulation is employment method. MANA lacks the ability to dynamically distribute a unit while maintaining adequate control measures. In order to control the employment method factor by tactic, four separate scenarios were implemented in MANA.
As discussed in Chapter II, USMC artillery conventionally operates as consolidated, six-gun batteries where a battery FDC controls six geographically centralized howitzers. In split battery operations, one FDC controls two three-gun sections which are geographically separated. In distributed operations, one FDC controls six geographically separated howitzers. These three employment methods are currently practiced to differing extents. The modeler created one theoretical section employment method in which one FDC controls three two-gun sections which are geographically separated. Figure 
18
Red factors are not altered until the fourth experiment. All factors that are varied for Red are identified above with the exception of armor and conventional force composition.
The modeler assumes that armor integration will not be pursued for Blue given USMC expeditionary weight constraints. Red is under no such constraints and actively employs various armored artillery units.
The extent of armor effectiveness on the 2S19M2 self-propelled howitzer is unknown, and Janes offers the following:
The protection offered by the hull is unclear as it is understood to be based on the T-72. In its standard configuration the T-72A is built from rolled homogeneous armour that is further protected by Combination-K armour. This provides the vehicle with protection from earlier generation anti-tank rounds, but it is unclear whether this level of protection is offered to the vehicle. The turret is understood to protect only against small arms fire and primarily artillery fragmentation 
(Janes 2021)
Given the uncertainty surrounding the level of armor, the modeler assumed that the 2S19 turret is comprised of one inch, or 25mm, of armor with which Red cannon firing agents were built in MANA. This factor is changed in the FIRECAP states of Default State, Squad Taken Shot, and Squad Shot At (see Chapter III, Figure 
14
The conventional Red force built in MANA consists of two 2S19M2 batteries and one BM-21 'Grad' MLRS battery. The modeler defines a unique Red factor as the composition of the force varying between this construct and one in which three 2S19M2 batteries and no MLRS comprise the force. This factor is changed through back-end mapping.
An incremental experiment methodology is developed to build intuition and draw conclusions about the factors most influential to Blue lethality and survivability.
Experiment one evaluates the range of possibilities if Blue and Red forces were to engage in battle as currently constructed. Experiment two examines the relative benefit of different Blue employment methods against the current Red force. Experiment three varies Blue factors to determine the most significant factors against the current Red force. Experiment four varies both Blue and Red factors to determine the most significant factors for success against variable and unknown Red force capabilities.
In experiment one, a base case is established. In this experiment, Blue and Red are constructed with parameters to best approximate the current capabilities and tactics employed by USMC and Russian artillery. The results of this experiment lend insight into the range of results that may be observed if these forces were to engage as currently equipped.
Experiment two envisions the same Blue and Red capabilities, but varies the method in which Blue employs its forces. The most immediately influenced capability that the USMC can affect through wargaming and training is artillery employment. The results of this experiment lend insight into the relative impact that differing USMC artillery employment methods make in a counterbattery scenario against current USMC and Russian capabilities.
Holding Red forces constant, as in experiments one and two, experiment three varies all equipment-based and TTP-based factors for Blue. The results of this experiment lend insight into the most significant factors for optimal USMC configuration for lethality and survivability against the best approximation of the current Russian artillery force. 
An efficient DOE strives to balance competing priorities of maximizing the quality of data to determine the relative importance of various factors and minimizing the computational work required. This chapter defines the factors explored in each experiment, establishes the levels between which these factors vary, discusses the manner in which each efficient DOE was constructed, and discusses the determination of adequate replications.
In experiment one, both Blue and Red are built as a best approximation of current USMC and Russian capabilities and tactics. See Appendix B for a summary of current conventional USMC and Russian forces used to construct Blue and Red for the base case.
As no factors are varied, a DOE is not required for experiment one. The stochastic nature of MANA introduces variability across multiple simulation runs. The variance across replications serves as a benchmark for the range of expected results if the two conventional forces engage as currently constructed. The base case is run for 200 replications, and results are presented in Chapter VI.
Experiment two examines the relative differences in Blue lethality and survivability by varying the employment method used. The employment method, which is determined by four different MANA simulation scenarios, is the only factor varied. For each of the four employment methods, 200 replications were conducted.
Although results are presented in Chapter VI, the results were influential in determining the number of replications required for subsequent experiments and thus are discussed in this section.
A power analysis is conducted to determine the number of replications sufficient for each design point in subsequent experiments. After each employment method was run for 200 replications, histograms for Blue Casualties were plotted and the standard deviation was estimated. The case with the largest standard deviation was selected to calculate the sample size required.
The calculation used to determine sufficient sample size is
where 𝜎𝜎 is the standard deviation estimate, 𝑍𝑍 𝛼𝛼 is the z-score for the desired confidence interval capability, 𝑍𝑍 𝛽𝛽 is the z-score for power, 𝜇𝜇 0 -𝜇𝜇 ′ is the practical difference to be detected, and 𝑛𝑛 is the sample size required.
Blue Casualties displayed the highest standard deviation of 3.22 in the Distributed case. With a desired 95% confidence interval (𝑍𝑍 𝛼𝛼 = 1.96), power of 0.85 (𝑍𝑍 𝛽𝛽 = 1.04), and practical difference of Blue Casualty detection of one, the resulting minimum sample size was calculated (𝑛𝑛) as 94. For convenience, this was rounded to 100. Therefore, for subsequent experiments, 100 replications per design point is used to achieve 95% confidence intervals and 85% power for detecting a difference of one Blue casualty. Figure 
20
(Hernandez et al. 2012
(Vieira et al. 2013)
(MacCalman et al. 2017)
24
In experiment four, both Blue and Red factors are varied. By varying factors on both sides, robust solutions can be attained. A robust solution for Blue is one in which the Blue construct is "not overly sensitive to small changes in the [Red] inputs" 
(Sanchez et al. 2020)
In experiment one, Blue and Red are constructed with equipment attributes mirroring current respective USMC and Russian capabilities and conventional employment methods. The experiment establishes a baseline for the range of possibilities that may be seen if the two forces were to engage as currently equipped and deployed. No factors are changed in experiment one, and the simulation is run for 200 independent replications.
This thesis defines a casualty as a destroyed artillery piece. As seen in Figure 
29
31
The base case established in experiment one serves as a comparative benchmark for subsequent experiments. The primary insight drawn from experiment one is that, assuming that the simulation is representative of USMC and Russian capabilities and employment, current USMC cannon artillery would sustain high casualties compared
to Russian forces and fail to set conditions for success if the forces were to engage in battle as currently constructed. Experiment two builds from this conclusion and evaluates the effect of altering only one factor in the pursuit of tactical superiority.
Experiment two maintains the equipment capabilities of current USMC and Russian forces, but alters the employment method of Blue. Unlike developing, testing, and fielding new equipment, the Marine Corps can train to different employment methods immediately. This experiment evaluates the comparative results of these potential training priorities.
The four employment options, from most concentrated to most dispersed, are consolidated, split battery, section, and distributed. Each employment method simulation is run for 200 independent replications.  Near parity in casualty medians is achieved in the section employment method, and
Blue gains an advantage in the distributed case. It is important to note that while Blue appears to have an advantage in median casualties in the distributed case, Blue and Red variability remains high.
A Kruskal-Wallis test at the 0.05 significance level results in a P-value less than 0.0001 and confirms that Blue and Red casualty means are not the same for all employment methods 
(Devore 2014, p. 671)
(Devore 2014, p. 420)
As dispersion increases, more cases are observed in which at least 50% of Red forces are killed. This is due to the increase in Blue lethality and survivability, and Figure 
33
35
(Devore 2014, p. 671)
Figure 
35
By altering the method by which USMC artillery is employed, a tactical advantage can be gained by Blue while maintaining the current equipment set. By increasing dispersion, Blue gains an increase in both lethality and survivability. The resulting increase in Blue tempo enables Blue to attrit Red below 50% force levels faster, all while maintaining battalion round expenditure within the feasible range of organic ammunition capacity or battalion support.
Experiment three maintains the equipment capabilities of current Red forces, but varies a set of Blue factors. The DOE for experiment three has 328 design points, with 100 replications per design point. For each design point, the 100-replication data is summarized by the mean of Blue and Red casualties.   
To identify which factors most influence Red casualties, a partition tree is created using Red casualties as the response, as seen in Figure 
38
Figure 
39
37
Figure 
40
Blue survivability is analyzed by creating a regression tree with Blue casualties as the response, as seen in Figure 
41
The first and most significant split relates to Blue employment method. Reinforcing the findings of experiment two, the distributed employment method results in a reduced number of casualties for Blue. The second most important split for increasing Blue survivability is a selection of 155mm Blue caliber. This suggests that Blue survivability is correlated with Blue lethality. By increasing lethality through a more powerful round (caliber), Blue is able to destroy Red forces faster, thus gaining a tempo advantage.
Along the red branch of the tree, which constitutes the worst conditions for Blue survivability, it is seen that Blue caliber does not appear until the fourth split. The nodes above Blue caliber are employment method and displacement time. If Blue is not able to disperse forces in the dispersed employment method, it is important for Blue to have the capability to displace quickly (within 99 seconds), prior to counterbattery rounds impacting the position.
Figure 
42
Employment method is vitally important, accounting for over 60% of the explanatory power. Although displacement time only accounts for 18% of the column contributions, it is critical to have a fast displacement time if dispersion of forces cannot be practiced. The 12% contribution for Blue caliber suggests that the capability to destroy Red forces is important for gaining a survivability tempo advantage, perhaps best captured in the adage that 'the [third] best defense is a good offense.' 
Caliber and employment method are dominant for lethality and survivability, respectively. Figure 
43
44
Figure 
44
A stepwise linear regression metamodel is built using Red casualties (Blue lethality) as the response. Figure 
45
Adjusted R-squared injects a penalty for the number of predictors used in the construction of the model to discourage overfitting. The Residual by Predicted plot appears to produce an approximate mean residual of zero, but variance is not constant. Therefore, this model does not meet all regression assumptions. However, a great deal (nearly 93%) of variation in the simulation is captured and explained in this metamodel. Moreover, we are using the metamodel not for prediction, but as a readily interpretable approximation to the simulation as a means for understanding 
(Kleijnen et al. 2005)
For Blue survivability, a stepwise linear regression model is built using Blue casualties as the response. Figure 
46
The most significant predictors for Blue survivability (outlined in blue box) are employment method, caliber, and two three-way interactions. The sorted parameter estimate window does not suggest that any one factor is dominant, but rather that multiple factors are significant for Blue survivability. This is reinforced by the lower adjusted Rsquared value as compared to the Blue lethality model.
Similar to the findings in the Blue survivability partition tree, employment method and caliber are the two most significant factors for Blue survivability. Specifically, consolidated employment method should be avoided entirely, as should split battery (appearing as the sixth most important factor). Blue caliber is the second most significant, and it is critical that 155mm be used by Blue to reduce the number of Blue casualties.
The largest benefit of fitting a linear regression model is the consideration and inclusion of two and three-way interactions. The second third and fourth most influential predictors in this model are both three-way interactions involving continuous factors:
defensive fire, time to conduct a survivability move, and time to emplace or time to displace after incoming fire. The simplest interpretation of a three-way interaction is that the interaction between any two factors is dependent on the third. Similarly, a two-way interaction is one in which one variable is dependent on the other. Although three-way interactions and the relationship to the response creates a four-dimensional surface, the effects of each component of the three-way interaction can be plotted carefully to extract insights.
Figure 
47
However, the same relationship is not true when Blue possesses a high defensive rate of fire (right plot). The slopes of the blue and green lines are opposite in directionality compared to low defensive rate of fire. Looking at the green line (long emplacement time) specifically, a narrative interpretation is that when defensive rate of fire is high, it is more advantageous to remain FIRECAP for a short period of time before conducting a survivability move. While this may be beneficial to survivability (long emplacement times and frequent moves render the agent undetectable for long amounts of time), it likely does not contribute significantly to Blue lethality (non-FIRECAP units are unable to remove Red from the battlefield). A more practical case is the inversed slope of fast emplacement (blue line) units in high defensive rate of fire (right plot) situations. Here, a unit is able to emplace quickly but casualties are decreased when waiting in position for longer. This is because remaining in position offers more opportunities to be detected and fired upon, thereby allowing the unit to take advantage of a fast defensive rate of fire. After counterfiring, the unit is able to move to a new position and emplace quickly. Although an 'offensive' and 'defensive' rate of fire is more controlled in simulation than real world engagements, this is a testament to the importance of high rate of fire capability.   a survivability move should be increased in order to reduce Blue casualties. The interpretation is that if a unit has a low defensive rate of fire and elects to displace quickly after receiving incoming fire, it is advantageous to conduct survivability moves less frequently. This tactic presents the opportunity for a unit to conduct more offensive fire missions with a move most often triggered by the receipt of fires. The opposite is true for units with a low defensive rate of fire (left plot) and long time to remain in position and return fire (green line). In this situation, a unit with a longer time to remain in position and return fire is better served to reduce the amount of time to a survivability move. If a unit has a low defensive rate of fire and elects to remain in position returning fire for a long amount of time, it is better to decrease the time until a survivability move is conducted.
The purpose of this tactic is to continue to move forward and close distance through short survivability move windows while an identical friendly unit continually draws counterfire through a longer counterfire window. By having one Blue unit draw Red fires, sister units are able to take advantage of a higher offensive rate of fire in support.
The inverse relationship is true for the case in which a unit has a high defensive rate of fire (right plot). In this case, a unit with a low time to displacement after incoming fire (blue line) reduces Blue casualties the most when time to survivability move is low. A unit that practices movement quickly after receiving fire is best served by conducting survivability moves frequently. This creates more opportunities for the unit to be fired upon, thereby taking advantage of a fast defensive rate of fire prior to a quick displacement.
Conversely, when a unit remains in positions returning fire for a long amount of time (green line), it is advantageous to increase the amount of time until a survivability move. This increases the probability that a unit will be detected and fired upon, thereby enabling the unit to take advantage of an increased defensive rate of fire for a long amount of time. This tactic is in line with gaining fires superiority through kinetic exchange.
Figure 
50
Figure 
50
Blue lethality is most influenced by the dominant factor of caliber. Using a 155mm caliber howitzer contributes significantly to a more lethal USMC artillery force, to the point that 105mm caliber cannons should not be considered as a viable howitzer caliber for a counterfire engagement with current Russian forces.
Blue survivability is not as clear cut as Blue lethality, as there is no single dominating factor for decreasing Blue casualties. Instead, a range of prioritized factors is considered. First, employment method is critically important to Blue survivability.
Reinforcing the findings in experiment two, the Blue force is significantly disadvantaged in survivability when consolidated. Second, the Blue force is at an advantage in survivability when using a 155mm howitzer, supporting the concurrent priority of Blue lethality. Finally, the interactions between defensive rate of fire, time to survivability move, and emplacement time or displacement time after incoming fires are significant in providing insights to TTPs derived from unit capabilities. A flow chart of unit capabilities and resulting TTP decisions for reduction of Blue casualties is presented in Figure 
51
A robust design is a "system optimization and improvement process that springs from the view that a system should not be evaluated on the basis of mean performance alone" 
(Sanchez and Sanchez 2020, p. 6-25)
(Sanchez and Sanchez 2020, p. 6-25)
Within this context, improving mean performance for Blue lethality and survivability means increasing Red casualties and reducing Blue casualties, respectively.
A Blue artillery configuration is 'robust' when it reduces variability (from uncontrolled Red noise factors) while still performing at or near the goals of achieving few Blue casualties and many Red casualties, on average.
One can imagine a three-dimensional fitness landscape where height represents performance. A robust configuration for the Blue force is one which resides on a high, flat plateau, as opposed to on top of a higher, "optimal" configuration that resides on top of a fragile "pointy" peak. The "optimal" peak configuration would be subject to failure given even a small amount of change from assumed conditions that are, in fact, uncertain. The robust configuration, residing on the plateau, would be resilient to variation and continue to produce good results.
Approaching analysis from a robust perspective enables recommendations for future force design and employment that are not merely based on mean performance, but also consider uncertainty and variability with respect to future Russian operating capabilities and tactics.
A loss function penalizes the distance away from a target value for a particular metric, multiplied by a scalar that can be used as a cost conversion. The quadratic loss function, with distance from target squared, so as to be in the same units as variance, is given by While this design point construct is closest to the origin, it represents only one point on the Pareto frontier. Some of the parameters in the above construct may be infeasible or mutually contradicting to achieve. To evaluate which factors are most important in the robust case, partition trees and regression models are built to provide more in-depth insight.
Partition trees are created for Blue casualty loss (survivability), Red casualty loss (lethality), and average loss (balance of survivability and lethality). In each partition tree, the goal is to minimize the overall loss by splitting and progressing down the left side of the tree.
Figure 
53
56
Next, main-effects only models are fit to the mean and variance of Blue casualties first, followed by Red casualties. All predictors are included. In these cases, the addition of interaction terms are not statistically significant and are not included in the models. With only main effects, the direct comparison of the prediction profilers for mean and variance will allow us to determine which factors drive expected performance towards the target value while also reducing variability.
A metamodel is constructed by evaluating all main effects against the responses of Blue casualty mean and variance.  It is important to note that this robust configuration is informed only by the Blue survivability metric. Some of the above characteristics will differ with respect to robust analysis on Blue lethality, presented next.
The same metamodel construction process as above is repeated for Red casualty mean and variance. Figure 
58
Figure 
Considering both Blue lethality and survivability robust models, a higher maximum range contributed to slightly more variance in both cases. However, a contradiction exists suggesting a prescriptive time until survivability move and displacement after incoming time, the analyst suggests that these TTP based factors are best determined by utilizing the decision tree, beginning with capabilities.
Figure 
60
51
The factors which contribute the most to variability are employment method, time to survivability move, concealment, max range, and caliber. Variability is reduced predominantly by distributing forces and employing 155mm weapon systems. After variability is reduced, the target goals of minimizing Blue casualties and maximizing Red casualties presents sets of both concurrent and conflicting force design and employment decisions.
A Blue force which prioritizes survivability is best suited to be fast and nimble, characterized by frequent survivability moves, quick displacement times, and immediate displacement after receiving incoming fires.
A Blue force which prioritizes lethality is most effective when it conducts survivability moves infrequently and elects to remain in position after receiving incoming fires, returning effective defensive counterfire.
An effective artillery force must balance these priorities. After comparative robust analysis, the tactics employed by the artillery force is determined to be dependent on their capabilities. These decisions are best informed by the decision tree presented in Figures 
51
60
The methodology for robust analysis presented above was repeated from the Red  Variability in Blue casualties is largest in the hybrid case, seen in Figure 
62
Experiment four insights lead to robust Blue cannon constructs. Two opposing tactics emerged, which were: As a result of three-way factor interactions, these two tactics are changed in the time to survivability move and time to displace after incoming factors.
Figure 
63
Observing the cluster of Blue constructs as a whole and comparing location between the two Red force designs, it is apparent that when Red uses a hybrid force with one MLRS battery, both Red and Blue are more lethal and produce more casualties (cluster located mid-upper left for Red cannon pure, shifted upper center for Red hybrid). Red is able to produce more Blue casualties due to large area mass rocket salvos. Blue is able to produce more Red casualties due to the unarmored characteristics of the MLRS.
The dimensions and area of the variation boxes is larger in the Red hybrid force design case. This is likely the result of the simulation time in which the MLRS battery was destroyed by Blue. If destroyed early, the MLRS battery is unable to conduct mass rocket fires. Conversely, if the MLRS battery is not destroyed early in the simulation, mass fires are able to swing tactical tempo favorable to Red.
protection and mission success. The author presents four recommendations for immediate consideration within the artillery community of interest.
• Finding: M777A2 currently meets all equipment-based significant factor thresholds for success in a counterbattery scenario.
• Discussion: The M777A2 is a 155mm caliber weapon system and possesses a maximum range above the 17,000-meter threshold. This study finds that the current USMC artillery equipment set, specifically the M777A2, is sufficient in significant factor equipment capabilities of caliber and range.
• Recommendation: Funding for artillery research and development is not critical for cannon artillery at this time and should remain allocated for rocket modernization.
• Finding: Employment method is a critical factor for Blue survivability and lethality with increased dispersion and segmentation of units important for improved performance in both metrics.
• Discussion: Current USMC artillery battalion TTPs are diametrically opposed to the findings of this study, principally in employment method.
USMC artillery batteries are currently conventionally employed as consolidated, battery sized units. While operating in a consolidated method reduces C2 complexities and increases local security defensive posturing, the risk to mission and risk to force is greatly elevated in a counterbattery scenario against a formidable opponent such as Russia.
• Recommendation: USMC artillery battalions immediately begin training employment methods that maximize segmentation of firing units.
Command and control at the battalion and battery level, local security resilience, and operational endurance of individual firing elements should be field tested and improved accordingly. This effort should be informed by, and inform, rocket artillery employment in the context of EABO.
• Finding: Interactions between remaining factors present unique TTP force design decisions.
• Discussion: Defensive rate of fire, emplacement time, time to survivability move, and time in position after receiving incoming are not dominantly significant but are meaningful in relation to each other. Simply, the two broad tactics are nimble or staying. Neither tactic has significant benefits to absolute performance over the other, but unit attributes should be consistent with the overall spirit of tactics employed. While a nimble force is attractive for survivability, the fast emplacement and displacement times and frequent survivability moves present a risk to force endurance.
Ultimately, the tactics employed will be a function of commander priorities, unit capabilities, and situation. It is recommended that the commander's decisions be informed by unit capabilities, referencing the TTP decision tree.
• Recommendation: Units assess their current capabilities to determine the most effective tactics by referencing the TTP decision tree. 
Both logistics and command and control were outside the scope of this study.
Having determined that the current shortfalls in cannon artillery are held largely at the employment method level, the author presents two recommendations for future work.
Logistics in support of artillery battalion operations were outside the scope of this thesis and research objectives. Although battalion ammunition expenditure was analyzed at the surface level to ensure feasibility, the logistics complexities associated with a distributed force was not analyzed. Further research is recommended for each level of possible employment method to determine supporting demands for distribution of supplies and medical support.
This study assumed perfect communications between all communication chains.
Although dispersion was found to increase lethality and survivability, it naturally results in a more complex C2 structure. The potential increase in radio traffic has potential to create a negative effect to concealment, rendering transmitting units vulnerable to electronic detection, targeting, and destruction. Further research is recommended to determine the appropriate C2 network for each employment method with particular focus on existing Digital Fire Control System capabilities.
The process of fielding new capabilities or redesigning a force is expensive in time and resources. An analytical paradigm between modeling and simulation, wargaming, and experimentation exists to reduce these costs and leverage the relative strengths of each.
Modeling and simulation attempt to approximate reality within scope and is thus only as powerful as the quality of quantitative data from experimentation and qualitative outcomes from wargaming. Experimentation produces real-world conclusions for feasibility and live fire data, but requires significant manpower and resources. Simulation reduces these costs through relatively inexpensive computer replication and statistical analysis. Wargaming aims to capture human decisions to ensure that appropriate and useful experiments are conducted.
A white paper on modeling and simulation, experimentation, and wargaming from the MITRE corporation concludes that "each of [modeling and simulation],
experimentation and wargaming exist on a spectrum ranging from very basic applications to the highly complex. In many ways, these techniques are fundamentally intertwined and there are meaningful opportunities for reuse and cross-domain solutions within this space 
(Page 2016, p. 9)
66
The underlying intent of this thesis is to provide data-driven bottom-up refinement during USMC force redesign efforts. Questions surrounding cannon artillery lethality and survivability in a peer fight began to emerge at the battalion level during the author's operational time at Battery B, 1st Battalion, 10th Marine Regiment. The author is hopeful that the findings in this study answer these questions and provide useful inputs for future cannon artillery modernization within the modeling and simulation, wargaming, and experimentation paradigm.       
First, further analytic research can be conducted at the Naval Postgraduate School and appropriate USMC analytic branches. Second, operational units should test distributed battery operations in a realistic training environment to assess feasibility, human factors, and weaknesses. Finally, wargames should occur at the operational level to determine the capability gaps associated with the reduction of cannon artillery, current artillery constructs, and robust cannon constructs presented in this study. These three independent efforts are mutually supporting and can synchronize to modernize the artillery force while preserving fundamental capabilities. The questions that I brought to NPS would have remained unanswered had it not been for the SEED Center. Specifically, I would like to thank my thesis advisor, Dr. Tom Lucas, for allowing me latitude to explore the problem in the way that I thought would be most impactful. Your guidance and critical feedback were instrumental in developing the final product. To Mary McDonald, thank you for your prompt and thorough replies to my numerous late-night emails and mid-day Zoom calls. Without Mary's expertise, the translation of idea to simulation would not have been possible. Finally, I would like to thank my family Kari, Mike, Alyssa, Warren, and Megan. Your steadfast love, support, and patience is forever appreciated. xxiv THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK xxv THESIS DISCLAIMER xxvi THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
In experiment three, Blue factors are varied against a best approximated Red force.
Having identified the model data input corresponding to each factor and simulation scenario for each Employment Method level, a DOE is built to vary the factors over an interval of levels. Figure 
21
The importance of efficient space-filling design of experiments cannot be overstated. As an example, the experiment four DOE obtained using efficient designs with good space-filling properties results in 13,456 design points. Assuming 180 processors available on a cluster computer, 20 second replication run times, and 100 replications per design point, experiment four can be completed in 1.7 days. If a full factorial of all factors were constructed, evaluating discrete and continuous factors at only three levels (low, mid, and high), the full factorial design would result in 688,747,536 design points. Under the same cluster computer, replication run time, and replications per design point assumptions, this theorized full factorial would take over 242 years to run.
In the above example, one might be led to believe that more explanatory information is captured in the exhaustive full factorial design. This is not necessarily the case. The theorized full factorial evaluates discrete and continuous factors at only three levels, whereas the efficient DOE evaluates throughout the factor level space. This is the principal benefit of the space-filling properties of the NOB. Although the full factorial's high number of design points enables better estimation of second order effects, the more efficient space-filling design allows for the possibility for estimating effects higher than second order (as it is not limited to three levels per factor) and detecting change points 
(Cioppa and Lucas 2007)
By implementing efficient designs of experiment, computational time is reduced, and high order effect analysis is possible. In totality, this thesis evaluated 13,788 design points over the course of the four experiments, for a total of over 1.3 million simulated artillery engagements. The total run time for this thesis was less than 48 hours.
where 'c' is a penalty/cost constant, tau (𝜏𝜏) is the target value and 𝑦𝑦 𝑥𝑥 is the response for each x design point.
In the experiment four design, each unique Blue design point (232 total) is run for 100 replications over 58 unique Red configurations for a total of 5800 replications per Blue design point. Each run includes variability due to the stochastic nature of MANA as well as the change in Red factor settings. By collapsing the 5800 data points by unique Blue design point, summary statistics for the mean and standard deviation of each design point is obtained over the entire noise space. The expected loss function imposes penalties for both variability and mean value distance from the target with the following equation:
In this study, the two response metrics are Blue lethality and Blue survivability.   not adjusted as the model suggests that a long emplacement time reduces Blue casualtieswhile this may be true for the model itself (a unit is not detectable during emplacement, and therefore cannot be killed), it is not practicable for real world implementation.
Ultimately, a Blue construct that is robust to a wide range of Red constructs and sustains low casualties has the following characteristics:  The absolute value of the magnitude of the slopes indicates that while extending maximum range is slightly detrimental to sustaining more Blue casualties, it is more beneficial to inflicting a higher quantity of Red casualties. Therefore, a higher maximum range is slightly more beneficial to Blue. Due to the modeling logic, a low maximum range would cause units to continue to bound forward by executing survivability moves, whereas a high maximum range would allow the unit to execute both offensive and defensive fires.
The translation from the modeling environment to a real-world counterbattery engagement would be that it is beneficial for Blue to possess longer range capability but initially prioritize closing distance as quickly as possible.
The two other conflicting factors of time until survivability move and displacement after incoming are most effectively analyzed by tracing the capability TPP decision tree previously presented in Figure 
51
60
This chapter summarizes findings from experiments one through four, draws conclusions about factor significance for cannon artillery lethality and survivability, and presents recommendations for immediate consideration. The chapter concludes with a discussion on future work to further this study in the analytic, wargaming, and experimentation communities of interest.
Experiment One: Fight Tonight served as the base case and imagines a counterbattery fight occurring between USMC and Russian forces as currently equipped and employed. The findings are that the current USMC construct is not postured for success in a counterbattery engagement with Russian forces.
Experiment Two: Train Tomorrow evaluated the efficacy of altering the most rapidly affectable factor of employment method. As Blue artillery units became more segmented and dispersed, Blue inflicts more Red casualties and sustains fewer Blue casualties, showing that dispersion increases Blue lethality and survivability. Each level of additional dispersion results in both a faster time to kill at least 50 percent of the Red artillery force and more observations in which Blue achieves this goal, leading to the conclusion that dispersion increases tempo significantly. Although logistics is outside of the scope of this study, total projectile expenditure was analyzed and found to be within feasible bounds for all employment methods considered.
Experiment Three: Optimize the Force considered all controllable Blue factors to determine which are most important to USMC lethality and survivability. Caliber is the dominant factor for lethality, and a 155mm weapon system was found to be critical for inflicting the maximum amount of Red casualties. While there is no single dominating factor for Blue survivability, employment method and caliber are the most influential factors for minimizing Blue casualties. Unique three-way interactions emerged, leading to a capability based TTP decision tree. The ultimate conclusions from experiment three are that it is critical that a USMC artillery battalion employ 155mm weapon systems, disperse as much as possible, and employ tactics based on the operational capabilities of the unit.
Experiment Four: Hedge the Construct considered controllable Blue factors and uncontrollable Red factors to determine the most significant factors for USMC performance over a range of unknown or future Russian capabilities and tactics. The methodology used in experiment four enabled the analysis of robust Blue constructs that consistently perform well while remaining resilient across a wide range of Red constructs.
Keeping with the findings of experiments one and two, caliber and employment method remain critically important. Maximum range was determined to be the third most important factor for lethality and a threshold of greater than 17,000 meters was established. The remainder of the factors are meaningful in their interactions with each-other and ideal levels are determined by unit capabilities and the priorities of the commander. A Blue force that prioritizes survivability should be nimble, displacing and emplacing quickly, and changing positions frequently; whereas a Blue force that prioritizes lethality should have a staying mentality, remaining in position returning defensive fire if fired upon and changing positions infrequently. These TTP decisions are mutually exclusive, and the author assumes that the commander desires to balance these priorities. The TTP decision tree derived in experiment three was validated in experiment four and was determined to be appropriate in determining TTPs predicated on the operational capabilities of the employed unit.
The most influential factor for Red lethality was found to be the inclusion of an MLRS battery in a hybrid force design. When controlling for this factor, it was found that when Red includes an MLRS battery, the number of casualties for both Red and Blue increases.
The findings of this study are that the equipment currently fielded by USMC artillery battalions is largely in line with the most significant factors for lethality and survivability. However, significant changes to current TTPs are necessary for force  This thesis assumes that the UAS will be employing the electro-optical sensor. As MANA assumes a foundational terrain of flat ground, the desert environment is used to extrapolate approximate sensor performance. Additionally, MANA assumes all agents are at ground level, and UAS movement is established as setting the agent to be unaffected by terrain. Therefore, assuming that the UAS is at 0ft AGL, a 45 deg sensor tilt at 4242ft AGL would be equivalent to 914.4m (3000ft) horizontally, and 914.4m is used as the range for 41% correct classification. A 100% correct classification probability is assumed when the UAS is directly overhead, or at range zero meters.
Assuming a linear relationship, the two data points of 100% correct classification at zero meters and 41% correct classification at 914.4 meters are used to fit a line for probability of correct classification by range, shown in Figure 
68
mean time between detection of 30 seconds. In the 'Classify' parameter section, probability of correct classification is set according to the probability distribution derived above.   
Red is modeled as fires elements of a Russian BTG. Fires elements consist of two 2S19M2 152mm self-propelled artillery batteries and one 122mm BM21 'Grad' MLRS battery. Each firing battery has one organic FDC. Target acquisition platforms include one 1L219M Zoopark-1M counterbattery radar and one Orlan-10 UAS.
The Orlan-10 UAS is a Russian artillery regimental asset, capable of 16 hours of flight time, a range of 120 km, a maximum altitude of 5 km, and a cruising speed of 90-150 km/h. After testing compatibility between three self-propelled howitzers batteries and one Orlan-10 in 2016, the Orlan-10 was adopted as the UAS of preference for Russian artillery operations (Janes 2020c).  