# ID: f0754bef97394533b375b1d672faf541
# Title: J3'fl FILE COPY 83 08 25 059
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1981.0
# Fulltext:
The Appendices presented here are four country studies which supplement Volume I of this report. They are in no sense essential for the support of the main text, but they may be judged by some readers to be useful additions to the cultural width and depth of the study. These four appendices, on the U.S.S.R., France, the United Kingdom, and China, were commissioned so as to enrich the study and to push outwards the perimeter of understanding of "national style" analysis. Given that this is a novel field of inquiry, the author did not know quite what to expect of his consultants. The result is gratifying. Three of these four appendices are judged to be penetrating "country analyses" (on the U.S.S.R., France, and China), while the fourth (on the United Kingdom) is acknowledged to be highly tendentious--though still very interesting. This author (Colin Gray) does not agree with some of the major points advanced by Robin Ranger in his analysis of the British "national style" in strategy, but Ranger's analysis is judged to be sufficiently interesting as to warrant inclusion, in toto, in these Appendices. Soviet strategic style, it is important first to delineate the boundaries of the inquiry. Strategic style, or the manner in which a nation deals with issues of military power, is not identical to political culture, for although the political system within which military and militaryindustrial institutions operate clearly has a major impact upon those institutions, it must nevertheless take its place alongside other important determinants as well. That a particular political system is oppressive does not necessarily imply that its military strategy will be aggressive and ruthless, any more than a free society must necessarily give birth to a purely defense-oriented strategy wedded to the principles of bellum justum. After all, it was liberal England which, in the nineteenth century, established the world's mightiest empire. And democratic America, in the twentieth, elaborated the notions of massive retaliation and assured destruction, than which a more ruthless strategy can hardly be imagined.
Above all, strategic style is not a function of what is sometimes called 'national character." In the first place, discussions of "national character" tend either to degenerate into silly stereotypes or to be so imbued with teleological purpose as to render their conclusions and *1 rules of evidence problematic.
Secondly, it is not clear that a hierarchically organized military establishment would necessarily reflect the same attitudes and institutional norms as the population as a whole, even if the elements of "national character" could be determined. Finally, strategic style, whatever it may prove to be, cannot be used to predict a country's pol icy decisions on all discrete defense issues. Such analyses ignore the multitude of unique considerations inherent in the flow of international affairs and domestic politics and provide a model which is simply too inflexible for application to powerful national actors dealing with specific problems. Attempts to use the U.S.S.R.'s strategic style in order to explain Soviet bargaining tactics in the SALT talks, for instance, usually end merely as perplexed laments that U.S. negotiators failed to show the skill exhibited by their Soviet counterparts, and what was purportedly to be a unique Soviet approach to arms control turns out to be nothing more than good common sense and hard bargaining. 
2
3
Certainly the vulnerability of the U.S.S.R.'s long land borders has done nothing to dimiflishthe weight of the armed forces within Soviet society, but the source of its militarization may well lie elsewhere.
After all, Imperial Russia and its Soviet successor have enjoyed their share of victories as well: the small settlements of ancient Muscovy did not gain control of one-sixth of the world's land mass, of over 100 nationalities speaking as many distinct languages, by losing all the time. 
5
The large numbers of forces conmmitted either by the Soviets themselves or by Cubans under their direction in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Angola, Ethiopia, and Afghanistan attest to this fact. Here, too, is the reason that plaintive Western projections that, with each new aggression, the Soviet Union may at last have found its Vietnam, have thus far proven incorrect.
It is sometimes argued that the militarism of Soviet society derives from this history of colonialism, itself an outgrowth of the state's search for relief from the limitations imposed by Moscovy' s poor soil, harsh climate, and lack of warm water ports. Yet it is hard to explain the protracted nature or, in some cases, the exact direction of Russian expansionism in these terms. 
6
Thus, if one can convince oneself that the Soviet Union is guided in its foreign policy by traditional Russian national interests, the fact should nevertheless provide little comfort. Whatever emphasis one places on the U.S.S.R.'s revolutionary ideology, the conclusion is much the same. The Soviet Union, like Russia before it, is bent on territorial and political expansion, and its armed forces enjoy the considerable influence one would expect to find in a state which organizes itself for war.
It would be hard to overestimate the extent to which military considerations have provided the impetus for domestic reform and social organiza-tion1 throughout Russia's history. Serfdom, for example, came much later to Russia than to Western Europe--not becoming entrenched until the seventeenth century--and the state's military ambitions played a crucial role in its introduction. Following the social upheaval of the Time of Troubles (1580-1620), an acute labor shortage developed in central Russia, as peasants migrated or fled to the southeastern frontier. To secure their socio-economic status, Muscovite landlords began to press the state for the power to deny peasants the right to move. 
7
War as the major impetus for Russian socio-political reform can again be seen in the reign of Peter the Great--one of the few tsars venerated by Soviet historians. Of the thirty-five years of his reign (1689-1725), only one was peaceful; in all the rest there were only thirteen months in which Russian armies were not at war. Peter's greatest test came in the Northern War against Sweden, during the early phases of which he suffered a humiliating defeat at the hands of the 18-year-old Swedish king, Charles Xl1. At the Battle of Narva, Peter's ill-equipped army was routed by a well-armed Swedish force only one-fourth its size. Following this defeat, Peter determined to modernize his army. He spent the rest of his life in this endeavor, sparing no cost and ignoring the condition of his people. His interest in conquest brought profound alterations in Russian society. He established Europe's first large standing army, manned by conscripted serfs. Nobles were required to provide one conscript for every 100 male serfs they possessed. The term of service for these conscripts was 25 years, which meant, in effect, for life, since few survived the full tour of duty. Indeed, the families of new conscripts held a funeral service for them before they were taken away.
Peter also built Russia's first navy, incorporating the best of West European maritime science, and established the country's first military academies. At the same time, he altered Russia's class structure and tax laws in order to increase revenues and enlarge the conscript pool.
Prior to his reforms, Russian society had consisted of nobles, who served as officers in order to retain their property rights; serfs, who paid no taxes but were liable to conscription; and several intermediary classes of free men, who could not be conscripted but did pay taxes to finance the state's military endeavors. Peter increased the number of serfs (and hence the number of conscripts) by eliminating many of the free middle classes, and then increased state revenues by making the serfs liable to both conscription and taxation. Moreover, the army was billeted in towns and villages at peasant expense, the serfs having to feed and clothe the soldiers while the soldiers in turn robbed and terrorized them. 8In short, military prowess took priority over social well-being.
Although serfdom was introduced and broadened in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to strenghten Russia's armed forces, it gradually became detrimental to state power. Military effectiveness is tied at a fundamental level to the social structure on which it rests, and by the time of the Crimean War that structure had been corrupted by the enervating effects of peasant bondage. Serfdom demoralized the population and sapped economic growth. It is not surprising that just as military expansion had played a major role in the establishment of serfdom, so military defeat in the Crimean War provided the impetus for its abolition.
Reform sprang from the desire to recapture the sense of national vitality which had been lost over the preceding decades and which the war made more painfully evident with each passing day. The malaise which had set in was poignantly expressed by the liberal censor A.V. Nikitenko, who, upon hearing the news of the fall of Sevastopol' at the cost of 34,000 Russian lives, wrote in his diary:
Our war is not just two years old--we have been at war for thirty years, maintaining an army of a million strong and unceasingly threatening Europe. What was all thi for? What advantage and what glory did Russia gain from it? But if defeat in 1855 brought malaise, in 1917 it brought complete collapse, enabling a small cabal of disciplined revolutionaries to gain control of the country and, indeed, the Empire. The Bolsheviks' espousal of an ideology based on violent conflict--whether, as for Lenin, between classes, or, as for Stalin, between states--certainly did nothing to reduce the spirit of militarism fostered by the imperial regime. Nor was the lesson of Lenin's own rise to power lost on the Bolsheviks.
Over centuries of tsarist rule, only once, in the late 1800s, did the government undertinance its armed forces in an effort to bala,.ce the 10 budget and improve industrial capacity.
But the collapse of 1917 surely demonstrated to the Soviets the folly of that course. Lenin and his
War Comnissar Trotsky proceeded immediately to rebuild Russia's ravaged military power, even if it meant compromising their ideology. Trotsky's reforms of March-April 1918 laid the foundation for the professionalized, disciplined fighting force the Soviet Army is today. Centralized command was reinstituted, former tsarist officers were reinstated in whatever numbers were deemed necessary to regain military efficiency, and the draft was reintroduced to assure adequate manpower. However, a price had to be paid. A regime which seizes power despite its almost total lack of popular support, proceeds to suppress all opposition, and then through terror, collectivization, purges, and general deprivation imposes untold misery upon the population is certain to face a legitimacy problem once the ideology for the sake of which all this was supposedly done proves to be an empirically flawed and spiritually vapid anachronism. Yet once again it is to war that the Soviet government has turned for help. The present leadership, possessing neither the fervor of Lenin nor the brutal charisma of Stalin, and ruling over a country with an unattractive political system and a weak economy, has 
among the population and the armed forces is more important than ever, both because modern war will involve such high casualties and because nuclear war is likely to be of brief duration. 
13
Among the most notable features of Soviet strategic style is the conservatism of the military establishment, evident in both strategy formulation and weapons design: here the impact of Stalin has been the greatest, producing attitudes which relfect both the strengths and the weaknesses of the Soviet system. Geography, too, has presented the armed forces with constraints which have fostered a conservative approach to security issues.
Soviet strategy differs markedly from its U.S. counterpart in its formulation and in its content. Those who contribute to the defense policy emanating from Washington comprise a diverse community of analysts-civilians and military professionals, academics and businessmen, historians and scientists. Soviet strategy, in contrast, is formulated only by a small number of high-ranking military officers in accordance with the general guidelines set by the Politburo. This reflects both the highly restrictive processes of policy formulation common to authoritarian states and the respect demanded by and given to the armed forces in a militaristic government.
Two important consequences follow from the elite nature of Soviet strategic formulation--one a strength, the other a weakness. On the positive side, Soviet strategy benefits from a unity of purpose often lacking in U.S. strategic debate.1 
6
'17
ments. This assimilation of ballistic missile technology by existing strategy stands in marked contrast to the course of events in the United States, where the advent of ICBMs led to a wholesale revision of military precepts.
Soviet conservatism is evident as well in the hierarchy of the services.
Protocol requires them always to be listed In the following order: Strategic 
was still in service on the MI-i. helicopter.2
Similarly, the SU-7 ground attack fighter and the SU-9 interceptor, although fitted with different wings and armament, nevertheless possess identical fuselages and tails. 
2 3
The conservatism of Soviet weapons design policy is nowhere better exemplified than in its stress on innovation through incremental improvement.
Though there are occasional instances of discontinuous advances in performance characteristics, the predominant pattern is one of gradual upgrading. The fact is that any measure--even the most effective--is not suitable if its realization would hold up the output of combat aircraft from the assembly line for even a few days. The front can't wait! ...The ability to achieve improved tactical-technical characteristics without having to turn the whole aircraft design upside down became one of the most important elements in the work style of our aeronautical engineers and scientists, even in 2 elatively calm times, when there was no special need for it.
The Soviets do not like to discuss their reliance on foreign technology, but one can surmise that this method of innovation reduces outlays on R&D, not only on individual projects, but on applied science as a whole.
According to one emigre scientist, the government to some extent even looks to the West's allocation of research funds as a model for ordering its own investment priorities. 
27
30
But a more serious problem derives from the system's negative incentive structure which relies more on sanctions imposed for failure than on rewards for success.
The fear which the threat of sanctions engenders among the scientif.; commvunity reached its apex under Stalin, who, believing that an "epidemic of improvements" degraded weapon designs, went so far as to encorrage designers to resist demands for innovations from military consumers: "It's hard to make a good machine, but very easy to spoil it. And it's the designer who'll have to answer for it!" 
3 1
Given the price which failure may exact, combined with the comfortable lifestyle available to the moderately successful, it is not surprising that scientists and engineers hesitate to contract into ambitious projects.
Risk aversion is a salient characteristic of the Soviet R&D commuunity, one which encourages design simplicity, modest, incremental innovation, and heavy reliance on proven foreign technology.
The features of Soviet strategic style outlined here have had their Colin Gray has rightly characterized the work done to date in strategic studies on national style as just "the first stirrings of interest."
The few works that qualify as examples of the genre are not in accord as to the principal indicators constituting a national strategic style.
One general assumption that does seem to be shared by scholars trying to identify national strategic styles is that a country's historical experiences predispose its policymakers to certain decisions, though they may--of course--choose to deviate from established patterns. As Snyder puts it:
Historical lessons thus have to be seen as establishing a latent propensity in the majority of observers, a propensity that may or may not achieve fruition depending on other factors (such as political or organiza Iional self-interest) that influences the observer's judgment.
In studying the Soviet strategic culture, Snyder stressed the lessons of World War 11 (e.g., the Soviet Union can depend only on its own power to ensure its security), and the post-Stalinist dominance of the military in defense policy-making in order to conclude that Soviet strategic thought places greater emphasis than Amierican thought on unilateral, as opposed to cooperative, damage-limiting strategies in the event deterrence fails. For a variety of reasons, the preponderance of Soviet thought on this question has shown a preference for the unilateral approach to damage limitation by means of unrestrained counterforce strikes and, where technically feasible, active and passive defenses. By contrast, U.S. thinking has increasingly moved toward the coopeative strategy of mutual restraint and intrawar deterrence.
Other contrasts between characteristically Russian/Soviet and Anglo-American approaches can be drawn by going much further back in history:
--vulnerable land frontiers vs. insular security and easy victories in interventions abroad.
--high casualties in war, including civilians vs. low casualties in war, with comparatively peripheral civilian involvement.
--no clear limits on military spending vs. how-much-is-enough attempts to minimize military spending.
--experience of defeat and subjugation vs. a "limited liability" approach and disbelief in the possibility of defeat.
--normalcy defined as international anarchy vs. normalcy defined as peace and good will, to be institutionalized in international organizations.
--respect for military professionalism in decision-making vs. distrust of the military and civilian predominance.
--no substitute for military power and numerical superiority vs. belief that economic and/or cultural strength can substitute for military power; irrelevance of superiority. "deterrence" flows from war-winning and war-survival capabilities vs. "deterrence" depends on guaranteeing mutual destruction; war-termination questions neglected.
--military necessity drives policy-making vs. moral choices and opportufiities in policy-making.
Such broad 5nd highly generalized contrasts simplify and even caricature complex historical realities. Nonetheless, they represent much of the essence of the few studies so far completed in the area of national strategic style. 
3
In looking at the French military-diplomatic experience (and how the French interpret it), four factors seem to stand out:
(1) France's history as a great power;
(2) the quality and uniqueness of France's military establishment and strategic thinking as compared to its contemporary competitors;
(3) the historical pattern of French civil-military relations; and
(4) the question of French national character.
After reviewing the main facts regarding each factor, conclusions will be drawn as to their current policy implications. The 1940 defeat, according to Wight, meant that France will "probably" never again be a Great Power. 
7
In summing up France's historical role as a Great 'ower, French writers stress the following points of continuity: 8
France requires a substantial military establishment to protect her vulnerable frontiers.
--France's natural frontiers (sometimes construed to include Belgium and the Rhineland) are "proportionate to her strength and abilities" (Montesquieu) and constitute France's rightful 4domain.
--France has always shown flexibility in alliances in order to maintain the balance of power, even engaging in alliances with such contemporary infidels as Muslims, Protestants, and Communists.
--France has served as the "guardian of weak princes" (in Germany, Italy, and Eastern Europe especially) against those who would subjugate them.
--France has stressed political and prestige considerations over economic ones; French colonization stressed the mission civilisatrice over profit.
Errors in French policy derive from failure to adhere to these principles. Louis XV's flawed statecraft in the Seven Years' War (1756-1763) left France incapable of preventing the partitions of Poland, but his successor was at least able to help another weak state--the United States-and incidentally weaken France's greatest rival. This notion of "guarding weak princes" could also be seen as a policy of keeping many of France's neighbors weak and controllable, but the French do not draw this conclusion-except as re-,rd the failure of Napoleon III to prevent the unification of Germa, Some French sources even attribute this failure to Napoleon I, who is reported as saying:
I made the mistake of my career in not removing the Hohenzollerns from the throne of Prussia when I had the opportunity. As long as this house reigns and until the red cap of liberty is erected in Germany, there will be no peace in Europe.
While Louis XIV is defended as acting from legitimate motives of raison d 'tat in the War of the Spanish Succession (preventing the encircle- ment which would arise from a Hapsburg on the throne in Madrid), Napoleon is criticizei (even by de Gaulle) as exceeding France's natural limits and pursuing a personal policy of aggrandizement. But de Gaulle hastens to add that Napoleon's legacy of glory is of pricel'ess value to the French:
...France is grateful to him for what he made of the French. They had recovered from Rossbach [a defeat in the Seven Years' War ...France has not forgotten him... In 1940, he was behind me y6en I told the French they were not what they seemed to be.
That many Frenchmen still think of France as a Great Power is above all attributable to the successes of General de Gaulle:
-- 
proposes to recover the exercise of its full sovereignty.
It is intolerable for a great state that its destiny be left to the decisions and actions of another state." 
'12
Objectively, France probably ceased being a Great Power with the 1870 defeat--if we define a Great Power as one able confidently to contemplate war with any other power. In post-Renaissance French history, in fact, one has the impression that up until the mid-nineteenth century, French political elites often resorted to war for reasons of domestic policy (to consolidate or change a regime); but since 1870 France has been preoccupied with the German question, and has been posing as a Great Power while seeking alliesl4--or, in nuclear weapons, instruments denied to the Germpis. As one recent survey of French military history concluded, "[niational feeling in this respect regarding the Russian/Soviet threat has never had the characteristics of unanimity, depth, and duration presented by anti-German feeling...Only the reunification of Germany, whether neutralized or not, could in the short term shake the current feeling of continental security that the French enjoy ." 15 The determination to be able to continue to hold something approximating first rank status, * with all of its traditional rationales (above all, an independent policy regarding all major world issues), is still a leading principle of French policy--in part because of its striking implementation and articulation by de Gaulle. Only Napoleon Ill and a few of his advisors recognized France's inadequacy in 1866; although they promptly revised the laws on conscription, the revisions were incomplete and not even fully enforced. One reason why the new laws were not enforced was that the French military establishment was confident that only long-serving professional soldiers could have the military spirit required for victory:
... the French army hierarchy was shocked by the Prussian victory of 186 
6
In the wake of the 1870 defeat, the French concluded that they had failed to organize their manpower properly, that conscription had to be universal and supported by extensive General Staff plans for rapid mobilization and deployment by rail. As Challener points out, there was, of course, nothing truly original in the French solution to the problem of national security in the post-1870 era. So powerful was the Prussian example that virtually all the European nations, except, of course, Great Britain, built national sjurity systems based upon conscription and the mass army.
Nor was there anything abnormal in the French assumption that war would be short and decisive.
What was distinctive about the French was that (in characteristically hyper-typical fashion) they carried this assumption to the extreme in theorists such as Grandmaison and Foch. This was not entirely irrational in the context of the contemporary and nearly universal faith that the war would be rapidly decided by offensive maneuvers. 22 The Foch formula of "Victoire-Volonte" (victory-will) and its stress on morale over numbers, tactics, strategy, and weapons has been often described; and Foch himself later conceded that his prewar arguments were "infantile."1 
2 3
French tactical doctrine was based not on careful analysis of recent wars but on myth and abstract thought.. .Between the defeats of 1870-71 and 1914 a myth therefore was woven of the Furia Francese, of the irresistibility of massed Frenchmen dashing forward to the pas de charge, bugles squealing, colors streaming, of the glorious memories of Marengo and Austerlitz... of the supposed recipe for success of Napoleon I...the French leadership became a victim of its own public relations: its strategy, its military organization and equipment and its tactical doctrine were influenced by the myth. Hence the offensive, whatever the circumstances. But this was not to be based on the careful use of ground or on the firepower of modern rifles and machine guns, or on modern artillery preparation; it was merely an abstract idea. Elan 2 nd cran ("guts") would do it all by a succession of charges... Similarly, Colonel Loiseau de Grandmaison "opposed the development of heavy artillery on the grounds that it hampered the mobility of troops on the offense and nurtured the false doctrine that firepower was more important than spirit and elan vital." 
2 5
26
2 7
Once the top military leadership and the politicians are added in, it becomes possible to harmonize these two points of view, as Challener suggests:
... by the early 1930s the French had built a system of national security founded on principles that were almost completely the reverse of those that had prevailed in 1914. But this system, too, was inflexible and proved unable to respond to crises short of total war... .when Hitler moved into the Rhineland... .the leaders of the French Army informed the Cabinet that French military forces were not organized to carry out a rapid movement of their own into the Rhineland and could not, in short, mount a quick surnical operation.
Indeed, the high command suggested that any sort of French military response * would require something close to a national mobilization. Worse still, they sketchel out a scenario in which there was a real prospect that any French operations in the Rhineland would bog down in a trench warfare stalemate on the 1914-1918 model-.the Rhineland incident stands out for the way that it revealed the limitations of the defensively oriented national security system that the French had created. Moreover, the revelation of such limitations served only to further appeasement. Within a short time leaders of the French Right were arguing that since the nation did not possess any army capable of pursuing an anti-German policy, then the nation should pursue a foreign policy that was in accord with her military situation; that is, a pojcy of appeasing Hitler and acceding to further German moves. "flexible reponse"--the demonstrative use of tactical nuclear weapons will convince the Soviets of NATO's willingness to consider further uses of nuclear weapons, including "assured destruction" of Soviet cities.
Through such threats--and not through war-fighting capabilities--will the crisis be managed, and the pre-war situation restored. The French version, as expounded by military intellectuals, comes complete with pseudomathematical equations reminiscent of Foch's "Victoire-Volonte."
In addition to being a hyper-typical caricature of an already intrinsically inadequate Western strategy, the 1972 white paper version of French strategy is--to use the key phrases above--"inflexible," "unable to respond to crises short of total war" and liable to serve "only to further appeasement." Since the Soviet response to the French SLBMs could be wholly disproportionate and essentially destroy France, the French are arguably less likely to execute their threat in a crisis or war than to try to use it to negotiate the most favorable settlement possible for France.
I have been told this by some of the top political commentators in France, and by some French military officers--not that the official secret doctrine calls for a negotiated surrender, but they see this outcome as more likely (particularly when Giscard was chief executive) than actual use of France's strategic nuclear forces. At the same time, I have been assured that de Gaulle would very possibly have followed through with the threat (or at least could be more credible in making such threats), and that there remained (even under Giscard) a chance that the French would follow their logic to its end and attack Soviet cities--knowing that the Soviets could then annihilate France. Some of my French sources have added that France might then be saved from destruction by Soviet desires to seize the country's valuable agricultural and industrial assets as intact as possible. They conclude that the whole issue is hypothetical anyway, so long as the American guarantee protects West Germany.
It is obviously logically inconsistent to assert at the outset that , the American guarantee is no longer credible, and to assume at the end that it will remain credible enough; but many French observers adopt this 
The French military was historically the "grande muette"-the silent partner and instrument of the executive--until 1870.
--
After the defeat of 1870-71, the Army cultivated an already existing ethos of military virtue to extraordinary extremes, as became apparent in the Dreyfus affair (1894-1906).
--1940 created a division of loyalties in that the legitimacy credentials of both the Vichy and de Gaulle governments appeared suspect.
--
The Indochina War (1946-1954)  In the enormous literature on French civil-military relations, the main question of interest to the search for a French strategic style is:
Who makes policy? Does the policymaker's civilian or military nature make a difference as to the kind of policy that is made?
Since 1870 and especially since the Dreyfus affair, French politicians have been concerned lest the military subculture become too ingrown and anti-democratic. The politicians tried to influence the nature of the military's tjb-culture by modulating the entry levels and promotion prospects of certain social and political groupings. But, in the pre-World War I era at least, the military and strategic planning was left primarily in the hands of the military. 
33
In  West Germany in order to create an in-theater substitute for the increasingly incredible American guarantee. Whether military dominance of the policymaking process would bring such ideas to the fore is perhaps a question too hypothetical to be worth considering.
It is probable that, even if France does acquire enhanced radiation warheads for its tactical nuclear systems, the basic French strategy for using tactical nuclear weapons (warning shots for deterrent purposes)
will not change. 
36
French in te primacy of internal political considerations in defense policy-making.
Challener makes a case for the primacy of internal political considerations over issues of military effectiveness against anticipated threats in the analysis of the parliamentary dimension of defense policy in the 1870-1914 era. The defenders of the Third Republic feared that professional soldiers would become the allies of the political Right, and therefore favored a system of short-term conscription. Conservatives favored long-service conscripts as being more effective soldiers and politically more reliable in domestic contingencies:
Anyone who has the patience to go through the almost endless pages of debate in the Chamber of Deputies over the conscription legislation of 1872, 1889, 1905, and 1913 can readily be pardoned if at times he comes to think that these political questions were the only issues ever discussed and that the problem of military effectiveness was, at best, a secondary consideration. There was virtually no discussion of the military merits of the de Gaulle proposals or his views on the role of air and armor. What happened was that the debate focused on the political implications of a professional army, with speaker after speaker rejecting the concept as anti-democratic and foreign to the republican tradition. The basic reason for de Gaulle's failure was that he hitched his air-armor chariot to the idea 38 of a professional army, and the latter was simply not acceptable.
The same constraints, mutatis mutandis, apply today. --mistrust --secretiveness and suspicion of the motives of others.
--incivisme --that is, a lack of civil spirit and distrust of the government, manifested in extensive tax fraud and what often seems a lack of concern for others. But this apparent incivisme must be qualified:
Ask a Frenchman for his money to save his country and perhaps he will not give it to you, in fact at the very moment when he shows himself ready to sacrifice his life. But appeal to him if you are defending, not a political platform of interests, but ideals like liberty, equality, or the Republic, and you will find yourself surrounded by 4 undreds and thousands of enthusiastic supporters.
--ambivalent attitude toward authority --fear of strong government, but turning to a savior-figure in time of crisis, when an external or internal threat is feared.
-insistence on principle --a tendency to prize clarity of thought, rationality, consistency, and the pursuit of principles to their logical end.
The impact of these national character attributes on the French strategic style might be put as follows: they are not inconsistent with, and are partly explicable by, the national historical experience of frequent internal political upheavals (mistrust, individualism, incivisme) and a strong national state (ambivalent attitude toward authority). Geyl suggests that the latter characteristic includes a highly legalistic habit of mind, and explains why the French have ambivalent feelings toward figures like Talleyrand and de Gaulle, who at first appeared to challenge constituted authority for purely personal reasons. 
4 4
Mistrust and individualism on a "national" rather than personal scale may be seen as stemming in part from France's twentieth century experience with allies. French generals and officials still point out that the U.S. One possible answer may be that France's military superiority from the late Middle Ages to the mid-nineteenth century was the functional equivalent of insularity. This historical experience allowed the French to build up a tradition of grandeur in foreign policy postures, and promoted a habit of looking upon military problems as questions of internal politics--from starting wars for reasons of domestic politics in the seventeenth, eighteenth, and early nineteenth centuries to analyzing military questions in terms of domestic political advantage in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The decline in France's strength relative to possible opponents became acute in the mid-nineteenth century. Since 1870, it has become obvious that France is no longer the same kind of an innovator or pacesetter in military affairs but more of an imitator driving the logic of contemporary military wisdom to the limit--from the offensive a outrance planning prior to World War I to 'proportional deterrence' today.
The French strategic style seems to consist in its essence of three factors:
(1) A preoccupation with considerations of Great Power status.
The French want the rank and prestige of a great power.
The old rationales of mission civilisatrice and "guardian of weak princes" speak to them in terms of their capability for intervention in Africa and their independence in NATO decision-making. Giscard struck a deep chord when he refers to France as the world's third nuclear power, superior to Britain and China. The French are willing to pay fairly high costs for this rank, and not solely because of their frequent declarations to the effect that (in de Gaulle's words) nation-states are such "cold monsters" that France * 1 cannot rely on others and must assure her own security.
(2) A tendency to drive the military wisdom of the era to its logical extreme. In contemporary nuclear terms, this has meant the elaboration of a strategic nuclear capability that is designed primarily for pre-war deterrence rather than actual use in the event deterrence fails. Although one suspects the French would not implement their threat and could be coerced, the French will probably take whatever measures are within France's financial and technological grasp to preserve its technical (if not political) credibility.
IRBMs, additional SSBNs, and other measures would therefore be within the logic of the nuclear posture the French have adopted and will probably continue with for the indefinite future.
(
Military decision-making dominated by civilians, who are preoccupied with domestic political considerations. Some of the virtually permanent features of French defense policy--conscription, the independent stance within NATO, and proportional deterrence for France alone--are attributable not to any analysis of the threat, but to domestic political * considerations and imperatives. They will therefore only be altered with great difficulty.
These conclusions naturally require further study and analysis.
Among the several topics that were not touched upon in this paper, and which seem to merit particular attention, are (1) the French tradition of colonial war, from the beginnings of the modern period (the conquest of Algiers in 1830) through Vietnam, Algeria, and contemporary interventions in Africa;
(2) the French process of weapons design and procurement, which seems to have some commonalities with the Soviet system; 
46
French decision-making during wars, as opposed to the peacetime military preparations stressed in this paper. For example, there are indications that in the recent past, French tactical nuclear doctrine differed from U.S./NATO doctine regarding "the employment of nuclear weapons when precise enemy information is lacking," with the French oriented toward distinctly prompter and more extensive use of nuclear weapons. 
47
Its main features, in contrast to the U.S. and European traditions of strategic analysis, are a reluctance to engage in theoretical analysis or to articulate the major assumptions of British strategy. These must therefore be inferred from British defense policy(s) and procurement, particularly as the British have retained an almost closed system of defense policy-making unique among the Western democracies. Not only are decisions arrived at in secret, but there is little attempt to justify them. There has thus been little development of the insider-outsider strategic analyst and therefore a correspondingly limited development of the non-governmental strategic studies community on other than an individual basis.
As against these rather negative conclusions, the British decision to expand their strategic nuclear capabilities to include Limited Nuclear Options (LNOs) indicates a remarkably hard-headed analysis of Britain's strategic situation, backed by political decision-makers. When combined with the British abandonment of their centuries old Imperial role, and their effective identification of British defense with the defense of NATO-Europe, this indicates that they may improve their strategic thinking and policy on NATO issues. Their approach is likely to be conservative, The antithesis between the British and the Continental--including U.S.--approach to strategic issues is exemplified by their approach to strategic nuclear issues. American traditions--strategic, intellectual and political--require strategic policies, force acquisitions and deploy- Pym, and are set out below, each being followed by a suggestion, in square brackets as to the real British position. How far this is admitted, even to themselves, by policy-makers, is doubtful. Mr. Pym' s view appears to be that the Russians are bad chaps, so defense is a good thing and, since Trident is a good system, Trident is a good thing.
Proposition 1: British nuclear weapons were developed, from 1940 to 1952, in a political and military setting in which it was inconceivable not to develop them. In particular, after 1945, there was doubt as to whether the U.S. would commiiit herself to the defense of Western Europe Proposition II. Once acquired for one set of reasons, the British deterrent was too valuable a military and political asset to throw away.
it is relatively cheap absolutely or as a percentage of the defense budget to maintain and to modernize; even Trident would cost only five percent of the defense budget in its most expensive years.
[The analogy is with an old family butler, who adds a touch of useful class at negligible cost. It is deceptive. The British have spent very significant resources, given their poor economic performance, on making their nuclear force as effective as possible.  In broad terms, the political rationale for the British deterrent was stronger than ever. U.S. policy was extremely erratic and could get more so, whilst the Soviets were becoming more dangerous.
The U.S. was prepared to be extremely generous on Trident, enhancing the Anglo-American Special Relationship in nuclear matters. There was therefore every reason to have the decision in favor of Trident made firm, while a Conservative government was in power in the U.K., and before the U.S. Presidential election. Everybody in the U.S. system who needed to be consulted had been consulted, and approved. The consensus for a traditional British strategic decision, based on self-interest and self-preservation, had therefore been established, in the traditional manner.
Just how traditional a manner is clearer from a survey of what British strategic thinking has or, rather, has not been, in the past. Much of this may be familiar, but its implications perhaps less so. Army; it did have a standing Navy. However belated and slow the British mobilization might be, the standing '4avy, plus the English Channel, provided virtually assured defense against invasion, whilst it was completing.
British complacency was grounded in experience: the last effective invasion by a foreign power had been in 1066. Similarly, experience suggested that although all Britain's Continental rivals understood her strategy perfectly well, none of them, singly or in combination, could defeat it.
This would require the sort of investment in naval forces that no Continental power could afford, given the even more pressing demands for land forces, a situation that remained true until emergence of a unified Germany, and of two extra-European naval powers, the U.S. and Japan. Britain's maritime strategy may not have been rationally articulated, but it was remarkably successful. British forces were also a military means to an economic end: building up profitable trade. Until the late Victorian era, the British Empire was expected to be--and was--a very profitable business operation. The British did not fight for ideas; they fought for trade.
All this is to make the basic point that Britain's strategic culture was--and is--quite different from that of the Continent and was remarkably successful, although handicapping the British adjustment to a century of technological change. The same argument holds, broadly, for Britain's political and social culture. Until the late 1970s, it could be argued that the economic price Britain was paying for her continued failure to adapt was more than countered by the general quality of life in a conservative society--The New York Times managed, typically, to discover this elementary truth shortly after it had ceased to be true. Hence, the classic British defense of their anti-analytical approach to defense--and other--* issues: "it may look funny to you foreigners, but it works."
This approach owed much to the fact that Britain was the only European power whose society was not drastically affected, politically, by the transformation of land warfare by revolutionary armies and generals from 1790 onwards. These changed the whole relationship between force and policy, a change we are still trying to understand, so that there is a direct line of descent from Clausewitz and Jomini to the late Bernard Surprisingly, perhaps, given the conLinuous changes in naval technology after 1853, the Royal Navy neither developed nor encouraged a significant capacity for strategic analysis or thought. This is less surprising, when the general tendency of navies, as social institutions, to discourage innovation is remembered and when, for the British, is added the weight of a tradition of almost unbroken success since 1588. There is also, though, a curious paradox that has yet to be fully resolved: the Royal Navy was, in fact, a leader in almost all the technological and material innovations from 1853 to--at least--19 
4
Nonetheless, the contrast is still sharp between the period of strategic innovation or, at least, adaptation (1853-1914) and the period of stagnation (1914-1945/1987).
In the first, the British transferred a like the Colomb brothers and civilians like Sir Julian Corbett. Even so, the result was, in 1914, a Navy lacking a proper staff, typifying its difficulty in thinking about how a war would be fought. It had extreme difficulty in meeting the challenge posed by German submarine warfare, the traditional remedy for the defense of merchant shippirg, the convoy being resisted by the Admiralty in 1917 until it was nearly too late.
Arguably, though, the real failure of British naval strategic thinking came in the postwar period, when there was no attempt to analyze and apply the experience of World War I. The effect of the two new weapons systems that had emerged, the submarine and the aircraft (land, as well as seabased) were grossly underestimated. So, less obviously, was the potential of oil refueling at sea, both for the British, and for their adversaries, who could again engage in long-range surface raids against commerce.
In terms of deterrence theory, the British Far Eastern Strategy against Japan remains an example of almost total analytical failure. Deterrence rested on the dispatch of a British fleet to the strategic base at Singapore, but how it was supposed to deter the Japanese was never analyzed, nor was the size of the fleet, or the defense of the base, ever properly related to Japanese countermeasures. Inevitably, the result was total failure, at the cost of heavy losses. Significantly, too, this was a new challenge to strategic thinking, in a way in which Imperial Germany was not. Germany was seen as yet another Continental power bidding for hegemony, to be countered in the traditional way, by organizing a European coalition to defeat her, without heavy British army commitments. The U.S. challenge was also new, but met, uniquely, by simply assuming that she would be an ally.
As the new service, the RAF, founded in 1917, had an interest in acquiring an intellectual justification for its independence. Like the USAF, it embraced the doctrine of victory through strategic bombing, expounded by the Italian Douhet. However, although the RAF High Command was certainly arguing Douhet's theory of air power, and may--or may not, the question is still debated--have read some of his writings, the RAF never referred specifically to them. Within the British strategic and political culture, this was wise. The RAF was already advancing a new strategic theory to justify its existence, which was therefore suspect enough. To add that these ideas were supported by a Continental writer,
and an Italian at that, would have been to invite rejection. Instead, the RAF spoke Gf the Trenchard Doctrine, named after its first commander.
Again, like the USAF, the RAF concentrated on its strategic bombing force, even though its technical capabilities were insufficient to meet the doctrinal demands in it, neglecting tactical air operations. Both thus shared a failure of strategic thinking, but the RAF was thinking. More typical of British strategic culture was the development of an extremely sophisticated air defense system, including the first radar, without any doctrinal justification and in opposition to the prevalent RAF doctrine.
Up until World War II, the continuity of British strategic thinking, style, and culture, was thus as remarkable as the absence of its articulation. There was really very little tradition of strategic writing, either within the services, or amongst the very small circle of civilians interested in defense issues. It is difficult, in retrospect, to realize the extent to which defense issues were--and perhaps still are--regarded in Britain as the esoteric preoccupation of a very small group of professionals, mostly senior military officers and civil servants. Outside of this group, academics were--again, perhaps still are--expected to devote themselves to historical work, whilst journalists mostly operated at a very low level of expertise. To a large extent, the idea of British defense intellectuals has always been an inherent contradiction: this species does not flourish in the British strategic climate. Complicating the picture, however, is the fact that military writers, intellectual generals, and admirals, do flourish, it is just that they write on almost everything except current strategic issues: if they do, they tend to engage in advocacy rather than analysis. Currently, General Sir John Hackett exemplifies this tradition, with his The Third World War: August 1985, a contribution to the long line of novels of future wars. Similarly, British politicians have, as a rule, neither written on, nor specialized in, defense issues, on a continuing basis, notwithstanding the great exception, Sir Winston Churchill. Incidentally, his record as a strategist is so poor as to discourage emulation.
The absence of British strategic thinking in the post-war period should therefore be seen as the continuation of a long-established tradi--tion.
Ironically, the British upgrading of their deterrent, discussed earlier, represents an untypically successful series of British defense analyses and decisions, albeit conducted in a typically oblique manner.
Otherwise, poor analysis has helped produce poor policy since World War 11.
This is a much broader and more diffuse topic, since it includes thinking on specifically British problems, on NATO problems and on U.S. The problem in terms of strategic thinking as it is understood in the U.S. is that, relative to the past experience, the British have come a long wa/. Unfortunately, relative to the development of strategic thought, the British still have a long way to go. This may be too harsh a judgment.
It is certainly not an argument for confusing the quality of strategic thought with its quantity. Nor is it meant as an endorsement of claims for the unqualified success of Amnerican strategic thinking, either in terms of analysis or of policy recommendations. But it is even more difficult to be too positive about British strategic analysis, or policies outside the nuclear area, when looking at the period from 1945 to 1980.
Specifically, the record is notably defective outside and inside Europe, except for the initial support for NATO's foundation. The Anglo-American strategist, Laurence Martin, accurately summarized post-war British defense policy as The Long Recessional. At no point in the retreat from Empire, beginning with the granting of independence to India in 1947, and ending with the withdrawal from the Gulf in the 1970s, did British strategic thinkers or planners raise the obvious question of whether British resources could match British commnitmrents. There was no real debate on whether Britain could, or should, remain a power "East of Suez" until about 1963 and even then it was unwelcome to the British defense and foreign policy establishment, still dedicated to the idea of Britain as a world power. This is explicable on historical grounds, but the failure to coordinate defense and foreign policy is not.
On the other )and, the preoccupation with the imperial legacy and the consequent prevalence of imperial modes of thought, may explain the British failure to define their NATO strategy adequately, either individually or collectively. Britain's contribution to NATO was, aftf all, regarded as a poor relation in British defense policy until Britain became unmistakably a purely European power in the 1970s. There were also some significant British contributions to NATO's move away from its almost total reliance on an early, and massive, resort to high yield, high collat- Instead, the British will agree in principle with the U.S., even if they think the U.S. is completely wrong, and then, if necessary, implement the policy in such a way as to force its reversal. Britain almost cer-* tainly has a clearly defined NATO strategy for herself, and one which she wishes to see NATO-Europe and the U.S. follow--probably a short conventional pause, followed by large-scale U.K., U.S. and NATO TNF use on the battlefi d, and for interdiction to defeat the Soviet and Pact forces.
But the British will never say what this is--not even to themselves! These peculiarities of British strategic thinking and policy are not only the result of an intellectual heritage of a British strategic style that abhors theorizing. There is also the heritage of a closed government system. The British remain unable to break the resultant vicious circle: those inside the system believe that only insiders have the necessary information and experience needed to advise policy-makers, but will not share this information because it will dilute their power. Outsiders are therefore debarred, by definition, from offering serious advice, and so come to believe that they cannot do so. In self-defense they also argue that they should not do so, and, as academics like Bull put it, they should remain in their ivory tower.
A major influence reinforcing this system has been the growth of the permanent (career) civil service, especially at the senior levels.
Although much admired abroad, particularly in the U.S., the British civil service clearly suffers from its resemblance to a powerful monastic order of the Middle Ages, dedicated to neither God, nor Mammon, but to the acquisition and retention oF political power. Novices are recruited young to the Service, formal training is largely absent, and promotion is for the best generalists. The power of the ci'il service is immense, precisely because there are no competing centers of experience linked to political power. Ministers have no expert assistance, and Parliamentary Committees virtually none. The Press is constrained by an effective Official Act.
Unfortunately, while the British civil service is brilliant, hard-working, literate, incorrupt and free of political bias, this reliance on the pragmatic-generalist has produced an appalling inability to analyze underlying problems, to address these, or to engage in effective planning. This has been particularly evident in economic, as well as strategic, policy.
The British view of experts, especially technical experts, as second-class citizens in the world of defense policy, also explains the otherwise curious failure to translate their wartime expertise in Operational Research (Systems Analysis) into strategic analysis.
There seems little reason to expect significant changes in this pattern of British strategic thinking by inference. A greater attention to NATO issues is likely as these are now central to British political and military interests, but this is more likely to be reflected in British policy, as has already happened, than in any public debate. Such a conservative assessment is appropriate for a conservative strategic culture, which faithful] reflects an extremely conservative political culture and society.
offensive, one should not believe that all other nations will be less offensive-minded. What one expects to be unique is the total collection of qualities. If all nations possess all these traits, then obviously there is nothing very unique about them.
In dealing with a country the size of China (or the United States, Soviet Union, etc.), one must also be very hesitant in speaking of a "national" style. There is simply too large a mixture of possible past historical experiences. A Sherman or a Patton will fight a different type of war from an Eisenhower. Chiang-Kai-Chek's forces were obviously as Chinese as Mao's, yet the former lost and the latter won. For obvious reasons, the focus in this paper will be on the Communist Chinese style of warfare.
That ancient maxims can come down through the centuries to affect modern day policies can be seen most strikingly by considering three general principles derived from ancient literature which appear to greatly influence current Chinese foreign policy. They are: (I) yuan-chiao-ching-kung;
to cooperate with the far country and to strike at the near country; (2)   i-i-chih-i; using a barbarian to check another barbarian; and (3) pi-shihchi-shu; to avoid strength and to attack weakness.
The relevance of the first two principles to current Sino-Soviet and Sino-American relationships should be self-evident. The third theme, as will be discussed below, is reflected in much of Mao's military strategy.
As one might expect from a nation having such a long history of military conflict, there is no dearth of classical Chinese military commentaries.
There can be little doubt that the primary classical Chinese source of strategic wisdom is a volume known as "Sun Tzu," who is actually the author of the book in question, called The Art of War.
Just who was Sun Tzu, precisely when the book was written, etc., are matters of some controversy. Wherever the truth lies in these controversies, the book is ancient by any standard and its wisdom is clear from any reading of the text.
Indeed, although the book was written thousands of years ago, some of Sun Tzu's conmments read as if they were of modern origin. In similar fashion, it could have been Mao, not Sun Tzu, who penned these words of wisdom: ''if I am able to determine the enemy's dispositions while at the same time I conceal my own then I can concentrate and he must divide. And if I concentrate while he divides, I can use my entire strength to attack a fraction of his. There, I will be numerically superior.
There, if I am able to use many to strike few at the selected point, those I deal with will be in dire straits." 
3
The following sequence of quotations from Sun Tzu, with corresponding quotations from Mao in parenthesis, gives some idea of Sun Tzu's influence on Mao's thinking. Now there are five circumstances in which victory may be predicted.
He who knows when he can fight and when he cannot will be victorious.
(Fight when you can win. Move away when you cannot win.)
2. He who understands how to use both large and small forces will be victorious.
&(It signifies progress and development in a commander who is initially capable of commanding only a small formation, if he becomes capable of commanding a big one.)
He whose ranks are united in purpose will be victorious.
(All of us share the same hardships, from the commander of the army to the cook.)
He who is prudent and lies in wait for an enemy who is not will be victorious.
(The object of retreat is to induce the enemy to make mistakes or to detect his mistakes.)
He whose generals are able an not interfered with by the sovereign will be victorious."
(In a word, it means guerrilla warfare waged independently I and with initiative within the framework of an independent strategy.)
Perhaps the most famous "explanation" by Mao of his style of warfare is a 16-character set of slogans, which rhyme in Chinese, which he coined at Ching Kang Shan:
The enemy advances; we retire.
The enemy camps; we harass.
The enemy tires; we attack.
The enemy retreats; we pursue. 6
In The Art of War we have the following advice (collected from several sections, not all placed together).
When he concentrates, prepare against him; where he is strong avoid him.
I.a. If numerically weaker, be capable of withdrawing.
l.b. If in all respects unequal [i.e., your forces are inferior], be capable of eluding him...
Keep him [the enemy] under a strain and wear him down.
2.a. When the enemy is at ease, be able to weary him; when well fed to starve him; when at rest to make him move.
Appear at places to which he must hasten; move swiftly where he does not expect you.
One defends when his strength is inadequate; he attacks when it is abundant. The only place where Mao and Sun Tzu would appear to differ relates to the last of Mao's four dictums. Not very much is said by Sun Tzu about how to deal with retreating forces. What little he says, however, is rather defensive in nature. Thus we have:
1. When he pretends to flee, do not pursue.
To a surrounded enemy you must leave a way of escape.
The logic behind the last three remarks is not benevolence. Rather the perspective is that given no choice other than death the opponent 99 SOL.
will fight to the death. Given an alternative, the opponent will flee toward "safety," allowing victory to be gained at a small cost of life.
Being thousands of years away from the China of that time, we are in no position to be sure Sun Tzu is incorrect. He is speaking about the psychological makeup of the Chinese warrior of his day.7
This brings us to a very important aspect of both current and historical (i.e., Sun Tzu) Chinese military strategy: an emphasis on psychological warfare, on attempting to gain victory by strategem rather than by brute force alone. Indeed, one of the most striking features of Sun Tzu's work is the lack of emphasis on overt physical violence to obtain the desired political ends. Although Sun Tzu has an extended discussion of the tactics of maneuver, marches, etc., actual fighting is not considered the epitome of skill.
The mark of a superior strategist is his ability to attack the mind of his opponent, using psychological kung-fu, so to speak, to obtain success.
The army, if it were actually used at all, was the instrument delivering the final blow to an opponent previously made vulnerable.
Thus, we have the following sequence of commnents from Sun Tzu:
1. Generally in war the best policy is to take a state intact;
to ruin it Is inferior to this.
2. To capture the enemy's army is better than to destroy it.
To subdue the enemy without fighting is the acme of skill.
Thus, what is of supreme importance in war is to attack the enemy's strategy.
Next best is to disrupt his alliances.
The next best is to attack his army.
thousand kitchen fires, on the following night fifty thousand, and on the third thirty thousand.
P'ang Chuan marched for three days and, greatly pleased, said: "I have always been certain that the troops of Ch'i were cowards. They have been in my country for only three days and more than half their officers and soldiers have deserted!"
He thereupon left behind his heavy infantry and wagons, and with lightly armed shock troops only followed by forced marches. Sun Pin had calculated that P'ang Chuan would arrive at Ma Ling in the evening. The Ma Ling road is narrow, and on both sides there are many gorges and defiles where troops may be placed in ambush.
Sun Pin cut the bark off a great tree, and on the trunk wrote: "P'ang Chuan dies under this tree." He then placed the most skillful archers of the army with ten thousand crossbows in ambush on both sides of the road, and ordered that when in the evening they saw fire, all were to shoot at it. P'ang Chuan actually arrived that night and when he saw writing on a tree, ignited a torch to read what was written there. Before he had finished the ten thousand crossbowmen of Ch'i discharged their arrows simultaneously, and the army of Wei was thrown into the utmost confusion. P'ang Chuan, at his wit's end, realized that his troops would be defeated. Whereupon he cut his throat, and as he expired, said: "So I have contributed to the fame of that wretch!" Sun Pin, taking advantage of this victory, completely destroyed the Wei army and captu 1 Td the heir apparent, Shen, after which he returned to Ch'i.
Although both stories involve the use of campfires to deceive the opponent, on a deeper level they are far different.
In the first case the campfires were used in essence as a form of cover in order to conceal the true location of Iphicrates' troops. In the second case the campfires were used over a period of days in order to confuse the opponent and induce 4him to act rashly and leave most of his forces behind. In essence, P'ang Chuan was manipulated, through a strategem, to act against his best interests.
*The best discussion of the role of strategem in Chinese strategy is given by Boorman. 12 His analysis is of particular interest because a considerable amount of time is spent contrasting the Chinese use of countryside will b?5h fall victim to the enemy's own evaluation of his priorities.
Boorman uses the example of the zero-sum two person game in two interesting ways. The focus of the two-person game is the payoff matrix, which tells what will be the "payoff" if contestant "A" chooses action "a," while contestant "B" chooses action "b."
In the abstract world of game theory there is only one payoff matrix known to both players. In the real world of conflict each side has its own "payoff matrix," not necessarily known by the opponent. One of the major goals of a strategem is to change the opponents's view of the payoff matrix so that he will take actions beneficial (in terms of a different payoff matrix) to one's own cause. Strategem now becomes the manipulation of the opponent's concept of reality in such a way that his utility function [i.e., payoff matrix],
and a fortiori his course of action, shifts in a direction favorable to one's own best interests. An example would be inducing the opponent to commit himself to defense of a particular strong point far out of proportion to its intrinsic worth.
The game theory outlook on strategy in many ways can be viewed as a Western outlook, and thus the contrast between the strategem and the game theory outlook provides some sense of the difference between American and Chinese outlooks on strategy.
Game theory furnishes a...concentrated encapsulization of some Western strategic values. Being formal, the theory takes beliefs that are often [vague]...and pushes them to their formal asymptotes, thereby crystallizing their exact implications... Twoperson zero-sum game theory is deliberately psychologically nai',e; the onl Information determining strategy formation is qsumed ' ,ie In the payoff matrix--in capabilities, that is, rat e ria in intentions. The mini-max concept of strategy is an dttempt to factor our enemy Intentions by assuming that one wants as much as one can get regardless of what those intentions may be .... This dominant emphasis is quite consistent with the evolution of Western strategy in recent centuries, emphasizing as it has more and more the economic and organizational bases of military power and national-security policy. In fact, a work such as Makers of Modern Strategy, gives the impression that there is a negative relation between predilection to use strategem and the psychology engendered by a modern military establishment and technology. One elementary fact is that a mini-max strategy is a rich man's strategy; the implicit assumption is that the conservative, mini-max value is worth living for. Explicitly not taken into account is the possibility that a player may prefer a nonmaximum gamble, preferring death to continued existence should he lose... [There] is the possibility that one player may be able to psychoanalyze the other, but not vice-versa. In this case where synwnep~ is violated, the maximum concept no longer makes sense.
(Emphases in original.)
One should note that Boorman's criticism of the mini-max approach is open to dispute. The whole point behind the mini-max approach is that if player A follows mini-max while player B does not, then the payoff to A is larger than if B does follow mini-max as well. However, what does seem to be a particularly American approach is what might be called the operations research-war game approach to strategy, where most, if not indeed all, the important variables are quantifiable.
Boorman is also correct in labeling the mini-max approach a rich man's way of waging war. Only a rich man can afford the "slow but sure" mini-max approach where one can "guarantee" some known return. An attempt to manipulate the enemy might succeed sooner but is not certain. A poor man can only win through a "trick" of some form.
Another, somewhat analogous, distinction can also be made. The German military historian Hans Delbruck has suggested that there are two k',nds of military strategy: the strategy of annihilation which seeks to overthrow the enemy's military power, and the strategy of attrition, usually employed by a strategist whose means are not great enough to directly overthrow his enemy, and thus resorts to an indirect approach. 
15
In Vietnam, interestingly enough, the U.S. also adopted a strategy of attrition, while the North Vietnamese employed the strategy of annihilation. (Clearly we are better strategists of annihilation than attrition.)
There are many possible reasons why the Chinese adopted the indirect approach in many of their conflicts. In some cases, no doubt, it was because they were "poor" militarily, and the indirect approach is ideally suited for a poor-man's war. But this cannot be the only reason, for the Chinese were not always militarily deficient.
One very important cause was that much--but obviously not all--of Chinese military history is of the civil war variety. Often the issue was one of fealty to, or independence from, the central regime. A preference for co-opting, rather than annihilating, one's opponents can be seen not only in Sun Tzu's writings but also in actual politicalmilitary events in ancient China. Writing about ancient Chinese military history, Fairbanks lists the following, "specific habits of mind and action" in China.
(1) A tendency to disesteem heroism and violence, not to glorify it, and to prefer nonviolent means in overcoming others or achieving one's aims; military force has therefore been kept in a perspective in which it is only one of several means to subdue an enemy, and not an end in itself. Military command should not be left to the military, since they by training lack this broad perspective.
(2) A tradition of land warfare that prefers defense to offense and stresses the exhausting of an attacker or the pacification of a rebel as less costly than their extermination. Chinese naval power in the modern sense of the term remained abortive. For example, instead of controlling the sea, the Ming and Ch'ing both applied to maritime enemies the concept devloped against invaders or rebels by land--chien pi ch'ing-yeh, "strengthen the walls and clear the fields," concentrate the manpower, food and other resources of the countryside within the city walls and so starve out the leaders ...
(3) A tie-up between militarism and bureaucracy, rather than between militarism and commnercial expansion, least of all overseas...The Chinese state decried commerce as an aim of high policy. State revenues came from land and salt taxes, plus corvee labor. Personal profit came from bureaucratic manipulation of perquisites. This extended to the military as bureaucrats. The danger of malfeasance on their part lay--in conducting punitive campaigns in such a way that a large portion of the camp?)gn funds might be pocketed by the general in charge.
In early Chinese history the political bureaucracy was able to keep the military well under control. Indeed, the military failed to develop into a separate profession all the way up to the top level of power,...[the] military high command was regularly given to civil officials,...dynastic founders fresh from combat...regularly assumed the guise of sage rulers, and...their successors seldom took to the field in person... The military arm, not being the preferred means of government, had to remain at the disposal of civilian generalists... Extermination of hard-core rebels or enemies would require military means, yet it might at any moment become preferable to pursue their pacification [appeasement] by means of intimidation, bribery, enticement or diplomatic manipulation, all of which were non-military means. In the classic case,... Tseng Kuo-fen, in subduing the Niem rebels in the 1860s, would proscribe the rebel leaders while pardoninq 8 their followers and recruiting them into his own forces...
One manner in which the military was kept under control was by establishing, in essence, a divided conimand. Rather than risk one general becoming too powerful, responsibility over forces was split between two or three generals. This, of course, reduced military efficiency, but that was not considered a very great price to pay.
In keeping with this trend of civilianizing the military, there were no large standing armies kept on alert during times of peace. Rather, the troops were dismissed or sent to do civilian tasks. In some cases agricultural-military communities were established near border areas, capable (it was hoped) of repelling invaders during times of war, and surviving economically during peacetime. (The Israelis, interestingly, have established something similar in their controversial "settlements.") Thus, involvement of the PLA in non-military activities, especially during Cultural Revolution times, is not a remarkable change from previous pract ice.
This attitude of keeping the army under firm control, needless to say, has been the source of much tension between political sovereign felt compeldn tonexplaion thtug thee wer. "thre ways inr whchamrler andt compeland generpaion thtroug the year. Suns Tzu for eample can bring misfortune upon his army."
(1) When ignorant that the army should not advance, to order an advance or ignorant that it should not retire, to order a retirement. This is described as "hobbling the army."
(2) When ignorant of military affairs, to participate in their administration. This causes the officers to be perplexed.
(3) When ignorant of commnand problems to share in the exercise of responsibilities. This engenders doubts in the minds of the officers. 19
One presumes that Sun Tzu was speaking not from a theoretical standj point but on the basis of past historical experiences.
a Tension between those who wish to promote a modern, professional standing army and those who place their priorities in other areas has been a recurrent event in Chinese history. Indeed, it would seem that we are seeing yet another such clash of interests in the wake of the death of Mao.
As of now it would appear as if those in favor of professionalism hold the upper hand. However, if past history is any guide, such ascendancy may be short-lived. During most of Chinese history those opposing a modern, professional standing army have usually been in commiand.
During the 1 8 60s, for example, the Tong-zhi Restoration occurred.
During that time a small group of enlightened officials with military backgrounds argued for military modernization along Western lines.
The restoration was motivated by defense considerations, since China's territorial integrity was threatened from both her land borders and coasts. These officials also argued that China should seek modernization in other spheres such as agriculture, industry and technology--areas which are marked for change by China's current leaders. Within a few years, however, the restoration burnt itself out; lethargy returned.... The effort ended ignominiously in September 1894. when the Chinese fleet was soundly beaten by Japan, damaging China's naval power to such an extent that it has taken nearly eight decales for it to re-emerge under the Comtmunist admiral-generals.
Precisely why the forces in favor of modernization have fared so poorly over the ages is beyond the scope of this paper. However, at least a partial explanation is provided by observing one important cultural trait of the Chinese in their military conflicts, a stress on the importance of man over machine.
Perhaps the most recent restatement of this theme was provided by Mao, who stated: "Weapons are an important factor in war, but not the decisive factor; it is people, not things that are decisive. The richest source of power to wage war lies in the masses of the people." 21(Emphasis added.) This is not a recent Maoist invention, nor a rationalization to comipensate for a lack of nuclear weapons, missiles, etc. The emphasis on man over machine goes back until ancient times in China. To give but one earlier historical example, during the Taiping Rebellion (in the 1850s and 1860s) an astute Western observer noted that among rebel soldiers there was often "a great demand...for swords [but] they seemed to take little interest in guns." 
22
2 3
Rather, the destruction of the enemy's forces in the field (though this may well be done by strategem, political pressure, etc.) which is the primary objective. Such a perspective obviously affects the types of weapons purchased, and the type of war fought. The relative lack of interest, historically, of the Chinese in naval warfare may be at least partially explained by this perception. (One should note that naval battles were fought and Chinese naval power was significant during some periods of China's history, but these stand for the most part as exceptions which prove the rule.)
This cultural tendency away from adopting the newest in military technology (which stands in remarkable contrast to the American fascination with whatever is the latest in mechanized slaughter) is reinforced (and may in part even be explained) by the fact that the Chinese army is essentially a peasant army.
For peasants to be able to use modern weaponry considerable training would be required, and even then the effort could well not be totally successful. Since, historically, the emphasis was not on large standing armies, but on armies raised depending upon the exigencies of the moment, there was thus little time available to provide such training.
Another trait which relates to the peasant army focus is the underemphasis on logistics. Given the rather simple needs of the peasants, large amounts of supplies are not needed. The best quartermaster is the enemy. (And, indeed, the Commnunist Chinese captured inmmense amounts of weapons from the Nationalist foes.) This too is no recent development.
In ancient times the troops also were expected to find their own supplies as they conquered territory. "Those adept in waging war do not require a second levy of conscripts nor more than one provisioning. [In other words, they require provisioning when they depart and they return--between such times they live off the enemy.] They carry equipment from the homeland; they rely for provisions on the enemy. Thus the army is plentifully provided with food," says Sun Tzu. 
25
Although not strictly a matter of Chinese cultural traits, it may be appropriate at this point to mention an interesting discussion by Boorman 2 
6
The go board is a 19x19 square grid, with stones, black or white, placed on the various points of intersection. The objective of go is to surround stones of the opposite color, thereby "killing" them, as well as to control territory, i.e., areas within which a stone of the opposite color cannot be placed without facing the prospect of being killed.
Go is a rather subtle game, at least as complex as chess, if not indeed more so, despite the fact that there is only one type of piece, compared to the six different types of pieces in chess. The basic theme of go is one of encirclement and counterencirclement. Who is the attacker and who is the defender is often unclear. Go is a rather long game.
In general, victory is only relative. The "victor" may control more ternitory than the "loser," but defeat is not total.
Because of its complexity, a player may be defeated tactically on [This] constitutes one of two possible answers to a recurring problem in military history: ... which target [should) a military commander strike first, the enemy's outlying supplementary forces or his concentrated central position... In both [Mao's]   .*strategy ... and wei-chi the decision to attack weakness before strength derives from the ... methodical character of both conflict theories. If strong groups are attacked before weak ones... the weak forces acting in conjunction 'with the strong may be able to contribute significantly to a successful over-all defense. If weak forces are neutralized, first, however, they are eliminated as potential reinforcements and diversionary elements, and the strong, erstwhile unapproachable group can be attacked with a maximum chance of success. The logic of this military principle underlies all Chinese Communist conflict theory and has remained pivotal in Comm 29 ist international strategy since national victory in 1949-50.
(Emphasis in original.)
3. Make wiping out the enemy's effective strength our main objective; do not make holding or seizing a city or place our main objective. Holding or seizing a city or place is the outcome of wiping out the enemy's effective strength, and often a city or a place can be held or seized for good only after it has changed hands several times.
In wei-chi...no intersection is of itself worth more than any other, and hence control of no specific intersection--city or place--is a valid objective... In wei-chi...capture of hostile stores and groups generally implies seizure as territory of the intersections upon which the stores and groups stands; and...such action is frequently the only method of significantly expanding zones of territorial control.
Regarding the final clause...note the following statement in an exposition of weichi--"in some cases territories will change hands several times during the game and points may be occupjed successively by white, by black, and again by white..." 1 4. In every battle, concentrate an absolutely superior force (two, three, four, and sometimes even five or six times the enemy's strength), encircle the enemy forces completely, strive to wipe them out thoroughly and do not let any escape from the net .... Strive to avoid battles of attrition in which we lose more than we gain or only break even. In this way, although inferior as a whole (in...numbers), we shall be absolutely superior in every part and every specific campaign... As time goes on, we shall become superior as a whole and eventually wipe out all the enemy. This is possibly the key dictum.. .and certainly the one to which Western analysts are most often attracted as occupying a pivotal position in communist Chinese strategy... Unfortunately most analysts fail to focus on "encirclement" rather than upon "concentration" or "annihilation."... From a wei-chi viewpoint encirclement is the essence of the complexities of principle 4. Seen in this light, concentration is merely the necessary precondition for encirclement; annihilation, its logical culmination. In wei-chi, as in war, encirclement demands superiority... and the margins of superior ty 3 ?ostulated in 4 are on the order of their wei-chi counterparts.
Give full play to our style of fighting--courage in battle, no fear of sacrifice, no fear of fatigue, and continuous fighting (that is, fighting successive battles in a short time without rest). 0 ...Periods of rest.. .should not in general be very long, and the enemy should so far as possible be permitted no breathing space.
[One] parallel [to wei-chi] is important enough to be men-$tioned here: the concept of the continuous pressing of the advantage. This principle, it should be noted, runs counter to that famous law of Clausewitz which postulates the diminishing force of the attack .... In good wei-chi...capture of one group makes vulnerable a second, whose killing exposes a third, and so on in a cascade effect familiar the servo-mechanism engineer.... [The] Chinese Communists during the civil war both sought to exploit and realized results from this principle of constant assault in strategic, operational and tactical maneuvers. In particular,...surrender by a given Nationalist commander or his army, combined with constant physical and psychological pressure, resulted in add iional capitulation of a series of other Nationalist forces. 
'
33
An interesting article by Francis J. Romance 3 4 suggests that the recent expansion of the Chinese Navy is primarily a response to the perceived threat of a Soviet thrust to encircle China. One should note, however, that Swanson 35 also discusses the expansion of the Chinese Navy but does not see this as an imporant motivating factor for the expansion.
It is interesting to see how many of the themes which have been discussed above were present during the Nationalist-Communist civil war.
First, it was a civil war, just as most of the ancient wars were civil wars. Second, the emphasis here too was not specifically on brute military conquest. Strong points were avoided, at least initially, and the Nationalists were attacked psychologically at least as much as militarily.
Being, at least initially, the inferior force, the Communists used strategem to redress their disadvantage. Every effort was made to present multiple threats so that the Nationalist forces would have to be divided, thus allowing the Communists to obtain tactical superiority in battles of their choosing. The importance of encirclement, both tactical and strategic, has just been discussed.
Another basic theme which cannot be overemphasized, especially with regard to the Communist Chinese, and which is clearly evident in the civil war, is the emphasis on the infantry. The PLA then, and to a lesser but still major degree now, is an army of Chinese peasants. Just as Sun Tzu, knowing the Chinese of his day, suggested they should be given an escape hatch rather than be forced to fight to the death, Mao knew the martial qualities of the Chinese peasant of his day--capable of bravery and stoicir' in the face of pain and death provided he could be sufficiently motivated.
Injunctions to fight continuously sound nice, but are worthless if the army is unwilling or unable to do so. Thus, both Mao and Clausewitz may be correct--each had a different soldier in mind.
Let us now examine what light the analysis given to this point can shed on present and future Chinese military strategy. In particular, of what relevance is this historical analysis to Chinese nuclear strategy.
As is well-known, the official Chinese policy is one of "no-firstuse." This is not merely a tactical move made because its potential nuclear opponents have far more nuclear weapons. They truly do not have a good first use of nuclear weapons.
As was noted above, there is not much stress in Chinese strategy on attacks on economic targets, for which nuclear weapons have considerable utility. The Chinese stress is on attacking the enemy's forces in being, and ICBMs are not of great value in this role. Smaller tactical nuclear weapons, of course, would have utility, but China does not have such weapons.
Mloreover, the Chinese style is one more of movement, attack by stealth, of hitting weak points in the hope of undermining strong points, and it is not clear how much value even tactical nuclear weapons would have in such a form of warfare.
Another reason why nuclear weapons may lack appeal to the Chinese is that if nuclear weapons w -r to be used by or against China it would most likely be on Chinese soil. The Chinese basically have a defensive orientation. From the Chinese perspective the main task is to defend against outside threats, not to acquire more and more territory.
In an article written in 1958, before China had even acquired nuclear weapons, then Commnander of the Air Force Lin Ya-lou made the following revealing statement which clearly shows a Chinese perception of nuclear weapons as being useful for defensive purposes. "China's... scientists will certainly be able to make... atomic bombs In the not distant future.... By that time ... we can -use atomic weapons and guided missiles... in coping with our enemies who dare to invade our country." 6 (Emphasis added.) (Lin Ya-lou, of course, had the United States in mind when discussing anonymous "enemies." Now it is the Soviet Union who is the most likely aggressor against China.) That the statement was made in the Liberation Army Newspaper, and thus meant primarily for domestic consumption, would seem to indicate this is an honest expression of the Chinese view and not a public-relations statement meant to disguise China's true rationale for deploying nuclear weapons.
Despite its image during the 1950s and 1960s as an aggressive power seeking to promote worldwide revolution, most of China's conflicts have been defensive in nature. China has had to fend off external attacks and destroy internal rebellions far more than it has attempted to expand the area under its control. (Given China's huge geographic area, this is not exactly surprising.)
There are, to be sure, times such as Korea when Chinese troops entered a fray far from home. For the most part, however, even here such acticns were considered by the Chinese to be defensive. China had indicated well before it intervened in Korea that it considered American trooops near the Yalu an unacceptable threat to its security.
The recent skirmish into Vietnam, and earlier into India, were not taken with a goal of capturing more territory, but rather to "teach" each country a lesson. Such actions seem part of the Chinese method of deterring undesirable actions by other nations. According to Whiting, who has made a major study of the Chinese style of deterrence, one major tenet is "the best deterrence is belligerence. To be credible, move military force; words do not suffice." 
3 7
were not attempts at conquest but merely over-the-border chastisements to reestablish the proper order in tributary capitals."3 
8
Given the disparity between the Chinese and Soviet nuclear arsenals, prudence alone, if not the other factors discussed above, would dictate that China not use nuclear weapons unless and until the Soviets do so first.
Nuclear weapons do have utility, however, for prestige and deterrence.
Having a vision of itself as a "Great Power," China cannot remain without nuclear weapons when "lesser" powers such as England and France possess them. Given its disputes with the Soviet Union, it must deploy some limited number of nuclear weapons so that it cannot be totally vulnerable to "nuclear blackmail ."
That the Chinese will deploy nuclear weapons in large numbers, however, is far from certain. Fairbanks has made what would appear to be an apt analogy. ... Nuclear power i.e., weapons now has the symbolic and potentially strategic value that the nascent Chinese navy once had. After all, the gunboat appeared on the China coast in 1840 as the decisive weapon of its day. Japan later responded to the Western impact by building a battle fleet, and China began to do the same. Missiles are today's rough equivalent, at least in prestige and military theorizing. The real question here is whether modern China, having failed to develop naval power when it counted, will now succeed in creating the diversified armaments of a first-class Qgwer of the late twentieth century, nuclear missiles and all.
Perhaps the clearest explanation of the lack of utility of nuclear weapons in Chinese eyes was given by Ross Terrill, who interviewed a highly placed Chinese policy-maker referred to merely as Mr. Y.
Oo nuclear weapons increase a country's bargaining power? "Only if the other country fears them," he Mr. Y replied. "If the other country does not fear them, then nuclear weapons are not a deterrence, much less a decisive force in international struggles." Mr. Y was making an assumption that seemed basic to his view of the United States--that the United States almost certainly would not use nuclear weapons. Here was one more sign of its flagging will. He is less confident that the Russians lack the will to use nuclear weapons. But Mr. Y did not merely mean that nuclear weapons are without power because they are unlikely to be used. He meant that they are literally without power to change the world! For a country cannot be "captured"--occupied and ruled--by the use of nuclear weapons; only physically laid waste. And the importance of nuclear weapons short of their actual use--th|, deterant effect--exists only if the potential victim fea% them.
(Emphasis in original.) In order for this posture to have some deterrent value China would have to have some ability to strike at long-range targets. Still, one would doubt that China would deploy a substantial American-style assureddestruction nuclear force.
(One should note that the American focus on "assured destruction" is another facet of the game-theoretic approach to warfare which is, as we have seen, alien to the Chinese approach.)
One final issue remains to be discussed before closing. Given the current upheaval in Chinese domestic politics, which for all practical purposes has meant at least a partial rejection of Mao's political views, is it not possible thaL China also will renounce Mao's military views as well, and wage war in a manner similar to any other "modern" nation?
No one can guarantee that the Chinese military will always remain true to Mao. Clearly, the current government is undertaking to modernize many aspects of Chinese society, including the military, to a far greater degree than Chairman Mao would have deemed desirable.
However, many of the traits discussed above stemmned from the time well before Mao, and are likely to remain relevent even if Mao were totally to be toppled from his pedestal. Given the vast size of the Chinese armed forces, the relative weakness of the Chinese economy, and the many other demands on China's quite limited resources, largescale military modernization is not likely to take place over night.
Historically, there have been recurrent spasms of "modernization," but most have flared and sputtered out. Any military defeat in the wake of such a modernization is likely to be interpreted not as proof of the need for more improvements, but rather as punishment for China straying from its traditional path.
What may be true is that the analysis given above would be far more relevant to Chinese involvement in a civil war, or a war against an invader, than a war on foreign soil. However, the most likely scenario for a substantial military conflict involving China is a Soviet invasion of China, where China would be on the defensive.
If China were to go to war again one should expect to see many of the traits discussed above appearing yet again; an emphasis on strategem over brute force, attacks on purely military as opposed to economic targets, a willingness to end the conflict once its essential political goals had been met, and a reliance on men over machinery. One hopes, of course, that neither China nor any of the other major powers will ever again engage in substantial military conflict, But just as history can teach us how a nation may fight its wars, it also teaches us how messianic is the hope that there will be an end to war.
explains the leadership's monotonous determination not to let the Great Patriotic War die. After all, whatever the regime's faults may be, it did save the country from Hitler.
explains the leadership's monotonous determination not to let the Great Patriotic War die. After all, whatever the regime's faults may be, it did save the country from Hitler.
See J.W. Russel and E.N. York, Expedient Industrial Protection Against Nuclear Attack (Seattle, Washington: The Boeing Company, March 1980), p.56 20. See Strategiia imperializma i bor'ba SSSR za mir i razoruzhenie [The Strategy of Imperialism and the U.S.S.R.'s Struggle for Peace and Disarmament], ed. by V.1a. Aboltin (Moscow, 1974), p. 12 . 21. V. Tolubko, Nedelin: "ervyi glavkom strategicheskikh [Nedelin: First Chief ,)mnander of Strategic Rockets] (Moscow, 1979), p.181. 22. M. Gallai, "Ispytano v nebe" [Tested in the Sky], Novyi mir, No.4, 1963, p.51. 23. Arthur Alexander, R & D in Soviet Aviation, R-589-PR (Santa Monica, Cal.: RAND, 1970), pp.21-22. 24. Edward Luttwak, Strategic Power: Military Capability and Political Utility, Washington Paper No.38 (Beverly Hills, Cal.: Sage, 1976), p. 2 2 . 25. M. Gallai, "ispytano v nebe: Okochanie" [Tested in the Sky: Conclusion], Novyi mir, No.5, 1963, p. 86 . 26. M. Gallai, Tret'e izmerenie [Third Dimension], (Moscow, 1973), P.33. 29 APPENDIX 8 THE FRENCH WAY OF WAR David S. Yost
See J.W. Russel and E.N. York, Expedient Industrial Protection Against Nuclear Attack (Seattle, Washington: The Boeing Company, March 1980), p.56 20. See Strategiia imperializma i bor'ba SSSR za mir i razoruzhenie [The Strategy of Imperialism and the U.S.S.R.'s Struggle for Peace and Disarmament], ed. by V.1a. Aboltin (Moscow, 1974), p. 12 . 21. V. Tolubko, Nedelin: "ervyi glavkom strategicheskikh [Nedelin: First Chief ,)mnander of Strategic Rockets] (Moscow, 1979), p.181. 22. M. Gallai, "Ispytano v nebe" [Tested in the Sky], Novyi mir, No.4, 1963, p.51. 23. Arthur Alexander, R & D in Soviet Aviation, R-589-PR (Santa Monica, Cal.: RAND, 1970), pp.21-22. 24. Edward Luttwak, Strategic Power: Military Capability and Political Utility, Washington Paper No.38 (Beverly Hills, Cal.: Sage, 1976), p. 2 2 . 25. M. Gallai, "ispytano v nebe: Okochanie" [Tested in the Sky: Conclusion], Novyi mir, No.5, 1963, p. 86 . 26. M. Gallai, Tret'e izmerenie [Third Dimension], (Moscow, 1973), P.33. 29 APPENDIX 8 THE FRENCH WAY OF WAR David S. Yost
Middle Ages to the present France's military policy was generally altered in conformity with prevailing trends in Europe and the West.
Middle Ages to the present France's military policy was generally altered in conformity with prevailing trends in Europe and the West.
is, so. To illustrate these points, I have started with an analysis of the recent British decision to purchase the Trident I SLBM system from the U.S. as a concrete example of the British strategic style, especially its reluctance to explain what they are thinking or doing. The historical evolution of this style is then traced up until World War 1I, and subsequently. Although the historical Section 11 may be omitted at first reading, it justifies what may otherwise seem curious, even questionable, statements about British strategic thinking in Sections I and 1ll.
is, so. To illustrate these points, I have started with an analysis of the recent British decision to purchase the Trident I SLBM system from the U.S. as a concrete example of the British strategic style, especially its reluctance to explain what they are thinking or doing. The historical evolution of this style is then traced up until World War 1I, and subsequently. Although the historical Section 11 may be omitted at first reading, it justifies what may otherwise seem curious, even questionable, statements about British strategic thinking in Sections I and 1ll.
1. Attack dispersed, isolated 2 gnemy first; attack concentrated, strong enemy forces later.
sailing navy into a Dreadnought Navy, and completely redeployed it, strategically, against Imperial Germany. British naval thinkers pioneered the concept of "command of the sea," popularized by Mahan, and replaced the traditional closL blockade--still practiced by the Japanese in the 1904-5 Russo-Japanese War--with distant blockade. They included naval officers
OP 06 Naval Sea Systems Cmd ATTN: OP 09 ATTN: SEA-406 ATTN: 
NOP 950
Force Level Plns Div
NOP 953
NOP 954
Strike & Amphib Warf Div Naval Submarine School ATTN: NOP OOX, Navy Lg Rg NOP 981, U/SEA/ST, War/Nuc En Dev ATTN: Commander DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CONTRACTORS (Continued) DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CONTRACTORS
The "Tso-chuan" or "Tradition of Tso," written somewhere between the late fourth and early second century B.C., is an account of Chinese political history, which most definitely includes military conflicts, of the period from roughly 700-400 B.C. Thus, we have a recorded span of over 2,500 years where Chinese forces have engaged in battle.
The purpose of this paper is to provide some insight into what form of Chinese "style" of warfare may be discerned over the span of the centuries.
Before beginning this analysis some caveats must be stated. The "style" peculiar to some particular culture will not always manifest itself when the country in question engages in war. What we are concerned with are perspectives, outlooks, ways of formulating strategies, methods of attack, etc., which occurred often in the national history and should, presumab'v, occur again if the nation were to go to war in the future.
However, all such perspectives, outlooks, etc., must be affected by the exigencies of the particular conflict at hand. One cannot expect these cultural peculiarities always to occur regardless of the nature of the conflict.
Thus, a Maoist preference to "lure the enemy in deep" might make sense in planning the initial massive Chinese attack on U.N. forces near the Yalu. In continuing the offensive past the 38th parallel in an attempt to conquer all of South Korea, however, this was not a very useful dictum. Also, one should not expect the various cultural idiosyncracies to be unique only to one culture. If a nation has a tendency to stress the 7. The worst policy is to attack cities. Attack cities only when there is no alternative. 8. Thus, those skilled in war subdue the enemy's army without battle. They capture his cities without assaulting 8 them and overthrow his state without protracted operations.
The difference between Western warfare and that advocated by Sun Tzu was perhaps best described by C.W.C. Oman: "For centuries war was studied as an art in the East, while in the West it remained largely a matter of hard fighting."1 9
A comparison of two stories of ancient military battles, one in the West, the other in the East, may also help to illustrate the difference in approach. In the Strategma of Frontinus the following story is told.
Iphicrates, when campaigning in Thrace, having on one occasion pitched his camp on low ground, discovered through scouts that the neighboring hill was held by the enemy, and that from it came down a single road which might be utilized to overwhelm him and his men. Accordingly he left a few men in camp at night, and conmanded them to light a number of fires. Then leading forth his troops and ranging them along the sides of the road just mentioned, he suffered the barbarians to pass by. When in this way the disadvantage of terrain from which he imself had suffered had been turned against them, with part of his army he overwhelmed th?6r rear, while with the other part he captured their camp.
Sun Tzu relates a similar tale regarding a battle (in 341 B.C.)
between the forces of the Ch'i State, led by Sun Pin and T'ien Chi and the Wei State, led by P'ang Chuan.
Sun Pin spoke to T'ien Chi and said: "The troops of the three Chin States are usually fierce, brave and contemptuous of Ch'i. They consider Ch'i to be cowardly. The skillful fighter will take this circumstance into account and plan his strategy to profit from it. According to "The Art of War," if the army presses on to gain advantage from a distance of one hundred li, the commander of the van will be captured; if from fifty Ii, only half the troops will reach the critical point." He then ordered that when the Ch'i army crossed the borders and entered Wei, they should on the first night build one hundred strategem with Western ideas on the same subject. Although It is impossible to do full justice to the article in the comparatively limited space available here, the following excerpt should provide some idea of Boorman's approach.
Current strategic thinking in the United States places comparatively little stress on strategem or deception practices.
Where it is most highly developed is significantly in the area of electronic warfare, which is minimally concerned with the long-run influencing of the behavior and intentions of an enemy operational commmander. By contrast, American thinking is extremely sophisticated in other areas of military policy, such as logistics planning (well symbolized by the mammoth Annual Department of Defense Bibliography of Logistics Studies). American military planning tends to be overwhelmingly based on evaluation of enemy capabiities--of his physical and logistical situation.
...Capabilities orientation of American strategy is...well symbolized by the following quotation from a basic doctrinal source. "The U.S. Defense Establishment must be fully capable of attaining national objectives regardless of any course of action the enemy can employ. (Emphasis in original.) ("Fundamental Army Beliefs," United States Army and National Security ROTCM 145-45, 1962) .... In modern warfare, the argument runs, the risks...and the stakes are too high for operational planning to rest on the assumption that enemy intentions can be effectively manipulated.
...The role of strategem in classical Chinese strategic theory is, however, unambiguous... [Successful] deception is held to be a mark of high strategic merit. Moreover,...,exchanges of strategem and counterstrategem are expected to be the normal currency of conflict interaction.
...This concept of strategy through strategem goes beyond attempts merely to outwit the opponent by conveying false intentions; it involves the more sophisticated task of directly manipulating his perception of reality, and in particular his perception of the values to him of various outcomes of the conflict. The aim, most particularly, is to manipulate his concept of his own objectives, and his own "face" to induce him--for whatever reason--to assign great psychological utility to courses of action favorable to one's own interest. "If we lose the field," said Shakespeare's Lartius, "we cannot keep the town." If one can cause the enemy's force to be inextricably bound up with holding the town first and foremost, one may thereby induce him to neglect the field. Control of the countryside will lead to encirclement of the city, and the city and the 