# ID: f11ca1ba4edc4a208f9975967952a7a1
# Title: From Mao Toward Modernity: The Increasing Westernization of the People's Liberation Army
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
While the People's Republic of China (PRC) continues to grow as a great power within the Asian region, its military continues to seek and develop commensurate military capabilities. People's Liberation Army (PLA) ambitions to modernize provoke a number of questions regarding underlying PLA rationale and motivation. Specifically, what has driven the PLA to choose to become less of a rural based guerilla force primarily focused on defense, and more of a modern, and Western-like standing military with a credible offensive capability? Further, what events, in particular, have shaped, and continue to shape PLA thinking in this regard? This monograph argues that three events in particular-the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese conflict, the 1991 United States (U.S.) Gulf War, and U.S. and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) military action against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1999-have contributed to a consistent PLA movement toward greater Westernization in its approaches toward and preparations for war. The abysmal performance of the PLA during the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese conflict marked the nadir for the Maoist operating concept of people's war, and served as a point of departure toward greater military Westernization. Additionally, both the 1991 Gulf War, and U.S. and NATO military action in Kosovo served to reinforce the trend in modern Chinese military development toward greater Westernization.
As a result, the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA), which began in 1927 as the Chinese Red Army of Workers, has moved well past its rural based revolutionary guerilla force roots, and more toward what is a comparatively more modern military force.
Today, the PLA, which now includes both a People's Liberation Army Air Force and a
People's Liberation Army Navy, continues to face increasing pressure to modernize its force capabilities. 
2
3
4
1 Great power, as used here, describes a state with a level of diplomatic, economic, social, and military power that affords it significant influence over other states who must consider it when undertaking any action or policy within a given region. See Paul Gordon Lauren, Gordon  Alexander Craig, and Alexander L. George, Force and Statecraft: Diplomatic Challenges of Our  Time, 4th ed. (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2007), 8, 19-21, 34, 40, 181.   2 Roy Kamphausen, David Lai, and Andrew Scobell, The PLA at Home and Abroad: Assessing the Operational Capabilities of China's Military, eds. Roy Kamphausen, David Lai, and Andrew Scobell (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, 2010), 9, 12.
3 For example, the PRC has been a major participant in both United Nations humanitarian relief efforts (e.g., Haiti in 2010), and continues to participate in multilateral anti-piracy missions off the coast of eastern Africa.
If so, then it is this ambition to modernize, and perhaps move away from its more foundational operating concepts, that provokes a number of questions regarding underlying PLA rationale and motivation. Specifically, what has driven the PLA to choose to become less a rural based guerilla force primarily focused on defense, and more of a modern, and Western-like standing military with a credible offensive capability? Further, what events, in particular, have shaped, and continue to shape PLA thinking in this regard?
This monograph offers answers to these particular questions. Specifically, it argues that three events in particular-the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese conflict, the 1991 United States (U.S.) Gulf War, and U.S. and NATO military actions against the Republic of Yugoslavia in 1999-have significantly shaped PLA thinking, and have been the primary and most proximate impetus behind PLA movement toward greater Westernization.
The abysmal performance of the PLA during the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese conflict marked the nadir for the Maoist operating concept of people's war, and served as a point of departure toward greater military Westernization. Additionally, the 1991 Gulf War, and the 1999 U.S.-led NATO military intervention to prevent Serbian aggression against Muslims and Albanian Kosovars both served to reinforce this trend. Furthermore, these cases relate to Chinese Communist Party (CCP) concerns over its ability to defend and protect PRC sovereignty, given China's history with direct Western impositions against that sovereignty in the past.
During the 19th century both Britain and France, along with other Western states, were able to impose mercantilist designs upon a reluctant pre-modern Chinese Qing state primarily due to the latter's military weakness. 
5
particularly important historical point that provides much-needed context for understanding PRC modernization in general, and PLA military modernization in particular.
As a result, China's political leaders remain well aware that the PRC must continue efforts to develop the sufficient military means to protect its sovereign interests in order to rectify what many consider to be China's century of humiliation. 
6
7
The term Westernization is central to the discussion here, and means to convey the process of PLA military modernization efforts or actions that are similar to, or influenced by the military characteristics, cultures, and systems endemic to the armies of Europe or North America (i.e., the U.S.).
When considering the evolutionary development of the PLA, it is prudent to consult both Western and non-Western perspectives. Limiting an inquiry such as this to just one perspective, either Chinese or non-Chinese, would certainly be incomplete. More importantly, a less than comprehensive approach would run the risk of mirror imaging (i.e., analyzing the PLA and understanding it solely through Western eyes).
Therefore, a number of Western and Chinese official and unofficial sources have been useful in determining both the characteristics of a Western style of warfare, as well as the nature and motivations behind the evolution of the PLA. Beginning with the former, there are a number of sources that are particularly helpful in pinning down what constitutes a traditional and distinctly Western war fighting archetype.
Victor David Hanson's The Western Way of War: Infantry Battle in Classical Greece provides an historical perspective from which to view warfare's development in the West through the ages. As the title suggests, Hanson sees these Western war fighting characteristics as originating in classical Greece, and that this approach has traditionally sought an "unequivocal and instantaneous result" gained primarily by "firepower and heavy defensive armament." 
9
10
"11
13
The Cambridge Illustrated History of Warfare: The Triumph of the West edited by Geoffrey Parker is an authoritative work that provides five very useful and simple characteristics that help define what can be considered a Western style and approach to waging war across 
9
(New York, NY: Knopf, 1989), xii, 9. 10 Ibid., xii. 11 Ibid., 9, 13.
13 Ibid., 15. time. 
14
15
Secondly, from the ancient Greeks to the "rise of missile weapons," a Western way of warfare "has always exalted discipline [through professional training] . . . as the primary instrument that turns bands of men fighting as individuals into soldiers fighting as part of organized units," whether on land or sea. 
16
15
16
18
19
Taken together, Hanson, Parker, and the relatively recent notion of casualty aversion, all support a particular conception of a Western military approach to warfare. Key characteristics include a continuous adaptation of military methods and approaches, a preference for high quality, professional, and technologically superior hard power military means, the necessary allocation of sufficient fiscal resources in order to acquire these means and methods, and a goal of 
18 Parker,
5. 19
20
21 Michael P. Noonan, "The Illusion of Bloodless Victories," Orbis 41, no. 2 (1997): 308-320.
utterly destroying a sometimes numerically superior adversary's will to resist with minimal cost in terms of manpower lost. Most importantly, these characteristics, along with the more recent ideas of casualty aversion, can serve as clear criteria that can be applied to relevant cases involving PLA actions, observations, and attitudes in order to illustrate increasing Westernization.
When considering the Sino-Vietnamese case and its relationship as a starting point for greater PLA Westernization, Gerald Segal's Defending China provides an excellent account of that conflict, along with other important events that have shaped China's security and foreign policies. Segal includes clear descriptions of PRC and PLA goals and objectives tied to Chinese military actions against a relatively more proficient Vietnamese military in 1979, and how the PLA was ultimately unable to achieve these because of its low level of military effectiveness. Specifically, and quite clearly, Segal asserts ". . . the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese war was China's most important foreign policy failure since 1949, and [that] the main reason for this failure was the poor performance of the PLA." 
22
23
25
After the Gulf War had ended, both PRC and PLA officials viewed the overwhelming American military success as a threat to its one China policy regarding Taiwan, and feared how a similar U.S. led coalition could form to intervene in a dispute over Taiwanese independence with the U.S. Many PLA officials believed that if this were to occur, the PLA would not be able to protect PRC sovereign interests against a more Westernized military force.
As a result of witnessing the U.S. military's capabilities in action, Shambaugh states "the PLA's goal [became to] develop a multifaceted, technologically modern force structure capable 
24
27
28
29
30
26
From time to time, certain prominent China watchers, such as James Mulvenon, Andrew N.D. Yang, and again, David Finkelstein, have written a number of reports on China's military modernization for prominent think tanks such as the RAND and Center for Naval Analysis corporations. 
31
For example, in their report Seeking Truth from Facts: A Retrospective on Chinese Military Studies in the Post-Mao Era, Mulvenon and Yang point out that, after the 1991 Persian Gulf War, the PLA experienced an unpleasant and clear realization that much of their equipment, weapons, personnel, organization, and training were sorely "antiquated" in relation to the U.S. military. This stark observation acutely elevated these matters to "a new and much higher level of significance" within the PRC government. 
32
Understanding the impact that Mao Zedong's own writings had on military matters is key to understanding early PLA operating concepts that have shaped Chinese approaches to war fighting throughout much of China's modern era. 
33
34
35
36
37
Zedong,
53. 38
Kuomintang nationalists, the Japanese, the Soviet Union, and the U.S. 
39
41
Sources like these help reveal that during the latter part of the 20th century, and after Mao's death in 1976, China's leaders assessed that a major conflict between the Soviet Union and the U.S. was unlikely, and that China's decision to open its economy to foreign trade and investment was sound because of this now improved security environment. This attitude, along 
39
40
41 Liu Huaqing, "Unswervingly Advance Along the Road of Building a Modern Army with Chinese Characteristics," Jiefangjun Bao (18 August 1993): 15-22, Foreign Broadcast Information Service.
with the recognition that the PLA performed poorly during the Sino-Vietnamese conflict, motivated CCP officials like Deng to claim that China could now "concentrate without fear on the drive for [military] modernization," and that the PLA was now required to make every effort to "absorb as many useful things as possible from other countries." 42 Official party statements like these support the claim made here that military modernization along Western-lines became official policy in the wake of the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese conflict.
In the aftermath of the 1991 Gulf War, PLA white papers placed even greater emphasis on the urgent need to increase military modernization efforts to effectively counter military forces that were seen as vastly superior. In a 1998 white paper, the PLA stated, "military forces still occupy an important position in state security," and recognized that the "military advantages" of other countries (i.e., the U.S.) "pose military threats" to PRC security. 
43
44
42
45
As shown in the above review of relevant literature, this monograph consults both Western and Chinese primary and secondary sources that provide historical evidence and expert analysis to support those arguments made here. Additionaly, this monograph relies primarily on the qualitative analysis of a particular set of historic cases.
To be sure, any exploration of PLA efforts to modernize throughout its history would benefit from the inclusion of a much larger and more comprehensive number of cases that would extend from its early 20th century origins up to the present day. However, such an all-inclusive approach is beyond the scope of this monograph. That said, three significant cases have been chosen in order to provide a better and more contemporary understanding of PLA Westernization efforts.
The first case considered is China's punitive cross-border conflict with Vietnam in 1979, and the after effects of that event. The second case chosen will examine PLA actions and initiatives that followed the U.S. military's Operation Desert Storm from 1990-1991 in order to illustrate increased efforts by the PLA to westernize in the wake of that conflict. The third and final historic case will likewise encompass what have been the PLA's views, opinions, and resultant actions that emerged both during and after the U.S.-led NATO air campaign against Serbian President Slobodan Milošević and the Republic of Yugoslavia in order to prevent the ethnic cleansing of Muslim and Albanian Kosovars.
Narrowing the cases to those that take place in the latter 20th century provides a more proximate evolving view of PLA thinking on contemporary warfare. Furthermore, events that have affected the PLA after the death of Mao Zedong in September 1976 are of particular importance due to the former leader's great hold and sway over Chinese military thought and development. After Mao's departure, it appears that senior PLA and CCP officials were better able to move away from dogmatic Maoist thought in general, and approaches to warfare in particular.
Additionally, as mentioned previously, the cases chosen here relate closely to more contemporary CCP concerns over its ability to defend and protect PRC sovereignty, especially in light of China's history with direct Western impositions against that sovereignty in the past. This makes the selection of cases such as the 1991 Gulf War and the 1999 Kosovo intervention appropriate given their similarity to core CCP sovereignty issues such as concerns over de facto Taiwanese independence, and international concerns over human rights issues tied to Muslim unrest in China's Xinjiang province.
To test these cases, the author chose five clear and measurable criteria that help describe a Western military approach to war fighting. The first is an emphasis on and reliance upon superior technology and force quality, as opposed to simply sheer mass and force size only.
Manifestation of this characteristic is measured in the form of official pronouncements that are present, and associated actions that support such emphasis, such as the actual acquisition of more modern military means by the PLA.
The second characteristic is a focus on military discipline and modern training, as opposed to other non-military activities (e.g., political education). This is measured by testing for the presence of modern training events that have actually been conducted and their frequency during the relevant periods, as well as for institutional initiatives to increase the quality and education of PLA members to increase military professionalism and effectiveness.
The third characteristic of a Western way of war fighting that will be applied to the chosen cases is a demonstrated ability to change and adapt when presented with a changing security environment, as opposed to dogmatic adherence to military approaches and methods that no longer apply or lack utility. Much like the first characteristic, this is measured by testing for the presence and importance of official exhortations and pronouncements that stress the need to improve PLA modernization of its personnel and systems, and the presence of unofficial writings by current and former PLA officials and scholars that equally echo the need to modernize.
The fourth characteristic is the actual willingness to finance military development through fiscal allocation. This is measured by testing for any positive or negative change in defense spending. If present, a marked increase in fiscal spending that supports PLA modernization efforts will indicate the presence of this characteristic in the chosen cases. Any decrease, or little to no measured movement will fail to provide evidence regarding the presence of this characteristic.
The fifth and final characteristic is casualty aversion. Measuring this particular characteristic is difficult given the fact that the PLA has not been involved in actual combat since the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese conflict. However, much like with the first and third characteristics, the presence of official and unofficial exhortations, pronouncements, and doctrinal writings that stress the need to avoid incurring excessive casualties through the employment of modern systems will indicate the presence of this particular characteristic. Source: Created by author.
By narrowing the selection of historic cases to those that occurred during the latter 20th century, this monograph seeks to provide a more proximate rationale behind PLA thinking on contemporary warfare. The first case considered examines PLA operations conducted against Vietnam in 1979, and how this particular event served to highlight PLA shortcomings, which spurred Westernization efforts. The second and third cases will examine PLA actions and initiatives that followed the U.S. military's Operation Desert Storm from 1990-1991, and NATO's Operation Allied Force against the Republic of Yugoslavia in 1999 to illustrate increased efforts by the PLA to Westernize in the wake of these modern conflicts.
The abysmal performance of the PLA during the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese conflict marked its nadir in modern times, and served as an impetus for increased military Westernization efforts.
What resulted was a growing acceptance and realization by the PLA that it had to seek more Western approaches to war fighting to be effective in future conflicts.
By 1979, China believed that its "struggle against Soviet power in general and Vietnamese influence in particular was not going well," given Hanoi's increased influence in Cambodia, and Moscow's continued support for Hanoi. 
46
In order to achieve this strategic goal, PRC leaders decided that any military approach undertaken by the PLA would need to be short and decisive. With a limited and quick offensive operation against Vietnam, China hoped to "teach lessons to both Vietnam and the Soviet Union" by conducting "a razor-sharp" limited military action to "stem the tide of Soviet influence in East Asia" before the Soviet Union was able to increase support or mobilize against China. 
47
46
47
Vietnamese forces directly across the Sino-Vietnamese border before drawing in increased Soviet support. 
48
Nevertheless, the PLA "had little room for error in a strategy highly dependent on the [relatively] surgical use of the military instrument." 49 However, "when the PLA [ultimately]   failed to strike an impressive blow, [the overall] Chinese strategy collapsed." 
50
By 1979, China's military power had decreased in quality and effectiveness compared to only a decade prior when it had been called into action against India in 1962. 
51
52
53
48
49
50
51
58
55
56
57
58
59
PLA forces conducted human wave attacks in both mountainous and built-up areas that led to high casualties. Shortly after the attack was launched on 17 February, "the PLA quickly ground to a snail's pace." 
60
61
63
In fact, it seems that the poor PLA performance, along with its limited objectives, prevented any perceived need by Moscow to increase its support to Hanoi. Instead, "China not only failed to teach the Soviet Union and the world a lesson about Soviet power," but also revealed its military shortcomings. The PRC "lost a great deal in the 1979 [Sino-Vietnamese]   war, whether the balance sheet is measured in lives or political cost. But perhaps the greatest loss was in a more intangible product-China's reputation." 64 60 Segal, 219. 
61
62
63
64
Most critically, the conflict also sparked the revelation within the PLA that it was currently unable to decisively secure PRC sovereign interests. Furthermore, the PLA acknowledged, "the war had 'lent a big impetus to the modernization of our army'." 
65
67
Nevertheless, after the Sino-Vietnamese conflict, the PLA realized its approach to war fighting had not worked, and that change was necessary in order to prepare for "a wide set of contingencies ranging from border conflicts to potentially high-intensity limited war."
68
On 12 March 1980, Deng Xiaoping, at a CMC meeting, openly questioned "the excessively defensive posture of fighting adversaries deep inside China in a war of attrition." 
70
71
72
73
70
71
72
73
74
75
In a speech given to the CMC in June 1985, Deng stated:
The four modernizations include the modernization of defense. Without that modernization there would be only three [agriculture, industry, and science and technology]. But the four modernizations should be achieved in order of priority. Only when we have a good economic foundation will it be possible for us to modernize the army's equipment. 
76
77
79
80
As the PLA moved into the 1980s, it began to develop a military strategy that framed local, limited war as a specific type of conflict to "assert one's own standpoint and will through limited military action." 81 Within this strategy, a more modern PLA operating doctrine soon developed that emphasized "rapid response by forces maintained at a high level of readiness," along with "increased emphasis on mobility, lethality, intelligence, and command and control coordinating swiftly, moving joint service operations to quickly terminate war." 82 By 1985, the PLA was preparing itself to fight and win local and limited wars primarily on China's vast periphery. As a result, the PLA moved further away from a purely defensive people's war approach it had clung onto, and began to "experiment with mobile, integrated 
79
80
81 Jiao Wu and Xiao Hui, "Modern Limited War Calls for Reform of Traditional Military Principles," Guofang Daxue Xuebao (November 1987), quoted in 
Mulvenon and Yang,
98. 82
warfare" along Western lines. 
83
Later in the decade, the PLA began to conduct training exercises in order to improve its interoperability between its different branches. These exercises focused on specific regions and "involved air, ground, naval, and special operations units," but suffered from a "lack of coordination" between the participating units. 
84
Additionally, the PLA now actively sought to acquire and domestically develop modern military hardware and systems. However, a lack of technological and scientific capacity severely limited PLA advances. While attempting to "selectively purchase key systems" from some European suppliers, it appears the PLA's self-reliant approach to development yielded little success largely because of its collective inability to replicate and reproduce those prototype systems it was able to acquire. 86 However, as with training, efforts like these do support the idea of an increasingly Westernized PLA, albeit in its nascent stages. 
83
84 Shambaugh,
Modernizing China's Military: Progress,
Problems,
and Prospects,
98. 85
86
Nevertheless, there is no evidence to suggest that the PRC significantly increased its fiscal allocation toward military modernization in the wake of the Sino-Vietnamese conflict.
Growth of China's gross domestic product (GDP) throughout the 1980s averaged nine percent, and the PRC spent just two percent of its GDP annually on defense. 
87
88
89
90
87 Shambaugh,
Modernizing China's Military: Progress,
Problems,
and Prospects,
191;
and
88
89
91
Additionally, the CMC authorized the PLA to "go into business . . . to offset and compensate for low levels of state allocations." 92 However, while these commercial activities helped somewhat in financing PLA activities, they also had the "very deleterious effect of soldiers spending time in unprofessional business activity (much of it illegal) instead of training." 
93
92 Shambaugh,
Modernizing China's Military: Progress,
Problems,
and Prospects,
184. 93
more modernized military threat, such as the U.S. in a dispute over Taiwan. As a result, official CCP and PLA pronouncements and actions in the wake of the Sino-Vietnamese conflict increasingly called for and directed the gradual acquisition of more modern military equipment and methods in order to counter military weakness. A purely defensive Maoist people's war approach was out, and a more active defense, in the form of "people's war under modern conditions" was in. 
94
Additionally, there appears to have been no discussion within the PLA of avoiding casualties in the wake of the Sino-Vietnamese conflict. However, much of the evidence discussed here does support the manifestation of a sincere willingness on the part of the PLA to change, adapt, and learn from this particular failure, all of which helped spur further movement by the PLA toward a more Western-like approach to war fighting.
The 1990-1991 Gulf War
The 1990-1991 U.S. led conflict against Saddam Hussein's Iraq significantly shaped PLA thinking. It also served as one of the primary and most proximate impetuses behind PLA movement toward greater Westernization.
After 1989, the PLA was excluded from Western military technologies and exchanges because of sanctions that had been imposed on the PRC by the U.S. and other European countries after the CCP crackdown against demonstrators in June 1989 in Tiananmen Square in Beijing. 
95
On 2 August 1990, the Iraqi military, consisting largely of Soviet equipped forces, invaded Kuwait, provoking the ire of many nations, especially the U.S. The actions of Saddam's
Iraq were "a clear threat to the great oilfields of eastern Arabia and virtually forced the West-led by the United States-to react." 96 Because of its diplomatic and military power, Washington, much to the consternation of Beijing, was able to assemble a military coalition with United Nations support. However, it was the rapidity and overwhelming effectiveness of the U.S.
response that most concerned the PLA.
Within 34 hours of U.S. President George Bush's order, "forty-eight F-15C air superiority fighters" arrived in Saudi Arabia, and a brigade from the 82nd Airborne Division was on the ground by 9 August. 
97
100
Nearly every aspect of the campaign reminded the PLA High Command of its deficiencies: electronic warfare; precision-guided munitions; stealth technology; precision bombing of military targets with minimized collateral damage; the sheer numbers of sorties flown, with minimal lass of attack aircraft and life; campaign coordination through airborne command and control systems; the deployment of attack aircraft from half a world away using in-flight refueling; the use of satellites in targeting and intelligence gathering; space-based early warning and surveillance; the use of command centers in the United states to coordinate Patriot anti-missile defenses in Saudi Arabia and Israel; the massive naval flotilla assembled in the Gulf; the airlift and rapid deployment capability; the maintenance of high-tempo operations; the ability of troops to exist in desert conditions; modern logistics; information warfare and the ability to 'blind' Iraqi intelligence and defenses; and so on. 
103
99
101
102
104
PLA symposia resulted in a wide range of PLA pronouncements and publications that keenly analyzed the 1990-1991 Gulf War, and supported increased modernization efforts. Within such forums, many prominent PLA theorists, such as Xiong Guangkai, viewed the U.S. military performance as a true revolution in military affairs. 
105
107
105
106
107
Department to oversee weapons and equipment develop and research, and link China's civilian factories with its defense industry. 
108
109
Furthermore, General Fu Quanyou, then commander of the Lanzhou military region and later director of the PLA General Logistics Department, recognized that the PLA must learn to fight jointly, by integrating all of its services, as the American military had done. In his view, a Western way of waging war was "five-dimensional," and involved "land, sea and air forces, as well as space and electronic technologies." 
110
108
109 Shambaugh,
Modernizing China's Military: Progress,
Problems,
and Prospects,
72. 110 Ibid.,
73. 111
112
After the Gulf War, China's defense industry began to focus its research and development efforts into acquiring advanced weaponry. Priority was on:
Mastering electronic warfare and electronic countermeasures (particularly air and naval countermeasures); improving ballistic missile production and precision-guided munitions (PGMs); building satellites, early warning and command systems, and advanced communication relay stations; investigating laser technologies; developing artificial intelligence and information warfare skills, improving avionics and mastering in-flight refueling; and developing anti-ballistic missile systems. 
113
115
113 Shambaugh,
Modernizing China's Military: Progress,
Problems,
and Prospects,
70. 114 Ibid.,
99. 115
116
grew from approximately $11.3 billion in 1991 to $39.5 billion in 1999-a 250 percent increase. 
117
These increases greatly assisted PLA efforts to, among other things, acquire and incorporate advance weapon systems across the land, naval, and air braches. Increased spending also led to improvements in mechanized vehicles, air defenses, aviation platforms, and the PLA's nuclear arsenal. However, the PLA also began to develop and test "a more robust space-based communications and intelligence architecture [that included] integrated satellites and precision guidance" of its weapon systems, along with other similar-improvements that sought to increase the capabilities of "joint operations across the domains of warfare." 
118
In the wake of the conflict, China's political and military leaders thoroughly studied and analyzed the conflict in order to learn how the PLA could improve the overall quality of its war fighting capabilities. These efforts included conferences and published papers that strongly advocated for a need to modernize the PLA along Western lines. 118 Wortzel, 23.  systems. Furthermore, the PLA sought to improve its professional training and discipline by placing a greater emphasis on combined and joint operations both between the different parts of the land forces, and between the land forces and the other branches of the PLA. Finally, much like the previous case, it appears there was no discussion of casualty avoidance within the PLA through this period.
As Table 
3
131
132
134
135
137
138
134
140
141
No enemy would 'let themselves so easily be involved in a protracted war with China,' though China might be defeated, because of the excessive cost of campaigning. Moreover, given overall Chinese strategy, 'it is also unallowable to have a protracted war. Under the conditions of a new history [(i.e., after Operation ALLIED FORCE)], the main task of the country is to carry out the economic construction . . . military actions must be quickly accomplished in scope and time. 
143
While the PLA continued to focus on modernizing its systems and improving its force quality and structure, it also realized that it required a vastly more effective and Westernized operational and strategic offensive capability to counter a potential attack similar to those conducted by the U.S. military in Kosovo. As a result, the PLA focused on developing a coercive air campaign strategy, much like the one that occurred in Kosovo, along with the development of ascent, anti-satellite anti-ship ballistic missile systems in order to both compel and deter potential enemies.
Furthermore, in the wake of Operation Allied Force, the PLA continued to significantly increase its allocation of fiscal resources toward its modernization efforts. This has resulted in the PLA becoming the highest funded military force within the Asian region. However, much like the two previous cases, there appears to have been no discussion of casualty avoidance characteristic within the PLA throughout this period.
As Table 
4
PLA Westernization and the Regional Balance of Power If Chinese military modernization efforts continue at their current pace, then the PLA will likely improve its capabilities over time. The PLA will be able to comprehensively defend the Chinese homeland and coastline beyond the "First Island Chain," a line that runs north-south roughly from the Kurile Islands, through the Japanese and Ryukyu Islands, to Taiwan and the Philippines, and further into the Pacific region. The gap between compelling and deterring capabilities vis-à-vis Taiwan will close significantly and the PLA will likely be able to deny U.S.
naval and air access to the region possibly out to the "Second Island Chain" area past the Philippine Islands and toward Guam. 
153
154
This would surely exhaust a Chinese military in the relatively nascent stages of its military modernization efforts along Western-lines. PRC officials most likely realize this, hence their preference for limited and local wars that are relatively short.
Not relying solely on its hard power deterrence alone, China will use other elements of its national power (i.e., soft power) to target the third element of the Clausewitzian trinity; that being an adversary's population and its will. 
155
156
That said, the increasing Westernization of the PLA is not occurring in a vacuum, and
Beijing's ability to shift the regional balance of military power must take into consideration a number of factors. First, barring any unforeseen shift or change in U.S. security commitment to the region (c.f., 1969 Nixon "Guam" doctrine), the Asian region will most likely continue to have a persistent U.S. presence due to the security and economic interests involving the U.S. and its allies and partners.
Second, other regional powers such as India, Russia, and Japan, as well as Taiwan and South Korea, will most likely not sit idle in their own respective military development and modernization efforts. As China's military capabilities increase, so will the militaries of other regional powers.
Third, continued heavy investment and budget allocation toward defense spending by the PRC is highly dependent upon continued economic growth of the Chinese economy. Possible economic shocks or downturns may cause China's leaders to make necessary budgetary compromises similar to those made in the early 1980s in order to focus on other domestic priorities.
Lastly, Chinese military modernization may still be hampered by its defense industry and the "firewall" that separates its civilian and defense sectors. 
157
Nevertheless, China does have money and time on its side. If the PRC can maintain the relatively stable environment it has enjoyed for approximately the last 20 years, continue to benefit from its economic growth, and continue to ameliorate most of its deficient areas, then the PLA will likely be able to continue to develop those naval, air, and land forces that will afford it comprehensive military capabilities commensurate with its great power goals. Finally, as table 5 summarizes below, PLA attitudes and approaches toward warfare from 1979 to today have trended toward becoming more Western. Four out of the five characteristics of a Western form of warfare have manifested themselves throughout the three chosen case studies. However, the fifth-casualty aversion-does not appear to be a current feature of PLA approaches to warfighting. Additionally, future research would benefit the ongoing analysis of China's military development by exploring the possible military advantages associated with an increasingly Westernized PLA that also possesses a relatively higher tolerance for casualties in relation to any future adversary.
and
131
136 138
Mao Zedong's economic Great Leap Forward (1958-1960)  and the subsequent CulturalRevolution (1966Revolution ( -1976) )  inspired by him served to stymie many real efforts to modernize during these particularly tumultuous periods within China. Additionally, the Chinese Communist Party's policy choice to subordinate military modernization in favor of first modernizing PRC
Rhoads Murphey, East Asia: A New History, 5th ed. (Boston, MA: Longman, 2010), 285-304.
James C. Mulvenon and Andrew N.D. Yang, eds., Seeking Truth from Facts : A Retrospective on Chinese Military Studies in the Post-Mao Era (Santa Monica, CA: National Security Research Division, RAND, 2001), 213; and James C. Mulvenon and David Michael Finkelstein, China's Revolution in Doctrinal Affairs Emerging Trends in the Operational Art of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, CNA Corporation, 2005, http://www.cna.org/documents/ DoctrineBook.pdf (accessed 5 February 2014), 381.
Mulvenon and Yang, 101.   
Information Office of the State Council, The People's Republic of China, "The Diversified Employment of China's Armed Forces," Xinhuanet, 16 April 2013, http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/china/2013-04/16/c_132312681.htm (accessed 13 November 2013).
Mulvenon and Yang, 97.   
Shambaugh, Modernizing China's Military: Progress, Problems, and Prospects,[62][63][64][65][66] 
Shambaugh, Modernizing China's Military: Progress, Problems, and Prospects,[69][70] 
U.S. DOD, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China 2013, 34.
Shambaugh, Modernizing China's Military: Progress, Problems, and Prospects, 240 .   
I would like to thank 
Dr. Michael Mihalka
ATZL-SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
and that the current estimated amount for military-related expenditures is currently "between $135 billion and $215 billion." 
150
151
152