# ID: f1970d19d2574300855c64c2a6a91e42
# Title: Overall German Strategy in World War Two and the Allied Air Offensive
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1997.0
# Fulltext:
I selected the topic of overall German Strategy in World War II and how it was impacted by the Allied Air Offensive for three reasons. First, I felt the relationship between the two has been under-explored. Second, World War II continues to be a rich storehouse of potential lessons on strategy, operational art and war-fighting. Third, and perhaps most important, I felt it valuable to explore the effects of an air offensive on a nation's war strategy to detect possible pitfalls the US should avoid.
The purpose of this paper is to show that during World War II German leaders did not modify their strategy when the success of the Allied air offensive became manifest, and that their failure to change strategy was a major reason Germany was totally defeated.
First, this paper will describe the two main legs of the over-all German World War II strategy. The two main components were to fight on one front at a time and to fight quick, but intensive offensive campaigns. Then, the paper will demonstrate the German war strategy was consciously changed after it proved ineffective on the Russian front.
Third, the paper will explain that the Allied air offensive became the Second Front against Germany long before the 1944 Allied invasion of France. At that point, the paper will show that German leader's failure to anticipate the impact of the Allied air offensive and failure to modify German strategy were major reasons why Germany was finally defeated.
..
The overall German strategy in World War II sprang from their autocratic leader, Adolf Hitler, who made all major German decisions. 
1
Hitler was careful to avoid conflicts on more than one front at a time as he wanted to reduce the amount of resistance his forces would face. 
2
4
5
6
Concurrently with this, Hitler reinforced the Siegried line of fortifications along the western border of Germany. 
7
8
9
10
11
Hitler did not want to face the US and Britain in the west while he was attempting to conquer European Russia. Therefore, he had the objective of neutralizing Britain in the west by "stripping Britain of its European allies." 
12
13
14
15
16
17
20
The Germans wanted to shatter an enemy's cohesion, organization, and psychological strengths using strength against selected weakness, and using speed and surprise. The Germans did not want the war to transition to a war of attrition, where victory depended less on military competence but more on quantitative superiority.
Hitler felt confident his one front and blitzkrieg strategy would propel Germany to a major military and political power, Initially, he was correct: in the first phase of the war in Europe Hitler's strategy helped him dominate most of Western Europe. The Russian campaign lay ahead.
Milton Shulman, Defeat in the West (New York: E.P. Dutton & Co.,1948)  Buell, 15.  Buell, 14, 15.  Buell, 69.  Hart, 225.  Chapter 3
As previously discussed, Hitler and the other German leaders had a two-fold overall strategy. First, Hitler planned to only deal with one front at a time. Second, Hitler planned to initiate the offensives. These offensives would be carried out on German terms: furiously and quickly. Hitler's invasion of Russia was consistent with this strategy. However, the Germans were not able to quickly defeat Russia and Hitler consciously changed their strategy in early 1942.
Previous to this, by the late fall of 1940, Hitler had stunned the world by his conquering of the Low Countries and France. On the other hand, Hitler had received a set-back when the Luftwaffe was defeated in the "Battle of Britain." Historians still debate whether Hitler would have initiated, or have been successful with Sealion-the planned invasion of Britain-even if he had attained air superiority over the invasion beachheads. 
1
2
3
4
5
Britain could initiate a second front in the west. 
6
7
The German invasion of Russia began in June, 1941. At first, the German strategy of a "blitzkreig" brought considerable success against the Russians. However, as events unfolded, it was shown that the Germans could be stopped. For several reasons, including German indecision, which caused the majority of German forces to be static for about a month in the summer, the German offensive faltered at the gates of Moscow in the fall. 
8
In late 1941, many of Hitler's generals and ministers understood the opportunity to defeat Russia quickly was now gone and they advised Hitler to withdraw to defensive lines to the West. 
9
10
By January 1942, Hitler realized his strategy of a short war was unsound and he recast German strategy away from the blitzkrieg strategy to a strategy of attrition warfare.
On 10 January 1942 he signed an order which directed the restructuring of the armaments industry for increased production and which directed that "all available raw materials"
were to be channeled into weapons factories so that increased amounts of war material could be produced. 
11
12
13
Harbor had occurred by this time, and that Germany had declared war on the US. 
14
Facing the US industrial might may have encouraged Hitler to abandon the short war strategy. However, a very credible source states clearly that these interpretations are incorrect. Albert Speer was Hitler's technical advisor and personal architect until February, 1942, when he became Munitions and Armaments Minister. Speer, with firsthand knowledge, clearly states it was setbacks on the Russian front that influenced Hitler to shift German strategy to a war of attrition. 
15
16
17
18
19
On the surface, Hitler's declaration of war against the US appears to be a repudiation of his single front strategy. Some authorities point out that this is not necessarily the case. First, in December 1941, Hitler's planned submarine warfare against the US did not change Hitler's long-held plan to concentrate against Russia. He could not use his submarine forces to directly attack Russia. Since his submarine forces were available and already deployed to the Atlantic, and if in his mind he was going to have to fight the United States sooner or later, he might just as well attack while his submarine fleet was potent. 
21
22
24
26
Hitler may have even calculated that a German declaration of war against the US could help force Britain to negotiate for peace. Specifically, Hitler felt that India was the "heart" of the British empire. Some historians point out that Hitler felt that Britain might be compelled to come to the peace "table" if Japan seriously threatened India. 
27
Chapter 4
The Allied Air Offensive
The Anglo-American coalition's plans for a strategic air offensive against Germany were long-standing. By the late 1930's both Britain and the US gave high priority for preparing for a strategic bombing offensive. There is clear documentation of very comprehensive plans for a British strategic air offensive as far back as 1937, when the "Western Air Plans" were published. The objectives of these British plans included key industrial targets such as the synthetic oil industry and plans for attacking the morale of the enemy population. 
1
2
In 1940, in accordance with his belief in the importance of preparing for conflict while trying not to be involved directly in WWII, President Roosevelt approved the proposal for a secret conference. This conference convened British and US military planning staffs in Washington, D.C. to make proposals on combined US/British strategy and plans. The conference was held from January to March 1941-many months before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. 
3
In May 1941, by direction of a joint-planning organization, the joint Army-Navy Board, the Conference's policies began to be assimilated into US war plans. 
5
6
7
9
10
11
12
This Allied air offensive against Germany caused the Germans to dedicate large amounts of resources to defending against the offensive. Additionally, the Allied air offensive caused massive reductions in German war production.
Due to the pressures of the air offense, by the end of 1943 there were over 55,000
anti-aircraft guns deployed throughout Germany. 
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
By the time Allied ground forces were poised to attack into Germany in early 1945, the Allied Air Campaign had severely damaged the German transportation system and key war industries. Specifically, tonnage capability of the German railroad system had been reduced by eighty-five per cent between 
September, 1944, and
March, 1945. 20
21
22
23
World War II stated "Allied Air Power was decisive in the war in western Europe." 
24
6
7
8
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
During 1941 the increased intensity of Allied air attacks was significant. For example, by November 1941, the RAF had an average of over 500 bombers and crews available each night to attack various targets. 
1
2
"wake up" call to the Germans, Lubeck was bombed by almost 250 RAF bombers.
Almost half of the central part of the city, over 200 acres, was destroyed. 3 Soon after that, in May, 1942, the RAF bombed Cologne with over 1,000 bombers. At the time it was the largest air attack in history, 4 and the fact that over 1,000 bombers were employed was well publicized. 
5
6
7
8
The ever-increasing Allied attacks on Germany and on German occupied countries
were direct evidence of the potential of an air offensive. To limit the effectiveness of these attacks, additional German anti-aircraft guns and fighters were employed in the West. If nothing else, the increasing amount of Luftwaffe fighter aircraft dedicated to defense of the Reich should have helped German leaders conclude a second front was developing in the West. There were only 116 Luftwaffe fighters dedicated to night air defense in the West in September, 1940. By September of the next year, the number was 250, and by September, 1942, it was 345. 
9
Significantly, the best German fighter pilots were assigned to the Western air defense squadrons. Moreover, when additional aircraft were sent to the Western air defense units they were always new variants of existing fighter designs while older, less capable fighter models went to the Russian front or to the Mediterranean theater. 
10
Based on the observations of the German Embassy staff, the German Ambassador to the US sent several warnings to Berlin during 1940 elaborating on US plans for a massive air force. The tone of the warnings was described by Murray, currently one of the foremost authorities on the Luftwaffe: "While America's material defense was still woefully lacking in nearly every respect, production would represent a serious threat by 1941 and increasingly each year thereafter." 
11
A top-secret document, eventually labeled the Victory Program Document, which detailed the entire US strategic plan for fighting Germany, had been developed in 1941.
A major part of US strategy was an air offensive, so the document detailed the plan for bombing Germany, including a detailed listing of overall objectives, targets, and aircraft production requirements. The strategic plan also called for large-scale combined air, sea, and land British/US offensives against Germany starting in 1943. This document was leaked to newspapers who supported isolationist policies. 
12
13
During the time frame of 5 to 14 December Hitler was briefed on the Victory Program, his staff's studies about the Program, and their recommendation that a major German strategy revision was required in order to defeat the objectives of the Allies. 
14
15
On the other hand, as already discussed, Hitler did make significant changes in strategy if he felt they were warranted. Due to changing conditions on the Russian front, Hitler modified the blitzkrieg strategy and made a transition to a strategy based on attrition. However, Hitler did not modify his one-front strategy. He did not adjust the strategy, even though there were many indications of an impending Allied second front in the West in the form of the air offensive.
Scholars advance several reasons why Hitler and the other German leaders did not revise the German strategy in the face of the Allied second front. These reasons include an underestimation of allied capabilities, with assumptions that the future would be like the past. Throughout the war, Hitler underestimated Allied, in particular US, capabilities.
For example, he apparently disregarded staff studies indicating the Allies might very well be able to produce the war material required in the Allied victory plans. 
16
17
18
19
21
There were many reasons that Hitler did not appreciate the potential for strategic bombing. One reason was Hitler misapplied the example of the Luftwaffe's inability to cripple Britain via bombing in 1940 and 1941. 
22
23
24
25
Chapter 6
As previously discussed, the Allied air offensive did become the second front. This second front, combined with Hitler not modifying German strategy, had several operational and strategic impacts on the Germans. Operationally, the Germans did not have adequate numbers and types of fighter aircraft and the trained crews to operate them -soon the Luftwaffe defenses were swamped. 
1
2
5
6
7
8
Clearly, there were many direct and indirect effects of the Allied bombing campaign-a campaign that was actually the second front. These effects include the transfer of key units from the Russian front, the virtual end of German fuel production, and the massive division of manpower from offensive combat to air defense duties.
While these impacts were significant, there was a more important and more basic result of Hitler not properly evaluating the potential of an aerial second front and modifying German strategy. In the overall strategic sense, the Allied air offensive meant that Germany was faced with a two front war. Unfortunately for Germany, her military plans and doctrine were designed around a one front war. Additionally, her resources were not capable of sustaining a long war on two fronts. 
9
10
11
12
Undoubtedly, even if Hitler had foreseen the Allied air offensive, it would have been very difficult for Hitler to have deflected the Allies away from their air campaign plans.
The Allies, using sound military thought, were attempting to fight on their terms. But there were other strategic options Hitler could have pursued in reaction to the Allied air offensive-options that could have shifted the character of the war so that it was being fought more on Hitler's terms.
A proper reassessment of all factors could have resulted in the adoption of one or more other German strategies. One potential course of action could have been a move to strategic defense. Operationally, this could have included foregoing large scale offenses in Russia in 1942 and a strategic withdrawal to defensive lines on natural and man-made barriers, 
13
14
15
16
Had this happened, the Russians could have been "bled white" leading to a military stalemate rather than a victory for the Russians. Moreover, a strategic withdrawal from the Russian Front could have allowed other opportunities, such as major initiatives in the Mediterranean or the freeing up of many divisions for duty in France to prepare for the D-Day invasion.
Another potential strategy was to attempt sincere negotiations with Stalin. 17 These negotiations could have been separate from, or in addition to, a strategic withdrawal from Russia. Separate from the options concerning the Eastern front was the possibility of withdrawal from the area east of the Baltic, Scandinavia, North Africa, Italy and perhaps even France. 
18
19
20
21
22
23
The above discussion of strategies is not designed to be an in-depth description of all the strategies available to Hitler and their potential advantages and disadvantages. There is little doubt the reader can outline other potential German strategies. The point of the above examples is to show there were strategic options available to Hitler-options other than carrying out a flawed one-front strategy. Needless to say, the key was for Hitler to re-assess German strategy early enough so that he was able to implement other options.
Of course, Hitler did not do this.
changing conditions was another major factor in Germany's defeat. Hitler did not adjust his strategy but maintained the adjusted strategy of attrition warfare on one front. As the Allied air offensive grew, the Allies exploited German weaknesses. Hitler's one front strategy meant Germany was not able to adequately combat the second front-the Allied air offensive while fighting the Russians on the East.
The lessons for us today are clear. If involved in a conflict, do not underestimate the enemy and constantly reassess the enemy's potential strategy and capability. Try to maintain the initiative. Carefully craft a strategy and options for courses of action if conditions change. Above all, stick to strategy if it is in our own best interests, but also be prepared to change the strategy if a modification is in our best interests. For example, if conditions change, our strategies may also have to change. As President Franklin D.
Roosevelt said: "Hitler built a fortress around Europe, but he forgot to put a roof on it." 
1
22
21
The United States Strategic Bombing Survey-Summary Report-European War (Maxwell Air Force Base, A.L.: Air University Press 1987), 37.
Wilbur H. Morrison, Fortress Without a Roof, St. Martin's Press: New York, 1982 preface.
The views expressed in this academic research paper are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the official policy or position of the US government or the Department of Defense. In accordance with Air Force Instruction 51-303, it is not copyrighted, but is the property of the United States government.
At the beginning of WWII the German strategy was a one-front, blitzkrieg strategy.
Hitler had considerable success concentrating on one front and carrying out intensive offensives in order to shatter enemy defenses. The Russians, unexpectedly for Hitler, survived the Nazi invasion which was launched in June, 1941. At this point, Hitler was not a slave to the strategy; he modified the blitzkrieg strategy in early 1942 to one of attrition warfare.
Concurrently, the Allies adopted an air offensive against Nazi Germany as a major part of US/British strategy. This offensive grew slowly, but in May 1942, the RAF was launching attacks by over 1,000 bombers at a time. US assistance to the Allied air campaign was very limited in the year after Pearl Harbor, but there were strong indications that a substantial Allied air offensive was going to be unleashed against Germany. Hitler did not properly assess the information available to him and determined the Allied air offensive would not be a serious threat. Hitler, rather than being prudent and over-estimating enemy capabilities, underestimated them. Without a realistic appraisal of the situation he had no basis to modify the one front strategy. However, as we have seen, the air offensive relatively quickly became the second front. The Allied air offensive played a major role in defeating Hitler. Similarly, Hitler's failure to respond to DISTRIBUTION A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
Maxwell AFB, Al 36112