# ID: f1a3d765b887461c914f3a58d4d23fa7
# Title: Operational Art during Operation Just Cause
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
During Operation Just Cause, the United States conducted a large scale limited contingency operation against the Panamanian Defense Force. LTG Carl Stiner, XVIII Airborne Corps (XVIII ABC) and JTF South Commander, led a massive
Figure 
1
-Colin Powell, My American Journey
The Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty in 1903 committed the United States to building a canal in Panama connecting the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Completed in 1914, the Panama Canal led to a US controlled Canal Zone, which placed the tiny nation in a pivotal role in US strategic and commercial endeavors. Manuel Antonio Noriega rose to power amidst a maelstrom of controversy regarding the death of his predecessor, electoral fraud, and murder of his opposition leader in 1985. On 5 February 1988, US Federal Grand Juries in Miami and Tampa, Florida indicted Noriega and most of his senior Panamanian Defense Force (PDF) officials on thirteen counts of racketeering and narcotics trafficking. 
1
2
3
4
There is a pervasive generality among military planners that politicians rarely define political objectives, thus there is no foundation for military planning. A review and analysis of US military history, strategy, and associated political objectives is beyond the scope of this monograph. Strategy is an emergent phenomena due to the dynamic nature of the global security environment. Emergent strategy does not absolve military planners of the responsibility to recognize policy transitions early and preemptively develop nested military options. 
5
6
8
This study aims to provide future military planners with empirical evidence that connects employment of operational art with operational success. Military planners must recognize transitions in US foreign policy then adapt contingency planning to the policy environment. The scope and scale of Operation Just Cause does not fit the current US Army focus on large-scale combat operations (LSCO), but there is ample evidence demonstrating how employment of operational art contributed to operational success.
Explaining several key terms will enhance the reader's understanding of this study. The literature review will explore operational art in depth. The literature provides a theoretical foundation that explains how the researcher will view case study evidence. Flexibility, operational tempo, operational reach, and operational risk are interrelated elements of the theory of operational art that the literature review will address in detail. A JTF is a joint force constituted and designated by senior Department of Defense (DOD) officials to accomplish a mission with specific or limited objectives. 
9
10
This study tests the following hypotheses to evaluate JTF South's employment of operational art. If JTF South's plan was flexible, then the options available to the commander were able to mitigate all threats from the enemy, which is evidence that they employed operational art. If JTF South maintained a higher operational tempo in relation to the enemy and the enemy could not address all of the threats posed to them, then there is evidence that they employed operational art. If JTF South was able to extend their operational reach without culminating, then there is evidence that they employed operational art. If JTF South was able to mitigate operational risk, then there is evidence that they employed operational art.
This study poses the following research questions to structure the collection of case study evidence. What was the strategic and operational context of Operation Just Cause? What were the stated political and military objectives? What were the strategic and operational assumptions?
Once the commander and staff recognized the strategic and operational context, how did they develop the operational approach? Did the commander drive the operations process or did the operations process drive the commander? What military options were available to the commander? How did the commander and staff anticipate, learn, and adapt to the operational environment? How did the outcome of the battles, operations, and campaigns influence military and political objectives? Did JTF planners develop branches and sequels to facilitate adjustments to the operational approach? Operation Just Cause is relatively recent military history, so access to primary source documents is limited by classification barriers. The extensive media coverage and attention paid to the Persian Gulf War limited published academic literature addressing operational planning during the invasion of Panama. Lastly, the XVIII Airborne Corps Command Historian is currently reorganizing the Corps' historical archives, which restricted access to documents that could deepen contextual understanding.
Despite limitations, this study is necessarily scoped to JTF South's planning and execution. This study will begins with directed revisions of contingency plans regarding Panama and concludes with the transition to Operation Promote Liberty. This timeframe provides sufficient evidence to determine JTF South's employment of operational art. This study makes two major assumptions. First, Dr. Robert K. Wright's, XVIII Airborne Corps Historian, structured interviews immediately following Operation Just Cause constitute primary source evidence. Second, the recently declassified joint staff history study of the planning and execution of Operation Just Cause limits subjectivity in evidence collection because the researcher had access to and analyzed classified primary source documents currently unavailable for this study.
This study proceeds in five sections. Section two presents a review of relevant literature and operationalizes variables. Section three explains the structured, focused comparison methodology. Section four is the case study, which collates evidence found during research presented as answers to the research questions. Section five presents findings and analysis based on the empirical evidence collected to determine the validity of the research hypotheses. Section six concludes the study, makes recommendations for future research, and discusses implications for future practitioners of operational art.
This section is the literature review. The literature review is subdivided into the theoretical, conceptual, and empirical sections. The theoretical section explains the theoretical lens and defines operational art. The conceptual section defines selected elements of operational art to operationalize case study variables. The empirical section integrates this study with current academic literature on the invasion of Panama.
There has always been an intermediate link between strategy and tactics, but a distinct concept that provided a systematic and deliberate method for campaign planning and major operations emerged in the nineteenth century. Broadly defined, operational art encompasses the area between strategy and tactics spanning the theory and practice of planning and conducting campaigns and major operations aimed at accomplishing strategic and operational objectives in a given theater of operations. 11 In the wake of Napoleon, operational art emerged as a theoretical framework jointly formed by Clausewitz and Jomini that explained the phenomenal success of the French combat method. 
12
Napoleon's legacy is a litany of interpretations ranging from worshipers to detractors with increased risk coinciding with polarization. 
13
14
12
13
14
15
The Soviet theory of operational art emerged out of a cauldron of war and revolution during the transition from tsarist Russia to Bolshevik Russia. In 1922, Aleksandr A. Svechin first defined Soviet operational art as a critical linkage between tactics and strategy. Svechin believed tactics solved immediate problems, strategy pursued goals defined by policy, and operational art governed intellectual creativity that linked tactical actions into a campaign to achieve strategic goals. He correctly interpreted Clausewitz and asserted that no amount of operational proficiency could overcome strategic miscalculation regarding the nature of war. 
16
21
22
23
24
The conceptual section operationalizes the variables used in the case study. This section explains how flexibility, operational tempo, and operational reach are interrelated elements of operational art. These elements of operational art enable a commander and staff to account for operational risk when developing and adapting an operational approach to achieve a position of relative advantage. These elements of operational art elucidate whether JTF South's actions during the planning and execution of Operation Just Cause are consistent with the theory of operational art. Clausewitz's statement that "everything in war is simple, but the simplest thing is difficult" highlights the importance of flexibility in an operational approach. 
25
26
27
28
George Washington recognized the importance of controlling the operational tempo and rhythm of a campaign during the American Revolution. General Washington manipulated his operational tempo during the New Jersey campaign and kept the British Commanders off balance. 
30
32
33
Clausewitz described the culminating point of victory as a keystone for planning that occurs when the attacker has progressed beyond a point where they can mitigate reductions in combat power resulting from battles. 
35
36
37
38
33
34 US Joint Staff, (JP) 5-0, (2017), 139. 
35
36
37 US Joint Staff, (JP) 5-0, (2017), 25. 
38
43
His study utilized operational art as a lens, but relied solely on doctrine instead of theory to define operational art. Additionally, he conducted his study when Operation Just Cause was still recent military history and lacked access to a recently de-classified study on JTF South planning. 
44
The literature review covered the theoretical, conceptual, and empirical elements of this study. The theoretical section explained how this study combines Napoleon's foundation, Russian evolution, American refinement, and current scholarship on the theory of operational art to define operational art as an iterative and deliberate cognitive process that enables a commander and staff to synchronize subordinate units in time, space, and purpose to conduct a range of military activities that gain and maintain a relative advantage. The conceptual section demonstrated how flexibility, operational tempo, and operational reach are interrelated elements of an operational approach that enable a commander and staff to account for operational risk when developing and adapting an operational approach. The empirical section asserted that this study is different and aims to fill a gap in the scholarship regarding Operation Just Cause, because 
43
The primary goal of this study is to test research hypotheses that evaluate the employment of operational art. This study employs a single case study method despite criticism from the social science community. Some social scientists characterize single case studies as relatively high risk due to the potential for indeterminacy based on multiple possible explanations that can lead to incorrect inferences. However, single case studies, like this one, are better suited for the evaluation and development of theory, because they enable a researcher to test multiple observations from a single case study. 
45
The method and logic of a structured, focused comparison is relatively simple in social science. Alexander George and Andrew Bennett assert that the structure is posing research questions to a case study that guide and standardize data collection, thereby enabling a systematic comparison and accumulation of the findings. The researcher then focuses the comparison by dealing with only specific aspects of a historical case study. 
46
The monograph will focus on JTF level planning and execution from directed revisions to the operation plans (OPLAN) through the transition to Operation Promote Liberty. Social scientists designed the structured, focused comparison to analyze historical experience in ways that yield useful knowledge from a specific case study. Despite limited academic writing and declassification barriers there is still plenty of available empirical evidence to determine JTF South's employment of operational art. Early recognition of a US foreign policy transition and military planning synchronized with emergent national strategy contributed to the overwhelming success of Operation Just Cause. This study aims to determine the role operational art played in JTF South's success.
The structured, focused comparison guides and standardizes data collection in this study.
George and Bennet developed the method to provide a systematic comparison and accumulation of findings by posing research questions of a case study. 
47
This study poses seven research questions to guide the collection of evidence. The questions are broken into three groups, strategic recognition, development of the operational approach, and adjustment of the operational approach. The first question of the strategic recognition group is what was the strategic and operational context of Operation Just Cause? The researcher expects to find that there was a US foreign policy transition early in the Bush Administration that required JTF South to build operational readiness rapidly for an armed intervention in Panama. The next question is what were the stated political and military objectives? The researcher expects to find that the military objectives were to remove Manuel Noriega from power and restore democracy in Panama. The final question of this group is what were the strategic and operational assumptions? The researcher expects to find that strategically, 
47
The adjustment of the operational approach group is the final group of research questions.
The first question is, how did the commander and staff anticipate, learn, and adapt to the operational environment? The researcher expects to find that JTF South's parallel planning and rehearsals generated the situational awareness required to adapt to the operational environment.
The next question is how did the outcome of the battles, operations, and campaigns influence military and political objectives? The researcher expects to find that the outcome of the battles, operations, and campaigns had little impact on military or political objectives. The final question of the adjustment of the operational approach group is did JTF planners develop branches and sequels to facilitate adjustments to the operational approach? The researcher expects to find that JTF South adjusted their operational approach. This section restated the purpose of this research, reviewed research questions, and presented expected findings. This single case study uses a structured, focused comparison methodology to determine the validity of hypotheses by answering questions derived from the theory of operational art that collate case study evidence. The expected findings presented were based on the assumption that the research hypotheses are valid. The next section is the case study, which presents empirical evidence found as answers to the research questions.
After reviewing relevant theory and explaining this structured, focused comparison study of Operation Just Cause, this section will present evidence found during case study research.
This section provides an overview of Operation Just Cause and answers the research questions from the methodology section in three groups. The research question groups are strategic recognition, development of the operational approach, and adjustment of the operational approach. The evidence presented in this section will determine the validity of the research and property, retention of access to the Panama Canal, and actions to bolster any government that might replace Noriega's Regime. 
56
57
58
59
General Frederick Woerner was a Latin America expert, fluent in Spanish, chosen to serve as a liaison with America's Allies in the region. There was a growing perception in the Bush Administration that General Woerner's advice and strategic direction were inconsistent with US foreign policy. 
60
56
57
58 James H. Kyle, The Guts to Try: The Untold Story of the Iran Hostage Rescue Mission by the on Scene Commander (New York: Ballantine Books, 1995), 1. 
59
60
Noriega annulled the results of the election citing foreign interference. Noriega's blatant disregard for domestic law, aggressive rhetoric toward the US, and the potential impact to US national security escalated domestic and international pressure on the Bush Administration to act. 
61
62
Doctrine Command prior to his nomination as USCINCSO. General Thurman developed a reputation across the DOD as a leader with uncommon vigor, aggressiveness, and determination.
In General Thurman's first week as USCINCSO, MAJ Moises Giroldi, who was instrumental in suppressing the first coup against Noriega in 1988, proposed to lead one of his own. General Thurman regarded the coup plan as amateurish and advocated strongly for US neutrality in the plot. The Bush Administration agreed and on 3 October 1989, the coup went off as planned and failed. Policy elites in Washington, DC harshly criticized the Bush Administration for their lack of support, but the failed coup actually benefitted military planners. The coup galvanized the 
61
62
64
65
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
Collectively, these actions enabled the uncharacteristic lead time to develop the operational approach.
The first question in the development of the operational approach group is once the JTF recognized the strategic and operational context, how did they develop their operational approach? Pentagon planners identified and activated XVIII ABC as the JTF South headquarters for Operation Just Cause early in the planning process. This decision enabled XVIII ABC's staff to consolidate an amalgamation of disjointed OPLANS, ironically titled Elaborate Maze, into an executable XVIII ABC OPLAN 90-2. 
70
76
PDF. LTG Stiner exploited the trips to keep planning informed with changes in the operational environment and share issues brought up during rehearsals with prepositioned planners. 77 LTG Stiner's unique experience in SOF and conventional units enabled sound planning insight and strong confident leadership of all forces assigned to JTF South. 78 LTG Stiner credited crossfertilization between the SOF, light-fighter, and airborne communities as another key factor that contributed to integration and de-confliction. LTG Stiner directed his staff to create a Joint Communications Electronic Operating Instructions (CEOI), which acted like a phonebook for every member of the JTF. The Joint CEOI was another lesson incorporated from operations in Grenada and streamlined communications at echelon. LTG Stiner's involvement in the operations process led to the decision to conduct bombing missions with 2000 pound bombs over 500 pound bombs. The decision seems strategically ignorant, but the 2000 pound bomb's far superior accuracy rate and delayed fuse supported JTF objectives and restraint. Bombing targets in this manner limited collateral damage while achieving the cognitive effect required to suppress the PDF. 
79
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
85
86
88
In mid-December tensions escalated between the US and Panama, when the Panamanian National Assembly passed a resolution that a state of war existed with the United States. The following Saturday night, a PDF check point killed Marine First Lieutenant Robert Paz and wounded two other servicemen after they made a wrong turn. 
90
89
90
The next question is how did the outcomes of battles, operations, and campaigns influence military and political objectives? JTF South's detailed, synchronized, and rehearsed plan achieved overwhelming success that presented an opportunity to consolidate gains and transition rapidly to stability operations. JTF South's simultaneity and operational tempo caused Early establishment of the JTF South JTOC enabled adjustments to the operational approach through FRAGOs. In 24 days, the JTF issued 41 FRAGOs that adapted the operational approach, issued new guidance about the rules of engagement, summarized results from completed operations, and enabled synchronized operational planning at echelon. The FRAGOs were the primary method to collate all the various staff function inputs, which resynchronized operational activity in a digestible format for subordinate units. Due to the limits of technology FRAGOs were disseminated manually, but they were an effective tool to adapt the operational approach during execution. 
102
The finding and analysis section provides concise answers to the research questions as an amalgamation of case study research. The answers to the research questions inform analytical deductions that infer the validity of research hypotheses. For context, each research questions is reviewed along with the researcher's expected findings. The analysis of findings will determine if each research hypothesis was supported, unsupported, or has a mixed outcome. 
101
102
The next question was what were the stated political and military objectives? The researcher expected to find that the military objectives were to remove Manuel Noriega from power and restore democracy in Panama. The empirical evidence showed that as the situation in Panama deteriorated the policy objectives simplified and remained to restore democracy and remove Noriega. The JCS translated those two policy objectives into four military objectives to protect US citizens, defend the Panama Canal, restore democracy, and capture Noriega.
The final question of this group was what were the strategic and operational assumptions? The researcher expected to find that strategically, the JTF assumed that the PDF had to be dismantled to restore democracy. Operationally, the JTF assumed they had an asymmetric advantage to operate at night. The empirical evidence found that the CJCS assumed that a deliberate build-up of combat power over twenty-two days as originally planned would result in protracted fighting, more casualties, and potentially a guerilla war. General Thurman assumed that the successful democratic election meant he could exploit initial tactical success with an immediate transition to stability operations once Noriega's regime fell.
The next group of research questions is the development of the operational approach group. The first question is once the commander and staff recognized the strategic and operational context, how did they develop the operational approach? The researcher expected to find that JTF South developed their operational approach as a reaction to the transition of US foreign policy. The empirical evidence found that a drastic transition in US foreign policy coincided with a change in US military leadership, which created an environment conducive to employing the theory of operational art throughout planning and execution.
The next question is did the commander drive the operations process or did the operations process drive the commander? The researcher expected to find that JTF South's commander drove the operations process to satisfy the demands of the Bush Administration. The empirical evidence showed that LTG Stiner relentlessly drove the operations process throughout the planning and execution of Operation Just Cause.
The final question of this group is what military options were available to the commander? The researcher expected to find that the geopolitical situation necessarily limited military options. The empirical evidence showed that despite the geopolitical situation, LTG Stiner developed two scenarios for employment of JTF South forces with either a simultaneous or sequential arrangement of operations. Both options were relatively similar, but provided flexibility with operational tempo.
The adjustment of the operational approach group is the final group of research questions.
The first question is, how did the commander and staff anticipate, learn, and adapt to the operational environment? The researcher expected to find that JTF South's parallel planning and rehearsals generated the situational awareness required to adapt to the operational environment.
The empirical evidence found that early establishment of the mission command architecture enabled JTF South to foster and sustain the organizational momentum to adapt their operational approach.
an opportunity to consolidate gains and set conditions for an immediate transition to stability operations.
The third research hypothesis was if JTF South was able to extend their operational reach without culminating, then there is evidence that they employed operational art. The empirical evidence supported a mixed outcome for this hypothesis. JTF South's parallel planning, rehearsals, training, and readiness enhancement activities did extend their operational reach. The hypothesis is a mixed outcome because the duration of the operation did not stress JTF South to the point of culmination. JTF planners adopted an operational tempo that exceeded their capacity to deploy sustainment architecture. JTF planners mitigated the operational risk through expeditionary sustainment operations, prepositioning, and prioritized sustainment assets during air-land operations.
The final research hypothesis was if JTF South was able to mitigate operational risk, then there is evidence that they employed operational art. The empirical evidence overwhelmingly supported this hypothesis. JTF South benefited from a clearly established chain of command from the Goldwater-Nichols Act. General Thurman unified command of all JTF forces under LTG Stiner as the JTF Commander, which facilitated his ability to mitigate operational risk at echelon. Colin Powell optimized his principle advisor role created by the new legislation to cultivate a continuous unequal dialogue with the Bush Administration. The continuous unequal policy dialogue for the duration of Operation Just Cause built trust, shared risk, and fostered collaborative risk mitigation. This section reviewed the research questions, expected findings, findings, and analysis of research hypotheses to determine if JTF South planners employed the theory of operational art.
The empirical evidence analyzed supports the assertion that Operation Just Cause successfully achieved the aims of US foreign policy because JTF South employed the theory of operational art during planning and execution. The next section will conclude the study and suggest potential avenues for future research based on the analysis presented in this section.
This study analyzed empirical evidence to determine if JTF South employed operational art during Operation Just Cause. This analysis fills a gap because it provides insight as to how operational art keeps military operations calibrated with policy. The limited literature on Operation Just Cause missed an opportunity to teach future planners how to recognize emergent policy and synchronize military activity within a policy framework. The empirical data supported the thesis that Operation Just Cause successfully achieved the aims of US foreign policy because JTF South employed the theory of operational art during planning and execution. JTF South remained synchronized with US foreign policy and ensured plans were flexible, sustained a higher operational tempo relative to their adversary, extended operational reach, shared and mitigated operational risk from policy maker to war fighter.
This study used a structured, focused comparison methodology to evaluate the employment of operational art. Seven theory informed research questions collected relevant primary and secondary source data for objective analysis. The research questions structured data that covered actions from the political to the operational level of war. The findings validated each of the four hypotheses to varying degrees. JTF South's plan was flexible because it presented multiple dilemmas that overwhelmed the PDF. The operational tempo was easily adjusted through the arrangement of operations. 
Colin Powell and Joseph E. Persico, My American Journey (New York: The Random House Ballantine Publishing Group, 1995), 416.
Lawrence Freedman, Strategy: A History (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013), 221.
Jennifer M. Taw, Operation Just Cause: Lessons for Operations Other Than War (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1996), vii.
Henry Mintzberg, The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning (New York: The Free Press, 1994), 24.
Aleksandr A. Svechin, Strategy, trans. Kent Lee (Minneapolis, MN: East View Publications  INC, 1991), 69.    
Huba Wass de Czege, "Thinking and Acting Like an Early Explorer: Operational Art is Not a Level of War," Small Wars Journal (March 14, 2011), accessed November 11, 2018, https://smallwarsjournal.com/blog/journal/docs-temp/710-deczege.pdf.
Richard M. Swain, "Filling the Void: The Operational Art and the US Army," in Operational Art: Developments in the Theories of War, ed. B.J.C. McKercher and Michael Hennessy (Westport, CT: Praeger Publishing, 1996), 165.
US Department of Defense, Joint Staff Publication (JP) 3-0, Joint Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017).
Cole, Operation Just Cause,7.   
Michael A. Bonura, Under the Shadow of Napoleon: French Influence on the American War of War from 1812 to the Outbreak of WWII (New York: New York University Press, 2012),
16 Jacob W.Kipp, "The Tsarist and Soviet Operational Art: 1853-1991," in  The Evolution of Operational Art, ed. by Martin V. Creveld and John A. Olsen (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 64-95. 17 Charles E. Thompson, "Miracle of the Vistula: The Red Army's Failure and the Birth of the Deep Operations Theory of Annihilation" (Monograph, School of Advanced Military Studies, May 2017), 61. 18 Georgii S. Isserson, "The Evolution of Operational Art," trans. Bruce W. Menning (Fort Leavenworth, KS: SAMS Theoretical Special Edition, 2005), 45-46.
US Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 100-5, Operations (Washington, DC: Headquarters, Department of theArmy, 1986)    
Swain, Filling the Void, 149.    
Everett C. Dolman, Pure Strategy: Power and Principle in the Space and Information Age (New York: Routledge Taylor and Francis Group, 2005), 14.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984), 104.
Ibid.   
Alexander L. George and Andrew Bennett, Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005), 33-34.
Ibid., chapter 3.
Ronald H. Cole, De-classified Operation Just Cause: Planning and Execution of Joint Operations in Panama (Washington, DC: Joint History Office, 2002), 7-8.
Flanagan, Battle for Panama, 44.   
Cody R. Phillips, CMH Pub No. 70-85-1 Operation Just Cause: The Incursion into Panama (Washington, DC: US Army Center of Military History, 1990), 3-49.
Flanagan, Battle for Panama, 228.   
Edward N. Luttwak, The Logic of War and Peace (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2001), 5.
Stiner, Interview,[7][8] 
G-3 Plans Section, XVIII Airborne Corps and Joint Task Force South. Group Interview by Dr. Robert K.Wright, Jr., Historian, XVIII Airborne Corps. Fort Bragg, North Carolina, 30 March 1990, 16- 27.   
 82  Flanagan, Battle for Panama, 47
.83  Cole, 20.   
James M. Dubik, Just War Reconsidered: Strategy, Ethics, and Theory (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2016), 113.
joint task force that included elements from the 7th Infantry Division, 82nd Airborne Division, 5th Mechanized Division, 6th 
Marine Expeditionary Battalion, Joint Special Operations Forces
Manuel Noriega
, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any
building, sought to transition responsibility to the Department of State and support Panamanian President Guillermo Endara's new government. 
49
50
51
The combat engagements around the Canal Zone were short, but PDF resistance in many cases exceeded intelligence estimates. The training and rehearsals conducted prior to the incursion postured JTF South to conduct operations with simultaneity and a relentless operational tempo that overwhelmed the PDF. Despite extraordinary complexity, JTF South successfully synchronized the actions of approximately 26,000 US service members, striking almost two 
49
50
South sent a Fragmentary Order (FRAGO) to Charlie Company 3rd Battalion 75th Ranger Regiment (C/3-75) ordering them to reinforce TF Bayonet. C/3-75 initiated their attack at 1550 and by 1700 the Comandancia was finally cleared. 
98
99
100
98
99 Cole,
[53]
[54]
The next question is how did the outcome of the battles, operations, and campaigns influence military and political objectives? The researcher expected to find that the outcome of the battles, operations, and campaigns had little impact on military or political objectives. The empirical evidence suggested that JTF South's detailed, synchronized, and rehearsed plan achieved overwhelming success that presented an opportunity to consolidate gains and transition to stability operations.
The final question of the adjustment of the operational approach group is did JTF planners develop branches and sequels to facilitate adjustments to the operational approach? The researcher expected to find that JTF South adjusted their operational approach. The empirical evidence showed that JTF planners cultivated a three-phased intervention that drove sequel planning and they utilized FRAGOs and one identified branch plan to make unanticipated adjustments to the operational approach. The next section will collectively analyze these findings to determine the validity of research hypotheses.
The first research hypothesis is if JTF South's plan was flexible, then the options available to the commander were able to mitigate all threats from the enemy, which means there is evidence that they employed operational art. This hypothesis had a mixed outcome after analysis of the empirical evidence. JTF South's plan was flexible because it presented multiple dilemmas for the PDF and the JTF could manipulate the operational tempo through sequential or simultaneous arrangement of operations. Due to the nature of the problem, geography of Panama, and US foreign policy framework JTF developed two scenarios with relatively similar schemes of maneuver.
The second research hypothesis is if JTF South maintained a higher operational tempo in relation to the enemy and the enemy could not address all threats posed to them, then there is evidence that they employed operational art. The empirical evidence overwhelmingly supported this hypothesis. JTF South's simultaneity and operational tempo completely overwhelmed the PDF. JTF South simultaneous attacks on two dozen targets in the first twenty-four hours created