# ID: f2209d761a4247e68b80bb8b0f64b3ed
# Title: Cloud Patterns: An Operational Hierarchy?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1995.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
The Report Documentation Page (RDP) is used in announcing and cataloging reports. It is important that this information be consistent with the rest of the report, particularly the cover and title page. Instructions for filling in each block of the form follow. It is important to stay within the lines to meet optical scanning requirements.
As the Army prepares for warfare in the next century, advocates of Arvin Toffler's Third Wave theory argue that the vertical hierarchical organization of the levels of war have been changed by new technologies. Figure #1 depicts the vertical hierarchy, which reflects the concept that the operational level serves as the "vital link" between tactics and strategy.
Toffler's advocates believe that the tactical level directly links to the strategic level as a result of the introduction and wide spread use of the microprocessor. Figure #2 represents this connection Figure 
1
Has the Information Age really produced a unique phenomenon? Have the levels of war historically remained in a hierarchial pattern in application? This monograph proposes that the strategic, operational, and tactical levels have always been interconnected, and practical requirements such as military command placed them in a vertical hierarchy.
Toffler's advocates suggest that the traditionally accepted view of society and man's environment undergo significant change due to the forces released by Third Wave technology. These adherents believe Toffler's theory that civilization is divided into three waves -an agricultural, an industrial, and an informational, each of these developments fundamentally changed the way people lived and interacted.
For example, prior to his First Agricultural Wave, man lived in small, semimigratory groups which foraged, hunted or fished for food. As the Agricultural Wave swept through these groups, man changed his way of life and began to settle in small villages surrounded by cultivated land. During the Second Wave, industrial forces transformed these small villages into larger cities to meet the pressures of manufacturing and the demands of mass production. 
3
4
Toffler's "wave" forces that changed society in th Agararian and industrial Ages would also change the relationships between strategy, operations and tactics as defined by the Army's FM 100-5, Operations. His advocates perceive a direct realtionship between the strategic and tactical levels as a result of Information Age forces. They argue that Information Age forces have altered the hierarchial pattern of strategy, operations and tactics as defined in the 1993 edition of the Army's FM 100-5, Operations. This manual defines these echelons as starting with
Strategy and running through Operations to Tactics. 
5
6
8
At the operational level of war, joint and combined operational forces within a theater of operations perform subordinate campaigns and major operations and plan, conduct, and sustain to accomplish the strategic objectives of the unified commander or higher military authority. 9
At the lowest echelon lies the Tactical level. This level concerns the employment of forces to win engagements and battles and thereby achieve Operational objectives. 
10
The Third Wave automobile, previously used to explain Toffler's themes, furnishes a means to analyze the significance of understanding the relationships between the three levels of warfare. First, the tactical level of war is considered as the numerous, minute functions that allow the engine to start, the wheels to roll, the brakes to stop, or the steering to turn. These functions such as fuel injection or spark plugs firing represent engagements and battles. Next, the automobile's systems represent the operational level of war. Similar to war's operational level which connect engagements and battles into campaigns; the cooling system, fuel system, electrical system, and exhaust system groups dozens of minute functions into a single, complex effect. Lastly, the strategic level is the automobile running on a road with all of its systems smoothly operating through their thousands of minute functions. With this analogy in mind, the Army officer is the automobile owner and driver. Similar to the driver knowing the multiple steps involved in effortlessly operating his automobile, the military officer must grasp the relationships between the levels in order to engineer successful combat operations.
The Agrarian Age -Toffler's First Wave
The levels of war were first defined for the late Agrarian Age, or Toffler's First
Wave, by two veterans of the Napoleonic wars, Antoine-Henri Jomini (1779-1869)   and Carl von Clausewitz (1780-1831). While the names for strategy, operations and tactics have been modified over time, the elements within the three levels have remained relatively constant with most of these theorists' fundamental concepts adopted into modern American military doctrine. The problem that arises is the misinterpretation of the theorists' ideas of the relationships and inter-connections between strategy, operations, and tactics. This misunderstanding occurred because of the complexity of the subject and style of the writers. Jomini and Clausewitz wrote about war on both a theoretical and realistic level. Over the years, interpretations of their writings have blended these two levels. While translations to English cause controversy with these difficult concepts, their style additionally leaves room for confusion. Jomini's writings are didactic and prescriptive in marked contrast to Clausewitz' metaphysical and philosophical technique. These styles cause many to believe they held opposite opinions when in fact they shared similar meanings only different approaches. 
11
To remain on firm doctrinal ground, a common description of the levels of war must be understood. FM 100-5 presents the levels of war as strategic, operational, and tactical. Jomini depicted the levels as strategy, grand tactics and tactics, while Both theorists defined strategic elements and links to the operational level that remain current in military doctrine. Although Jomini regarded The Art of War as a strategic guide, he concentrated more on our present day operational and tactical levels to the detriment of the strategic level. At this level, he described the relationship between the people, the economy, the military, the government, and the nation that prevail during war. 
13
15
16
This political objective represented his connection between the strategic and operational levels.
Both theorists attached great significance to what is now referred to as the operational level. Jomini's definitions of Strategy and Grand Tactics fell within the operational level. Jomini focused on decisive points, bases of operation, lines of operation, and lines of communications, which clearly reflect concepts relating to FM 100-5's operational level. His definitions emphasized four maxims that generally pertain to maneuvering an army to attack an enemy's decisive point or cut his line of operation, while negating the enemy's efforts to execute the same maneuver. 
19
21
For Clausewitz, the operational level was the use of engagements for the purpose of war to attain the political objective. 
22
23
24
25
Both theorists tended to agree on the elements which compose the tactical level of war. Jomini was inclined towards the battle as the principle event at the tactical level, and delineates three types of battle: offensive, defensive and unexpected or meeting on the march. He additionally grouped courage, genius, and fortune as elements of tactics. 
26
27
29
Jomini created a non-linear pattern to explain the relationships between the levels.
Jomini presented evidence of a bond that joins strategy and tactics. This interrelationship occurred in Jomini's description of a national political leader taking the field to perform "great actions" that could be done by his subordinate generals. 
30
Clausewitz opined that the reason for the effectiveness of most attacks lies in the general, the political conditions of war? 1 He additionally furnished specific practical evidence of this theoretical connection between the strategic and tactical levels. He offered examples of national leaders at the strategic level who knew everything turned on tactical results? 2 For both theorists, political considerations represented a vital coupling of strategy with tactics. Jomini and Clausewitz drew the evidence for this theoretical relationship from their interpretation of the experiences of Frederick the Great and Napoleon.
The battle of Rossbach on 1757 demonstrated the impact of a tactical battle on the strategic level during the Seven Years ' War (1756-1763). This conflict pitted Prussia against Austria, France, Russia, Saxony, and Sweden. During the war,
Frederick successfully led his country in all three levels of war simultaneously. His Strategie war aims were to retain possession of Silesia, continue his dominance in central European politics, and win economic and military assistance from Britain.
To achieve these political objectives while surrounded by three invading armies,
Frederick organized a large mobile striking force and smaller frontier detachments.
His operational plan sought to slow the penetrations of the enemy armies with his frontier defenses to allow the strike force, bkßre brigade, to defeat each uncoordinated thrust. Frederick knew that the tactical victories of the strike force would blunt his enemies' enthusiasm to continue their invasion, and ultimately achieve his political objectives. Therefore, Frederick personally took the field and commanded the strike force. His defeat of a French army at Rossbach on November 5, 1757, quieted hostilities on the western frontier, and allowed him to turn his attentions toward the eastern frontier. More importantly, this tactical victory reversed the British strategic decision to provide only economic assistance to the Prussians, and began the British commitment of troops on the continent against France. 
33
The Industrial Age -Tqffler's Second Wave
Toffler's advocates assert that Industrial Age, or Second Wave, warfare existed under a vertical hierarchy for the levels of war. Primarily this relationship between strategy, operations and tactics resulted from requirements for a command structure to control the large armies developed during this period. While this vertical hierarchy ran counter to Jomini's and Clausewitz' theoretical non-linear relationships between the levels of war, warfare still reflected these theorists' concept of a dynamic coupling of strategy and tactics. However, the vertical hierarchy influenced military command systems and received acceptance throughout the Industrial Age. While that hierarchy existed for command purposes, the non-linear phenomenon continued throughout this period.
The Prussian tactical defeat of the Austrians at Koniggratz (Sadowa) on Jury 3, 1866, demonstrates the existence of the non-linear pattern for the levels of war during the early Industrial Age. The Industrial Age, or Toffler's Second Wave, had just begun when this battle was fought. 
43
46
To comprehend the significance of Koniggratz, one must understand the central   Moltke changed the theorists' connection of strategy to tactics based on his military leadership experience. Rightly or wrongly, such a command system influenced European and American military institutions during the First World War.
The principle antagonists fighting in the western theater had all adopted systems similar to the Moltke model by 1918. Predictably, Germany continued the Moltke system, but military leaders became increasingly isolated from strategic political concerns. In their case, the politicians and military combined to oust the chancellor, Bethmann-Hollweg, because of his attempts to inject politics into the military effort. This concept ran contrary to contemporary German viewpoints, and served to bring in the Hindenburg-Ludendorff team and military control of the government. A grand strategy conference held on November 11, 1917 best exemplifies the separation of military objectives from the strategic level. With
Ludendorff as chairman, the assembly busied itself with finding a military solution to winning the war, and their discussions were completely divorced from any political objectives. 
69
On the other hand, political considerations acted as a connection between the strategic and operational levels for the Allies. Surprisingly, the British came closest to emulating the German war experience with the Moltke command system.
Unlike Bethmann-Hollweg, who attempted to insure the war remained an instrument of policy, British politicians tried to keep out of the way of the military.
Either because of a lack of military expertise or a fear of public rebuke, Prime Ferdinand Foch, during the dark days of the Ludendorff offensives in the spring of 1918. Under the French system, the strategic leader, Clemenceau, would also involve himself with the operational level, but he remained aloof from the tactical fight. In France at this time, there was no interaction between the strategic level and the tactical level. The French command system continued the political connection between strategy and operations. 
71
74
The Japanese political objectives in the war arose from their determination to create a Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere over an area roughly stretching from Siberia through Australasia. With these strategic objectives, Japan laid out military objectives and prepared operational plans to achieve its war aims. 
75
76
77
78
The operational plan called for Navy aircraft carriers to transport Army Air Corps bombers near Japan and launch them. The bombers would then fly to their targets, drop bombs, and land in China. 
79
The Doolittle Raid occurred on April 18, 1941. The battlefield for this engagement encompassed the sky lower than one thousand feet above the island of Honshu. The engagement featured eighty United States airmen in sixteen B-25 bombers against the home island population of Japan. Doolittle planned for the aircraft to fly to their targets, drop a mixture of demolition and incendiary bombs, then continue their flight and land in China. 
80
81
82
83
84
States, was the shock it delivered to Japanese confidence. This minor tactical engagement demonstrated the vulnerability of the home islands to airborne attack, and posed a direct threat to the Japanese emperor. Because the continued safety of Hirohito was a political objective, the Japanese operational plan had failed to meet this requirement. To rectify the strategic situation, the Japanese adopted a new operational plan that shifted the main war effort from defense to an offensive operation into the central Pacific to establish a deeper defense. The offensive they undertook resulted in the Battle of Midway, the climatic event of the Pacific 
War. 85
Undoubtedly, the non-linear relationships between the levels of war existed in the Industrial Age. While Jomini and Clausewitz proposed these dynamic relationships in the Agrarian Age, this phenomenon continued in the Industrial Age.
In 
The unique technology introduced during the Information Age has not produced a revolution in military affairs concerning the levels of war. Toffler advocates failed to notice the non-linear connections between strategy, operations, and tactics during the Agrarian and Industrial Age. Throughout the First and Second Waves, tactical events directly impacted on the strategic level, demonstrating that non-linear relationships existed over the last two hundred years.
Two Agrarian Age theorists, Jomini and Clausewitz, were the first to conceptalalize the levels of war. Their theories grasped a coupling of strategy to tactics, based on the experiences of Frederick the Great and Napoleon.
Misperceptions developed and obscured the meaning of this strategy to tactics affinity based on the theorists' writing style and the difficult concepts that dealt with war. However, historical examples, particularly Rossbach and Austerlitz, reveal the powerful political impact of tactical victories on strategic decisions. The argument that the non-linear relationship is possible through the technology present in the Information Age is disproved by these events during the Agrarian Age.
The late 19th century and World War I saw the development of the vertical hierarchy as a structure for military command as a response to the unwieldy proportions of the Industrial Age armies. While this vertical hierarchy ran counter to Jomini's and Clausewitz' theoretical relationship between strategy and tactics, political considerations remained an element of the operational level. Only when political considerations were excluded, such as in Germany, during the last two years of World War I did problems develop. This vertical hierarchy system of command, or Moltkean model, continued to shape command structures through World War II. But, while this hierarchy existed for command purposes, the nonlinear phenomenon remained applicable to explain the relationships between the levels throughout the Industrial Age.
The latest edition of FM 100-5 continues to follow the vertical hierarchy, similar to the Moltke model, for the Army's command structure. While the fundamentals within strategy, operations and tactics were based on the theories proposed by Jomini and Clausewitz, the manual fails to address the non-linear relationships between the levels of war. To remain with this vertical hierarchy is similar to the automobile driver not pumping gas into his vehicle. Using the analogy of the automobile, as explained in the Introduction, the minute functions of the engine represent the tactical level, car's major systems are analogous to the operational level, and the act of driving on a road illustrates the strategic level.
When the gas gauge registers empty, the driver fills the tank. If a tire looks flat, the driver changes it or adds air. When the thermostat shows hot, the driver adds water and coolant. These circumstances are comparable to a tactical event impacting on strategy. The Army must realize that such events occur, and re-examine its doctrine to include this phenomenon. This Prussian invasion portrays the beginning of modem operational art as defined by the criteria from the Military History Course. In fact, there exist many similarities between this campaign and Napoleon's Campaign of 1809.
First, Frederick's strategy called for the survival of his country against four enemies. He chose to defend against two (Russia and Sweden), and attack the third (Austria) before the fourth (France) could interfere. This offensive against Austria signifies an integral part of his strategic plan to save his kingdom.
Napoleon conducted a similar strategy in 1809. He placed minimal forces against Britain in Spain, and diplomatically isolated then militarily defeated Austria.
Second, the Prussian campaign effectively linked strategy to tactics. Fourth, the opposing forces were symmetrical and approached a corps-type organization. The Austrians fought using a regimental system and the same weapons as the Prussian Army. While not named as a corps, they possessed rudimentary staffs and approached the corps in size. From east to west, the Prussian columns numbered 19,300 soldiers, 39,600 soldiers, 20,300 soldiers, and lastly 34,000. The Austrians were arrayed in groups of 24,000 soldiers, 30,000 soldiers, 28,000 soldiers, and 27,000. 
90
Fifth, the Prussians employed decentralized command and control. Each advancing column possessed a commander with specific orders for the invasion.
Prince Moritz lead the eastern most column, while Frederick was his overall commander and lead the second column. Field Marshal Schwerin commanded the western forces consisting of his column and the Duke of Bevern's column. The
French columns in 1809 also received detailed instructions on routes and timings.
Sixth, the Prussian advance exhibited sequenced and simultaneous engagements. Specifically, orders to Moritz and Bevern were for independent movement and raids to confuse the Austrians, then to unite with Frederick and Schwerin respectively. Once the two major forces united, Frederick's pushed an Austrian force south along the Elbe, while Schwerin's moved independently against another Austrian force toward the rear of Prague. 
91
Seventh, as discussed above, the Prussian Army possessed a common understanding for their unique tactics or doctrine. But, these procedures extended into higher level methods. Frederick, a prolific writer, wrote three military works that included instructions on technical, campaign and tactical procedures. These doctrinal works were Prinicipe generaux de la guerre written in 1746, Testament politique written in 1752, and Principes generaux provided as an attachment to the latter. The Prussian field marshals read and understood Frederick's methods from these books. The French field marshals fought alongside Napoleon for many years
The author paraphrased from the following references noted below, and includes a summary of the evidence cited in each reference.  and General Staff College, December, 1993), page 6. GEN Franks discusses the impact of "Third Wave" knowledge warfare that is changing the basic nature of warfare. .
The Third Wave. (New York, New York: Bantam Books, 1981), pages 9 and 14. (Hereafter cited as Third Wave.) These pages provide Toffler's themes of "social wave front analysis." He believes history is a "succession of rolling waves of change." These pages describe elements mat make up and caused change for societies in his First Wave -agrarian and Second Wave -industrial.
Alvin and Heidi Toffler, War and Anti-War: Survival at the Dawn of the 21st Century, (New York, New York: Little, Brown and Company, 1993), pages 1 through 5, 18 and 19, and 33 through 43. (Hereafter cited as War and Anti-War.) The authors restate and summarize the "wave" themes of the previously published The Third Wave. 4. Third Wave, pages 1 through 5 and 127 through 154. These pages provide Toffler's themes for his Third Wave. It is not until his War and Anti-War that he emphasizes information age.
War and Anti-War, pages 1 through 5 and 64 through 80. The authors stress "knowledge" as information gathering and the basis for change in Third Wave society. They emphasize the importance of the microchip and computers to conduct Third Wave warfare. 5. David Jablonsky, Parameters, "US Military Doctrine and The Revolution in Military Affairs," (Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania: US Army War College, Autumn 1994), pages 18 through 36. COL(r) Jablonsky's article concerns a broad Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) as a result of the interaction between technology and war. He cites Toffler's "wave" themes. His conclusions stress shorter decision times, and the spread of tactical and strategic decisions into the operational levels. Douglas A. MacGregor, Parameters, "Future Battle: The Merging Levels of War," (Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania: US Army War College, Winter 1992-93), pages 33 through 47. LTC MacGregor's article discusses "the technologically altered battlefield" that "merges the three levels of war."
GEN Gordon R. Sullivan, Brief to SAMS, (Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: School of Advanced Military Studies, 141200 February 1995). While no transcript exists of this briefing, GEN Sullivan discussed the leadership skills of LTC Hugh Shelton during Operation RESTORE DEMOCRACY. GEN Sullivan explained a "new" pattern for the levels of war as a result of the Information Age.
US Army, FM 100-5, Operations, (Washington, D.C.: US Government Printing Office, 1993), pages 1-3 and 6-1. (Hereafter cited as Operations.) These references provide the paraphrase for establishing the "echelons" of the levels of war, or a hierarchical pattern. The first paragraph of each page describes the levels of war and explains that they "flow" in echelons from highest to lowest. 6. Operations, page Glossary-8. This reference provided a direct quote for the definition of Strategy.
7. Operations, page 1-3. This reference provides a passage describing the levels of war within the text of the manual, and is paraphrased to further define Strategy as seeking "alliance or coalition objectives." 8. Operations, page 1-3. This sentence contains a direct quote of operation's "vital link" to Strategy and Tactics. Page 6-2 also contains the description of the Operational level being a "vital link." 9. Operations, page 6-2. A direct quote describing the Operational level of war. 10. Operations, pages 1-3, 6-3, and Glossary-8. These references describing tactics as "the art and science of employing available means to win battles and engagements" are paraphrased in this sentence. Additionally, page 6-3 explains the link to the Operational level. 12. This table results from a class hand-out distributed by James J. Indeed, in this class we may place the passions of the nation to be fought, their military system, their immediate means and their reserves, their financial resources, the attachment they bear to their government or their institutions, the character of the executive, the character and military abilities of the commanders of their armies, the influence of the cabinet councils or councils of war at the capital upon the operations, the system of war favor with their staff, the established force of the state and its armament, the military geography and statistics of the state which is to be invaded, and, finally, the resources and obstacles of every kind likely to be met with, all of which are included neither in diplomacy nor strategy.
14. Art of War, pages 12, 13 and 34. On these pages Jomini defines political objective as the object of the war, which is determined by the statesman. Additionally, Jomini's Military Policy evolved from the object of the war similar to Clausewitz' military objective.
15. Art of War, pages 12, 13, and 61 through 64. These pages describe decisive points, bases of operations, lines of operations, and lines of communications, and reveal a resemble to the operational definitions in FM 100-5.  84. The Doolittle Raid, pages 200 and 201. These pages describe the damage to the B-25s, and explain the Japanese and American reaction to the insignificant damage. Doolittle, A Biography, pages 198 and 199, and 202 and 203. The first set of pages describe the extent of damage, the lost B-25s, and the reaction in Japan and the United States. The second set record Doolittle's reaction, who felt he did not deserve a Medal of Honor for losing the aircraft.
85. John Keegan, The Price of Admiralty: The Evolution of Naval Warfare, (New York, New York: Penguin Books, 1988), pages 214 and 215. These pages relate the shift in Japanese strategy and ultimately operations based on the tactical event of the Doolittle Raid.
The Barrier and the Javelin, pages 118 and 119. These pages additionally describe the shift in Japanese strategy and operations based on the tactical event of the Doolittle Raid.
86. Age of Battles, pages 167 through 170. This paraphrase concerns Weigley's description of the strategies employed during limited warfare, the size of armies, the threat to the monarchies, and parade ground tactics. R.R. Palmer, "Frederick the Great, Guibert, Bulow; From Dynastic to National War," in Peter Paret, editor, Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, (Princeton, New Jersey, 1986), pages 91 through 95. After cited as Frederick. This paraphrase points out the strategic objectives of limited war, and the parade style battle maneuver. 87. Age of Battles, pages 179 and 180. This reference furnished evidence to paraphrase the enemy and Prussian strategies during the Seven Years War.
Jay Luvaas, editor and translator, Frederick the Great on the Art of War,  (New York, 1966), pages 213 through 216. Hereafter cited as Frederick on Art. This reference provided additional insight into the strategic setting.
Christopher Duffy, The Military Life of Frederick the Great (New York, 1986), pages 109 through 111. Hereafter cited as The Military Life. This reference contributed to paraphrase the overall strategy and enemy objectives facing the Prussians.
Christopher Duffy, "Rossbach," in Cyril Falls, editor, Great Military Battles,  (London, 1964), pages 58 through 61. This reference presented a brief examination of the Prussian Campaign of 1757.  B.H. Liddell Hart, Strategy, (New York, 1956), pages 108 and 109. This reference supplied a general overview of strategies of the participants in the Seven Years War. The primary focus is on Great Britain. 88. Frederick on Art pages 215 and 216. This reference gave evidence for the disposition of Prussian forces against the Russians and Austrians.
50
49
Prussia and Russia worked out a system to strengthen the weak Germanic countries of central Europe. For centuries, France had invaded this area for territorial gains.
Prussia and Russia worked out a system to strengthen the weak Germanic countries of central Europe. For centuries, France had invaded this area for territorial gains.
Vordre mixe and the Ordinance of 1791 for tactical engagements.
The Prussian invasion of Bohemia in 1757 represents the earliest evidence of modern operational art. Warfare in the eighteenth century primarily embodied limited war that flowed from limited resources and limited strategic ambition.
During the Bohemian campaign, the Prussians transformed this paradigm and advanced the distinct traits of modem operational warfare. Frederick's campaign against Austria in Bohemia personifies the first rustling of modern operational art as defined by the criteria from the Military History Course.
Command in War, pages 115 through 118. These pages additionally describe the Moltke's operational planning.
Genius for War, pages 79 and 80. This pages additionally describe the Moltke's operational planning. 55. Koniggratz, pages 43 through 70. These pages describe the engagements and movements of the Prussian and Austrian armies leading up to the final climatic battle of Koniggratz.
A Genius for War, pages 80 and 82. These pages additionally describe the engagements and movements. 56. Command in War, page 104. This page provides Van Crevald's belief that Moltke was not a "master piece" of operational command, and his direct quote. 57. Command in War, page 104. This page provides Moltke's evaluation of his personal performance.
Koniggratz. pages 82 and 83. These pages provide Schlieffen's appraisal that the Prussian army commanders failed to understand Moltke's operational plan to encircle Benedek's army. 58. Koniggratz, pages 87 and 88. These pages describe the battlefield. Page 92 provides a map to estimate the distances involved in the battle. 59. Koniggratz, pages 88 through 93. These pages explain Benedek's tactical defense plan, and describe the difficulties he experienced control his forces prior to the battle. 60. Koniggratz. pages 83 through 86. These pages describe the Prussian tactical plan and its origination with 1st Prussian Army's concept for the next days engagement. Further, this account shows Moltke played little part in devising an operational plan. It was purely tactical.
Command in War, pages 135 and 136. These pages agree with Craig's account of the little part Moltke played in the scheme of maneuver for the battle on Jury 3, 1866.
A Genius for War, pages 84 and 85. These pages additionally describe the development of the tactical plan.  1943), page 185. This page points out that the quickness of the tactic victory Napoleon III could have attempted to take the Rhineland and increase French influence with the German states.
The Art of War, page 139. This page explains that the Prussian victory dissuaded Napoleon HI from attacking the German states.
63. Koniggratz, pages 167 through 172. These pages describe Bismarck's diplomatic maneuvering and the treaties and agreements as a result of the battle A Genius for War, pages 86 and 88, and 89 through 93. These pages additionally describe Bismarck's diplomatic maneuvers.
History of the German General Staff, pages 88 and 89. These pages additionally describe Bismarck's diplomatic maneuvers. Koniggratz, pages 172 through 179. These pages detail the rise in prestige of the Prussian military.
65. Moltke on War, page 7. This page is paraphrased from the introduction by Daniel J. Hughes and points out Moltke's belief in the role of political and military advisers in time of war.
On War, page 31. This page is from the introduction by Michael Howard and additionally points out Moltke's views on political and military advisers in time of war.
66. Moltke on War, pages 12 through 14 and 45 through 47. These pages concern Moltke's belief that war is a system of expedients.
67. Moltke on War, page 36. This page provides Moltke's view on political considerations, and the italicized passage is a direct quote.
68. Moltke on War, page 7. This passage is a paraphrase of Moltke's role as military adviser in time of war.
Age of Battles, page 180. This reference furnished the evidence: "Two of the columns were to converge in the rear of Prague, while the other two would come under Frederick's immediate command for a direct assault on the capital."'
The Military Life, pages 111 through 116. This reference contributed the Prussians operational plan.
89. The Military Life, pages 16 through 81. Duffy recounts the importance of Frederick's writings and Prussian drill.
Frederick, pages 99 through 103. This articles furnished evidence for Prussian tactics, Frederick's writings, and the "oblique order." 90. The Military Life, pages 112 and 113. This reference furnished the number of soldiers per force for the Prussians and the Austrians. 91-Age of Battles, page 180. This reference furnished the evidence: "Two of the columns were to converge in the rear of Prague, while the other two would come under Frederick's immediate command for a direct assault on the capital.'"