# ID: f2d761507e1449af8b0ccdad8bed6b33
# Title: Satellite and Ground Communication Systems: Space and Electronic Warfare Threats to the United States Army
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Threats to communication satellites and ground communication systems will present significant challenges to the US Army in a conventional war. The US Army is significantly dependent on satellite communication for the planning and execution of operations. In an austere environment, most of the Army's high-data mission command systems cannot function without satellite connectivity. Potential belligerents' counter-space capabilities can disrupt the Army's access to satellite communication, and US forces operating at northern extremes may not have connection due to geosynchronous satellite geometry. This would leave US forces more reliant on their terrestrial communication systems. Although the US Army has a strong historical precedent for countering electronic warfare threats to its ground communication systems, disciplined electronic protection has deteriorated since the end of the Cold War due to waning threats and to an apparent technological superiority. This leaves the Army with little capability to counter the increasing electronic warfare capability that would target US communication systems. Given the threats to satellite and ground communication systems, the US Army is unlikely to be successful in a conventional war against a comparable adversary without significant change to equipment, doctrine, and training.
The Athenians are addicted to innovation, and their designs are characterized by swiftness alike in conception and execution; you have a genius for keeping what you have got, accompanied by a total want of invention, and when forced to act you never go far enough.
It is the law, as in the arts so in politics, that improvements ever prevail; and though fixed usages may be best for undisturbed communities, constant necessities of action must be accompanied by the constant improvement of methods. Thus it happens that the vast experience of Athens has carried her further than you on the path of innovation.
-Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War
United States ground forces are significantly vulnerable in future conflict due to a dangerous reliance on satellite communication (SATCOM) and a lack of readiness to fight in the face of a growing counter-space and communications electronic warfare (EW) threat. Although SATCOM provides significant advantages over terrestrial communication systems, it carries some liabilities for which the US Army is ill-prepared. Coinciding with the Army's dependence on SATCOM, there is a lethargic institutional response to the unyielding proliferation of EW threats facing terrestrial communications. Although the US military's overall technological lead over nearpeer threats has narrowed, the US Army continues to train and equip as though there is little technological threat to its communication practices and as if SATCOM is guaranteed. This complacency is accompanied by the procurement of high-data communication and mission command systems that deny ground forces both the flexibility and electronic protection they need to communicate and fight effectively in an environment where both space and the electromagnetic spectrum are contested.
One of the US Army's most critical vulnerabilities is its overreliance on SATCOM, on which most of its mission command systems depend. Most of the Army's mission command systems have developed to require data rates so high that the only way for them to function in an expeditionary role is through SATCOM. The increasing need for SATCOM bandwidth has led the US military to channel its operational communications through the leased networks of commercial satellites, which lack adequate protection against jamming and are susceptible to state-actor influence.
Potential adversaries of the United States, such as the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of China, have long recognized US dependence on SATCOM and have developed formidable capabilities-such as jamming and anti-satellite missiles-to attack that dependence.
Even without human threats to SATCOM, periodic geomagnetic storms have the potential to damage all satellites in orbit. Besides these challenges, most communication satellites do not function north of 65°N latitude, which includes zones for potential conflict with Russia. Despite these concerns, most ground force communications are structured to require consistent SATCOM.
As the US Army's celestial communication systems have enjoyed an apparent sanctuary in space, terrestrial communications EW has been put on the back burner. Advances in US electronic counter-countermeasures (ECCM), the fall of the Soviet Union, and the low EW threat in the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan are factors that have contributed to the Army's apathy toward communications protection. Current doctrinal manuals that cover communication practices and electronic warfare often lack the depth and tactical solutions that Cold War doctrine once provided to combat the EW threat. As well, the decision to field ground communication systems with highly detectable electromagnetic signatures is very reflective of an Army doctrine and culture that does not appreciate the potential of a terrestrial communications EW threat.
To overcome these significant vulnerabilities, the US Army must procure communications systems that maintain the information high ground, but also allow redundancy, flexibility, and survivability against threat counter-space and EW capabilities. As well, the Army must refine its doctrine to place proper emphasis on the threat of electronic attack and detection. Individual and collective training should combine the right equipment and techniques to ensure units are training for a realistic fight, which would include periods of denied SATCOM and increased threat of electronic attack and reconnaissance.
Upon assuming duties as the Chief of Staff of the Army, General Mark A. Milley said, "If we do not maintain our commitment to remain strong in the air, on the sea and yes, on the ground, then we will pay the butcher's bill in blood, and we will forever lose the precious gift of our freedom."
1
However, the equipment, training, and doctrine of today will determine how steep that learning curve is and what price in blood the US Army will pay. Currently, the Army's communication vulnerabilities will face increasingly eager and sophisticated threats, and the benefit of prescient groundwork in peace is preferable to costly improvisation in a time of war. proximity to the equator allows SATCOM to function without terrain or man-made structures frequently blocking connection between the ground terminal and the satellite. As well, SATCOM provides data rates much higher than lower-frequency, terrestrial systems discussed above. The Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) joint-service satellite system can provide up to 8 megabits per second (Mbps) for as many as 6,000 terminals between the 65°N and 65°S latitudes. 
6
As SATCOM has provided the warfighter with increased operational reach, data, and stealth, the US Army has increased its dependence on SATCOM. During the Gulf War, up to sixty satellites supported the transfer of operational data, allowing US ground units beyond the range of CNR to keep pace with rapid developments on the battlefield. 
7
10,
11
12
8 Ibid, 202. 9 Edward Byrne and Paul Konyha, eds., Space Primer (Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University Press, 2009).
10 Blue Force Tracking (BFT) communicates GPS-enabled position location information (PLI) and text via commercial L-Band SATCOM, while EPLRS communicates such information through line-of-sight terrestrial UHF radio and automatic mobile relay.
11 Patrick J. Donahue and United States Army Forces Command, "Force Command Mission  Command Network Priorities," April 26, 2016, 1-3.  per second (Gbps) today to 80 Gbps by 2022; projected SATCOM coverage will only be capable of providing up to 50 Gbps. 
13
DCGS, an intelligence-sharing product, requires a large amount of bandwidth,
14
CPOF can function at rates as low as 5 Mbps for about 300 users,
15
Without system modification, DCGS, CPOF, and other mission command systems will only function with SATCOM in an expeditionary environment. In an immature theater without advanced infrastructure such as fiber optic cable, many of the Army's mission command systems that support warfighting will not function if satellite connectivity is lost.
The logic of war usually leads belligerents to fight with whatever tools are at hand.
-Gideon Rose, How Wars End Spaced-based satellite relay is the obvious choice for providing long-range reliable communications…However the vulnerability of satellites in the future suggests that it would be unwise to rely exclusively on such systems.
-Timothy Garden, The Technology Trap
Dependence on SATCOM comes with an array of geographic limitations and terrain interference. Most significant is the geographic limitation of the satellite "footprints" to between 65°N and 65°S, which define the areas in which ground terminals can connect to a satellite and vice versa. 
16
Half of Norway lies north of 65°N latitude, and this key NATO ally shares a 120-mile border with Russia, which has shown itself to be a reemerging threat since its 2008 invasion of Georgia. While some may consider NATO and the other Nordic countries currently safe from Russian invasion, a 2015 Russian training exercise that rehearsed a contingency invasion of Norway, Finland, Denmark, and Sweden shows otherwise. In the exercise scenario, Russia simulated the invasion of these states in order to control access to the Baltic Sea, denying NATO the ability to reinforce its allies in Eastern Europe. 
17
18
19
Not only do SATCOM footprints not extend beyond 65°N and 65°S, but the degree to which mountains, hills, and valleys affect satellite communication increases as ground communication terminals move further from the equator. Because most military communication satellites orbit above the equator, these satellites will appear in the southern sky when observed from the Northern Hemisphere. As the observer in the Northern Hemisphere moves further north, the communication satellite will appear lower in the sky. In relatively flat, open terrain, this is not an issue as long as the ground terminal can 'see' and communicate with the communication satellite. However, if a ground terminal has elevated terrain or infrastructure to its south, it may not be able to communicate with the desired satellite. Any command and control systems that can only communicate through satellite-based communications will be nearly useless. As long as BFT, CPOF, and DCGS require SATCOM to function, those systems will be of no use to US ground forces operating in mountainous terrain near these northern extremes.
A useful illustration of this problem can be gleaned from the website, dishpointer.com. The website allows users to determine the azimuth and elevation to which they must orient their ground terminals in order to successfully connect to a satellite. Although the longitudes of most military communication satellites are not available at the time of this writing, the Eutelsat 12 commercial satellite will show line-of-sight challenges that are comparable to military SATCOM. If US ground forces were to operate alongside NATO forces to deter or defeat Russian aggression on the Scandinavian Peninsula, military SATCOM would meet some significant challenges due to satellite geometry, man-made structures, and terrain. For example, some of the MCPP-N equipment is in a cave complex in Trondheim, Norway, which sits at 63.4305° latitude. This is technically within most SATCOM footprints, but subject to significant terrain interference.
After expanding the port basing area, follow-on ground forces would likely have to deploy through Trondheim's port and fight across the peninsula around that same latitude. According to dishpointer.com, a SATCOM ground terminal in Trondheim must aim at 16° elevation to connect with a communication satellite similar to the Eutelsat 12 (Figure 
2
21
21
Notwithstanding the limits of geosynchronous communication satellites, there are some military SATCOM constellations that can communicate with terminals beyond 65°N. Lockheed Martin claims that their Mobile User Objective System (MUOS) achieved successful Ultra High Frequency (UHF) voice and data connection on board an L-100 aircraft at 89.5°N. However, this connection was on an aircraft-therefore allowing an elevated line-of-sight advantage that ground units do not have-and the connection was only successful during "peak orbital conditions" of the supporting MUOS satellite. 
22
23
24
25
Besides the geographic limitations of SATCOM, satellites are significantly vulnerable to some rare naturally-occurring events and emerging threat capabilities. Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) resulting in geomagnetic storms have the potential to cause significant damage to satellite electronics. 
26
Even if US forces are operating in the optimal geographic area for successful satellite connectivity, natural phenomena or human interference could damage SATCOM systems-civilian or militaryto a point of critical dysfunction.
Geomagnetic storms are a significant concern for any system that relies on electronics, but particularly for satellites exposed in space. The 1859 Carrington Event-a geomagnetic solar storm "with the energy of 10 billion atomic bombs"-caused telegraph machines to spark, "shocking operators and setting papers ablaze."
27
28
29
30
Unavoidable CMEs are a valid concern, but intentional human interference with SATCOM is a more pressing matter. The People's Liberation Army (PLA) of China recognizes "the United efforts have caused concern in the US intelligence community that China's counter-space capabilities "could destroy or disable US satellites responsible for handling nearly 90% of US military communications." 38 A 2006 DoD report determined that China "can currently destroy or disable satellites by launching a ballistic missile or space-launched vehicle armed with a nuclear weapon," 39 causing the destruction of a cluster of satellites at a specific longitude. The strategic advantage of using a nuclear weapon in space against communications satellites is that it would paralyze the targeted nation's ability to communicate at all levels of operations without direct loss of life to the adversary's population or military personnel. Such an attack on US SATCOM would likely not result in nuclear retaliation and mutually assured destruction.  report confirmed that China had satellite jammers in development as well as other non-kinetic counter-space capabilities. 
42
43
44
In July 2013, China launched a rocket carrying the CX-3, SY-7, and SJ-15 satellites, one of which was equipped with a robotic arm for grabbing or capturing items in space. Once all three were in orbit, the satellite with the robotic arm grappled one of the other satellites, which was acting as a target satellite. The satellite with the robotic arm then changed orbits and came within proximity of a separate satellite, the SJ-7, an older Chinese satellite that was orbited in 2005. Robotic arms can be used for civilian missions such as satellite repair, space station construction, and orbital debris removal; they also can attach to a target satellite to perform various antisatellite missions. 
45
Russia has been historically competitive with the US in counter-space development.
Between 1968 and 1971, Russia conducted seven ASAT tests, five of which successfully destroyed 42 Michael T. Flynn, "Annual Threat Assessment," § sec. Senate Armed Services Committee (2014), sec. Senate Armed Services Committee 15, accessed on November 25, 2016, http://www.dia.mil/Portals/27/Documents/News/2014_DIA_SFR_SASC_ATA_FINAL.pdf. 
43
44
45
satellites at altitudes of 230 to 1,000 kilometers. 
46
47
48
49
50
46
47 Charlie Moore, "Russia Successfully Tests Anti-Satellite Missile," Daily Mail, May 27, 2016, http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3612851/Russia-successfully-tests-anti-satellitemissile-capable-wiping-navigation-communications-intelligence-devices.html. 
48
49
50
51
Unfortunately, commercial satellite companies outside the United States are at risk of state manipulation. From 2012 to 2014, the DoD leased the Chinese Apstar-7 satellite to increase bandwidth for US Africa Command (AFRICOM). 
52
53
Given potential adversaries' capability to destroy, damage, or disrupt both military and commercial SATCOM, it is important to recognize the lack of redundancy in the satellite constellations themselves. Only three satellites make up military's AEHF constellation, 
54
55
53 Noah Shachtman, "Pentagon Paying China -Yes, China -To Carry Data," Wired, accessed November 4, 2016, https://www.wired.com/2013/04/china-pentagon-satellite/. 
54
55
56
Even if just a single US communications satellite were to be destroyed, it could have devastating effects on communications for land forces. 
57
Ground units would continue to lack communication until either they switched to a redundant satellite (if available), until they adopted a terrestrial CNR solution, or until the US put a new satellite in orbit.
Replacing satellites is a lengthy and expensive process. For example, the first AEHF satellite was scheduled for launch in 2006, but did not actually launch until 2010. The second AEHF satellite went into orbit in 2012, five years later than its original launch date. Besides the emplacement time, satellites are expensive. The total AEHF program cost is currently at $14.6 billion, which is twice the original cost estimate. 
59
56
57
58
59
The US Army does recognize this dependence and is developing and fielding systems to fill the gap with terrestrial systems such as High-band Networking Waveform (HNW) and Mid-Tier Networking Vehicular Radio (MNVR). HNW is meant to allow Army command and control systems to continue to function if SATCOM is lost, without significantly sacrificing rates of data.
Unfortunately, the most recent Follow-on Operational Test and Evaluation (FOT&E) of the HNW yielded disappointing results. At best, the HNW could achieve ranges of 10 km in the open desertwith use of a stationary relay tower-but even at these short distances, 81% of data traffic still went through SATCOM. The evaluation document also reported that the HNW was limited to distances of 1 km in the densely wooded terrain of Ft. Campbell, Kentucky. 
60
Overreliance on SATCOM will surely pose some of the above challenges to an army at war. To fight effectively, US ground forces must have mission command systems that can function through mediums other than SATCOM. Although many consider SATCOM to be critical to the 
60
62
In a conflict where access to SATCOM is contested, ground elements-from individual vehicles all the way up to corps-level headquarters-will likely increase their use of terrestrial CNR. A corresponding increase in electronic signature will raise their exposure to terrestrial EW threats. The US Army has a strong historical and doctrinal precedent for countering these threats.
Unfortunately, potential adversaries of the US have increased their ability to target terrestrial CNR through direction finding and electronic countermeasures (ECM) 63 such as jamming. Meanwhile, the US Army's confidence in its terrestrial systems' survivability against EW has allowed US ground forces to become complacent and to develop communication practices that lack proper emphasis on countering these threats through electronic counter-countermeasures (ECCM). 
64
Both jamming and direction finding are significant concerns for ground force communication. Jamming is dangerous in that it prevents units from communicating (i.e. preventing the calling of a much-needed reserve, calling for artillery support, logistics support, etc.), but jamming does not provide to the threat a location of friendly positions. Direction finding is 63 James M. Rockwell, ed., Tactical C 3 for the Ground Forces, AFCEA/SIGNAL Magazine C 3 I Series, v. 4 (Washington, DC: AFCEA International Press, 1986), 293. ECMs are "those actions taken to prevent effective use of the electromagnetic spectrum by an enemy (includes jamming and deception)." 
64
4
67
67
CEP if they have sufficient artillery. 
68
Direction finding is not limited to horizontal triangulation, because HF direction finders add a vertical dimension to the geometry. A particular advantage of an HF direction finder is that it can use single-site location (SSL) with only one bearing to determine the location of the emitter. 
69
5
Simply coupling the direction with the distance provides a general location of the emitter, at which 68 Field Manual (FM) 24-18, Tactical Single-Channel Radio Communication Techniques (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1987), 6-2. 
69
71
72
73
74
72
The Soviet Army also used emission control on the Eastern Front for the purpose of avoiding German direction finders and other forms of radio reconnaissance. Learning from their lack of radio discipline during World War I and consequential defeat at Tannenberg, the Russians enforced strict emission control to deny the Germans the opportunity to triangulate Russian positions. 
76
77
78
79
80
82
83
84
85
6
85
86 Doug Richardson, An Illustrated Guide to the Techniques and Equipment of Electronic Warfare (New York, NY: Arco Pub, 1985), 69. Historical, doctrinal, and technological precedent shows that the US Army had a healthy concern for a defensive electronic posture during the Cold War. In this context, the US Army continued to pursue technological improvement in electronic protection. The US military began design of SINCGARS in 1974, with production deliveries starting in 1988. 87 SINCGARS replaced many of the Vietnam-era radios that were considerably vulnerable to electronic interception and jamming. The advantage of SINCGARS-both in the 1980s and today-is that it can change frequencies over 100 times per second on a hopping pattern known only to friendly radio systems. 
88
89
The advances in ECCM technology in the 1980s and the decline of the Soviet Union allowed the US Army to relax its emphasis on the EW threat. During the 1991 Persian Gulf War, the Iraqi Army enforced strict radio silence until in contact with the enemy, but the US-led coalition 
87
88
89
90
91
92
found it difficult to maintain radio discipline. 
93
US Army doctrine gradually began to assume a dependable advantage over enemy ECM. In 1996, FM 11-1, Talk II-SINCGARS, claimed that with the fielding of SINCGARS, the "capabilities of sophisticated, complex enemy jammers have to a great extent been neutralized," even considering the "technological improvements in enemy jamming and electronic collection" at that time. 
94
95
The manual details critical aspects of enemy interception, direction finding, jamming, and techniques for radio operators to overcome jamming with various radio sets. In addition to having a section completely dedicated to ECCM, the manual references ECCM seventeen times. The manual provides an entire annex dedicated to the use of the SNAP-1. The manual explains in detail the inherent advantage of additional gain and avoidance of enemy jammers and direction finders. 96 
93
94
95
96
98
99
For example, FM 3-38, Cyber Electromagnetic Activities, which broadly covers aspects of both cyber and EW, mentions emission control twice, but does not specifically reference ECCM at all. The manual mentions directional antennas and other forms of ECCM in passing: Take appropriate actions to minimize the vulnerability of friendly receivers to enemy jamming (such as reduced power, brevity of transmissions, and directional antennas). Ensure redundancy in all systems is maintained and personnel are well-versed in switching between systems. 100 ATP 3-36, Electronic Warfare Techniques, mentions direction finding five times, but provides no in-depth description of how an enemy may employ direction finding, nor does it provide any 
97
98
99
100
101
Again, the lack of emphasis on electronic protection in US Army communications and EW doctrine indicates the Army is not actively concerned about avoiding enemy electronic jammers and sensors. This is in sharp contrast with the 1987 doctrine of FM 24-18, a simple radio manual, which provides more in-depth analysis of enemy EW effects-as well as appropriate ECCM-than do all of the contemporary manuals listed above.
Part of this shift was due to a reduced EW threat. The swift defeat of the Iraqi Army, the waning military power of Russia during the 1990s, and the rapid toppling of Saddam Hussein in 2003 made security on the electromagnetic spectrum seem like an afterthought. However, the belief that SINCGARS could elude modern enemy jammers, as surmised in FM 11-1, is inaccurate. Even before the full fielding of SINCGARS in 1987, scholars were voicing the concern that it was still vulnerable to EW capabilities. A 1986 monograph bemoaned that procurement of SINCGARS radios was underway "despite the fact that it is now known that they are just as vulnerable to the new jammers as are single channel radios."
102
For all the emphasis the Army placed on masking communication emissions during World War II, the consequence of lacking radio discipline may have only been a massed artillery bombardment.
Today, however, potential adversaries have precision capability which can completely destroy headquarters and massed forces at any echelon if their location is known. Even the slightest chirp of a radio emission picked up by a single direction finder can cue an enemy UAV along a directional bearing to identify the target location, leading to the devastating accuracy of enemy precision fires.
A recent account from the Russo-Ukrainian War best illustrates this potential:
The low-intensity counterinsurgency wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have not prepared U.S. forces for the high-intensity, peer-on-peer battlefield. In July 2014, Russia launched fire strikes with long-range artillery and multiple rocket launchers employing top-attack munitions and thermobaric warheads against two Ukrainian mechanized battalions in the open. This intensely concentrated fire strike lasted only a few minutes yet inflicted high casualties and destroyed most armored vehicles, rendering both battalions combatineffective. 
113
115
116
117
118
119
120
The US Army is significantly vulnerable to terrestrial EW attack and detection. Although there is strong historical, technological, and doctrinal precedent for the US Army's inclusion of EW defense, the most recent doctrine and equipment altogether exclude electronic protection. Russia has proved its effective EW capability against the Ukrainian Army, and the technological advantage that the US enjoyed in past conflicts will not continue against such a threat. The US Army must address its EW capability gap.
The US Army should prepare for the loss of SATCOM in a future conflict, as such a loss is sufficiently likely. Preparing for such a conflict will require systems to have the flexibility to operate through terrestrial CNR. Regardless, with or without an increased use of terrestrial CNR, the US Army is also likely to encounter significant terrestrial EW reconnaissance and attack. To prepare for this threat, the Army should make immediate changes to equipment, doctrine, and training to address the current threat.
To equip for a future conflict with a persistent space and EW threat, the Army should cease fielding of WIN-T, develop mission command systems that can function at low data rates, field directional antennas for terrestrial communication systems, and employ null steering processors to mitigate the EW threat. The most recent tests and evaluations of WIN-T show that it will not facilitate adequate command and control of forces if space is a contested domain, while its network will also be dangerously visible to threat electronic sensors. As well, its lack of adequate transmission range is not worth whatever increase in data rate it may provide.
With contested access to space, the Army may have to rely on legacy radio systems for data transfer. The various mission command systems should have software updates to allow continued function through a "degraded mode"-through terrestrial CNR mediums-in the event of SATCOM loss. Some of this has already happened outside the formal acquisition process. For example, a unit deployed to Iraq in 2005 requested that Raytheon provide a means to transmit AFATDS data through the HF PRC-150 Harris Radio. Raytheon created a software update, burned it to a CD, and mailed it off to the unit within two weeks. 
121
If more mission command systems are to operate via terrestrial CNR-and thus increase exposure to terrestrial EW jammers and sensors-the Army will need to improve CNR's electronic protection, increase range, and data rates. To mitigate the threat of electronic sensing and jamming, the Army should increase fielding of directional antennas for terrestrial CNR, which would also improve transmission range and data rates. A RAND study on Army bandwidth requirements claims that using steerable directional antennas can increase data throughput "between 70 to 370 percent." 
122
9
123
10
124
122
123 Joint Multinational Training Group-Ukraine et al., "Lessons Learned from the UKR 1-24th Mech BDE," 15. 
124
The Army should consider phased array antennas given their ability for rapid electronic steering to null out jamming signals and to narrow transmission beams between 5 and 30 degrees, while also increasing transmission range (See Figure 
10
125
125
11
11
Communications doctrine should put greater emphasis on ECCM, particularly the practice of emission control. The Signal Center of Excellence should be the proponent for ECCM so that there is no separation between the practice of effective communication and the masking of communication systems from electronic sensors and jammers. The two tasks should be completed in the same act. Communications doctrine should also stress the need for system redundancy, so that Army communication specialists understand that SATCOM is not a guaranteed enabler. Maneuver and mission command doctrine cannot be separate from communications and electronic protection. Maneuver doctrine should include considerations for the movement and positioning of forces in a manner that masks their communication emissions from threat sensors, just as maneuver tactics and techniques prescribe methods for using terrain and vegetation to conceal movement from observation. Mission command doctrine should include discussion on the risks and benefits of decreased synchronization to allow a reduced communication electronic signature. Conveniently, the concept of mission command-with emphasis on decentralized operations and small-unit initiative-complements the practice of reduced communication. In combat, reducing communication with subordinate units comes with the small risk of losing some control. However, the practice of incessant radio traffic in the face of a growing EW threat carries a much higher risk: broadcasting friendly locations to enemy direction finders.
Exercise rotations at the combat training centers (CTCs) of Ft. Irwin, Ft. Polk, and Hohenfels, Germany, should include periods of degraded and denied satellite connectivity. In addition to confirming the ability of mission command systems to function without SATCOM and through CNR mediums, the loss of SATCOM would force rotational units to revise their scheme of maneuver to make up for line-of-sight issues that SATCOM would have overcome. Such scenarios are likely in real combat against a peer adversary, and CTCs should be replicating the real fight with as much fidelity as practicable.
Routinely, units should practice various levels of emission control depending on the threat scenario. At times, the threat scenario should allow more liberal use of CNR. Other times, the EW threat should be escalated to encourage the use of directional antennas, radio silence, and terrain masking, while also forcing leaders and subordinates to understand the flexibility required to outmaneuver and out-smart EW attack and direction finding. Units should also practice communicating through field wire to account for situations when that is the only way to elude enemy direction finders. Such situations would include the conduct of defensive tasks, screening, guarding, etc.
The United States Navy anticipated attritional tactics with night torpedo attacks by the Imperial Navy, but its leaders failed to follow up this insight with rigorous programs of material preparation and training to meet this clearly recognized threat. Too many officers ladled on top of this error a 'fatal lethargy of mind' as to the capabilities of the Imperial Navy.
-Richard B. Frank, Guadalcanal US ground forces are significantly vulnerable due to a dangerous reliance on SATCOM and a lack of readiness to face a formidable counter-space and communications EW threat. Geographic limitations will reduce SATCOM availability in certain regions. SATCOM will remain vulnerable to increasingly effective counter-space technology. Consequently, current mission command systems will be of little use in such space-denied environments. In the likely event of SATCOM loss, the US Army will increase use of CNR, even though CNR will not allow most mission command systems to communicate. Uncontrolled and undisciplined use of CNR for lengthy orders transmission, incessant reporting, and constant centralized coordination will allow enemy sensors to quickly locate and destroy a slow, clumsy, and confused US ground force.
The US Army must not emulate the "lethargy of mind" to which the US Navy succumbed in the Pacific against the Japanese Imperial Navy. The Army has already anticipated an enemy counter-space and EW threat, now the Army simply needs to readjust its equipment, training, and doctrine to prepare for that threat. The US Army need not wait for a crisis to make this transition, but can instead develop a solution to the counter-space and EW threats before American troops face those challenges on an unforgiving field of battle.
8 R-378AM direction finder and jammer. ........................................................................ 9 Relative capacity improvement of directional antennas. ............................................... 10 Possible directional antennas for combat net radio. .......................................................
Satellite Communication: US Army's Dependence
Satellite Communication: US Army's Dependence
74
Dan Lamothe, "'We Will Pay the Butcher's Bill in Blood': General Issues Stern Warning as He Becomes Army Chief," Washington Post, August 14,
2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/checkpoint/wp/2015/08/14/we-will-pay-the-butchers-billin-blood-general-issues-stern-warning-as-he-becomes-army-chief-of-staff/.2 Field Manual (FM) 6-02.72, Tactical Radios (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2002), I-2.3 Field Manual (FM) 3-55.93, Long-Range Surveillance Unit Operations (Washington, DC:  Government Printing Office, 2009), 6-18.   
Michael R. Frater and M. J. Ryan, Electronic Warfare for the Digitized Battlefield, The Artech House Information Warfare Library (Boston: Artech House, 2001), 48.
Richard S. Deakin, Battlespace Technologies: Network-Enabled Information Dominance (Boston, MA: Artech House, 2010), 317.
Bert Chapman, Space Warfare and Defense: A Historical Encyclopedia and Research Guide (Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2008), 139.
Joe Leland and Isaac Porche, Future Army Bandwidth Needs and Capabilities (Santa  Monica, CA: RAND, 2004), 42.   
Intelligence Science Board, "Integrated Sensor-Collected Intelligence" (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2008), 25.
Kevin McCaney, "Army Still Catching Flak for Tactical Intell System," Defense Systems, March 22, 2016, https://defensesystems.com/articles/2016/03/22/army-dcgs-acriticism.aspx.
  15  HarryGreene et al., "Command  Post of the Future: Successful Transition of a Science and Technology Initiative to a Program of Record," Defense Acquisition Research Journal 17 no. 1, no. 53 (January 2010): 11.
Byrne and Konyha, Space Primer, 188..   
David Blair, "Russian Forces 'Practised Invasion of Norway, Finland, Denmark and  Sweden,'" June 26, 2015, accessed on November 12, 2016, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/russia/11702328/Russian-forces-practisedinvasion-of-Norway-Finland-Denmark-and-Sweden.html.
18 Matt Payton, "Norway Is Now a Nuclear Target," The Independent, November 1, 2016, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/norway-nuclear-target-us-marines-russiapolitician-weapons-a7390386.
html.19  Thomas Nilson, "Norway Creates New Army Unit on Border to Russia," The Independent Barents Observer
, July 17, 2016, http://thebarentsobserver.com/security/2016/06/norway-creates-new-army-unit-border-russia. 20 Tatum Vayavananda, "Marine Corps Equipment Rolls out of Classified Norwegian Caves," United States Marine Corps, December 2, 2016, accessed November 9, 2016, http://www.marines.mil/News/News-Display/Article/655368/marine-corps-equipment-rolls-out-ofclassified-norwegian-caves/.
Lockheed Martin, "Lockheed Martin MUOS Satellite Tests Show Extensive Reach in Polar Communications Capability," January 31, 2014, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/us/news/press-releases/2014/january/131-ss-muos.html.
Christopher Klein, "A Perfect Solar Superstorm: The 1859 Carrington Event," History in the Headlines, March 14, 2012, accessed November 12, 2016, http://www.history.com/news/aperfect-solar-superstorm-the-1859-carrington-event.
28 Tony Phillips, "Near Miss: The Solar Superstorm of July 2012," NASA, July 23, 2014, https://science.nasa.gov/science-news/science-at-nasa/2014/
23jul_superstorm. 29 Pete Riley, "On the Probability of Occurrence of Extreme Spaceweather Events," Space Weather 10 (2012): 1, accessed November 13, 2016, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.
1029/2011SW000734/epdf.30  Zell, "Impacts of Strong Solar Flares."
Army Techniques Publication (ATP) 3-36, Electronic Warfare Techniques (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2014), 1-2.
David Bolton,  The Challenge of Electronic Warfare (London: Royal United Services Institute for Defence Studies, 1986), 30.
Phillip Karber and Joshua Thibeault, "Russia's New Generation Warfare," The Potomac Foundation, May 13, 2016, accessed December 2, 2016. http://www.thepotomacfoundation.org/russias-new-generation-warfare-2/.
McCleary, "Russia's Winning the Electronic War."
Sydney J. Freedberg, "Miserable, Disobedient & Victorious: Gen. Milley's Future US Soldier," Breaking Defense, October 5, 2016, accessed on November 25, 2016, http://breakingdefense.com/2016/10/miserable-disobedient-victorious-gen-milleys-future-ussoldier/.
116 John Antal, "Simplify, Simplify, Simplify: An Update on the US Army's Lower Tactical Internet Effort," Military Technology, February 2015,
84.117  Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, "FY 2015 Annual Report," 104.
Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, "FY 2015 Annual Report," 104.    
Director, Operational  Test and Evaluation, "Warfighter Information Network-Tactical (WIN-T) Increment 2, Second Follow-on Operational Test and Evaluation," 29-30.
Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, "FY 2015 Annual Report," 104.   
Henry S. Kenyon, "Gunnery Tool Hits the Mark," SIGNAL Magazine, March 2005, accessed November 12, 2016, http://www.afcea.org/content/?q=gunnery-tool-hits-mark.