# ID: f31cc033f73b4201b1b6ff01404718ac
# Title: The Flattening of Sustainment: The Interaction of Technology, Information, Force Structure, and the Emergence of Operational Logistics
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
The United States' military power and capabilities are singularly enabled by unequaled sustainment capability and reach of our transportation and logistics systems. The current conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan are highlighting an emerging trend in the operational level of logistics seen in the flattening of Command and Control (C2), theater distribution and the increased use contracted sustainment of operational formations across both Iraq and Afghanistan. Combatant Commanders continue to exercise the authority to maximize logistics resources in their respective theaters to enable favorable Tooth to Tail Ratios (T3R) focused on Combat Forces. The unintended consequence is the shifting of many strategic sustainment capabilities to the operational level of logistics. This shifting of capabilities is making the operational level of sustainment an agent of change. The reduction of the strategic sustainment and industrial base to a reactive provider of logistics and the reduction of the tactical sustainment of units in "the last 1000 yards" to the foxhole will have unintended consequences. The emergence of operational logistics is a recent phenomenon. The collapse of Deterrence and the emergence of The Air Land Battle Doctrine coupled with the Goldwater-Nichols Act set in motion the emergence of operational logistics as we see it today in action in support of Combatant Commands (COCOMS) across the globe. The Department of Defense and its transformational efforts focused on joint modularity, the increased use of Private Military Companies (PMC) providing contracted logistics, and the continued emergence of new information management and digital communications tools has empowered the operational logistician. These factors make the operational level of logistics the center of a growing construct that enables the tactical formation to focus forward on logistics and make reactive the numerous strategic sustainment structures including the industrial base. The monolithic cold war era top down driven logistics structure exists no longer. The introduction of widespread contracts and corporations providing sustainment capability in lieu of military sustainment units has implications for future force structure and sustainment for full spectrum operations.
One must be fully aware both of contemporary achievements in military equipment and trends in the further development of every type of weapon. Otherwise, one cannot understand those changes that may occur in the organization of armies in the near future. 
1
The United States' military power and capabilities are enabled by the unequaled sustainment capability and reach of our transportation and logistics systems. The current conflicts in the Middle and the Near East are highlighting an emerging trend in the operational level of logistics seen in the flattening of distribution, acquisition, contracting, and sustainment of operational formations across both Iraq and Afghanistan. 
3
4
Operational Logistics is defined into two primary categories: sustainment and transportation. Sustainment is supply, maintenance and shelter of operational forces. Transportation is the services related to the movement and movement planning of units and materials. Though Operational Logistics is divided into sustainment and transportation, the terms "Logistics" and "Sustainment" will be used interchangeably. 5 Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 4.0, Joint Logistics (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2008). V. Executive Summary states Joint logistics spans the strategic, operational and tactical levels of war. It is, however, at the tactical level where the principal outcome--sustained logistic readiness--of joint logistics must be measured. At the strategic level, joint logistics is characterized by the There continues to be the shifting of many strategic sustainment capabilities to the operational level of sustainment that is making the operational level of logistics an agent of change. This reduces the strategic sustainment and industrial base to a reactive provider of logistics and focuses the tactical sustainer logistics the foxhole will have unintended consequences. To maximize that amount of combat forces on the ground versus military logistics assets and increase the amount of teeth in the Tooth to Tail Ratio (T3R) there is an increasing use of Private Military Companies (PMC) to provide like or similar capabilities of supporting combat forces on the ground. 
6
7
8
The introduction of widespread contracting and for profit driven corporations providing sustainment capability in lieu of military sustainment units has major implications for future force structure and sustainment for full spectrum operations. This expansion has compressed the tactical and strategic level of sustainment while not minimizing their importance and making the influence of the operational level sustainment extend from the end of the factory assembly line or the end of the runway of Charleston Air Force Base to the actual execution in the immediate rear of the deployed unit (See figure 
1
What makes the expansion of the operational level of sustainment problematic is the potential risk that is incurred by the use of contracting for logistics to maximize the amount of teeth in the operational commander's formations. This "commercial" logistics force structure is not available for deployment into a non-permissive combat environment and puts the deployed operational force at risk. The trade off financial savings versus expensive force structure is a leadership decision that General Rupert Smith calls, "the fight to preserve the force." Western militaries must maximize the balance of the force as personnel costs represent up to 50 percent of a defense budget. 9 A conservative estimate for adding 10,000 soldiers, sailors, airmen and 9 Rupert Smith. The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern War (New York, NY: Vintage  Books, 2008). marines to the force structure is $1.2 billion per year. 
10
To determine the validity of the expansion of the operational level of logistics and to demonstrate that the operational level of sustainment is an agent of change there will be three Elements of Operational Design applied to four case studies. Three of the four case studies are historical in nature and will demonstrate the growth of the operational level of logistics. The case studies illustrate the growth of operational logistics and sustainment that one sees today on the portable server and satellite capability of the Joint Network Nodes (JNN). The PMCs are providing Business Model Contracted Logistics. Flattened C4 is the flattening of the technical and sustainment C2, communications and computers. battlefields of Iraq and Afghanistan. 
13
The three elements of Elements of Operational Design are operational reach, simultaneity, and depth (see figure 
2
14
15
16
16
19
The rediscovery of the Soviet interwar theorists fundamentally changed the awareness and scope of how we see the operational level of war.
The final case study will focus on the Kuwait, Bosnia, and Baghdad, a period from the early-1990s onwards. Here there is the shift that begins to take place with logistics in the first Gulf War away from the mountains of iron and begin to see combatant commanders exercise operational logistics in their areas of operations. 
20
Logistics is the final Arbiter of operations. 
21
26
Cohesion is important as this gives an organization its structure and basic shape. 
27
28
29
30
26
27
28
29 Antoine H. Jomini, The Art of War (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press). First Published in 1862. Translated from French by CPT G.H. Mendell and LT W.P. Craighill, 11. Baron Jomini is a great departure point in defining operational logistics. We are an Army firmly rooted in the prescriptive tenets of Baron Jomini. Our doctrine is rooted more in Jomini's interpretation of Clausewitz. His Summary of the Art of War reads somewhat like the tenets of the operational Level of war listed in the post active defense FM 100-5 of the General Starry era of TRADOC. 
30
31
32
The contribution of Napoleon Bonaparte to modern warfare is immense. Unity of Command, mobility, and comprehensive planning are some of the hallmarks of the Napoleonic period. 
33
34
35
36
The three elements of reach, simultaneity, and depth logistically remain unchanged and similar to the limited wars of the King's of Europe. Still one difference introduced is the detailed attention planning receives in the Napoleonic system. Napoleon's Chief of Staff, General Berthier moved the Grand Armee 140 kilometers in four weeks then an astounding achievement, "Each Corps had a designated march route. Supplies were assembled in advance of the march of troops while in 
35 Fuller,
22. 36 Ibid.,
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
37
The staffs created by commanders in the time of the limited wars of Frederick the Great were personal affairs focused on the administration of small forces and the household of the leader. There was generally no special training. 
39
General Smith uses the term the "central nervous system" but the key fact is that Napoleon began to move far away from the personal household staffs as the staffing system took root downward through the Grand Armee to the corps and even division level. 40 37 Robert M. Epstein, Napoleon's Last Victory: 1809 and the Emergence of Modern War (Fort Leavenworth, KS: School of Advanced Military Studies Printing, 1992), 47. 
38
39
40
The Grand Armee of 1805 provides an example of the maturation of the staff. Each Corps and Division Commander had a functioning staff with each having a chief of staff with department heads for logistics, intelligence, troop movements, artillery and engineers. The Grand Armee of 1805 was structurally different from the Austrians, Russians, and Prussians who were still using staffs similar to that of Frederick the Great did in the previous century. Still, it did not take long for the allies to adopt the staff model of the Grand Armee. The concept of the staff took root in the Prussian Army and after the defeat in the Battle of Jena in 1806, which led to the establishment of the Prussian General Staff and the education system of the "Kriegsakadamie" system that forms the basis for the modern general staff today. 
41
Civil War of 1861-1865, with the need to control systemically at first the hundreds of thousands and subsequently millions of men under arms. The logistics demands on the staff increased with the amount of materials needed by these formations. The Confederate Army established a set of staff structures and the Northern Army laggardly followed suit. By 1864, these armies each faced each other with set corps structures and staffs. The day-to-day corps staff by 1864 was composed of a chief of staff, chief of ordnance, inspector general, adjutant general, quartermaster, and commissary of subsistence. 
42
42 Robert E. Epstein, "The Creation and Evolution of the Army Corps in the American Civil War," The Journal of Military History 55, no. 1 (January 1991): 39. http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 1986127?seq=1.
Corps, Division, and Brigade trains and movement of supplies from either railhead or port was critical to the sustainment managed and organized by a designated staff. 
43
44
The U.S. Civil War harkened two revolutionary innovations in sustainment. Those two innovations were the extensive use of the railroad and the military employment of the telegraph.
In the past, these two innovations had impacted on the strategic level of sustainment. Simply put, both railroads and the telegraph had a role in the strategic employment and sustainment of forces. 
45
General Henry Halleck in his ad hoc role as the Union Army Chief of Staff lamented after the Union victories of Antietam, Perryville, Iuka, and Corinth that the Union Army was unable to pursue based on the gigantic baggage and supply trains that had grown too large to 
43
44
45
46
47
The railroad specifically at the strategic level improved reach, depth, and simultaneity but it could not overcome the lament of Halleck on the immobility of the huge baggage and supply trains that could not move rapidly to support Union armies after victory. The successful use of railroads by the Prussian during their three wars of unification were essential to the initial deployment of forces to the frontiers ready to begin an operation or a series of operations. The railroad played a critical role not only in deployment of forces but also now the mobilization of 46 Herman Hattaway and Archer Jones, How the North Won; A Military History of the Civil War (Chicago, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1983), 288. It is interesting to read Halleck's comments on the growth of the baggage trains and the perception of luxury they implied with the level of rations and personal effects that could be carried by the supply trains. 
47
Prior to World War I, there were flashes of strategic logistics that were striking in the distances covered and the amount of forces moved. These movements of vast distances were instances of strategic transportation moving forces to the operational commander. The first was the Great Britain moving a quarter of a million men 6,500 miles from the British Isles to South Africa for the Boer Wars. Russia moved by rail and sea a similar amount to fight the Japanese in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904. The time needed over that great of distance was revolutionary due to the rail and ship technology available. 
49
50
With the advent of World War I, it is visible the impact of industrialization and transportation infrastructure on warfare and the massive increase in consumption that before the war could not even begin to be imagined. For example, the French underestimated prior to the war the amount of artillery rounds required for the scope of static warfare. The ammunition levels required could not be produced and thus the French operated throughout the war constrained by artillery ammunition production. 
51
49
50
51
Even with advent of motorization of sustainment elements, the numbers of motor vehicles did not change the dynamics of sustainment. The potential was there but just as there was the dependence on the massive numbers of the horse and wagon, there was the also the fixed system of depots, magazines and supply trains existing in massive numbers to support the explosion in consumption. Initial motorization could not overcome the fixed nature of sustainment built up behind the trench system and the massive dependence on the horse and wagon. Rail movement was still much more efficient than the European road network, and as you got closer to the front, you started to deal with the destruction of infrastructure on a massive scale. 
52
53
Munitions and food moved by horse and wagon.
The American Expeditionary Force experience in France was similar to the Napoleonic era of depots arrayed behind the main force on lines of communications to support the static of this difference. Still the consumption rate was staggering and would probably remained constrained regardless of the amount of materials available even in unlimited amounts. battle or the decisive battle of annihilation. General Carter MacGruder stated, "The U.S.
Communications Zone included three echelons of depots: advance, intermediate and base.
Stockages at each was based on French experience . . ." and further stated that the "beauty of the system was its simplicity. It worked well in a stabilized theater where the desirable depot stockages had been established by ample experience." 
54
Imperial German Colonel General Helmuth von Moltke, the German Chief Staff at the beginning of World War I, encountered unseen problems in synchronizing forces at the operational level as the forces got closer to Paris. Since there was not a level of command between the strategic level of von Moltke and the tactical armies moving towards Paris, there was a level of command and control missing that would not be realized until the end of the war. There was not an Army Group that could synchronize between the strategic level and the tactical army commanders such as General Kluck and his First Army. Similarly, without that intermediate level of command and control would also mean that logistics synchronization rested at the Imperial German High Command instead of the Army Group level. The need for an Army Group Headquarters to fill the needed gap between the high command and the army was obvious looking backwards during analysis but not intuitive to the time and concept of art of command with the German General Staff System. 
55
54
55
World War I, when applying the three elements of reach, simultaneity, and depth was as limited as the Napoleonic era. However, there was a potential for operational logistics to emerge whether it was understood or not, the limitations of the horse and wagon coupled with the massive rise in consumption of ammunition of materials would see the ability of sustaining reach, simultaneity and depth as problematic at best. World War I was a technological break similar to the American Civil War and the railroad and telegraph. Just as Soviet Military theorists that emerged from the Great War and the Russian Civil War realized, the potential for motorization and mechanization of logistics to support the movement and consumption of modern armies was now a real possibility. The implication that the Operational level of war was being realized and that it would have tremendous implications for logistics. The slow transition away from the horse and wagon meant the potential emergence of some aspects of operational logistics. Figure 
3
The interwar period and World War II represented a transition from decisive battle to recognition that mobilized industrial armies, echeloned in depth operating in multiple theaters, represented a new paradigm that was not understood in World War I. The post Napoleonic realities of World War I and the exponential effects that the development of firepower, generating force structure, and transportation infrastructure had on expanding a series of campaigns, operational areas, and ultimately the operational level of war to a level previously unseen. 
58
The scale of warfare that was seen from1914 to 1918 could, and would, be exceeded as industrial economies produced on an immense scale. The result would mean a fully mechanized and motorized force that truly departed from the horse and wagon. The challenge would not only be producing the material needed for the armies but sustaining them while they were conducting operations. The operational level of war was emerging but there were true hurdles to providing logistics support to operational forces conducting successive operations with mechanized units over vast distances. 
59
57
58
59
were not only writing about the consumption of units but also theorizing on the militarization of society and the importance of the industrial base of a nation sustaining a force of quantity and quality. 
60
The Soviet Union in their path of massive industrialization and collectivization of their economy understood the amount of material required to support such a force. By the mid 1930s, the Soviets had fully mechanized four corps to support the emerging doctrine of Marshal Tukhachevsky and others of Shock Armies, Deep Battle and successive operations embodied in the Red Army 
's 1936 Field Regulations. 61
62
60
61
62
The Soviet--Polish War of 1920 was a great example of the disconnect between the emerging operational level of war and the sustainment of operational forces. The distances covered combined with the use of rail make this campaign unique and a first and must be considered a departure point different from World War I. 
63
64
64
65
66
The Polish-Soviet War was the operational warfare attempted by the Red Army. Though severely under-resourced and the application of the industrial might of the Soviet Union many years away conceptually, it was an attempt to conduct the application of shock units to enable maneuver warfare. Most importantly was the concept of successive operations carried through to the gates of Warsaw. Lastly was the role of the transportation networks the enabled the quick gathering of Red Armies to mount the campaign. Still Svechin sums up the operational logistics preparations by stating, "Rational organization of logistics requires at least the approximate determination of certain standards pertaining to time, space and intensity that defines the lines of 
65 Kipp, Mass, Mobility And the Red Army's Road to Operational Art 191-1936, 1-22.
66
67
The campaign plan for Operation Barbarossa was a campaign plan designed for a totally mechanized force. 
68
69
68
69
70
71
72
Mobile mechanized operations represent a departure from past types of warfare regarding primary mode of transportation. With mobile warfare, there is a transition in importance of the railroad versus the road. Though dependent on the railhead for the movement of troops, equipment and supplies, the dependence of motorized formations on road networks becomes vastly more important with the fluidity of operations. The importance of the road network is essential when conducting multi front independent but supporting operations. The railroad could not support mobile operations adequately. 
73
71
72
73
Though the German fought Barbarossa like they were motorized both in the plan they executed and the operations attempted, their experience on the Eastern Front would be one of half measures as in the end they were unable to motorize fully their divisions through either lack of industrial capacity or other production priorities. As the war in the east ground on the Wehrmacht was faced with an increasingly motorized Red Army, who by late 1943, and certainly by summer 1944 was truly a mobile and fully motorized foe. 
74
A striking feature of World War II was America's ability to raise and equip a modern army seemingly overnight. 
76
Brigadier General Albert Wedemeyer and his War Department War Plans Division team putting 
74
75 Charles E. Kirkpatrick, An Unknown Future and Doubtful Present: Writing the Victory Plan of 1941 (Washington, DC: Center for Military History United States Army, 1992), 81. Charles Kirkpatrick notes that General George C. Marshall realizes that the mass of lend lease equipment destined to head to Russia and Great Britain was not sufficient to turn the tide of war and a significant United States Army would be needed. BG Albert Wedemeyer based on Marshall's guidance developed the 90 division Victory Army and even more important the framework for the Army Air Corps and the total manpower figures that the United States would have available for mobilization; between 10-14 million men. 
76
77
78
The logistics forecasts of the ASF were always more pessimistic than reality would present and the ASF demonstrated time and time again that the logistics structure supporting the ETO was prepared to sustain the fight similar to the last war, France 1918. 
79
78
79
The interwar period, through 1944, represented a true leap in the sustainment of forces at the operational level for those understanding the implications of full motorization and the vast quantities of material required to support motorization. Operational Logistics began to emerge but there were still limitations imposed of sustaining fully motorized formations. These limitations focused on the command and control of synchronized logistics support. The ability to sustain echeloned independent forces conducting successive operations was somewhat realized by 1944 for both the Americans in the ETO and the Soviets in the East, though both armies were essentially fully mechanized. Tukhachevsky addresses the challenges of mechanization, which "opened a way to a whole new approach to planning of procurement, force structure, tactics and training. 
80
4
With the closing of General Smith's Interstate Industrial War, the farewell of the horse and wagon as the linchpin of sustainment was complete and "the rise of the gasoline powered motor vehicle meant that armies were now released from the tyranny exercised over them by railways since the days of Moltke and Grant." 81  82 This diagram technique demonstrates the forces that are contributing to the expansion of the operational sphere of logistics. The mechanization of warfare continues and contributes to an explosion of consumption of materials to include, fuels, munitions and spare parts. Even more critical is the war based economy that is capable to produce the material like trucks, tanks, self propelled artillery, support equipment and all the other major pieces of equipment necessary for the fully motorized and mechanized warfare. Transportation technologies continue to speed the movement of materials from the industrial base to the railhead, port or beach. Motorization begins to solve the movement of materials from the railhead, port and beach to the forward elements of the mechanized formations conducting successive operations. The Allies in the ETO, the Russians in 1944, China, Burma, India Theater of Operations and The dual drive in the Pacific Theater of Operations show the potential and the beginnings of the emergence of operational logistics supporting the operational commander and his forces. The issue that remains unsolved is the appropriate structures and theory to now C2 and sustain a mechanized army. Full motorization of support forces to provide logistics from the point of entry through a road network was a revolutionary leap from the horse and wagon and the Napoleonic system of logistics (maybe even Frederick the Great's system of sustainment).
The emergence of nuclear weapons and the new direction of the "New Look" defense strategy of President Dwight Eisenhower integrated nuclear weapons all the way to the tactical level. 
86
87
The emergence of civilian strategists, Herman Kahn and Bernard Brodie, brought a new factor to the table of warfare. The influence of their written works and meant civilians were taking the lead on U.S. Strategy formulation. The emphasis of the strategic model of deterrence, and winning with nuclear weapons was paramount. The "Defensive Mentality" eschewed by Kahn would now be an official part of policy and reinforce the nuclear tripwire at the tactical level. 
88
Vietnam would provide a glimpse of operational logistics as limited war emerged in spite of the deterrence era. The expanded role of intra and inter theater lift; contracted infrastructure and sustainment; and improved C4 Logistics were all at work in Vietnam. 
89
By the mid 1950s, U.S Army Officers believed they could decide the outcome of the next war by using tactical nuclear weapons. 
91
92
90
91
The close of World War II introduced the computer as a command, control, and information weapon on the battlefield. Van Creveld comments that, "after 1945, several factors came together and caused the American armed forces to undergo an unprecedented process of centralization. In the first place there was a revolutionary explosion of electronic communications and automatic data processing equipment which made effective worldwide command and control 
93
The publishing of the U.S. Army's 1982 FM 100-5 represents the beginnings of the emergence of operational level of logistics seen today. The doctrine introduced focused on defeating the numerous echelons of the Soviets without resorting to nuclear weapons. The confluence of continued mechanization (i.e. procurement of the "Big 5"), heavy lift aircraft, and C4 improvements, paved the way for structural changes in composition of forces and the institutional army. 
97
95
96
97
One must be mindful that the Soviet Union was undergoing a similar intellectual and structural revolution. The U.S. was reacting to their multiple echelons prepared for self-contained operations of penetration, shock, and maneuver. Soviet General Makhmut Gareev led the intellectual rediscovery of deep battle and the development of the Operational Maneuver Groups (OMG) and deep air-mechanized operations. What was essential to the Soviet intellectual awakening was the rehabilitation of the operational thinkers of the early Red Army; Tukhachevsky, Svechin, Triandifillov, and M.V. Frunze. This led to similar structural, equipping, and intellectual changes that were presenting conventional, non-nuclear options in Central Europe and elsewhere. 
98
99
Enabling this explosion is the exponential growth of information technologies, processor technologies, precision guided weapons, and transportation systems. In the western professionalized militaries, there is an expansion of depth in the operational level of war not only on the battlefield but cognitively as well. The operational level of logistics begins its emergence as an operational commander sees massive growth in the reach of sustainment, and sustainment's ability to simultaneously support forces in depth (see figure 
5
Their achievements are especially spectacular in the light of the fact that we supported a 21st century battlefield with a mid-20 th Century logistics structure. 
102
Tooth to Tail Ratios grew rapidly in World War I to account for the massive requirements in consumption of the new formations and weapons systems. The integration of technological innovations such as the machine gun, the truck, the tank, and artillery created a tail of support personnel required much greater than the traditional supply trains and depot system of the foot infantry and cavalry forces of the preceding era. Interestingly T3R has remained generally constant since World War I.
The mobilization of millions of men created a need to care, rest billet, entertain, and tend to the needs of these soldiers as they conduct combat operations. These life support functions, though complementary to logistics, strengthens the tail requirements of any expeditionary 104 Using the DOD math of 1.2 billion dollars per 10,000 soldiers to add and maintain in force structure, the "Cost Plus" contracting with PMCs like Kellogg Brown and Root (now known and called by its acronym KBR) at the macro level are cheaper to continue than maintain force structure. From 2002 to 2004, KBR earned 11.4 billion dollars utilizing upwards of 60,000 contractors and third country nationals to provide services. The equivalent of force structure cost would be 21.6 billion dollars. DOD saved 10.2 billion dollars in a very conservative estimate.  based on the mission assigned. 
110
111
8
112
LOGCAP and the various attempts to contract shortfalls in sustainment capability today are in line with historical trending from Frederick the Great and the use of sutlers to Military Assistance Command--Vietnam's work with multinational corporations like KBR. LOGCAP today is the sutler from the Civil War selling hardtack out of the back of his wagons and from his suppliers just on a vast scale and just in time.
The continuing use of LOGCAP and the substitution of civilian business corporations reinforce the model of maximizing combat power at the expense of logistics units. The pressure to gain as much teeth in the T3R ratio by a combatant commander coupled with a declining industrial base and reactive strategic level of sustainment introduces risks to the sustainment of forces. The model of PMC use currently in place works well for counter insurgency and stability operations in the Iraqi and Afghani theater of operations. There is an attempt to mitigate the risk entailed by the use of LOGCAP by using the robust modular sustainment unit's C4 structure and information architecture to plug in non-military logistics capability or host nation support. 
120
121
The mitigation is the Standard Army Management Information Systems (STAMIS) and the modular sustainment architecture that provides the capability to plug in LOGCAP sustainment and services into the STAMIS network and the military oversight provided by the technical experts that monitor and provide technical oversight to the LOGCAP contractor providing the service.
The term for all the third country nationals providing the labor for contracted sustainment is called "Star Trek Effect" re: LOGCAP originated in the 1 st Calvary Division headquarters during OIF IV. The quote is unattributed but anecdotally encapsulates the citizens of many nations participating as contracted workers in sustaining our forces in the many theaters of operations.
Corporations applying a cost plus business model, the PMC is now essential to the sustainment of forces on a full-spectrum battlefield. 
122
123
OIF operations continue to cut logistics forces from the force structure and replace their capabilities with LOGCAP; a practice called off ramping. Further analysis is critical in the "bean counting" of off ramping military sustainment units to LOGCAP.  Charles C. Krulak, "The Strategic Corporal," Marine Magazine (January 1999). General Krulak postulates a model of warfare that in a three block area, one block could be peace keeping operations, the next block could be a humanitarian operation and the third block is a high intensity combat operation where the strategic corporal is making decisions that are not only tactical but now strategic in nature.
Off ramping is redeploying units to home station and replacing them with LOGCAP. 125 MG (R) James Simmons conducted a series of logistics unit visits during the surge period and this was a central theme is his discussion with logisticians in a stated attribution environment. August 16th 2007, Q-West Air Base, Iraq.
The conservative figure of 60,000 contractors on the battlefield was much cheaper than adding troop end strength, which generally cost 1.2 billion dollars to add 10,000 soldier, sailors, airmen, and marines. 
126
Our troops are drowning in "stuff". Mountain-high pallets of bottled water in the desert. Cat scanners in a tent city. On-line "cafes" amid the IEDs. 3,000-calorie dinners in the middle of nowhere. Bar-codes on everything from ammo boxes to boxes of plastic forks. We joke about this surfeit of things, and how it makes our military slow and plodding. In truth, they can go almost anywhere in the world and in hours clone almost any landscape in America, from the sewage and power systems to the communications and food. There has never been any logistics remotely comparable to that of the presentday American military. 
127
128
Our enabling of the operational commander to fill the gaps of force structure through instruments like LOGCAP are echoed in Marshal Tukhachevsky' s comments on logistics, "The commander must see to it that the logistics system firmly guarantees the resupply of forces with essential commodities whatever turn the situation may take. 
129
9
Operational logistics has emerged. The tension between maintaining a lethal force structure and the logistics forces necessary to sustain that force will continue to be an issue. The generating force will struggle with budgetary pressures and limits to troop strength on the ground.
As the U.S. continue to seek the continuation of remote, precision war, there will be the continued 128 Makhmut Gareev and Vladimir Slipchenko, Future War (Fort Leavenworth, KS:  Foreign Military Studies Office, 2005), 12-17. weapons employment. The complex environment of cities and other constricted battlegrounds will remain a battleground of the present and the future. 
131
The emergence of operational logistic is a recent phenomenon (see figure 
10
Aleksandr A. Svechin, Strategy (Minneapolis, MN: Eastview Press, 1992), 69. There will be continued use of the concepts of the Soviet military theorists from the interwar period. The gestation of the operational level of war and the codification of the lessons learned from the Napoleonic period forward captured the departure from the great battle of annihilation to one of attrition and exhaustion that must be addressed operational level commanders conducting successive operations in multiple theaters sometimes independently.
The case studies are very ground forces centric and in turn are very focused on U.S. Army sustainment and the implied Title 10 Service Specific requirement to be the Service lead for logistics and sustainment as the ground component lead.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication (JP) 5-0, Joint Planning Manual (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2006), 129. Operational reach is the distance and duration across which a unit can successfully employ military capabilities. Reach is fundamentally linked to culmination, the point in time at which the force can no longer attack or defend successfully. Although reach may be constrained or limited by the geography in and around the OA, it may be extended through forward positioning of capabilities and resources, increasing the range and effects of weapon systems, leveraging HNS and theater support contracting support, and maximizing the throughput efficiency of the distribution architecture. Page IV-23, Operational Simultaneity refers to the simultaneous application of military and nonmilitary power against the enemy's key capabilities and sources of strength. Operational Depth seeks to overwhelm the enemy throughout the OA, creating competing and simultaneous demands on enemy commanders and resources and contributing to the enemy's speedy defeat, IV-24.
General Don Starry, Letter to Dr. Richard Swain, his comments to Dr. Swain on his recently published article, Filling the Void, dated 7 June 1995, pages 2-3, discusses the employment of tactical nuclear weapons in the mid-1950s and almost the inevitable and quick use of strategic nuclear weapons once the tactical fighting and subsequent use of tactical nuclear weapons began.
A Mountain of Iron is a term used in the United States Army for large and vast stockages of repair parts, supplies and equipment usually in a rear area location.
Department of the Army, Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2008), 6-1.
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 3-0, Joint Operations, IV-14.
Schnieder, The Theory of Operational Art, 22.
Triandifillov,  The Nature of the Operations, xv of the Foreword. Dr. Jacob Kipp's Foreword of Triandifillov's, The Nature of the Operations of Modern Armies, gives a summation of tenets of Operational Art laid forth by Svechin from his intellectual rigors and experience from the Great War, the Russian Civil War and the Soviet-Polish War. Kipp states, "His main points can be summarized as the following: (1) the establishment of a political-economic foundation beneath a strategy; (2) a division of strategy into two ideal types: attrition (izmor) and destruction (sokrushenie); (3) the delineation of operational art and the assertion of radically new understanding of the concept of operations; (4) a reduction of the role of combat; (5) denial of the importance of the single decisive engagement and the transformation of combat into an ongoing episodic process; (6) radical reduction of march-maneuver as a strategic factor; (7) emphasizing the role of transportation and communications in strategy and the significance of military-technical superiority."
J.F.C.Fuller, The Conduct of War: 1789
-1961
Svechin, 179. Svechin was discussing the quality versus quantity that manning an army faces and the day to day implications of sustaining that force.
Smith, The Utility of Force, 73. Rail movement was much more economical and efficient in the speed it moved men, materials and munitions to the front. This would hold the same in the second world war and would really only change with the advent of inter theater and intra theater air transportation like the C-130, C-141, An-12, An-76, An-120, C-17 and the C-5 transport aircraft.
Triandifillov,  The Nature of the Operations, 64-65. The analysis of Triandifillov on the post war requirements of transportation without motorization is truly staggering. Triandifillov eventually states that modern arms cannot be support by the horse and wagon due simply to the numbers employed. Any road network would be overwhelmed and the units would stretch off into the distance without end.
Herman Kahn, On Thermonuclear War (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1961), 470-471. The focus of Herman Kahn was the quality and quantity of nuclear weapons to win and that all things military were subordinated to the strategic level.
Ibid.,[99][100][101] 
Jacob W. Kipp, "Confronting the RMA is Russia," Military Review (May/June 1997): 49-56. The United States Army's intellectual journey was a response to many stimulus to include the Arab-Israeli 1973 War, the lessons learned from Vietnam and the reaction to the failure of Active Defense to defeat the multiple echeloned Soviet Threat. Our Air Land Battle doctrine is a reaction to the OMG and the deep echelonment of the Soviet Army.
Citino,[260][261][262]. Though the exercise "Zapad 81" was small in scale it still was a demonstration of concept of what the average U.S. Division could expect to face them in an echeloned fight. The Soviets had a similar Big 5 consisting of the T-64/T-72 Tanks, BMP 1 and 2 Infantry Fighting Vehicles and Attack and Lift Helicopters.
Guy C. Beougher, "Improving Division and Brigade Logistics in the Modular Force," Army Logistician Magazine (May June 2006), http://www.almc.army.mil/alog/issues/May-June06/ improve_brig_log.html
Hanson.   
Richard E.Simpkin, Deep Battle, 174.   
Command and General Staff College 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY
The use of nuclear weapons at the end of World War II, becomes a breakwater point in operational logistics. The nuclear era of deterrence represents stagnation and demonstrates the effect of the tactical tripwire of strategic nuclear weapons on force structure and equipping. Still, all the tools for operational logistics exist for emergence but remain suppressed. Long range heavy lift aircraft, integration of computers and data processing into sustainment, and appropriate C2 headquarters empowered operational commanders. In the age of deterrence and the tripwire of active defense, the conflict in Vietnam provides a glimpse of emerging operational logistics. 
83
84
85
83
84
85
105
6
106
The interesting trend is the increase of life support personnel as a category. The growth generated by the replacement of individual soldiers in the 1944 ETO, the rotation of individuals into fixed units in Korea and the individual rotation of soldiers in Vietnam creates a need for infrastructure and troops to man life support installations. The massive infrastructure associated with our presence in Iraq stretches back to the AEF of 1918. Vietnam becomes significant with the much greater use of PMCs to make up for an initial shortfall of military engineers and engineer troops needed to create the life support infrastructure. The pressing need to get as much combat power in theater starting in 1965, led the services to turn to PMCs to create the infrastructure and services necessary to support the growing U.S. presence. 
107
113
114
117
Risk is amplified by the decline to the military industrial base. This decline is reinforced by the "just in time" logistics model that parallels business models of the late twentieth century 