# ID: f3c0734a7ad64f31adf8b7f738cd4d61
# Title: Towards organized disorder, the evolution of American infantry assault tactics, 1778-1919
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1980.0
# Fulltext:
constrains mentioning all of them there are some individuals whose assistance has been so important that acknowledgement is essential. Mrs. Dorothy King typed the manuscript and provided suggestions for its i•nprovement. And, of course, my wife, Alexis Lee, has had to put up with all the frustrations of having a husband emeshed in research. Without her support and love the project would have been inestimably more difficult.
There is one more group of people who will probably never read this thesis, yet who were supremely important in its conception. They are the enlisted soldiers of the American Infantry with whom I have had the honor to serve the past ten years and to whom, respectfully, this work is dedicated.
.17-
A modern battlefield, with its proliferation of machine weapons, can be a largely impersonal place. Men who operate many of the machines of war never get close enough to their opponents to observe the destruction their weapons have caused. War has become, for these men, a faceless, automated, technical affair. There is, however, a class of soldier for whom war remains an intensely personal, dirty, bloody business. That soldier is the infantryman armeU with a rifle, the man on the ground whose job is to close with and kill or capture enemy soldiers. The infantryman fights war on Its most basic level. He lives in a filthy uncomfortable world with the constant presence of death.
For him, each day becomes a struggle for survival.
He sees the most unpleasant side of war: the pain in faces of his wounded friends, the bloated grotesqueness of death, and the destruction caused by his weapons. He feels the deep emotions that only such traumatic experiences cause. His jib is the most dangerous and the least glamorous of all the tasks of soldiering. Yet it is largely his success or failure which, in the end, wins or loses wars, and it is in support of hin that all other soldiers function. He is, at once, the least enviable and most important member of the armed forces. What he does and how he does it have always proved crucial to the study of war.
Of all the tasks an infantryman performs, the one in wich he has the I rtatest chance of being wounded or killed is in the attack or the assault of San enemy position. Because of the highly dangerous nature of this action, infantrymen and their leaders carefully study the methods or tactics for
(1)r -L --
-MR -conducting the assault. The object is always to accomplish this task successfully while sustaining the fewest casualties. In 1978 United States Army doctrine called for a tactical system of fire and maneuver to conduct this assault. This is a method by which the enemy force is pinned down by fire of one group of infantry, often working in conjunction with artillery and armor, while another group advances. The advance is made from the flank or rear of the enemy position when possible, but may, at last resort, be attempted frontally. The maneuvering group uses three to five second rushes, moving from one covered position to another. If the enemy is not suppressed and his fire is causing casualties to the maneuvering element, those soldiers return fire and may continue their advance by crawling to reach the objective.
They then attempt to kill or capture the remaining opponents who man the position under attack. 
1
Tactics are, in most instances, created in an evolutionary pragmatic, process usually in response to some technological innovation which has made the previous system too costly in lives to be effective. To understand the present United States infantry assault doctrine, then, one must study the history of Infantry assault tactics which led to its formation. And because these tactics are developed by particular men at a given time and place,it is essential to understand these men, their leadership, their state of training, and their ability to execute successfully the tactics they have devised.
American infantry assault tactics have evolved in three phases. The first phase, which reached a successful maturity during the Mexican War and died amidst the improved technology of the Civil War, was the use of the eighteenth-century linear formation which will be sketched in Chapter 1.
The second, the assault by a firing line of skirmishers with supports and reserves, which would evolve out of the Civil War and last until its bloody demise in World War I,will be developed in Chapters II, and III, and IV. In World War I American infantry adopted fire and maneuver. Chapter V will develop the acceptance of this concept in the crucible of that conflict.
In the evolution of infantry tactics one may also discern the story of a fledgling army which finds its identity, develops professionalism, and, finally, finds the method of operation best suited to Its character. The evolution of assault tactics closely parallels that story. From a beginning which employs a foreign system, taught to novice soldie.rs by a foreign instructor, the army slowly evulves its own system derived from its own experience, taught by its own professional soldiers, and retained as a doctrine by its own agencies. The process is a slow one, listing almost a century arid a half, but that process is a microcosm of the development of the United States Armiy from a collection of untrained militia to a professional fighting force. The Mexican War in a strict sense remains the most successful military enterprise in our history. During that conflict American forces did not lose a battle while consistently defeating Mexican armies whose numbers were greatly in excess of their own. 
1
in possession of the battlefield and the victory. How, then, did an army whose history was as spotty as was that of the United States Army attain such quick success in 1846? The answer lies in three areas: the nature of war in the first half of the nineteenth century, the history of the United States Army, and the quality of the Mexican Army.
IExemplary are the facts: Zachary Taylor with 2,288 men won the battles of Palo Alto and Resaca de la Palma against a Mexican force of 6,000. Winfield Scott with 8,500 men won Cerro Gordo opposed by 12,000 Mexicans, and he won the battles near Mexico City (Contreras, Churubusco, El Molino Del Ray and Chapultepec) with 10,700 men facing 25,000 Mexicans (see Vincent J. Esposito, ch.ed., The West Point Atlas of American Wars, 2 vols. [New York:  Frederick A..Praeger, 1959], 1: 16-17). [4]  Both the armies t.*iat fought the Mexican War employed the classic linear infantry formation which had formed the heart of European battle since the latter half of the fifteenth century. 
2
3
4
5
3
4
(Washington, D.C.:
8, 9.
",1bid.. p. 7.
Tmr"T!V T-'-T'
is very unnatural for an average rational human being to place himself will-Ingly in a situation that may result in his being maimed or killed. And, once he is there, to remain In that position, while his friends fall around htn, oradvance in the direction from which has come their violent death, stepping over their fallen bodies, is even more unnatural. 
6
How this was done by the Continental and United States Armies explains a great deal of the success or lack of it enjoyed by American arms.
Battle during the American Revolution, while attempting to 'imitate the model developed in Europe, often bore a character of its own. The forests, swamps, and mountains of the colonies forced the employment of irregular formations. Such irregular formations had been in use since the origin of firearms, but chiefly by poorly trained auxiliaries. 
8
8
• Revolution they included many such units in the forces fighting in Ar-erica. 
9
These light troops often formed the advance, flank, and rear guards during movement.10 In battle they moved out in front of the close-ordeline. 
11
12
13
9
1 2 Mahon,
Irfantry,
p. 7.
If many battles of the Revolution were fought with unique tactics and in special circumstances, such fighting did cot alter the thinking of General George Washington, the American commander, who believed that to fight war properly one had to have an army which could stand up to the British in a battle on the European model.' Early In the war the men who fought in the formations of the Revolutionary amy were, at best, poorly trained militia.
They proved that, untrained as they were, they could not stand up to British
Regulars on the field of battle. By the winter of 1777-78 the remnants of the Continental Army were encamped at Valley Forge. The important American victories had, up to this point, often been won by light infantry employing tc,.hniques of irregular warfare rather than conventional linear tactics.
General Charles Lee, a former British officer then se..ond in command of the Continental Amy, advocated abandoning the attempt to fight a classic battle.
In a letter to the Continental Congress in the winter of 1778, he "stressed the value of simplicity and the need for . . . warfare fit to the American genius."14 It was "madness to fight British Regulars on their own terms," he wrote, advocating the dissolution of the Continental Army and the employment of American forces as guerrillas. 
1 5
16
14
To field an army capable of fighting linear warfare, however, training was essential. On 28 February, 1778, an unemployed Prussian soldier, Baron Friedrick Wilhelm von Steuben, appeareu'at Valley Forge seeking employment. Washington made him the head of a department of inspection, later
Inspector General, to train the Amy. 
18
1 9
20
I should do injustice if I were to be longer silent with regard to the merits of Baron de [sic] Steuben. His knowledge of his profession added 1 7 1bid., pp. 12-13; Marshall and Peckham, p. 62. 
18
19
2 3
Russell F. Weigley, a leading authority on the history of the U.S. Army, has observed that even after the arrival of von Steuben, Washington tended to avoid confrontation with the British because he believed that the Continentals fell short of European proficiency. 
2 4
2 5
26
It was a European model and the knowledge was only rudimentary, but von
Steuben had given the Americans. the first appreciation of the importance of discipline, effective leadership, and training.
Baron von iSteuben would also, with an outsider's objectivity, touch on a part of the American character that would make maintenance of his brand of discipline and continuation of this training extremely difficult.
"The genius of this nation," wrote von Steuben to a friend (Baron von Gaudy), "is not In the least to be compared with that of the Prussians, Austrians, or French [soldiers with whom the Baron had-worked].
You say to your soldiers, 'Do this,' and he doeth [sic] it; but I am obliged 2o say, 'This is the reason why you ought to do that,' and he does it."'
The Baron was the first of many observers to note certain abiding characteristics of American soldiers which would appear in all wars. This soldier was inclined to be very individualistic, resenting the discipline and unavoidable restrictions of military life. Before he would put his heart into doing things, he sought to know the reason for doing them. If he finally accepted the discipline and the regulations as essential he did so only with the idea of winning victory in the shortest possible time so that he could return to his civilian endeavors. 
2 8
Even the "regulars" were regulars only in their terms of enlistment. It might have been possible to make soldiers of even those unfortunates by providing time, competent leadership, decent equipment, and adequate training. 31 Harry E. Wildes, Anthony Wayne, Trouble Shooter of the American Revolution (New York: Harcourt, brace and Co., 1941), p. 343.
The force had, however, been hurriedly raised in 1791 to punish the Indians who had defeated the first force sent against them. As Marvin Kriedberg and Merton Henry, in their study of U.S. Army mobilization, add:
The short enlistment period of the volunteer levies, the insistence on quick action, and the slowness of recruiting left no time for training. Equipment, even including rations . .. , either was wanting or was of poor worn ut substance. And the leadership was as shoddy as the equipment.
It seems almost anticlimacti.cto note that this force was routed by the Indians on 4 November 1791 with the loss of some nine hundred men. 
3 3
. __-waterfront taverns and bawdy houses to go skulking through the woods on practice raids against the Indians. . . Even his officers complained of Wayne's severity. Brought up In the lackadasical tradition of Harmar and St. Clair, many majors, captains, and lieutenants were pleasureseeking, if not drunken, leades who looked on soldiering as an easy way of drawing government pay.
Undeterred, Wayne set up a training program and insured that it was carried out. He was aware of the lack of knowledge and motivation of many of his officers. On 13 September 179? shortly after he assumed command, Wayne reported to Henry Knox, the Secretary of War: Baron Steuben's Blue Book [the name given Steuben's manual] and the Rules and Articles of War are much wanted and that in proportion to the aggregate number of officers--for they are all new to manoeuvre-and discipline and some of the old officers are rather rusty tho' [sic] conceited and refractory--however, they will be made sensible of their error or shall quit the service. They have either een too much indulged or have forgot the service in the late war. Wyne, 
3 5
officers, essential for an effective regular arny,disappeared. This forgetfulness would cost the country and its army dearly, for the next force the Army would face was far tougher than the Indians.
The level of training received by the Army in those years was abysmally low. In addition to suffering from'a shortage of trained personnel, the Army did not even have enough drill books to guide the inexperienced officers. Von Steuben's "Blue Book" remained the official drill manual, Congress having again sanctioned it on 18 May 1792, but, by the second decade of the nineteenth century, the book had been out of print for years and copies were scarce. Officers of both the militia and the regular army, when they infrequently conducted drill, instructed their units from whatever texts they could find: some using the French tactics of 1791, others the official British system written by General Sir David Dundas in 1792, many with no texts at all. 
37
The book was a direct copy of an English translation by a man named MacDonald.
It was, a contemporary account stated, marked with "blemishes" which were the results of the poor translation and the author's lack of field experience. 
3
Possibly in response to this request, in an attempt to profit from his earlier work, William Duane published his Handbook for Infantry. The book, composed of the same material that he hiad submitted earlier, again seems to have failed to get government approval, but a thousand copies were printed. 
41
42
They were fortunate to be trained and led by Winfield Scott, the best American military mind to emerge from the war. Scott had practiced law in Virginia, been a militia officer, and had joined the Army during the excitement following the Chesapeake-Leopard affair in 1807. Following conviction by a court martial which resulted in his suspension from service for a year in 1810, Sct etre to duty and served with distinction during the first two years oftewar. By 1814 he was a Brigadier General. In March of that year, Scott arrived in Buffalo, New York, to command his small force of Regulars, some three thousand men, and in his own words: 
43
The evolutions of the line, or the harnmonious movements of many battalions in one or more lines with a reserve--on the same principle that many companies are maneuvered together in the same battalion, and with the same exactness were next daily exhibited for the first time by an American Army, and to the great delight of the troops themselves, who now began to perceive why they had been made to fag [work] so long at the drill of the soldier, the company, and th battalion. Confidence, the dawn of victory, inspired the whole line.4q If the explanation sounds complicated, putting the actual movement into practice on the drill field was even more so. To move three thousand men through even basic large-scale maneuver, which was essential to bring enough muskets to bear to cause a hole in the enemy formation, and to do so effectively required a great many hours of work. !t was arrangement or choreography of a deadly ballet which had to be perfected on the practice field to become effective in the horrifying arena of actual performance. It took hours in the sun or the cold, a hard task for the instructors who continually barked commands, a mind-chilling one for the soldier who automatically obeyed.
Yet there is truth in Scott's assertion of a rise in confidence. As the men grasped the drill, they also grasped the ideas of their own proficiency and, with it, the ideas of their ability to win a battle. Almost all of Scott's training program took place on the drill field, but it was there that the complications of the linear tactics had to be mastered, it was there that the iron discipline had to be instilled, and it was there that confidence in leadership had to emerge if the force hoped to face an opponent versed in linear warfare with a chance of success. Four months after he began, Scott's brigade marched out of camp to face such an opponent.
At Chippewa, Scott's regulars advanced against an equal number of British Regulars. To the surprise of the British Commander, who was accustomed to encountering untrained militia, the American soldiers kept coming through his fire. Finally, it was the British who broke and ran, prompting the historian Henry Adams to write, "The Battle of Chippewa was the only occasion during this war when equal bodies of regular troops met face to face in extended lines on an open plain in broad daylight without the advantage of position; and never again after that combat were an Army of American regulars beaten by British troops." 
4 5
45
46 At Lundy's Lane, Scott's brigade formed the bulk of MaJ. General Jacob Brown's little American army of about 2,000 men. British forces under Lt. General Sir Gordon Drummond numbered 3,000 men. On 17 September 1814 the British and American Regulars met for the last time when General Brown's forces sortied from Fort Erie which was beseiged by General Drummond. The Americans stormed out and were successful in a three-pronged assault. (See Esposito, Atlas, p. 1: 11; Dupuy, History of the U.S. Army, pp. 67-68.) Scott's brigade still held firrm.47 Those long hours on the drill field had produced results. The keyswhich had produced that success were not entirely ignored by the American government.
When Congress met in the autumn of 1814 one of the earliest measures passed was a resolution calling for the executive to institute a board of general and field officers to prepare a uniform system of Infantry tactics for the Army. 
4 8
4 7
5
If the War of 1812 demonstrated, once again, the necessity of trainirng for successful infantry, it also pointed to the essentiality of competent leadership to command that infantry. Professor Weigley notes:
The crucial issue was again one of leadership, of finding officers who could train men and handle them properly. When regulars were led by 'old officers' who, as Winfield Scott described them, 'had generally sunk into either sloth or intemperance' and who neither drilled their troops nor led them with skill or bravery on the battlefield, American Regulars were no match for British Regulars. When led by men who disciplined and inspired them and used them with regard tg their limitations, meeting with the British might lead to victory. I To provide these officers, the United States Military Academy had been founded in 1802. By the outbreak of the War of 1812, as General Scott comments:
The West Point Academy had graduated but few cadets--nearly all of whom are mentioned . . . as meritorious; for a booby sent thither, say at age 16, 17., or even 19--and there are such In every new batch--is in his term of four-years, duly manipulated, and, in most cases, polished, pointed and sent to a regiment with a head on his shoulders; whereas, if a booby be made at once a commissioned officer, the odds are great that he will live and die a booby.52 Scott's perceptions on the value of academy training are quite accurate. Alt.ough the Academy did not teach a great many military subjqcts, it did teach drill. Every day cadets woke up to drill, marched to meals., marched to classes, conducted parades, etc. This very exposure left them at the end of four years both adept at conducting the drill and inculcated with the discipl~ine. It was this experience which would make the ex-cadets knowledgeable when they arrived at their regiments. To know-...he drill was to know the training. Thus, the West Pointer arrived at his regiment understanding what needed to be done and capable of doing it. The few West Pointers who had participated in the war had dune remarkably well, but their real significance was to be in the formation of a professional officer corps which would lead the small units of the little Regular army that emerged from the War of 1812. In thirty years of frequent Indian fighting "hey would train that army for its next major test as Scott had trained his men at Buffalo.
In the summer of 1817, with the appointment of Majcr Sylanus Thayer as Superintendent, West Point acquired a man who would increase the value of academy training. Thayer was an engineer who had graduatLI from West Point in 1808 and, in the two years prior to assuming the superintendency, had toured the military schools of Europe. He weeded out incompetent cadets and faculty, established a four year curriculum, and organized the cadets into companies under tactical' officers. Thayer also created the position of Commandant of Cadets, a faculty officer responsible for all cadet discipline 5 2 Scott, Memoirs, 1: 35-36. SI and military training. 
5 3
54
General Scott was to play a large part in the formulation of infantry tactical doctrine during the next thirty years. His work on the Board of Tactics finished, Scott went to Paris in 1815 where he observed the conquerors of Napoleon, collected books, and studied tactics. 
5 5
58
59
In Europe, with the return of peace following NIapoleon's final defeat, armies began to digest the lessons of the war years. The basis of both the American manuals of 1815 and 1825 was the French system of 1791, which had been written by Jacquesde Guibert, the great military theoretician, in 1789.
The book, incorporating the column for movement with the line for fighting, remained virtually unchanged in France during the Napoleonic wars. 
60
57
61
62
-The author of the drill book still stood to make money on every copy sold; thus, the job of translating the French book was quite remunerative. That profit motive, on Scott's part, may have led-to the decision to modify the tactics. In any event, Scott completed his three-volume work and submitted it to a board of officers in early 1835.6 However, the army was changing, and his work would not be received in silence. 
61
62 bd. " nfnrTatc, ANC, 5 March 1835, p. 76.
The years after the War of 1812 had seen the birth of institutions The Army and Navy Chronicle was a weekly newspaper-like journal.
Among the many items, on births, promotions, arrivals, departures, assignments, and deaths of military personnel, it also contained articles on military 
64
6 6 5 1W., p. 150. 66 bid.,, p.12 matters. One such article, written by the editor, appeared on 5 March 1835. It announced Scott's tactical revision, hailed it as an improvement over the old system and suggested the author receive credit for his efforts. 
6 7
The first man to voice opposition to Scott's revision was "Clairfait" who, in a series of articles from March to May, criticized the lack of any substantial improvements in the new regulations. He noted many officers still had not bothered to learn the system of 1825, while a larger group of infantrymen wanted to learn the drill, but could not because their troops were scattered.68 He derided the inclusion of a three-rank formation, noting the British had demonstrated the obsolescence of this formation in the Napoleonic Wars, complained of the inadequacy of the light infantry instructions, commented on many trivial aspects of the translation, and observed that both boards which ruled on the tactics rubber stamped them without changes or modification. 
69
Other officers defended the tactics and pointed out the value of the changes that were made.72 In October, "Hindman," the staunchest defender of the tactics, began a series of articles which traced the history of United States tactical development and presented a detailed analysis of Scott's system. He addressed all the complaints about the system and concluded that the changes, having been based on experience gained in war or at camps of instruction, were beneficial. 
7 3
7 6
As the debate over Scott's tactics raged in the Chronicle, two boards met to review the manuscript and to accept the system. John Garland; and Brevet Captain Samuel Cooper, secretary. 
7 7
7 7
For biographical data see: DAB, 12: 256, 10: 62-3, 20i 513; WAMB, pp. 200,  268, 489; NCAB, 2: 241, 4: 2W12: 130, 7: 379, 4: 256, 11: ST. Reitman, 1: 453, 341, 447 their leaders must be competent professionals who will make their soldiers undergo the long hours on the drill field to lerrn their art, and who will then calmly lead them into battle. With the three ingredients, American infantry had invariably produced victory no matter the opponent, but, wanting one or more of these essentials they invariably met defeat. American military tradition had been slow to incorporate the implications of these essentials. A people who disliked the disciplined requirements of military existence,combined with a Congress skeptical of standing armies, quick to minimize military expenditures and eager to limit personnel strengths,produced a climate in which a professional soldier was an anomaly.
Slowly, the government had modified that tradition as legislators and leaders. gradually came to understand the necessity of maintaining a trained corps of officers and a small standing or Reguiar Army. By the eve of the war with Mexico, the Military Academy at West Point had produced many of the company grade (captains and lieutenants) and some of the field grade (majors and lieutenant colonels) officers who would lead the units of the fourteen regi-79 ments of the army.
Although it would.be another sixty years before the government would realize the need to train volunteers before they went off to war, the army that would fight in Mexico had learned the value of such training.
The force that General Zachary Taylor gathered in Texas in 1845 was not the normal mass of untrained volunteers with which the United States had so far responded to its few military crises. It was, rather, most of the Regular Army: five of the eight regiments of infantry; one of the two regiments of dragoons (literally mounted infantry who rode to battle but fought 7 9 The Infantry School, Selected Readings in Military History (Ft. Benning, Georgia: The 
Infantry SchOol,
1953),
p. 154.
8 0
8 1
8 2
8 3
8 4
8 5
8 7
the senior officers was not fatal. The first was the law restricting the number of senior officers In the army to three generals, and one colonel, one lieutenant colonel, and one major for each of the fourteen regiments, and the fact that because many of those senior officers were on detached duty or sick leave (there was no retirement), few of the regiments were led by their colonels. Regular regiments were often commanded by their lieutenant colonel, major, or even a senior captain. 
8 8
The great strengths of the U.S. Army were in its junior officers, especially the West Pointers, and its enlisted men. They not only made the Regular Army which opened the war a formidable force for its size; they also demonstrated again what Scott had shown when he fashioned the force that won Chippewa and Lundy's Lane, that the leadership of a relatiVely small number of officers and NCO's who knew their business could make soldiers out of willing citizens in a remarkably short time. 
8 9
The army that won the first two victories of the Mexican War consisted entirely of Regulars. On 8 May 1846, Taylor's forces,outnumbered two to one, defeated the Mexicans with artillery fire that decimated the Mexican ranks and a defensive stand by a regiment of infantry which broke a Mexican cavalry charge. The next day, the same forces clashed again. This time American 88Bauer, Mexican War, p. 33.  At the battles of Palo Alto and Resaca de la Palma [the ones just described], General Taylor had a small army, but it was composed exclusively of regular troops, under the best drill and discipline. Every officer, from highest to lowest was educated in his profession, not at West Point necessarily, but in the camp, in garrison, and many in Indian wars. The rank and file were probably inferior as material out of which to make an army to the volunteers that participated in ell the later battles of the war; but they were brave men, and their drill and discipline brought out all there was in them. A better army man for man probably never faced an enemy than the one commagded by General Taylor in the earliest two engagements of the war.
For the first time in United States history the opening battles of a war had been fought by trained, disciplined, well-led soldiers. To insure that success continued, Regular army recruits received training at camps of instruction before being sent to Mexico. When they arrived, further training was conducted during the weeks between actual campaigning, by the considerable number of trained junior officers who led the Regular units. 
9 2
The same leavening process was not available to the volunteer units that soon began to arrive in Mexico. These units, the first of a large levy Congress ordered to help prosecute the war, arrived at Taylor's camp without any preliminary training: General Taylor prescribed six hours daily drilling for the volunteers once they reached Mexico. Later in the war, volunteer regiments were sent to schools of instruction in Mexico where they were drilled with Regular regiments and the officers received instruct8on in tactics. Drill was of course, the chief element of training. The volunteers who followed (the Regulars to Mexico] were of better material but without drill or discipline at the start. They were associated with so many disciplined men and professionally educated officers that when they went into ;ngagements it was with a confidence they would not have felt otherwise. 6
The army had learned the value of training. In Mexico, as never before, each unit, Regular or volunteer, was drilled incessantly until the ability to maneuver and fire in linear formation became second nature. In that drill the inculcation of discipline would forge that very unnatural  Although the Reyulars were rich in trained junior officers, the men who would accomplish that inculcation of the volunteers were a different breed. In the regiments of volunteers that came to Mexico,the men had, in the national tradition, elected their officers. Inthe past, this practice had been universally detrimental.' During theMexican War, however, there were circumstances not previously extant. In a growing young nation with a high demand for trained engineers, yet with a Small a-ony andalmostnonexistent promotion, many West Pointers, who had engineering degrees from one of the few engineering schools, had left the army to go into business. A number of them now returned to the volunteers, but not as junior officers.
Men like Albert Sidney Johnston, Jubal Early, and Jefferson Davis (all 'later prominent Confederates) were among the West Pointers who were given field grade conmissions in the volunteers. 
9 7
9 8
They would provide the training for their junior oFficers and the steadying Influence in battle that the volunteers had never had before. It was not the Ideal, but it was a great improvement over previous volunteer militia formations. Such men as Early, later a Confederate General, were essential to the development of the volunteers. They were the "professionally educated officers," whom Grant remembers, "giving the volunteers drill, discipline and confidence." 100 ' They had the time in Mexico to drill their men and train their junior officers before taking them into battle. And they produced the best volunteer record yet seen. A few individual regiments broke and ran under fire as did the 2d Indiand at Buena Vista, but the great majority behaved extremely well in battle. 
10 1
The soldiers of Mexico often lacked discipline as two views of the defeated garrison marching out of Monterrey confirm. A private of Taylor's army wrote:
The Mexicans as:a mass,, appeared to look at the affair [the defeat] as an ordinary occurrence in their history. The soldiers, four abreast made a line nearly a mile in length, In the rear followed the strangest medley of hangers-on of a camp that ever met the eye--youth and age, beauty and ugliness, donkey and dogs, rags and finery, all mingled together in a strange confusion and told a volume against the discipline of a Mexican'Army. 
10 2
My pity was aroused by the sight of the Mexican garrison of Monterrey marching out of town as prisoners. . . . Many of the prisoners were cavalry, armed with lances and mounted on miserable, half-starved horses that did not look like they could carry their rider out of town. The mm looked in but little better condition. I thought how little interest the men before me had in the results' of ths war and how little knowledge they had about what it was all about.1o3 Grant further noted that soldiers of the Mexican Army were poorly clothed, underfed, and seldom paid. They were, for the most part, conscripted peasants who were dismissed when wounded or no longer needed without compensation.
Yet on occasion this motley group could stand and fight bravely.) 
0 4
Thus, although a lack of discipline was evidenced, Jackson was also pointing to deficiencies in the other two key ingredients to victory, Perhaps an examination of one of the campaigns of a typical MexicAn force will further enlighten the subject.
An apt example of how a 'Mexican Army was formed occurred in 1847 in the midst of the war. General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna, already a twice deposed ruler of Mexico, returned from his latest exile in Havanna in August of that year, triumphantly entered the capital city, quickly seized power, and vowed to defeat the Americans. Santa Anna, rushed by political considerations, quickly gathered an army together. The men were a sorry lot. Some men were prisoners sent~from their cells to the front, while most were frightened raw recruits without even rudimentary training. 1 0 7 Further, the men who 'formed the army were wretchedly equipped. Medicines, surgical equipment, surgeons, and doctors were almost non-existent. 1 08 These shortcomings may have been corrected with proper training, but, in this area, as his biographer Wilfrid Callcott notes, Santa Anna . . . paid little attention to the actual training of the troops in camp. They seldom drilled in battle maneuvers and saw little of ranking officers who were to lead them into battle and in whom no confidence had been built up. Santa Anna was fine for conceiving a general scheme but he sadly needed a drill-master to take care of he essential details . . . in which he was so little interested.lOg If the commanding general had so little interest in training, it is not surprising that his subordinates did not emphasize it. When political pressure forced Santa Anna to move to meet Taylor, his army was characterized as 40 "wretchedly equipped and scarcely organized, with desertions running into the thousands."1 
1 10
1 11
For the soldiers who fought the war, however, the accent must be on the hideously bloody as opposed to the dramatically important. It was their plight to be the human guinea pigs with which the evolution of warfare conducts its costly experiments. To the young infantry man of 1861, the gap between technology and tactics meant simply that when he employed the prevailing tactics of the day to assault an enemy armed with an improved weapon his chances of being killed or wounded were, sadly, all too good. 
1
2
3
4
The major mechanical problem had always been in loading the rifle.
For a projectile to adhere to the rifling, it had to be hammered down the bore with a mallet and a special ramrod. This was a slow and laborious process, reducing the rate of fire far below that of the smooth bore. Even the American "Kentucky" rifle,which employed a greased patch around the ball to ease loadingwas somewhat slow, although that rifle's major drawback for large scale military use was precision essential to its manufacture. Each rifle, for instance, had to have a special model for making exact size bullets to fit it. 
5
6
4
7
The army that had fought and won the Mexican War, although shrunken by 1853 to 10,572 officers and men, had proved to the world that Americans * had mastered the linear tactics of smoothbore, muzzle-loader warfare. 
8
7
8
1 1
12
13
9
13 1bid.
formations with men advancing shoulder-to shoulder. They were formed in two ranks instead of three, but the basic assault techniques had changed little since the eighteenth century. 
4
15
As the war began, however, the immediate problem confronting Americans   Except for the rearrangement of the order of paragraphs in one section of 
18
19
2 5
The drill manuals were complicated, keyed for use by trained offl-' cers. 26 In the hastily raised armies of 1861, there was only the barest knowledge of these tacticA and trained officers were few and far between.
When present at all, they were usually serving at too high a level to influence squad or compapy training. The situation was almost opposite that of the Mexican War. As Civil War historian, Bruce Catton commented on the 25 James L.' Morrison, editor, The Memoirs of Henry-Heth (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1974), pp. xxxi-xxxii. This Is not to imply that all, or even most soadiers were given marksmanship training. As Bruce Catton noted, men in the heat of battle failed to notice that they had not pulled the trigger, or they forgot to put a percussion cap under the hammer (which ignited the.powder when the trigger was pulled), and they loaded ball "after ball into th1ir unfired muskets. It may be that some men preferred this to the awful Kitk the weapons produced. At any rate, after Gettysburg, General George G. Meade introduced daily target practice in the Army of the Potomac to teach the men to shoot.. On the inability of soldiers to shoot see Bruce Catton,"T•e A omyof the Potomac, vol. rigorous requirements:
To get from marching to fighting formation, the soldier had to learn, and become letter perfect in a long series of intricate maneuvers.
If he had to march any distance he did so in a column. To fight he had to spread-out in a long line two ranks deep and the complexities of infantry drill in those days designed to bring this about were something today's soldier is happily spared. Furthermore, those comn exities . . . had to be learned if the men were to be able to fight.
"There were numercus ways to get a column Into a line. To be effective in this.form of warfare, officers and men had to know them well enough to perform them under fire. For a young man who had recently been a farmer in Pennsylvania or a clerk in Louisiana and now found himself elected a a lieutenant or captain of infantry, the drill book to which he turned for . instruction when he could get it was an incredibly complicated thing. Not * -, even addressing movement fi,-m place to place, it took eleven commands and * .
eighteen to twenty motions simply to load and fire one round. 
2 8
3 1
-54 officers as well as their experience and knowledge. 
3 6
37
38
3 9
40
36
37
38
4 1
In the north when a unit sustained casualties in battle, it did not receive replacements but fought on with its survivors. 
42
4 3
41
See
formed into a line of two ranks with skirmishers protecting the flanks and thrown out to the front. It was moved forward at a walk. Up to this point, the drill books were being closely followed. Now, however, a dramatic departure that would signal the end oF one age of infantry war and usher in the start of another began to occur-with increasing frequency.
The first instance of such a departure occurred during the battle for Fort Donelson on 15 February 1862. General (then Colonel) Morgan L.
Smith's brigade was formed for attack as described above. As they advanced up a bare slope they came under heavy fire. The entire brigade lay down.
The five companies deployed as skirmishers returned the fire. When the enemy fire slackened the brigade rushed, absorbed the skirmishers, lay down again and opened fire. Then, as brigadier General Lew Wallace, commander of the division to which Smith's brigade belonged, noted in his report:
Soon as the fury of the fire abated, both regiments [the brigade was composed of the 8th Missouri and the l1th Indiana] rose up and rushed on, in that way they at length closed upon the enemy falling when the volleys grew the hottest, dashing on when they s 1ckened and ceased. Meanwhile, our own fire was constant and deadly. '
This first instance of an advance by rushes was to be duplicated time and time again during the war, often with far less rigidity than in its first occurrence. Troops scattered for the cover of stone walls, fences, or trees; they advanced by short rushes; and supported each other by fire. 
4
and though our lines were deployed according to tactics, the men were generally found in stron skirmish lines taking advantage of the ground and every cover.
Arthur L. Wagner, the great American tactician of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, called the advance by rushes along with the use of heavy skirmish lines and attacks by successive deployed lines the principal tactical developments of the Civil War. 
47
On the battlefields of the Civil War occurred a phenomenon that would thereafter remain an essential tenet of infantry combat. It was the final separation of parade ground drill and formations from infantry assault tactics. The separation was not made by the officers who wrote the tactics nor by the drill masters who kept the men to their work on the parade ground, rather, It was done by the infantrymen themselves. 
48
49
Instead of having the men of a company close enough together for their captain to direct with shouted commands, this new assault left a great deal to the initiative of the individual soldier.
It proved much easier for these soldiers to accept this added responsibility than It did for some officers to believe that they could do so. Reluctance on the part of some officers to accept the truths of the battlefield over the doctrine of the drill field would take many years to erase. 5 0 Further, intransigence on this issue would manifest itself time and time again in the future to obstruct tactical progress.
Wagner mentioned attacks by successive lines and the use of heavy skirmish lines as the other principal tactical developments of the war. Indeed, many authorities have described these two types of attacks as the typical attacks of the war. 
5 1
52
53
54
5
tth 
5 3
In the continuing attempt to overcome the stranglehold of the Mini6 ball on the battlefield, other variations of assault tactics were tried. One man who sought a solution was a young West Pointer named Emory Upton. Upton had graduated from the academy in 1861. He was commissioned in the artillery and served as a battery commander at Bull Run. By 1863, as a Colonel of Volunteers, he commanded the 121st New York, an infantry regiment. On May third Upton launched his men in a frontal attack right out of the drill book. His casualties were enormous, from a regimental strength of 454 men he lost 104 killed and 174 wounded. In that one attack he learned the futility of the old-style linear frontal assault. He never tried such a maneuver again. 
5 5
The formation bunched men together one behind the other so that instead of a long line with a depth of two men, the column had a much smaller frontage, but much greater depth. Upton felt thaL the column could close with the enemy more quickly than the line. On May 10, 1864, Upton led twelve regiments formed in such a dense column at a run towards the Rebel lines. The men succeeded in breaking the Confederate lines, but they were not supported and mounting Confederate pressure forced them to return to Federal positions. leaving a thousand casualties behind. 
5 6
he had initiated a tactical system, based on open order, minimized casualties, and the assumption of responsibility by individual soldiers, that would attempt to deal with the realities of the battlefield. 
59
Unfortunately, it would take that Army sixty years to officially sanction a tactical system as effective as the one employed pragmatically by the Civil War soldiers. The Civil War was over. Across the nation hundreds of thousands of recent soldiers returned to their farmns and shops.. For them the stark realities of the great killing ground that was the Civil War would fade in the memory with each Grand Armiy of the Republic reunion. For the professional soldier, however, the war had a much more lasting importance. As the Regular Army shrank to peacetime levels and resumed operations in the West, a few of those soldiers attempted to apply the costly lessons of the war to a tactical system which would find a solution to the unsolved problem of closing the gap between weapons technology and infantry assault tactics.)
The quest for a solution would be impeded by rapidly developing technology.
retarded by conservative reactionary soldiers, and encumbered by the nature of the tasks currently confronting the U.S. Army. Yet, understanding that quest and the men who undertook it is to know the history of the second phase of the evolution of American infantry assault tactics and the emergence of an independent American tactical doctrine.
The pioneer who devised the first official American system of tac--tics was Emory Upton. Only twenty-six years old when the war ended, he had l ~ 1n 1866 the Aymmy strength was 54,600 enlisted and ) was an infantry man and had been Commandant of Cadets at West Point,1862-64, as well as instructor in tactics there 1848-55. Black, USMA. '47, was also an infantry officer and Commandant of Cadets, 1864-70. Ayres, USMA '47, al- though an artillery man, had commanded an infantry brigade in the Army of the Potomac at Chancellorsville and a division from Gettysburg to the end of the war. He had six brevets for gallantry. Van Horn, the recorder, USMA '58, had served throughout the war as an infantry officer. As a group the board would seem to have been well suited to assess the tactical system presented.
(See J. T.  Cullum, 2: 242-45, 325-29, 331-32.)   [ I-No. 300, 11 June 1867. The members, in addition to Grant, were Major General George G. Meade, Brigadier General Edward R. S. Canby, Colonels (Brevet Major General) William F. Barry and (Brevet Brigadier General) William N. Grier, and Major Black. All the members were West Pointers. Meade had commanded the Army of the Potomac from Gettysburg to the end of the war. Canby had commanded in New Mexico, at New Orleans, and in Alabama as well as serving under Stanton in the War Department. Barry was an artilleryman who had led artillery units during the Peninsula Campaign, commanded the artillery of the Washington defenses, and been on Sherman's staff, 1862-64. He was commander of the artillery school at Fort Monroe, Va., 1867-77. Grier was a cavalryman, but he had served as a tactics instructor at West Point, 1840-41.
Black, Commandant at USMA, had been a member of the previous board. This board was less expert than the Clitz board, which originally approved Upton's work, but it had the prestige necessary to silence the dissenting generals which may well have been a reason for-its existence. (See DAB, 12: 474-76; NCAB, 4:66-68, 5:333, 363-64; Cullum, 1: 703-07, 627-28, 601-OT, 2: 18-24; HeTtman, 1: 478.) 
7
8
From a doctrinal viewpoint the most important contribution of the new tactics was the appearance of a small unit of men as the basis for maneuver. In Upton's system the fours were locked in to prescribed movements in each evolution, but in introducing the idea he had unwittingly taken the first step towards modern infantry organization. More important this small i•nit of men would one day serve as the basis for the army's most effective assault tactics. Appleton and Co., 1874), p. 7. 
8
eAmbrose states the bulk of the work was copied from Casey. This included all the school of the soldier, camping, ceremonies, trumpet signals and drum and fife signals. Actually all these creas were peripheral to the basic Idea and imrovement of Upton's system which was the fours. See Ambrose, p. 63; Crites,, pp. 36-37; Upton, Infantry Tactics, pp. 1-67, 334-434; Silas Casey, Infantry Tactics, 3 vols. (New York: D. Van Nostrand, 1862), 1: 2W-98.
Upton's tactical system was easy to understand, but how the man's ideas on the infantry assault evolved was not. Upton has been given credit for developing a totally new infantry attack doctrine. Eventually he came to understand the necessity for such a radical departure, but not when he wrote his book right after the Civil War. He had seen the bloody assaults of the war. In his tactics he emphasized the use of skirmishers, but his manual shows that he could not completely escape the concept of linear attack or totally advocate the use of heavy skirmi~h lines. Even in his revision of 1874 he wrote in the preface:
The introduction of the breech loader has changed none of the principles of grand tactics, and while it had given the impetus to the employment of skirmishers, which is to be encouragedexperience will prove that the safety of an army can not be entrusted to men in open order with whom it is difficult to communicate; but that, to insure victory,,a line or lines of battse must always be at hand to support or receive an attack.
Upton saw skirmishers preceding the infantry line and, when possible, taking the objective on their own. 
1 1
1 2
The fact that he refused to part with a line of battle was not. 
1 3
1
12 Ibid., p..117. 131bid., p. viii; Upton included a plate facing page one which illustrated the close-order formation. Each company was formed in a line of two ranks. The men shoulder to shoulder with sixteen inches between ranas: (see Upton was appointed Commandant of Cadets, USMA, in 1870. The Commandant, in that age when drill and tactics were synonymous, was extremely important in maintaining tactical proficiency in the army. Since the man who held that office controlled the tactical instruction of the young men who would soon become junior office-'s, it was prudent, when possible. to 'practicing the intricacies of the tactical system. As long as American officers learned tactics on the drill field, the man who drilled the Corps, which produced the majority of those officers, would remain important. The problem after the Civil War was that rifled weapons had already made such tactics obsolete. Upton was Commandant for five years. In those years he refined and improved his system without changing his basic concept.
Neverthdess, Upton's thinking on tactical development was not stag- the organization, tactics, discipline, and maneuvers of the armies of Japan, China, India, Russia, France, England, Austria, Italy, and Germany. 
1 4
1 5
1 6
1 8 ',ecause
4
15Ibid. 
1 6
The formation consisted of the fighting line (two companies) and the reserve (two companies).
The fighting line was further broken down into three units. Each company deployed forty men as skirmishers.
They were supported by another forty men about 150 yards to their rear (supports) and the main body of the company (reserves: 160 men) another one hundred yards to the rear. (actually distances varied with terrain). The method of advance was by a series of rushes from cover to cover until the enemy exhausted his ammunition or became demoralized, when a final rush gained victory. Upton noted this assault was "supposed" to gain victory, but that such an advance exhausted the courage of the men making it. Upton, Armies, pp. 271-75, 315.  battle lines for assault, and almost total repression of small unit leader initiative. Upton continued to think about tactics until his suicide in 1881. Towards the end of his life he seemed to have grasped the obsolescence of his system. He became convinced, as one of the officers of his regiment wrote after his death, of the failure of his tactics and particularly of the deployment as skirmishers,
[he] said if his system wq adopted it would involve the country in disaster in the next war.
To correctthis failure Upton was working on a revision of his tactics. The manuscript, found after his death, proves the evolution of his thought. In it he advocated skirmishing or open order as the habitual order for company instruction. He adopted the German column idea and, significantly, wholly endorsed heavy skirmish lines and advance by rushes. In a major advance in his thinking Upton finally gave responsibility for gaining victory to the
In each position the skirmishers, singly or with their supports, seek to overwhelm the enemy by their fire or tempt him to expend his ammunition. If he shows any weakness they rush to the next cover and open fire as before. . . . They work forward man by man those in front protectipo the advance of those in the rear by keeping down the enemy's
It must be remembered that Upton was-one of the most advanced American tactical thinkers of his time. His new system of tactics, although only the first small step in tactical evolution raised a great deal of protest.
The pages of the Arm and Navy Journal, a weekly magazine which begar, in 1863, are filled with comment on his system. 
21
2 2
2 3
2 4
Two months after Upton's death, however, the first step towards correcting the lack of education in the Army was taken with the publication which printed the latest technical developments in the military profession see Donald N. Bigelow, William Conant Church and The Army and Navy Journal New York: Columbia University Press, 1952j, p. 199).
2 2 Ambrose, p. 66. The practice of appointing the man who had authored the tactical system as "tactical editor" had begun with Casey (see Bigelow,  pp. 124-25).  the opportunity for further professional study or for remedying mental stagnation. Some military conservatives scoffed at the idea of learning war in school. 
2 7
28
35
The problem of outdated tactics was exacerbated by other disadvantages endured by the infantrymen of the army. One infantry officer enumerated the problems he perceived in the Army of the 1883's:
1. No traininq for larqer units. 2. Slow promotions. Younq Caotains were needed for vicorous traininq. 3. A want of American textbooks. 4. The Cavalry had fought the Indian Wars, giving the Infantry no experience. 5. Military Posts were remote. 
37
The year after Arthur Wagner arrived at Leavenworth, 1887, General Phillip Sheridan, Sherman's successor as Commanding General, ordered a board convened to review the tactical system and make improvements as required.
The board, which was composed of nine offipers, initially met on 10 February 1888 in Washington, and, shortly thereafter, called for submission of new 
35
36
3 9
4 0
4 1
Not all past boards had conducted tests of proposed systems, but when they had done so it was on the parade grounds at West Point. This board tested concepts in a maneuver area near Leavenworth using the infantry stationed at the school and in so doing signalled the end of a tactical system based or, the close-order drill of the  NCAB, 14: 34-36, 25: 370; Cullum, 2: 793-94; Crites, pp. 114-TB.
4 0 A complete listing of personnel submitted proposals may be found in Crites, pp. 116-19 or ANJ, 21 January 1888, pp. 501, 507; 10 March 1888,  p. 659  
parade ground. The board finished its work and submitted its findings in 1891.42
The result of the board's work was The Infantry Drill Regulations of 1891, with their publication a number of changes occurred in American tactics. First, never again would an individual be the author of a complete tactical system, rather systems would be the work of boards of officers synthesizing a number of proposals. Second, and more important, close-order drill and extended-order maneuver were separated from each other in the book. 
4 3
4 4
The extended order assault received criticism from a small group of obstinate and, apparently, ignorant officers. They argued that * the extended order had not worked in Europe and that American noncommissioned officers (NCO's) did not have the initiative to exercise control successfully over their men. Other, more perceptive officers, rebutted these contentions by pointing out that under the new system the NCO's would have the opportunity to get the training that would enable them to demonstrate the requisite initiative. 45 Some officers applauded the open-order attack, but 
complained that the tactics still relied on the bayonet charge, not rifle fire, and that the tactics were still tied. too closely to the parade ground. 
4 6
4 7
Maneuver Tactics furnishes the connecting link between stritegy and tactics as it consists entirely of drill movements . . . all essentials of maneuver tactics can be learned from drill regulations; but fighting tactics or tactics proper require more extended consideration.
The organization of the regiments of the Army in 1895 was still the 
ten company organization of the Civil War. In 1895, however, each company theoretically had a strength of three officers and one hundred three enlisted men. They were organized into two platoons of two sections each. In each section were three squads of seven privates and a corporal. 
5 1
5 2
to ..align it with the drill system. 
5 4
2
5 4
unmurmuring endurance of hardships by the soldiers and in their willing, energetic, and intelligent efforts to perform their whole duty in the presence of the enemy. A minimum of stragglers on the mgrch and of skullers in battle is the best proof of good discipline. I 
5 Wagner,
58
59
found its way onto the Civil War battlefield. Both Spencer and Henry repeating rifles were used in varying degrees. Upton's'Cavalry Division, for 60 example, was armed with Spencer repeaters.
In 1867 the U. S. Army adopted a breechloader for the infantry. At first it was only a conversion of the Springfield rifled musket to a single-shot breechloader, but better weapons gradually became available. 69ANJ, 9 Oct. 1897, P.95.________ I a few rehashed old ideas of returning to close-order assaults which gave officers greater control, the prevailing opinion tended to agree with Sherman's pronouncement: that the education and thorough training of NCO's and privates were the keys to success on the battlefield. 
70
The soldier who had once only to march forward like an automaton, now had to think independently during that assault. In short the more technology mechanized war the less of a machine the soldier became. Between the end of the Civil War and World War I the United States Army fought only two actions which tested its assault doctrine on a comparatively large scale.
The conduct of those attacks and the evaluation of the results proved important to American tactical evolution. ~ ---
In a decade which spanned the turn of the century three wars were fought which effected American tactical evolution. The most significant of these for the United States Army was the Spanish-Auierican War with its attendant conflict in the Philippines between Americans and Filipinos which continued long after the war ended.
In 1898, when the Spanish-American War started, the United States Army was a small, but comparatively well-trained, force of 28,183 officers and men.' To fight the war, however, the army was expanded by volunteers to 10,516 officers and 199,198 enlisted men. 
2
General of the Army, reported to the Secretary of War on the force that went to Cuba:
It contains 14 of the best conditioned regiments of voluiteers.
Between 30 and 40 percent are uqdrilled, and, in one regiment over 300 men have never fired a gun.
In a tradition as old as the nation, American militia would once again go to war with only a modicum of training.
The two major assaults of the war were launched on the same day when, on I July 1898, the American forces in Cuba attacked El Caney and San Juan and Kettle hills on the outskirts of Santiago. Only two regiments of the fifteen in the assaulting force on Kettle and San Juan Hills were volunteers. One, the First Volunteer Cavalry (Rough Riders), did well.
The other, the 71st New York Volunteers, panicked and refused to advance. 
5
Crawling along the ground, taking advantage of every shelter, here and there rushing forward, the troopers steadily pushed on in the face of galling fire. As they advanced the support pushed forward into the main line and many companies and some regiments became mixed; but regardless of formation they quickengd their pace, rushed across the open ground and charged up the hill.°4
Kriedberg and Henry, pp. 170-71; Walter Millis, The Martial Spirit (New York: Literary Guild of America, 1931), p. 174. 
5
The irregular affect of the rushes was similar to the assaults of the Civil War as men ran forward a hundred yards or so, threw themselves down to rest, and rushed again. 
8
9
The Journal noted that no valuable deduction could be gained from the assaults. 11
On the other side of the world American forces fought, first, Spaniards and, then, native insurgents in the Philippines. The terrain of 
7
81bld., pp. 125-27. 
9
1 0 Arthur L. Wagner, Report of the Santiago Campaign (Kansas City, Mo.: F. Hudson, 1908), p. 108.' "llANoJ 
23 July 1898, p. 952.
While the drill manual called for intervals of two yards between men, for example, in the Philippines extensions of five yards or even more proved advantageous. A line so extended gave each man more freedom of action, reduced casualties, and permitted envelopment of enemy positions. 12 Such modifications also caused problems centered, once again, on the amount of individual initiative to allow each infantryman. Qne officer, a regular serving with a volunteer regiment, noted the advantages of the new formations outweighted the disadvantages, but pointed out that men so dispersed were hard to control. 
1 3
The record, however, does not reflect any examples of such behavior. American soldiers tended to be far more likely to advance too boldly than too timidly. More prescient officers simply insisted on thorough training to insure these soldiers could use the new techniques correctly. 15 12LtC. James Parker, 45th Vols. (Cpt., 4th Cav.), "Some Random Notes of Fighting in the Philippines," 27 Journal of the Military Science Institution (JMSI): (Nov. 1900): 330. Parker noted that almost every frontal attack was accompanied by a flank attack (see ibid., pp. 322, 329).
13 1bid., pp 329-30. Parker insisted on control of the firing line by an officer, pointing out that Volunteers often tended not to listen to the instructions of NCO's (who were after all their peers or friends whom they had elected), but would listen to officers (see ibid., pp. 330-31).  In his reports General Nelson Miles, Army Commanding General, lauded company training as an army-wide strength. 
1 7
1 8
1 9
2
The Spanish American War had illuminated glaring weaknesses in the administration of the United States Army. Efforts to equip, train, and supply the soldiers raised to prosecute the war proved inadequate and 1 6 Krledberg and Henry, pp. 172-76.  lieutenant to brigadier general, while establishing a superior record as a commander in the Philippines where he won the Medal of Honor in September, 1899.26 Bell was an enthusiastic advocate of officer education. He insisted regimental commanders, who had found Leavenworth a convenient place to dump off deadbeats, send only their best officers to attend the course.
Although older military conservatices called Leavenworth "Bell's Folly," this vigorous, extroverted officer developed a following among the student officers. He participated in sports with hi-studpnts and addressed them and their wives by their first names. 
27
28
One of the tasks assigned to the officers of the newly created General Staff was revising the Infantry Drill Regulations. 
29
ir, tihý regulations t~he open-order assaultI was the only ap-rovEd a s sa,, I-t c -r
Thcat. was a great advance -i n as sau t doct ifr: Tlerv with, t.he-regulla5tions was t,.-he fact that they wen~t into far too much d et1Za -l Thle "no-rmal form of attack" or "normial atEtack" as it was cle
Load tlal-er the distances which Weagnerl had proposed as "an illustrat`;On Of gineraj prInciples" and cemiented them, -Into doctrine. The rnomi-al attack ra-,e t-he exact. distances at which -the skirrnishers advanced,, ru-shes c-ýmernced, etc. c It even gave the number of m.nds cft-.1t each me.. ,ld fire ateacdidStarnce. 0
This stan~dardization er~abied the normjal att"ack to be condu.ct-ed wit a hi';h degree of precision in open terrai n, but it was hard to adapt to broken terrain or varying situa tions, and it~developed 'little -initiative.
the new assault te'chniques represented tactical regression, but thýe qUestion Was whethzerl they would be accepted by the officers who used ther., M'ore arnd mo re of those, of f icers-were seriously studying their profession.
In theý latter' hal~f-,of`.the nineteen~th _cientury .this exp-anded professioral 30 ,The norm~al atEtack for a company w-,as described in th~e L-rill Re.-ultions. All distances were in relation to the enemy: "'at 12010 .Brds diep-zy as sk ,rmnizhers.
At 1000 yards conduct the first halt. iTheriea~tet-haitevary fifty yards until the unit reaches 200 yards. Quick tim-,e is t-e sehũ sed to 80-1 yards then double tCime. At-600 yards correct density is one s~k'Ir~m~iher per yard. The chiefs of platoons and sections desir:nate a ý-'Luad .. r squads to fire-at each halt. At the first 'our halts one squad inEach ,jIetoon fires one round. At tL t L he next four halts two squads in each platoon fire t-wo rounds. At the next four halts one platoon fires at will. At the next-.;our halts, t.he entire-company fires at will. At 200 _yards rapid fire is deivered. The Captain orders',`the `chargeý by orderina, "CEase Firing, To the "Charge* ch" The rnr enaýdv'anc~e at the double tie. At thirty yards. the Cap~tain orders',,-!' Charge". "The,.men charge bayonets5 and run at the ener~y.
n-vace, by a 1t ern e.,p iatosfow hlisathorized. Twenty f ive 7: yr6s her thffs ruh fit~ ds+ t'hereafter." (See U. S. Department of'.War,"Infantry, Drill Re' ulAtiohs,--10904 rN'ew York: Arriy and Navy the small amount of space allotted to battle tactics, some even expressed concern over the fixed pattern of the attack. 
3 4
Tactics that had been used in two recent wars were also debated extensively in Infantry. It was the experience of these wars which increased opposition to the normal attack. The Boer War, 1899-1902, had shown the British fixed form of attack was a failure whea met by Boer's firepower.
This failure, had caused the Germans to change their "sealed pattern" attacks to a less centralized concept. 
3 5
It had also shown that an attack might take hours or days as men slowly advanced the fighting formation. 
3 6
Opposition to the normal attack was generated in the improved school system as more qualified officers attended the courses and instructors improved. The dean of American tactical thinkers, Arthur Wagner, newly appointed to the staff of the Army War College, was still concerned about the quality of officer students as a letter from him to the War Department, shortly before his untimely death, indicated. He asked the department to:
Cause a ray of light to penetrate the skulls of the superannuated individuals who have not kept pace with the march of events and who would give the detail at Leavenworth to the regimental idiot. 
3 8
4 6
Meanwhile reports from officers assigned to observe foreign and domestic maneuvers commented on'tactics and called for reforms. As early as 1902 a War Department observer had noted the lack of coordination between infantry and artillery, and the need for a more flexible set of tactics. 
47
4 8
4 9
-.
the use of cover to advance. 5 0 Such observations indicated American officers were becoming increasingly proficient in their tactical thinking and led them to advocate a more realistic domestic tactical system.
Soon opposition to the rigid style of the normal attack was voiced more loudly. One officer pointed out that in the 1880's and early 1890's the serious study of tactics had been confined to a very few rfficers. Life in isolated garrisons and meager official requirements had provided little incentive for original study-or research. By 1908, however, thanks to the school system, the improved methods of professional cornunication, and the experiences of war, many officers were concerning themselves with the serious study of tactical questions.5 
1
There is no such thing as a normal attack and procedure. It is, therefore wrong, if not crimi.nal, to attempt to teach it to men who will probably not discover the mistake until tby learn it through unnecessary loss of life in their first battle. ( Colonel Evans continued his sca hing but well reasoned sally by pointing out that the 1904 regulations treated the attack as a parade ground maneuver and that England, France. and Japan had already prohibited such a fixed form attack.   DAB, 5: 298-99; ANJ, 22 May 1909, pp. 1074-75.   5 8 ANJ, 30 April 1910, p. 1040; 27 August 1910, p. 1543. Col. Duncan  had been comiissioned In 1873 and served as an infantryman in the Indian Wars, 1877-78, 1890-91. He received a brevet for gallantry in 1877. He served in Cuba where he charged up San Juan Hill as a captain, 13th Infantry, and was breveted for gallantry again during that action. He campaigned in the Philippines, 1899 to 1903, and was again recommended for brevet promotion for gallantry against the Moros. In 1903 he became Colonel of the 6th Infantry. In 1911 he was promoted to Brigadier General shortly after he finished work on the board. Major Dentler was a West Pointer, class of The new regulations contained many changes in assault tactics. The basic attack still consisted of three lines: 'firing line, supports, and reserves, but the movement of those lines to the enemy was completely deregulated. 
6 2
6 4
6 5
6 3 1bid, p. 112. 6 4 1bid., p. 80. 651bid., p. 44. 6 6
• I M I regulation provided exactly the flexible, realistic instructions infantrymen had demanded.
The new tactics immediately produced a great deal of comment in
The Army and Navy Journal and Infantr~journal. A few officers criticized the regulations. One stated that the company frontage was too small, another that there was, "not enough How to" in the regulations. 
6 7
6 8
6 9
7 0
With the publicationof the 1911 system, infantrymen had a set of regulations which provided the best chance for success and survival in attack that they had seen since they devised their own techniques in the Civil War. The regulations did, in part, owe their existence to warfare, but, significantly, it was not American warfare. By 1911 the American infantry had a character and a tradition all its own. It was sufficiently 6 7 Letter from E. B. B.,San Antonio, Texas, ANJ, 15 Oct. 1911, pp.  216-17; Letter from J.B., ANJ, 1 Nov. 1911, p. 308;--F.F., "The New  Drill Regulations," ANJ, lrlov. 1911, p. 340.   6 8 For the rebuttal see "Infantry," ANJ, 28 Oct. 1911, p. 248.   6 9 1bid.; ANJ, 9 Dec. 1911, p. 436; W. C. and F. P. Church, ANJ,  19 August 1911, p.Tt550; 16 Sept. 1911, p. 74  
professional to assess the developments in the tactical world, to adopt some of the best foreign ideas, and to blend them into the American tactical system. To be sure there were still complaints about training. But after three years Brigadier General John J. Pershing would assemble many of those American soldiers and prepare them for the biggest test they had faced in over half a century. American infantry assault tactics had evolved a long w ay In those fifty years. It had taken almost all of that time for the approved doctrine to arrive'at the flexibie heavy line of skirmishers that infantrymen had informally adopted in the Civil War. After 1911 the American infantry had an improved form of that doctrine. Infantry soldiers also had professional officers and NCO's, well trained in Army schools, who had vl.,died those tactics and knew how to use them. The U. S. Army was a superb little professional force in 1914, but th, key word was little. As late as 1 April 1.917 the total strength of the 7egular Army was only 127,588 officers and men. 
7 5
The approved solutions to the map problems at the Army School of The Line, a successor to the Infantry and Cavalry School at Fort Leavenworth, invariably dictated envelopment with machine guns positioned to support by. fire. 
3
1912
-1913
, 1913
-1914
(Fort Leavenworth: Army Service Schools, 1914
), 1912
-1913: Part I, pp. 29-35;
Part IV, pp. 24-25, 57-58. 1913
-1914: Part I, pp. 37-40;
Part II, pp. 54-55. 4
What American infantrymen did not know was that when attempted on a large scale any linLar tactics became inflexible because preserving the line was a primary object. Once an attack was Miitiated the leaders had little option to change their direction of attack or their objective. The conflict in Europe had begun as a war of movement with soldiers enacting tht Schlieffen Plan and fighting the battles of the frontiers, but by December it had ground to a standstill of opposing trenches, and the assault tactics of European armies began changing in efforts to break the enemy lines.
In the opening battles the French had lost 400,000 men, rmny of vhom died, still clad in their red trousers, charging foolishly into the fire of German machineguns. A French Captain who had lived through those assaults noted the attack was characterized by a single furious rush and that,"Infantry units disappear in the furnace of fire like handfuls of straw." 6 As historian S. L. A. dense masses of the enemy, line after line appeared over -the ridge, some of their officers even mounted on horseback, and "advancing as if carrying out a field day drill in peacetime. 9
The diary of the 15 Reserve Regiment left a grim commentary of what followed: 7 S. L. A. Marshall, The American Heritage History of World War I (New York: American Heritage, 1964). p. 49. 
8
The British lost 385 officers and 7,861 men in that assault and never reached the first German trench.
One effort to overcome the tactical deadlock of the trenches was to precede each attack by longer and longer barrages of artillery fire. From a forty-five minute preparation on Aubers ridge, 9 May 1915, the bombardment stretched to seven days before the first battle of the Sormine, 1 July 1916.11
The artillery was largely ineffective because the barrage was lifted before the assaulting infantry had left their trenches. Consequently, the defenders easily clambered up out of their shellproof dugouts and manned their positions long before the opposition had crossed no-man's land.
By the end of 1915 this brutal, bludgeoning fighting was changing the philosophy of assault.
At the outset of the war European assault tactics had all been some version of the three-line, extended-order system like that espoused in the 1911 American manual. These tactics required the infantry leaders to use rushes, employ cover, attain fire superiority, and, when the tactics alone could not defeat the impasse of the trenches.
In 1916 the French first discovered that if the artillery barrage were laid down directly in front of the advancing infantry and could then be moved forward as the infantry advanced the defenders could be caught while still in their deep dugouts. This idea was adopted by the British.with some success in 1917.16
By 1918 the creeping barrage was a standard feature of almost all infantry assaults. 17 The tank also made its first large scale appearance in 1917.
At Cambrai on 30 November British infantry followed 324 tanks in a very successful attack. The assault, which resulted in 4,000 British casualties, had taken more ground in one day than had the Third Ypres offensive which lasted four months and cost Britain 244,897 men. 18 The tank and the creeping barrage ), two Dominion officers, Sir Arthur Currie, a Canadian, and Sir John Monash, An Australian, seem to have been the frist to propose the use of the creeping barrage in the British Army. Both tt'se officers displayed a capacity for tactical analysis sadly lacking in most of their British "compatriots. After the Somme, for example, Currie, then a division commander, interviewed every surviving unwounded officer and three enlisted men per company to determine why the assaults failed. He also visited Verdun and made notes on the new French tactics in use there: infiltration and the creeping barrage. On Currie see Albert M. J. Hyatt, "The Military Career of Sir Arthur Currie" (Ph.D. dissertation, Duke University, 1964), pp. 97-99, 104-106. Monash's book The Australian Victories in France (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1920) evidences an excellent grasp of tactics. 1 
7
18 Wilfrid Miles, Military Operations in France and Belgium, The Battle  of Cambrai (London: His Majestys Stationery Office, 1948), p. 352; Marshall,  pp. 214, 220-221.  The story of tank development, while not of critical importance to this paper is, nevertheless, illuminating in helping to understand British military thought. The tank was a British idea, but opposition to use of the vehicle was also strong. The breakthrough at Cambrai, for example, was not exploited because no reserves had been provided for that purpose. The French also gave little attention to the rifle, preferring to support their attacks with artillery, grenades, and automatic weapons. The British went even further. In what amounted to an attempt to reverse tactical progress by a hundred years British Army doctrine claimed, "The decisive factor in every b 1ont.,20 attack is the bayonet.
Thus, assaulting troops were ordered not to lay down or fire their weapons during assault, but to walk forward behind a creeping barrage in lines with a five pace interval between men and attempt to bayonet the enemy. Since the automatic rifle was of little use in such an endeavor, no firing being permitted during the advance, British assault troops were directed to leave half of their Lewis gun (automatic rifle) magazines in the old front line trenches to be brought forward later.  Baker-Carr, Trom Chauffeur to Brigadier (London: Benn, 1930), pp. 144-145;  Douglas Orgill, The Tank [London: Heineman, 19701, pp. 22-23, 34, 41-46; Arch  Whitehouse, Tan._•k [Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday and Co., 19601, pp. 20, 26-28,   38).
19enor Officers School, Notes for Commandingt Officers (Aldershot: Gale and Polden, 1917), p. 219. 2 0 Ibid. 2 1 Ibid., pp. 194-195, 223-224, 227. One finds it hard to understand such doctrine, perhaps it was a manifestation of the disdainful attitude of some British officers towards machine weapons in general.
Brigadier Baker-Carr, who ran the British machinegun school in France and later commanded a tank brigade, provides some useful insights into this attitude (see Baker-Carr, pp.  71, 79-80, 86-89, 97, 100, 150-53, 260-61, 269-70).
For other authors comments see: Peter The British were making use of technological improvements, but their tactical ideas wera archaic.
The United States entered the war on 6 April 1917 and the nineteen officers on duty with the General Staff began planning to send an American army to France. 
2 3
2 4
Along with problems of command and utilization of his troops, Pershing faced allied officers whose ideas of training differed significantly from his '11n.
The Americans were trained in two increments with the first portion of their training conducted in the United States. The newly inducted volunteers and draftees were collected in camps throughout the country, organized into 141; Whitehouse, pp. 20, 28. The offensive spirit of the French and British has largely disappeared because of severe losses. . . . In many respects the tactics and techniques of our allies are not suited to American characteristics. The French do not like the rifle, do not know how to use it, and their infantry is consequently too dependent upon powerful artillery support. Their infantry lacks aggressiveness and discipline. The British infantry lacks initiative and resource. ... 32
Such criticism was easy from an army which had scarcely been bloodied in the fighting. The enormous losses sustained by the French and British had certainly given their regimental officers some reticence about plunging boldly 33 into the fray.    , 1918 [New York: Charles Scribners Sons,  1972], pp. 8-14). While this generalization may have been true of British and French soldiers, the same does not apply to Canadian, Australian, and New Zealand troops. The Australians, all volunteers, were almost universally acclaimed the finest infantry of the war, with the Canadians a close second. It is significant that the Australian and Canadian corps led the British attack at .Amiens, which ruptured the German lines on 8 August 1918. See Essame,  pp. 3, 104, 113; Baker-Carr, pp. 150-53, 314-16; Orgill, pp. 41-46; Firkins,  pp. 114-15; Brigadier 6eneral Sir James Edmonds, official British Historian, quoted in ibid, p. 159; John Terraine, The Western Front 1914-18, quoted In 'ii ibid; Shelford Bidwell, Annor= at War (London: Arms and Armor, i970) pp. 39-45; Pershing understood his allies' feelings, but his responsibility was training the new American Amy. He utilized his allies' expertise in trench warfare, but his emphasis, repeated again and again in orders and directions, was on training his infantrymen to become expert in the use of their rifles and to advance using cover. These tactics, he thought, would serve infantrymen well both in trench fighting and the open fighting that would follow. 
3 4
The American Infantrymen who trained in France learned two types of offensive tactics, one for use from trench to trench, the other for open warfare. They learned to follow closely behind the creeping barrage in a linear formation of three or more lines. The first two lines rushed forward to keep up with the barrage while the third entered the trenches and dugouts to clear out the remaining enemy resistance. 
3 6
3 4 Pershing,
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
181;
Deweerd,
p. 215
3 5 "General Principles Governing Training,
" General Headquarters (GHQ)
3 7
3 8
3 9
37
In fact, Americans complained most vociferously when they felt they were not getting enough offensive or tactical training. Adherence to the tactical methods of these allies would not dull American fighting spirit, but their use would add significantly to the casualties A.E.F. units sustained as they were initiated into combat. The aggressiveness of American soldiers combined with archaic tactical methods added significantly to the carnage of the battlefields. Captain Howard Clark, a company commander in the 4th Division, who had some of his pre-combat training with the British, typified such feelings: K During those eighteen days, with British equipment and under British training we learned but little that was to stand us in good stead later. The hours spent learning the nomenclature of the Lee-Enfield (I can hear him yet, that big raw-boned Irish sergeant--"Th' front soight 'as thr-ree par-rts, the bed, blade and bead") might well have been devoted to practice in open warfare formations and in gaining some useful kno% 1 edge of the technique of outguessing the murderous machinegun.
The training cycles which Pershing established would continue throughout the war as more and more American units arrived in France, but for the units already trained, 1918 brought the first offensive combat. At first Americans participated in small trench raids, assaults from trench to trench the objectives of which were to capture prisoners and secure intelligence.
When the mission was accomplished the soldiers vacated the enemy trench and returned to their own lines.
A soldier destined to win fame in two world wars received his baptism pp. 330-331.
from the linear formations of the drill regulations. In the confusion of the battlefield lines often disappeared and were replaced by groups of infantrymen advancing on their owin or with the support of another group who provided suppressive fire against enemy positions. Infantrymen soon found that advancing in such groups was, more adaptable and more effective than attempting to advance while maintaining a linear formation.
The Americans were evolving assault tactics adapted to the conditions, but, despite admonitions in training, many new units had to re-learn the lessons of their predecessors on the harsh stage of combat. On 29 July the 109th and 110th Infantry, 28th Division, advanced without artillery fire, but in "faultless ranks" across an open field towards German positions in a woodline. Five assaults were r-epulsed by the Germans until the position was finally taken with artillery support on the next day. 
5
United States' soldiers were employing the ordered trench warfare formations taught by their allied instructors. These formations were easier to control for the inexperienced leaders, and offered the false security of close proximity to 58 William Burkhardt, Hobnails and Helmets (Cham'bersburg, Pa.: Kaye,  Inc., 1967)  Pershing and his Headquarters did their utmost to insure subordinate comnanders understood the necessity of employing open warfare techniques. A memorandum to corps and division commanders directed that "strong emphasis must be placed on the use of all aveilable cover and upon the great value of flanking and encircling movements."' 
6 1
The headquarters of the A.E.F. was espousing nothing less than the employment of fire and maneuver because the officers of the headquarters had come to believe that the technique saved men's lives. In the entire memorandum there was just one sentence on the set piece trench to trench attack. It stated .,63 such attacks "... will occasionally be practiced.    School, Fort Benning, Ga., 1932-33), pp. 3-6.  4-15 October 1918" (Monograph, The Infantry School, Fort Benning, Ga., 1927-28), i p. 18.
IL 129 fire into the position. 
7 2
7 3
7 4
7 5
7 6
The official method of assault became fire and maneuver. "Fire must cover all movement in the presence of the enemy, the regulations stated. Movement L 7 2 Major Ben Hur Chastaine, "Operations of Company A, 142nd Infantry (36th Division) in the Champagne Offensive, 7-12 October 1918" (Monograph,  The Infantry School, Fort Benning, Ga., 1931-32), p. 14. 
7 3
was to be used to get to the flank or rear of the enemy and gain a position from which to destroy him. 
7 7
An officer writing in the American Army and Navy Journal stated the new tactics had evolved in response to the demands of the battlefield. 
7 8
(Washington, D.C.: G.P.O., 1919), pp. 97, 104-108, 117-121. 78
life, but unlike those forebears, they had the fortunate experience of hearing those tactics espoused as accepted, even recommended, doctrine. It was, in the final analysis, the developing professionalism of the leadership of the American Army which combined with the harsh lessons of the realities of war to produce the quickest and most appropriate step in the evolution of infantry assault doctrine in the history of the United States Army.
Infantry assault tactics had seen many changes since those initial tentative steps of a few ragged Continentals in the snow at Valley Forge.
The United States Army had first adopted foreign systems and made the necessary improvements to use those systems effectively. Then slowly, as advances in technology signaled the need for change and as the army developed its professionalism, Americans initiated and refined their own system of tactics.
As increasing numbers of officers were educated in army post-graduate schools and cultivated an interest in exploring professional subjects, as-the army developed institutions which provided forums to air the ideas produced by the increased interest and created mechanisms to act on those ideas, and as the realities of war made themselves felt, the evolution of the infantry tactics proceeded ever more quickly until it arrived at a system which was effective, adaptable, and fit to the character of the American soldier.
The methods by which these tactics evolved provide insights into the development of the army. First foreign systems were adopted in toto for use by the infantry. Then adaptations of those systems were translated or pirated by individuals seeking financial gain, and rubber stamped by boards which did little or nothing to change the propositions. When the Civil War exposed the inadequacy of the last translated texts, very few officers proposed solutions to the problem and only one, Emory Upton, had the originality to propose, and the power to insure the adoption. of, a unique system whidh
4 ln182d4 *ASPMA, 111: 87-91); Ganoe claims the Secretary of War approved Duane's tactics in 1812. He may have confused that work with Smythe's book (see Ganoe, p. 143).
General officers on duty in Washington. Major General Alexander Macomb, the Commanding General of the Army, was President. The members were: Fenwick; Brevet Major General Thomas S. Jesup; Brevet Brigadier Generals John E. Wool, George Gibson, Roger Jones, and Nathan Towson; Colonel George Croghan; Major Trueman Cross; Brevet Major
108Ibtd., p. 127. 1 0 9 1bid., pp. 244-45. S.. . ... . . . ...... . ...... .. . .. . ...-.-. -..... ... . _ _ _ _ _ _
Hardee who had graduated from West Point in 1838, studied cavalry tactics in Europe in 1840, and fought through the Mexican War where he was twice breveted for gallantry.17 His 14 Mahon, Infantry, p. 19; Weigley, p. 235; Matloff, p. 182. 16 Ropp, p. 176; R. Weigley, p. 567).
2 7 
2 7 
an EM
an EM
2 Peter S. Michie, The Life and Letters of Emory Upton (Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas: George A. Spooner, 1891), pp. 121-78; Stephen E. Ambrose, Upton and the Army (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press., 1964), pp. 22-43; Allen Johnson and Dumas Malone, ed., Dictionary of American Biography (DAB) (New York: Scribners, 1930-36), 19: 228-30; Webster's American Military Biographies (WAMB) (Springfield, Mass.: G. C. Merriam and Co., 1978), p. 441; George Cullum, ed., Biog aphical Register of the Officers aiid Graduates of the U.S.M.A., 3d ed. (New York:
* European maneuvers in 1887. Lancaster had been a tactics instructor at West £i Point, 1863-65, and Professor of Military Science and Tactics at Bishop Seabury Mission, 1873-77. French had served in the 4th artillery, Hasbrouck's and Upton's regiment, but other than that he seemed to have no special quali-
4 1 Crites, p. 100.
4 9 Genoe, p. 363; Hunt, p.  
4 9 Genoe, p. 363; Hunt, p.  
;-••,+-• . ,•-:: . • '""+ "-!+ • . /,'" ''"'T ""T'"-•"'"•• =. +;-S-.FMarshall's meno"added luster to the professional reputations of Infantrymen whobhad attended.the Infantry School under Marshall in the 1930's (see ibid., p. 266). During World War I Morrison, then a Major General, was
force had to continue with what had become a frontal attack. One should not imply, however, that American tactics were comparatively inferior. No tactician in 1914 had seen beyond the flexible linear attack and American infantry tactics did incorporate more flexibility than most. Soon, however, the bloody carnage of trench stalemate would cause perceptive soldiers to reevaluate tactics.
OThe militia continued to use Steuben as a guide until 12 May 1820 when Congress directed that they too adopt the system of the regular army S(see ANC, 15 October 1835, p. 332).f.. 5 1Weigley, History of Amy, p. 132.
l
Dupuy, History U. S. Army, p. 105.
U.S. Department of War, Adjutant General's Office, Special Orders
7
8 1btd., p. 315.
The artillery school, opened at Fort Monroe, Virginia in 1824, served as a model for this institution. (SeeKriedberg and Henry, p. 147;  Dupuy, Compact History U.S.A., p. 163; Welgley, p. 153.)   
0 1bid., pp. Ambrose, p. 44. Dupuy, Compact History U.S.A., Unfortunately for the Army the repeating rifles were, in the interests of economy, dispensed with shortly after the war. The Cavalry who had been armed with Spencers were given a shortened model of the singleshot breechloading Sharps. SeeDupuy, p. 151. !j 6 1 Ibid., p. 151; Crites, p. 43. 6 2 1bid., pp. 56-57; Dupuy, Compact History U.S.A., p. 197. 6 3 OCr.ites. pp. 44, 49; Brodie, pp. 145-46. , N,••?;' .:,!' i• Ow
0 William A. Ganoe The History of The United States Amy (New York: D. Appleton, 1924), pp. 421-22.
7,R -
3
7
373; on the wartime officer training program seeKriedberN  and Henry, 
1  Cpt. Howard Clark, "Operations of the 3rd Battalion,
59th Infantry (4th Division) in the Ainse-Marne Offensive 17-21 July 1918"(Monograph, The  Infantry School, Ft. Benning, Ga., 1932), p. 6. One should realize that this feeling did not encompass those units who operated with Australian and Canadian units. Monash, although sometimes critical of the rash exuberance of the Americans, found them good soldiers: high praise from one of the war's finest commanders (seeMonash, Firkins,. Americans worked well with the Commonwealth soldiers (seeFirkins,  Bidwell, Orgill,.
Pershlng, 1:152-153. 68Mj. G. E. Bertand, 6th Chausmirs Alpines, "Tactical Qualities of the Infantry," 14 IJ (October 1918):276. 69 Cpt. H. D. Ayres, "Operations of the 3rd Battalion,
7th Infantry (3rd Division), 29 September -1 October 1918"(Monograph, Fort Benning, Ga.,  1932-1933), pp. 16, 30.
There are a great many people to whom I owe thanks for their help, encouragement, and support in making this paper possible. Although space
Silas Casey among them, objected to the board's findings and put forth some ideas of their own.4 As a result, the Secretary of War appointed a new board to reconsider Upton's tactics and the ideas of the other officers. 
5
6
4
favor of an open-order assault. 
3 2
3 3
7 1
7 2
7 3
7 4
Infantry no longer advances by any conventionally organized movement . The troops crawl Along the ground. They sneak over and around undulations in the soil. The men a're flat on their stomachs. Then when the least pause occurs in the firing these men leap up for a minute, hurl themselves forward, not as a body but individualiy and independently in bounds and begin hugging the ground afresh.'
The fire of the men was irregular and intermittent. As they closed on the objective they formed a "fire line," reinforced it, and, at an appropriate f2 moment, charged.' Most Infantrymen were convinced that they had an effective method ofrassault and they stu&ck closely to the prescribed manual.
The Army advocate.d maneuver whenever possible as opposed to frontal attack and had'Incorporated supporting machine gun fire into these assaults.
1 "Effect of-the New Tactics on the Operations of Infantry," 11 Infan--try Journal (L.3.J) ($September-Octoberi 1914): 243-44.
21bid.
II I Infantry combat begins with the charge." 
1 2
3
The French, meanwhile, were making some very different changes in their tactical system. In 1916 the French began to experiment with infiltration.
They sent assaults forward as groups of men rather than as lines. These combat groups used the available cover and provided supporting fire for each other as they advanced by rushes. During the Somme battles in July the French enjoyed some success with these tactics as the British sent their volunteers 14 forward in ordered lines losing 60,000 men on July first alone.
In an article for Infantry Journal Major G. E. Bertrand, a French infantryman, later noted that all maneuver depended on a combination of fire and movement.
"One unit of infanty advances," he wrote, "helped by the fire of the neighboring unit." 
1 5
4 7
The Marines never used it (the formation) again. It was a formation unsuited for open warfare and incredibly vulnerable. It didn't take long to learn better but there was a price to pay for learning. 
4 8
4 9
50
top jin] as pretty a line as you ever saw." An NCO who participated reported the platoon sergeant was swearing like a demon at his men, "Right dress, there, you dirty lousy doughboys, right dress, or I'll drill you damned feet off when I get you back to camp, right dress." 
5 3
5 4
When the next revision came, the involvement of growing numbers of officers in tactical revision g4ave the board newand more importantldutieS.
Instead of simply approving a single solution, boards became responsible for synthesizing an ever-increasing number of new tactical ideas.tnd producing a-system which amalgamated the best of them. Since the systems produced by these boards were published by the Army, the motivation for the men who proposed and tested the tacticschanged from financial gain to professional enhancement.
For the most part two types of boards had ruled on tactical development: one a prestigious group of senior officers assembled to lend authority to the acceptance of new tactics; the other a collection of experts often chosen because of their familiarity with the tactical systems of the day.
This second type of board was composed of drillmasters, often instructors at West Point, when tactics and drill were synonymous aid, later, tacticians, often affiliated with the schools at Leavenworth or the General Staff, after parade-ground and battlefield had been doctrinally separated. Whatever their backgrounds these experts provided the official mechanism for tactical development.
It is significant that real tactical' progress was made only after tacticians took over the boards.  , 1863-1914, 1919-1922.   Infantry Journal, 1904-1919.   Journal of the Military Service Institution, 1900-1910, 1911-1912, 1915.   Military and Naval Magazine, 1833-1836.   Stars and Stripes, 8 February 1918-13 June 1919.   United Service Magazine, 1879-1896.
United States Military Magazine, 1839-1842.
The Infantry School Library. Fort Benning, Ga. These monographs are all the personal experiences of men who were infantry officers in World War I. [134]
° i°i .
i.