# ID: f3ff10d3b23149c0ba04ccbe85df034d
# Title: Tactical Victory Leading to Strategic Defeat: Historic Examples of Hidden Failures in Operational Art
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1993.0
# Fulltext:
Clauswitz first conveyed the culminating point as that point beyond which "the scale turns and the reaction follows with a force tlhat is usually much stronger than that of the original attack'. He goes on to state that this point must be detected 'with discriminative judgement*. 
12
13
Coordination, Integration, Synchronization -These are the central tenets of successful operations because they focus on the requirement to successfully link a series of tactical actions to attain strategic goals.
Clauswitz described the requirement to coordinate the results of tactical actions with others to attain the objectives of war.  
15
Uncoordinated tactical victories, if disparate and gapped, allow the enemy time to regroup and concentrate to meet each subsequent action.
In such cases, it may even be possible for the enemy to achieve his own strategic goals despite tactical defeat.
Operational Reserve -Plans for sequels, those possible outcomes of battles, are crucial for operational success because they determine how tactical success will be exploited, or the operational consequences of tactical setbacks will be minimized. Such plans inevitably revolve around the retention of an adequate operational reserve.
If the reserve is inadequate, exploitation of tactical success may lead to overextension and arrival at the culminating point. Once the culminating point is passed and the offensive slows, the attrition of reserves leaves the attacker weak in the face of counterattack, and vulnerable to defeat,16
6. Operational Sustainment -This term refers to the logistics and support required to keep operations moving toward the achievement of their objectives. Throughout all operations, commanders must conserve sustaining resources while setting priorities for further support. 17 Offensives that can not be logistically sustained are doomed to quickly reach their culminating point, regardless of how spectacular the tactical successes may be. In fact, they can often be considered to have passed their culminating points before starting. Clauswltz acknowledged that there may be different centers of gravity at the strategic and tactical levels. 12 Therefore, if taken to a lower strategic level, the center of gravity for the Insurgency of the Viet Cong was the support of the people, and for the NVA infiltration it was the security of the Ho Chi Minh Trail. While there were those in the US military who recognized these centers of gravity and attempted to direct operations toward them, too often American political and military leaders focussed resources on short term attainable tactical objectives. While always victorious in the field at the tactical level, a prolonged involvement with a rising casualty rate gradually sapped American will and attacked the center of gravity for a democratic society at warpopular support.
A successful pacification program must separate the insurgents from the population, provide security to the population from rebel reprisal, and win the support of the population for the regime. 
13
20
2 1
preponderance for air and artillery firepower.
The refugee problem reflected the failure of coordination between the pacification and conventional strategies. Defoliation, ARC LIGHT strikes, and 'depopulation* of areas further alienated the population and made them ripe for VC  The decision to take the third option and continue to push north was a complex one and due to a number of factors. MacArthur was a very popular hero in what had been a very unpopular war, and few people wanted to be placed in the unpopular and politically risky position of reining him in.
Many policy makers, and even the JCS, stood in awe of MacArthur's prestige and reputation. There was also a certain amount of fear that slowing the offensive would lose congressional and allied support for Cold War polices.35However, the dominant psychological factor seemed to be simple victory fever. It simply felt too good to be enjoying such tactical and operational success, so rather than be satisfied with the achievement of our original strategic goal of freeing South Korea, we changed our goal.
"Resistance to aggression' was changed to 'punishment of aggression 
', and
The decision to proceed north to the Yalu with the new strategic goal MacArthur's ego was in the way, but Truman had also failed to trust his own misgivings.
In the end, the adninistratlon escaped most of the culpability for the disaster. It suited their political purpose to saddle MacArthur with most of the blame, and it also suited their diplomatic purpose to brand China as the new aggressor. Therefore, the administration manage6 to have it both ways: they could satisfy the liberals by blaming MacArthur for the political and military failure, while satisfying the conservatives by blaming China. 
69
In the north, the Russian commanders failed to heed this lesson, and by the time they finally started the assault after a massive bombardment, the enemy was waiting and easily repulsed them.
Incredibly, despite using three times the shells as Brusilov, they complained that their offensives failed due to a lack of artillery ammunition!75
Eventually, Stavka realized that the breakthrough of the south was not going to be repeated in the north, and sent two armies south in an effort to exploit Brusilov's gains. However, it was too slow in happening, and the Germans were able to shift troops from the north and west, reinforce the Austrians, and construct additional defenses. As the offensive slowed, Brusilov was forced to resort to battering ram techniques to take advantage of his superiority in troops and artillery. 76The
Russians simply did not have the mobility to exploit their breakthroughs, and the narrow front 'grand phalanx" tactics began to grind down the army in an endless cycle of carnage. Stavka continued to show reluctance in moving the forces and munitions from other fronts to the south, while the Germans continued to employ their superior railroads to shuttle troops wherever needed.77 Behind the Russian front most railroads ran east to west out of the more heavily populated cites, and, therefore, slowed the movement of forces from north to south. 
7
In the end the offensive to the south slowed to a bloody stalemate that further ground down the Russian war machine. Romania's entry into the war only provided a wider front for the Russians to defend, and this proved to be Russia's last major effort of the war. Brusilov's offensive was a brilliant tactical success that undoubtedly provided relief for the French at Verdun, the British at the Somme, and Italy in the Tyrol. Antwerp, which were so necessary to logistically sustain the offensive.
When they met in early September, Eisenhower was not predisposed to look kindly on another of Montgomery's plans. Montgomery had been badgering him incessantly to slow Patton, and dedicate more resources to a narrow penetration in the north. However, when presented with the new plan, Eisenhower could not help but be impressed with its audacity. It also served several purposes for the Supreme Allied Commander. For months, Ike had been receiving pressure from Washington to find a mission for the First Allied Airborne Army. Several missions had been planned, but aborted due to weather, or the objectives had simply been outstripped by the rapidly advancing ground units. The British were also pressuring for some sort of aggressive action to stop the continued V-2 rocket assaults on London.
Therefore, despite his dislike for Monty, and some soldierly misgivings, Ike approved the plan as long as it required no additional resources and fit within the broad front strategy. 
82
However, the British 1st Airborne Division ran into significant problems at Arnhem, and the northern advance of XXX Corps proved far too slow. The British paratroopers had been expecting to encounter a handful of dispirited 'ear and stomach* battalions;83 however, poor intelligence had failed to warn them that cadres of two Panzer divisions were resting at Arnhem. 
84
Bad weather prevented dropping additional supplies and reinforcements for the Arnhem defenders, 
88
Fighting their way north on a narrow road, the armored column was presenting too narrow a front to the opposition, which again had been grossly underestimated. 
89
When it became obvious that they would never reach the tightening German stranglehold on the Arnhem defenders, the operation was aborted and the remnants of the 1st Airborne Division were on their own to escape. Only 2,000 men managed to swim and ferry themselves down the Rhine to safety, and the valiant defenders of the bridge finally succumbed, having held their objective twice as long as expected.
With over 1,000 killed, and 6,000 captured, the Ist Airborne Division effectively ceased to exist.92
Montgomery claimed Operation Market Garden was "907. successful', 
93
failure in coordination at the tactical level with the confusion of the northern drops. Gross overestimation of XXX Corps' speed of advance had destroyed the required synchronization, and the lack of close air support for the armored assault was a failure of integration. Timing was essential to the entire operation, and its failure spelled overall defeat, despite the impressive tactical successes at Eindhoven and NiJmegan.
No Knock-out Punch -The Lack of an Adequate Opergatonal
When the commander fails to retain a sufficient operational reserve, tactical victories become hollow when they cannot be exploited.
The ground or advantage gained often must then be surrendered and strategic recognition, while politically it might bring more 'peace democrats' to power in the upcoming northern elections. 
94
Stragglers fell out by the thousands as they marched north.95
The southerners' reception in western Maryland was considerably cooler than Lee had expected, and constituted the first strategic failure of the invasion. There was no sweeping movement to join the Southern cause. The new tactics to be employed were based on past experience, astute intelligence, and detailed staff work. New infiltration techniques were developed to disrupt enemy centers of resistance, and penetrate the lines as deeply as possible. Special assault troops, 'storm troopers' using semiautomatic weapons, would lead the assaults after a massive, sudden "hurricane bombardment'.
Officers and men were retrained in special training courses on the new tactics.1 
0 3
14
Mutinies became widespread, and gangs of deserters harassed reserves coming up to the front as 'strike breakers'. French advance began to encounter heavy resistance, and the intense summer heat began to take its toll, further slowing and stringing out the massive force. Additionally, the French were losing significant forces along the way as garrisons to protect their increasingly long supply lines.  Blinded by his ego, his quest for decisive victory was far beyond the reality of his capabilities, especially in 1942.139 His logistics focus was always on the tactical level, always reactive, and he became involved only when matters deteriorated to the point that he had to do so to regain the initiative. 
14 0
The German high command failed in its selection of a commander they knew to be highly aggressive for a secondary theater to fight a holding action. By failing to curb hir offensive operations, they attrited precious Axis forces, which led directly to the fall of Italy and the collapse of the southern front. Enamored with Rommel's tactical victories that could not be sustained, they unknowingly accepted strategic defeat.
shrinking resources. The new regional focus for the US and our allies further underscores the importance of effective coordination, integration, and synchronization.
Operational reserves and sustainment are also ageless principles that continue to prove relevant in today's military operations. With shrinking resources and a reduction in forward bases, US military planners must adjust their objectives accordingly. Forces will undoubtedly be smaller, and planning objectives must be formulated with close analysis of where and when culminating points can be projected. The reductic.,' iJ forward baiýes, and the dubious outlook for maintaining a costly strategic lift capability, will effect logistical planning and force sustainment issues that, in turn, determine the size of the conflict we can support.
Victories that can not be sustained only pave the way for eventual defeat.
Victory on the battlefield provides the ultimate gratification for the troops, the commander, and the nation. It can provide critical rejuvenation of an army's morale, a commander's confidence, and a nation's will. Politically, it can spell the survival of a national leader, a party, or a form of government. However, by its very ability to justify a cause, ensure survival, or satisfy basic human nature, it can constitute the greatest danger. Every victory must be thoroughly analyzed within the context of the strategic goals it is designed to achieve, and its true effect on future operations. The operational commander is in the best position to provid., the most accurate and rational analysis of victory.
Failure to do so will ultimately relegate him to history's pantheon of doomed tactical geniuses who won their battles, and lost the war.
victory. Cannae, the very mention of the great battle sent men like von Schlieffen's general staff poring over their maps to duplicate the epitome of a successful battle of annihilation. Indeed, the terror and completeness of the victory struck awe and admiration in generations of military men that time only burnishes rather than erodes. But what became of the great victor of this classic example that generations strove to emulate' the reality of defeat must be recognized in the forsaken principles of successful operations. This paper will use historic examples of tactical victories that ultimately lead to strategic defeat to illustrate the importance of the principles involved in successfully linking the correct tactical means to the strategic ends within the operational level of war. I. Strategic, Operational, and Tactical Levels of War -These are the broad divisions of activity in preparing for and conducting war. Military strategy is the art and science of employing a nation's or alliance's armed forces to achieve policy objectives by the use or threat of force. As On War, in which he refers to *the hub of all power and movement, on which everything depends. That is the point which all our energies should be directed."5 In reference to a theater of operations, he states that *a center of gravity is always found where the mass is concentrated most densely. It presents the most effective target for a blow: furthermore, the heaviest blow is that qtruck by the center of gravity."6 Much confusion has arisen as to how this principle should be applied in the study of operational art. Most military theorists believe that operations should be directed toward an enemy's center of gravity to achieve strategic goals. The confusion usually arises in defining this center of gravity. It Is not the weakest point, the Achilles Heel, that if struck will bring about the enemy's collapse. 7 Rather, it is the concentration of combat power, which is the enemy's strength. If struck where It is vulnerable, then it may well bring about the desired defeat when it collapses. At the strategic level It
28
enlistment.
enlistment.
timed in conjunction with action on another front, especially when woiking on exterior lines, may allow a numerically inferior opponent to shift forces to meet threats sequentially. Additionally, phased operations and I. The Eastern Front, .1916 By 1916 the futile stalemate of the Western Front had been matched by the bloody and often pointless surges of ineffective offensives and counteroffensives on the Eastern Front. Despite a superiority in numbers of men and artillery, the Russian army had been incapable of translating it into success on the battlefield. By sheer weight of numbers they had been The Russians had agreed at the Conference of Chantilly in 1915 to take the offensive in 1916 to support the allied offensives on the Western Front. 71 Ineffective offensives in the North had been attempted in April, would not learn for another two years. Emphasis was placed on security and secrecy in staging forces for attack. Large underground bunkers were built close to the front to stage shock troops for an offensive. Surprise became the paramount goal, with deception and diversionary movements planned fc each group of the army. Huge preliminary bombardments were forsaken in favor of carefully targeted counterbattery strikes based on aerial photography. Assaults were planned in three to four waves to take subsequent lines of trenches and neutralize enemy reserves. 72 When these tactics were first tried in June they achieved wild success in the south. A huge, 50 kilometer wide break-through on the Volhynla sent a panic through the Austrians, and they fell back In a headlong retreat. The Russians raced to Bukovina and the Carpathian passes, capturing over 200,000 Austrian prisoners.7 The entire Eastern Front was in danger of collapsing, but the old Russian system would eventually thwart the success in the south.
disappeared. Napoleon had made logistical plans and preparations unheard of in his day. Yet, knowing their importance, he continued with an operation he could not support. The tactical victories on the road to Moscow only Refusing to rest his exhausted Panzerarmee, Rommel
superiority in the theater. For distribution in theater, there were no railroads, and only one hard-surfaced road that ran along the coast.
Motorized cargo transport was also in short supply. 