# ID: f5a1d01a306a4fb599e48d10d5c22cfd
# Title: Regaining Strategic Competence
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
about CSba
The Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments (CSBA) is an independent, nonpartisan policy research institute established to promote innovative thinking and debate about national security strategy and investment options. CSBA's goal is to enable policymakers to make informed decisions on matters of strategy, security policy and resource allocation.
CSBA provides timely, impartial and insightful analyses to senior decision makers in the executive and legislative branches, as well as to the media and the broader national security community. CSBA encourages thoughtful participation in the development of national security strategy and policy, and in the allocation of scarce human and capital resources. CSBA's analysis and outreach focus on key questions related to existing and emerging threats to US national security. Meeting these challenges will require transforming the national security establishment, and we are devoted to helping achieve this end.
The ability of the US national security establishment to craft, implement, and adapt effective long-term strategies against intelligent adversaries at acceptable costs has been declining for some decades. Granted, US strategic performance since the late 1960s has not been uniformly poor, as the outcome of the Cold War testifies. US strategies such as offsetting Warsaw Pact numerical superiority with precision strike, increased US defense spending in the early 1980s, President Ronald Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, and the covert arming of mujahedeen fighters to defeat the Soviets in Afghanistan all contributed to the Soviet Union's collapse in 1991, even if the more fundamental causes were economic decline and the loss of confidence in the Soviet system. And, while long overdue, the improvement in US strategy in Iraq since 2006 has also been impressive. Nevertheless, the overall trend in the strategic performance of American political and military elites appears to be one of decline.
Reversing this decline in US strategic competence is an urgent issue for American national security in the twenty-first century. The reason lies in the multi-faceted security challenges that the United States now faces. The three challenges most likely to persist and possibly grow more acute in coming years are: defeating both the Sunni Salafi-Takfiri and Shia Khomeinist brands of Islamist radicalism; hedging against the rise of a more confrontational or hostile China; and preparing for a world in which there are progressively more nuclear-armed regional powers than there were in the early 1990s. These challenges present the United States with a more complex and diverse array of security concerns than did the Soviet Union during the Cold War. Islamist radicalism and nuclear proliferation present challenges far different from the large-scale, high-intensity, non-nuclear (or "conventional") warfare at which the US military excels. At the same time, the Chinese military appears to be systematically targeting weaknesses in the current American way of war, especially US power projection in the western Pacific and dependence on space systems.
Why has US strategic performance been deteriorating? The deeper problem seems to be more a lack of understanding of what strategy is than structural or organizational defects in the United States' national security establishment. Both public strategy documents from recent administrations and actual American strategic behavior suggest that US political and military leaders have been increasingly inclined to equate strategy with listing desirable goals, as opposed to figuring out how to achieve them. As a practical matter, strategy is about making insightful choices of courses of action likely to achieve one's ultimate goals despite resource constraints, political considerations, bureaucratic resistance, the adversary's opposing efforts, and the intractable uncertainties as to how a chosen strategy may ultimately work out. Competent strategy focuses on how one's ends may be achieved. In this vein, strategy is fundamentally about identifying or creating asymmetric advantages that can be exploited to help achieve one's ultimate objectives despite resource and other constraints -most critically the opposing efforts of one's adversaries and the inherent unpredictability of strategic outcomes.
How important is it to strive to do strategy well rather than poorly? Why is a concerted effort to do strategy well preferable to merely muddling through in response to unfolding crises and events? If the threat to use military force, or its actual use, is to be justifiable, then strategy appears to be necessary. Without strategy the use of force is merely random violence.
This being the case, is effective strategy feasible? Might strategic competence be merely an illusion given the unpredictability of strategic outcomes? The various objections of academic strategists to the possibility of strategy are grounded in a Western standard of rationality that demands the explicit maximization of benefits relative to costs. In other words, unless strategies and their implementations are optimal in the sense of utility maximization across costs, benefits and risks, then strategy is an illusion. But while one might wish that strategies could meet this standard of rationality, in reality it is an impossibly high desideratum. As the Nobel laureate Herbert Simon noted in the 1950s, humans lack the complete information and computational capacity required to make optimal choices. That is why strategic choices are, as strategist Richard Rumelt has observed, ultimately heuristics or guesses subject to the indeterminacy and contingency of ultimate outcomes. As for the option of merely muddling through in response to events, that too is a strategic choice. But it is unlikely to be the wisest one.
If strategy is both necessary and possible, are there historical cases in which strategic choices by the side that ultimately prevailed appear to have played a significant role in the outcome? One of the most extensively researched and documented instances is that of Anglo-American versus Nazi Germany strategic performance during World War II. British and American grand strategy was largely crafted by four men: President Franklin Roosevelt, General George Marshall, Prime Minister Winston Churchill and Field Marshall Alan Brooke. German grand strategy, on the other hand, was mostly dictated by one man, Adolph Hitler. The contrast in strategic performance between the two sides is striking. Whereas the Allies avoided major strategic missteps, Hitler was guilty of numerous blunders, some of which were repetitions of the same mistake.
The first major choice that the British and Americans agreed upon in January 1942 was a "Germany first" strategy. This decision was based on the insight that defeating Germany first would make Japan's surrender a matter of time, whereas defeating Japan first would not materially weaken Germany, especially if the Germans succeeded in conquering Russia. The next strategic decision the four Allied leaders faced was how to defeat Nazi Germany. George Marshall argued from the beginning that Germany's defeat would require a cross-Channel invasion of northern France followed by a direct advance into Germany to confront the German army head on and, by capturing the Ruhr and Saar, deny Nazi forces the ability to fight on indefinitely. Churchill and Brooke, however, ever mindful of the limits the First World War had imposed on Commonwealth resources and of the superior fighting power of the Germans, were inclined to pursue peripheral objectives in the Mediterranean. The campaigns in North Africa, Sicily, and Italy eventually deferred the Allied landings in Normandy until June 1944. In hindsight, these peripheral campaigns were not major strategic mistakes. By mid-1944, the Allies' campaigns in the Mediterranean had given US forces, commanders, and staffs needed battle experience and had also tied down substantial German forces in Italy. In addition, the Combined Bomber Offensive had placed increasing stress on Germany's war economy; the Allies had achieved air superiority over Western Europe; and the German disasters at Stalingrad and Kursk had kept Russia in the war while further weakening the Wehrmacht and limiting Hitler's capacity to move forces from the Eastern Front to Western Europe. Churchill and Brooke were undoubtedly right to oppose a cross-Channel invasion in 1942 and even in 1943, but Roosevelt and Marshall were right to insist on one in 1944.
Hitler's major decisions, by contrast, were rife with strategic blunders. He began World War II without fully mobilizing the German economy. He attacked the Soviet Union in 1941 without fully appreciating the resources that defeating Russia might ultimately require. He pursued counterproductive objectives as exemplified by his racial policies in Russia and his obsession with Stalingrad as a prestige objective. Time and again, Hitler's "no retreat" decisions wasted resources Germany could not afford to waste. His contempt for the productivity of the US economy and the fighting power the Allies would eventually bring to bear against Germany reflected a lack of understanding of his adversaries. Thus, German grand strategy during World War II was prone to repeated blunders whereas Anglo-American grand strategy was not.
What conclusion about the importance of strategic competence can be drawn from this case study? The temptation to attribute Allied victory exclusively, or even mostly, to superior Anglo-American strategic performance must be resisted; the causes of Allied victory were many. Allied air power, for example, did not win World War II for the Allies by itself, but it was a critical weakness on the Axis side and perhaps the greatest single advantage enjoyed by the Allies. The Allies gave greater priority to air power, particularly to heavy bombers, than did the Germans and, as World War II unfolded, the Allies took full advantage of their strength in the air. By contrast, the Luftwaffe's failure to gain air superiority over the Royal Air Force in 1940 precluded a German cross-Channel invasion of England and turned Hitler's thoughts toward x CSBa > Strategy for the long haul invading Russia instead. Thus, one cannot attribute Allied victory to any single cause, including superior strategy. Nevertheless, Germany's strategic blunders together with the absence of major mistakes on the Allied side were surely contributing factors in the ultimate outcome.
If strategy is necessary, possible, and important, it is nonetheless difficult. Evidence of ill-conceived, inadequately thought-through, poor, or counterproductive strategies abounds. Building on the list of "common strategy sins" Richard Rumelt has culled from his long experience with business strategy, one can identify at least ten recurring pitfalls that can undermine competent strategic performance.
1. Failure to recognize or take seriously the scarcity of resources.
2. Mistaking strategic goals for strategy.
3. Failure to recognize or state the strategic problem.
4. Choosing poor or unattainable strategic goals.
5. Not defining the strategic challenge competitively.
Making false presumptions about one's own competence or the likely causal linkages between one's strategy and one's goals.
7. Insufficient focus on strategy due to such things as trying to satisfy too many different stakeholders or bureaucratic processes.
8. Inaccurately determining one's areas of comparative advantage relative to the opposition.
9. Failure to realize that few individuals possess the cognitive skills and mindset to be competent strategists.
10. Failure to understand the adversary.
In World War II Hitler fell pray to most of these pitfalls, whereas the British and American leaders mostly avoided them due to the collegiate process by which Roosevelt, Churchill, Marshall and Brooke argued out their strategic choices. Hitler could, and did, override his generals, whereas none of the four Allied grand strategists could override the other three, and the occasions when they split two-againsttwo usually resulted in compromises that also avoided outright blunders.
The persistent recurrence of these strategy pitfalls argues that deciding in whose hands to place US strategy in the twenty-first century is a critical issue. The fact is, however, that few individuals -regardless of intelligence, education, credentials or experience -possess the necessary cognitive skills and insight to be competent strategists. The insight to see more deeply than one's opponents into the possibilities and probabilities of a competitive situation is rare. Strategy may be a game anyone can play, but the evidence is strong that very few can play it well. Thus, identifying individuals with the mindset and talents to craft strategy competently is one step the United States will need to take to regain strategic competence.
What other steps might the US security establishment consider taking to begin regaining a modicum of strategic competence, especially at the national level? First, a reversal of the adverse trend in US strategic performance is unlikely unless the president takes strategy seriously enough to invest time and energy into the crafting and implementation of American strategy. Two presidents who did take strategy seriously were Abraham Lincoln and Dwight Eisenhower, and their examples remain worthy of study and emulation. Second, while process and organizational remedies do not go to the heart of the matter, there is merit in recreating entities similar to the Eisenhower administration's Planning Board and Operations Coordinating Board. The former helped Eisenhower and his key advisors develop effective strategies and the latter ensured that the government implemented them.
The central argument of this report is that, in light of the complex and intensifying security challenges the United States now faces, the nation can no longer afford poor strategic performance. The time to reverse the decline in US strategic competence is long overdue. The first task is for American political and military leaders to develop a clearer understanding of what strategy actually is, and what cognitive skills are necessary to craft and implement good strategies.
Resources are always limited in comparison with our wants, always constraining out action. (If they did not, we could do everything, and there would be no problem of choosing preferred courses of action.)
-Charles Hitch and Roland McKean, 1960 1
The defining principle of the Pentagon's new National Defense Strategy is balance. The United States cannot expect to eliminate national security risks through higher defense budgets, to do everything and buy everything. The Department of Defense must set priorities and consider inescapable tradeoffs and opportunity costs.
-Robert Gates, 2009 
2
The project had two principal aims. The first was to generate the sort of independent analysis and insight that might help the next administration craft a more balanced approach to meeting the complex needs of US national security in first half of the twenty-first century. The second was to jump-start the next Quadrennial Defense Review, which the Department of Defense now plans to complete during 2009. CSBA's long-haul effort was predicated on the view that the United States now faces three long-term security challenges that, in many respects, are more complex and divergent than those posed by Soviet power and ideology during the Cold War.
During the long competition with the Soviet Union, the principal challenge the United States faced was containing Soviet expansionist tendencies until the Bolshevik regime (which George F. Kennan correctly diagnosed after World War II as bearing within it the seeds of its own decay) collapsed from within. 3 Today, the principal security challenges confronting the United States are: defeating both the Sunni Salafi-Takfiri and Shia Khomeinist brands of Islamist radicalism; hedging against the rise of a more openly confrontational or hostile China; and preparing for a world in which there are progressively more nuclear-armed regional powers.
There is every reason to expect that these three challenges will persist for decades and may grow more acute. Al Qaeda's September 11, 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon now appear to have been the opening blow in what could become a worldwide insurgency waged by terrorists and extremists with the aim of undermining the power and dominance of Western states, particularly that of the United States. The prospect of an atomic arc of instability, stretching from Iran along the shores of the Persian Gulf, through Pakistan, India and China, to North Korea at the Sea of Japan, with the likelihood of another round of proliferation in the Middle East, confronts the United States with a substantially different challenge from that posed by Soviet nuclear arms during the Cold War. The possibility that a terrorist organization may one day acquire a nuclear weapon illustrates the potential interconnections between the principal security challenges currently confronting the United States. Meanwhile, China is engaged in an openly declared, long-term effort to expand its defense perimeter in ways that could threaten vital US security interests in Asia and the Pacific.
America's brief "unipolar moment" following the Soviet Union's collapse may have seduced some into thinking that the country's vital interests could be sustained with only a minor expenditure of resources. This is clearly no longer the case. While there are grounds for thinking that the United States may eventually achieve its strategic aims in Iraq, the cost in blood and treasure has been far higher than anticipated in early 2003. The United States has also become the world's principal debtor nation, and is now suffering from a financial crisis that, by many accounts, will produce the most severe economic downturn since the Great Depression. The country can no longer afford -if it ever could -a "rich man's" strategy of solving national security problems by throwing money at them. Instead, the United States needs to devise "smarter" strategies -strategies that husband resources, engage allies, and impose disproportionate costs on adversaries by focusing our strengths against their weaknesses. US national defense strategies, as well as the forces and capabilities they call for, must be both affordable and sustainable over the long term.
In 2007, when CSBA began its Long Haul project, the plan was to publish the results in a series of some fifteen monographs. The first three appeared in August 2008.
See "The Sources of Soviet Conduct," Foreign Affairs, July 1947, which Kennan published anonymously under the pseudonym X. In his February 1946 "long telegram" from the US embassy in Moscow, Kennan likened world communism to a "malignant parasite which feeds only on diseased tissue."
This particular monograph, tentatively titled "Organizing for Defense," was originally conceived as focusing on recommended changes to the organization and structure of the US national security establishment. Issues envisioned for this report included the organization and functioning of the National Security Council and the structural linkages between the various intelligence agencies and the Defense Department.
However, as CSBA's research and analysis proceeded, it became increasingly clear that the organization and structure of the US national-security establishment, while far from ideal, were not the most fundamental problems. The far more important and critical issue was the US government's ability to craft, implement, and evolve longterm strategies. As Aaron Friedberg concluded following his service on the National Security Council (NSC) from 2003 to 2005, the US government "has lost the capacity to conduct serious, sustained national strategic planning." 
4
This view of the fundamental malaise affecting American strategy should not, of course, be taken to imply that organizational changes to the present national security structure are irrelevant. Some structural remedies, including resurrection of entities along the lines of the NSC Planning and Operations Coordinating Boards that proved so successful during the administration of President Dwight Eisenhower, will be advanced. Nonetheless, revising organizational charts does not constitute the heart of the strategy challenge now facing the United States. Consider, for example, the extent to which a consistent feature of US strategy in the Middle East following the terrorist attacks of 9/11 has been the acceptance of huge costs for the United States compared with those imposed on our enemies. Being on the wrong side of cost imposition is not a characteristic of strategic competence. Without a concerted effort to regain strategic competence, it therefore appears doubtful that the US government will be likely to craft national strategies that can be both sustained and afforded over the long haul.
In light of this perspective, this monograph proceeds as follows. Chapter 1 explores the deteriorating of US strategic competence. Chapter 2 tackles the question of what strategy is. Chapter 3 addresses the charge that strategy is an illusion and offers historical evidence that strategic competence matters. Chapter 4 discusses common strategy pitfalls. Finally, the report concludes with recommendations on how the United States can begin to regain strategic competence.
I agree that as a national security establishment we do not "do strategy" well, as defined by academic strategists. But I don't think the United States or other modern great powers have ever done strategy well, as defined by academic strategists, so the deficiency may not be so consequential . . . . I think the real problem is the political context, especially the partisan political context . . . . But some of the same reasons that we do not do strategy well are also the same reasons that we are, as a nation, less vulnerable to bad strategy than, say, Germany was [in World War II]. Our fractious democratic politics make strategy hard to do, but it also makes us strong relative to our adversaries.
-Peter Feaver, 2008 
5
-Colin Gray, 2009 6
What led to the conclusion that the overall ability of the US national security establishment to craft, implement, and evolve long-term strategies offering some prospect of success at acceptable costs had been declining for several decades? After all, the Cold War grand strategy of containment is generally considered to have been successful. It was the Soviet Union, not the United States, that collapsed in 1991, abruptly and largely unexpectedly ending the Cold War. Indeed, US strategy since World War II has had its failures, notably in Vietnam. But it has also had its successes; why then conclude that the overall trend has been negative? ChaPter 1 > haS uS StRategic peRfoRmance Been deteRioRating?
One of the reasons was a growing sense, by 2005, that American strategy in Iraq was not working. Worse, the principal reason seemed to be that the United States and its coalition partners had "never settled on a strategy for defeating the insurgency and achieving their broader objectives." 
7
8
Outside critics say that the Bush administration's second term record -relatively effective strategic planning on some key issues like Iraq but less effective strategic planning on others -underscores their concerns about the US government's capacity to formulate comprehensive, long-term national security and defense strategies. In 2006, Michèle Flournoy and Shawn Brimley, agreeing with David Abshire, offered this assessment:
There is still no systematic effort at strategic planning for national security that is inclusive, deliberative, and integrative. David Abshire was correct in concluding that the demands of strategic transformation necessitate "structural reforms aimed at constructing 7 Andrew F. Krepinevich, Jr., "How to Win in Iraq," Foreign Affairs, September/October 2005, p. 87.
Ibid. President Bush's summary of US strategy in Iraq is from a speech he gave at Fort Bragg, NC, on June 28, 2005. In it he stated that the principal task of the military was "to find and defeat terrorists" (see <http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2005/06/20050628-7.html>). Krepinevich's argument in "How To Win in Iraq" was that the United States and the Iraqis should abandon the focus on killing insurgents and, instead, concentrate on "providing security and opportunity to the Iraqi people, thereby denying insurgents the popular support they need" (ibid., pp. 88-89). a 'rooftop' that integrates the several key strategic pillars (diplomatic, economic, military, etc.) of American power and influence." The reality is that America's most fundamental deliberations are made in an environment that remains dominated by the needs of the present and the cacophony of current crises. 
9
Flournoy and Brimley were also right to highlight the Project Solarium exercise at the beginning of the Eisenhower administration as an "example of a truly inclusive and integrated process of long-term strategic planning" worthy of emulation today. 
10
13
As for the post-9/11 US campaigns in Afghanistan and Iraq, while their ultimate outcomes are still uncertain, they have already incurred considerable human, budgetary, and material costs. To date, some 4,800 US Service members have been killed in these wars, and about 33,000 have been wounded. 
16
17
18
19
20
21
Grossly underestimating the fiscal cost of OIF was not the only strategic misstep US leaders committed in Iraq. In January 2007, retired General John F. Keane, who had been Army vice chief of staff when the campaign kicked off in March 2003, as well as one of the architects of the "surge" later implemented by General David H. Petraeus, offered this assessment of US strategy:
> First, from an early point in the planning for OIF, the Pentagon opted for a minimalforce-level, short-war approach to regime change in Iraq.
> Second, US decision-makers did not anticipate an insurgency on the part of disenfranchised Sunnis, much less one that would be increasingly aided and abetted by al Qaeda terrorists and other jihadists, criminal elements, Iraqi militias (both Shia and Sunni), and the Iranians.
> Third, once the insurgency began to gather momentum, the US military persisted with its short-war approach based on two premises: first, that American forces could take the lead in defeating the insurgency and do so quickly enough to avoid a protracted American involvement in Iraq that would undermine US domestic support for the war; and, second, that predominantly military means would suffice to achieve the political objective of a stable, representative Iraqi government quickly and directly.
> Fourth, even after it became apparent that the military strategy focused on capturing and killing insurgents and terrorists was failing, US political and military leaders failed to undertake appropriate adjustments in light of the fractious and uncompromising post-Ba'athist political culture in Iraq.  Until General Petraeus assumed command in Iraq in February 2007, most US commanders persisted in pursuing a "capture and kill" approach that bore a striking resemblance to the unsuccessful "search and destroy" strategy that General William Westmoreland had pursued in Vietnam. With Petraeus' arrival as head of the Multi-National Force-Iraq (MNF-I), US military strategy finally began shifting from "capture and kill" to providing security for the Iraqi population, especially in Baghdad. The new approach, which Petraeus evolved with his Department of State partner, Ambassador Ryan Crocker, appears to have succeeded for a number of reasons. Besides the five-brigade surge in 2007, the turnaround in Iraq was greatly facilitated by other developments. 
23
24
25
26
27
Another reason for suspecting that the overall trend in US strategic performance has been negative stems from the focus of public US strategy documents. The 1998,  2000, 2002 and 2006 editions of the national security strategy of the United States all appear to be little more than lists of eminently desirable goals with hardly a hint as to how they might be achieved under existing resource constraints and in the face of active opposition from American adversaries. Take The National Security Strategy of the United States of America published in 2002, roughly a year after 9/11. The document starts, logically enough, with an appraisal of the United States' position in the world. Totalitarianism had been decisively defeated and the United States found itself in "a position of unparalleled military strength and great economic and political influence." 
28
29
> strengthening alliances to defeat global terrorism and work to prevent attacks against us and our friends;
> working with others to defuse regional conflicts; > preventing our enemies from threatening us, our allies, and our friends, with weapons of mass destruction; > developing agendas for cooperative action with other main centers of global power; and > transforming America's national security institutions to meet the challenges and opportunities of the twenty-first century. 
30
The 1998, 2000, and 2006 national security strategies exhibit a similar tendency to list goals without going into much detail as to how they might be achieved in a practical sense. Further, this pattern is not limited to national security strategy documents written by civilian political appointees. The same regrettable tendency can be observed in Joint Chiefs of Staffs documents, including "Joint Vision 2010" in 1996 and "Joint Vision 2020" in 2000. Their call for "full-spectrum dominance" based on "dominant maneuver," "precision engagement," "focused logistics," and "fulldimensional protection" are more desiderata than strategies. 
31
Of course, one must be cautious about jumping to the conclusion that the administrations of Bill Clinton and George W. Bush both tended to mistake lists of desirable goals for actual strategies offering some prospect of succeeding in light of resource constraints and the opposing efforts of thinking adversaries. The documents in question, it should be recalled, are public strategy documents. Particularly in the case of the Bush administration, it is possible that the missing specificity on real-world implementation may exist in still-classified National Security Presidential Directives (NSPDs) such as NSPD-9 ("Defeating the Terrorist Threat to the United States") or NSPD-46 ("U.S. Strategy and Policy in the War on Terror"). 
32
The National Security Strategy of the United States of America, 2002, pp. 1-2. for the excellent reason that it is generally unwise to reveal one's strategy in all its particulars to the other side.
Still, over any period of time, the broad thrust of one's strategy cannot be entirely concealed from the enemy. In the case of the Truman administration's strategy of containment, the basic concept was published by Kennan in Foreign Affairs in 1947 and was endlessly debated in public thereafter. Much the same thing occurred with Eisenhower's strategy of massive nuclear retaliation. The Soviets could hardly have been oblivious to the buildup of Strategic Air Command's bomber force during the 1950s, and they plainly were not. As for OIF, the fact remains that the United States' national security establishment failed to settle on a coherent strategy for Iraq until late 2006. Thus, recurring American difficulties with "doing strategy" predate not only the collapse of the Soviet Union but President Richard Nixon's efforts to achieve peace with honor in Vietnam.
Putting aside the public national security documents of the last two administrations, what can be reasonably concluded about strategy? Strategy involves more than enumerating what one hopes to achieve: it entails crafting plausible ways of achieving one's ultimate goals despite limited resources, despite political and other constraints, and despite the best efforts of opponents to prevail in achieving their own ends. As Richard Betts observed prior to 9/11 and the ill-named "war on terror": "Among practitioners, politicians often conflate strategy with policy objectives (focusing on what the desired outcome should be, simply assuming that forces will move the adversary toward it), while soldiers often conflate strategy with operations (focusing on how to destroy targets or defeat enemies tactically, assuming that positive military effects mean positive political effects)." 
33
-Andrew W. Marshall, 1991 34
The quintessential strategy story is of unexpected strength brought against discovered weakness. Not simply the deft wielding of power, but the actual discovery of power in a situation, an insight into a decisive asymmetry.
- engagements for the object of the war." 
37
The other limitation of traditional definitions of military strategy is that they offer little insight concerning how one might actually go about "doing" strategy as a practical endeavor. Based on long experience with business strategy in competitive situations, Richard Rumelt defines strategy as a heuristic approach to a problem that usually stems from "an insight that creates or exploits a decisive asymmetry." 41 He adds, echoing Charles Hitch and Roland McKean, that strategic choice is always conditioned by the overall problems of resource quality and scarcity.
The crucial element of Rumelt's working definition of business strategy is the notion of a heuristic or guess. Because the course of events in competitive situations is not precisely predictable, one cannot know with certainty how one's chosen strategy will work out in the long run. Here Rumelt insists on the literal truth of the Arab proverb he first heard from the scenario planner Pierre Wack: He who predicts the future lies, even if he tells the truth. 
42
Another important distinction Rumelt makes is that strategy formulation is distinct from strategic planning. Planning is about the coordination of resources in time and space, and by type, in order to implement a strategy. 
43
44
45
Rumelt, "Some Thoughts on Business Strategy," slide 6. those steps so that they can be implemented almost automatically, and articulating the anticipated consequences or results of each step." 46 Strategy, therefore, should not be conflated with strategic planning.
The distinction between strategy and strategic planning leads to another insight. In a 1973 book on grand strategy, John Collins observed that, although . . . strategy is a game that anyone can play, it is not a game that just anyone can play well. Only the most gifted participants have much chance to win a prize. 
47
48
49
50
51
Strategy is fundamentally about identifying or creating asymmetric advantages that can be exploited to help achieve one's ultimate objectives despite resource and other constraints, most importantly the opposing efforts of adversaries or competitors and the inherent unpredictability of strategic outcomes. This is not, of course, the usual definition of strategy. However, it has the considerable merit of applying as readily to chess or a business firm competing against other firms for profits and market share as it does to military competition during peacetime or war. More importantly, it goes beyond the traditional definitions of military strategy by indicating how one actually goes about doing strategy. At its core, strategy is about finding asymmetries in competitive situations that can be exploited to one's advantage. This perspective also suggests why good strategy is so difficult. Very few among us possess the cognitive skills for genuine strategic insight. 50 For a functional map of human cognition based on meticulous, physics-like experimentation, see Daniel Kahneman, "Maps of Bounded Rationality: A Perspective on Intuitive Judgment and Choice," Nobel Prize lecture, December 8, 2002, in Tore Frängsmyr (ed.), The Nobel Prizes 2002 (Stockholm: Nobel Foundation, 2003), pp. 450-452. Kahenman's partner in working out their two-system view of human cognition was Amos Tversky, who died in 1996.
Strictly speaking, the British use the HCSC to identify individuals who can make the transition from tactics to operational art. But since the cognitive skills required for strategy appear to be the same as those for operational art, those who can make the transition are also potential strategists. 
Strategy is the essential ingredient for making war either politically effective or morally tenable . . . . Without strategy, there is no rationale for how force will achieve purposes worth the price in blood and treasure. Without strategy, power is a loose cannon and war is mindless. . . . Because strategy is necessary, however, does not mean that it is possible. Those who experience or study many wars find strong reasons to doubt that strategists can know enough about causes, effects, and intervening variables to make the operations planned produce the outcomes desired.
-Richard Betts, 2000 
52
ChaPter 3 > doeS StRategic peRfoRmance matteR? development; preventing conflict; countering potential region aggressors; confronting new threats; and steering international peace and stability operations -appear to conflate strategy with desirable ends. 
54
Though not entirely satisfied with all his counter-arguments, he nevertheless concluded that while sensible strategy is not impossible, "it is usually difficult and risky, and what works in one case may not in another than seems similar." 
55
56
But isn't this insistence simply demanding that strategy meet an impossible standard of performance? If the ultimate outcomes of our strategic choices are, in reality, indeterminate and contingent, then there is scant likelihood that they will be utilitymaximizing across costs, benefits, and the risks run. Outcomes in war, as Clausewitz rightly observed, arise from "an interplay of possibilities, probabilities, good luck and bad" that makes war, in the whole range of human activities, most closely resemble "a game of cards." 57 Moreover, there is now considerable support for Clausewitz's view even among economists. As Herbert Simon pointed out in the 1950s, the economists' classic standard of optimal choices based on rational calculation is incompatible "with the access to information and the computational capacities that are actually 54 The White House, "A National Security Strategy for a Global Age," December 2000. 55 Betts, "Is Strategy an Illusion?" p. 48.
Ibid., p. 22. 57 Clausewitz, On War, p. 86. Clausewitz also insisted that even the ultimate outcome of a war "is not always to be regarded as final" (ibid., p. 89). possessed by organisms, including man." 58 Instead, while organisms, including strategic decision-makers, adapt well enough to "satisfice" by making satisfying and sufficient choices, they do not, in general, "optimize." 59 Rationality, as Simon put it, is "bounded," especially when making strategic choices under the pressure of unfolding events with limited information, not all of which may be accurate. Consequently, so long as strategy is not held to an impossible standard of perfection, it is not only possible but unavoidable to the extent that people cannot avoid making strategic choices. Indeed, reacting to national security challenges by merely muddling through, as Berger would advise, is itself a strategic choice, though not perhaps the wisest one.
If strategy is not an illusion, can one point to cases in which inferior strategic choices by one side compared to those made by the other side appear to have affected the global outcome? Before trying to answer this question with a specific historical instance, one caveat must be mentioned concerning the dependence of outcomes on contingencies. Consider the largely bloodless manner and rapidity with which the Soviet Union collapsed from 1989 to 1991. This specific outcome cannot be plausibly attributed to any single cause, and some of its causes were contingent -matters of chance rather than inevitability. One of the most critical, as Walter Laqueur has emphasized, was the Politburo's election of Mikhail Gorbachev as general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union following Konstantin Chernenko's death in March 1985. 
60
61
62
With this caution in mind, perhaps the most persuasive instance of strategic performance affecting the overall outcome can be seen in comparing Anglo-American and German strategic performance in the European Theater of Operations (ETO) from 1942 to 1945. To begin with, Germany's defeat in the West poses something of a conundrum because of the tactical superiority the Germans had over the Allies in fighting power and how narrow the margin of Allied victory was in many of the key battles from 1943 to 1945. The best indication of German fighting power comes from Trevor N. Dupuy's analysis of some sixty World War II battles (mainly in Italy in 1943  and 1944). 
63
In 1943-1944 the German combat effectiveness superiority over the Western Allies (Americans and British) was in the order of 20-30 percent. On a man-for-man basis, the German ground soldiers consistently inflicted casualties at about a 50 percent higher rate than they incurred from British and American troops under all circumstances. This was true when they were attacking and when they were defending, when they had local numerical superiority and when, as was usually the case, they were outnumbered, when they had air superiority and when they did not, when they won and when they lost. 
64
German combat effectiveness over the Russians in the early days of the war was close to 200 percent; this means that, on the average, one German division was at least a match for three Russian divisions of comparable size and firepower, and that under favorable circumstances of defense, one German division theoretically could -and often actually did -hold off as many as seven comparable Russian divisions. In 1944 this superiority was still nearly 100 percent and the average German frontline soldier inflicted 7.78 Russian casualties for each German lost. 
65
The popular answer has been that the Germans were overwhelmed by the Allies' superiority in manpower and matériel. During the war Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan mobilized 12.5 and 7.4 million, respectively, for a total of 19.9 million while the United States (14.9 million), the British Commonwealth (6. Union (25 million) mobilized a total of 46.1 million. 
66
67
68
69
71
72
73
74
75
Nor did Eisenhower, as late as September 1944, have sufficient ground forces -particularly front-line infantry -to overwhelm the Germans in the West through sheer weight of numbers. 
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
The critical point here is that, as difficult and protracted as the Anglo-American debate over grand strategy was, from the Arcadia conference in Washington to the November 1943 conference with the Russians in Teheran, Roosevelt, Churchill, Marshall and Brooke ultimately got their grand strategy right. They committed no major blunders. Granted, "Brooke's and Churchill's campaign up to the Po Valley was largely a waste of effort after Rome, while Marshall's and Roosevelt's Operation Anvil/ Dragoon [the Allied landings in southern France] was also largely a waste of time." 86 But these were minor missteps compared to Adolf Hitler's strategic blunders, some of which he repeated time after time. Hitler's "no withdrawal" policies in Tunisia, Russia and Italy as well as his decisions to invade Russia and to pursue extermination campaigns against the Jews and Bolsheviks all appear to have been major strategic errors that have no parallels on the Anglo-American side. 
87
Again, one must resist attributing Allied victory in Western Europe exclusively, or even mostly, to superior Anglo-American strategic performance. True, the Germans ultimately lost, despite their tactical superiority on the ground, but the causes were many. Neither did Allied air power alone win World War II for the Allies, but "it proved to be the critical weakness on the Axis side and the greatest single advantage enjoyed by the Allies." 89 It was the Luftwaffe's failure to gain air superiority over the Royal Air Force in 1940 that precluded a German cross-Channel invasion of England and turned Hitler's thoughts eastward, to Russia. While inferior strategic performance was not the sole cause of Germany's defeat in World War II, it was a major factor in the final outcome. In this regard, German failure to develop heavy bomber forces comparable to the US Eighth Air Force or the British Bomber Command can be seen as yet another example of poor strategic choices under Hitler.
Strategy, then, is not only possible, but important to try to do well -or at least better than one's opponents. This conclusion reinforces Feaver's observation that while fractious democratic politics undoubtedly makes strategy hard to do, democratic politics may also give democracies a strategic edge over more authoritarian opponents, whether they be states like the People's Republic of China or terrorist organizations such as al Qaeda. As Andrew Roberts has noted, German strategic choices during World War II were not subjected to the kind of unsparing analysis that would undoubtedly have halted their adoption in a democracy. By complete contrast, the strategies of the Western Allies had to be exhaustively argued through the Planning Staff, General Staff, Chiefs of Staff and then Combined Chiefs of Staff levels, before they were even capable of being placed before the politicians, where they were debated in microscopic detail all over again. 90 Thus, Roberts certainly appears justified in concluding that the "lack of a collegiate Chiefs of Staff system was one of the major reasons the Germans lost the Second World War." 
91
ages between one's strategy and one's goals.
7. Insufficient focus on strategy due to such things as trying to satisfy too many different stakeholders or bureaucratic processes. 
95
8. Inaccurately determining one's areas of comparative advantage relative to the opposition.
9. Failure to realize that very few individuals are likely to possess the cognitive skills and mindset to be competent strategists.
10. Failure to understand the adversary.
The first two of these strategy pitfalls (failure to recognize resource constraints, and confusing goals with strategies to achieve them) have already been discussed. They require only one further comment: ignoring resource constraints and confusing ends and means are hardly academic quibbles. Quite to the contrary, they are pitfalls that can cripple real-world strategic performance. As Hew Strachan observed in his 2005 review of US strategy in the Middle East following 9/11: Kabul fell within 40 days. The United States had prevailed in Afghanistan (or so it seemed) without having had to formulate strategy. Action had generated its own results . . . . Planning for Iraq displayed a comparable under-appreciation of strategy. Clearly the US armed forces displayed their competence at the operational level of war in March-April 2003 . . . . Theoretically they could see the campaign in strategic terms, with a planning cycle that embraced four phases -deterrence and engagement; seizing the initiative; decisive operations; and post-conflict operations. But strategy was driven out by the wishful thinking of their political masters, convinced that the United States would be welcomed as liberators, and determined that war and peace were opposites, not a continuum. This cast of mind prevented consideration of the war's true costs or the implications of occupation . . . 
96
The remainder of this section focuses on articulating some of the practical issues embedded in Rumelt's five other strategy sins, plus the three additions. The discussions of pitfalls #3 through #10 are brief. The intent is simply to illustrate that they represent genuine, real-world barriers to competent strategic performance. faiLure to reCognize or State the StrategiC ProBLeM (#3). The common mistake here is to jump ahead too quickly to the actions one hopes or plans to carry out before having crisply stated the actual problem. The US Army's focus in Iraq on "capture and kill" from 2003 until at least 2006 is a case in point. The Army's natural institutional response to the insurgency was to begin hunting down the terrorists and insurgents. But embracing man-hunting as the main mission misunderstood the strategic challenge, which was, from the outset, to provide security for the Iraqi population (as longstanding counter-insurgency experience has shown time and again). Petraeus' subsequent success in coping with the Iraqi insurgency, therefore, stemmed in part from correctly diagnosing the strategic challenge confronting the United States in Iraq.
Important for strategists to keep constantly in mind, though, is that the problem can change over time. Ever since German aircraft sunk the Italian battleship Roma in September 1943 with early Fritz-X guided bombs, the US Navy has worried that surface combatants would become so vulnerable to enemy aircraft or long-range missiles that they would cease to be survivable when within reach of enemy precision-strike networks. Admittedly, this problem has taken a long time to mature into a serious threat to US carrier battle groups, although China's evolving anti-access/areadenial capabilities seem designed to "interdict or attack, at long ranges, military forces -particularly [US] air or maritime forces -that might deploy or operate within the western Pacific." 97 These capabilities, moreover, are part of a broader Chinese strategy to reshape the strategic landscape in the western Pacific that includes exploiting US vulnerabilities in space and intimidating US allies in the region. These sorts of gradual changes affecting the US position in Asia and the Pacific exemplify the "slow-moving variables," to borrow Sidney Winter's term, that tend to be ignored in developing strategies. It is also the sort of change that is especially difficult for large, bureaucratic institutions, such as the US military Services, to take into account.
Another aspect of the failure to recognize or state the strategic challenge is the possibility that the fundamental nature of the competitive environment may change in unexpected ways. Examples include the emergence of thermonuclear plenty for both the United States and the Soviet Union stemming from the development of the hydrogen bomb, the sharp spike in the price of a barrel of oil precipitated by the October 1973 Arab-Israeli War, and the abrupt collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. By the late 1960s, the marriage of thermonuclear plenty with intercontinental ballistic missiles rendered an all-out US-Soviet nuclear exchange suicidal for both societies. The 1973 oil shock ended the era in which oil companies could plan on low prices for a barrel of oil and expanding demand, and only Royal-Dutch/Shell, whose top managers had been enticed by Wack's scenario planning to think through the business implications of this "unlikely" competitive environment, were prepared to take advantage of the changed situation brought on by the 1973 War. Finally, the disappearance of the Soviet Union as a long-term, near-peer competitor undermined the threat-driven approach to force planning that the US military had relied upon since the late 1940s. Thus, both adversary responses and the nature of the competitive environment need be taken into account in defining the strategic problem competitively.
ChooSing Poor or unattainaBLe goaLS (#4). Closely related to the issue of correctly diagnosing the strategic problem is the temptation to adopt unattainable goals. Consider the post-9/11 threat of terrorist attacks on the US homeland. The natural impulse of the US government -at least in its public pronouncements -has been to embrace the comforting notion of stopping all terrorists at the borders, before they can get inside the country to attack relatively undefended or "soft" targets. But the resources to seal all US land and coastal borders simply do not exist, and a strategy built around this goal would give terrorists ample leverage to impose ruinous costs on the United States. This observation should not be interpreted as a suggestion that the Department of Homeland Security ought to neglect taking prudent, affordable steps to preclude easy entry into the United States by terrorists. Rather, the feasibility and costs of strategic goals need to be taken into account in crafting strategies.
not Defining the StrategiC ChaLLenge CoMPetitiveLy (#5). Here the cardinal sin is treating the adversary as an inert object without any capacity to think or respond in ways that can unravel or negate one's own strategy. But the opponent, as the British general Rupert Smith has reminded us, "is not inert"; indeed, the adversary "has a free creative part" in the competition and, especially in war, is powerfully motivated by the prospects of defeat or death to achieve ends "directly opposed to one's own." 98 Suffice it to say that strategists must constantly keep in mind the need to design their strategies on the reality that the "enemy is a reacting, thinking being; he is not sitting still waiting for your onslaught but actively creating his own strategy both to foil yours and probably attack you." 
99
101
1
Strategy, in the creative sense of an insight or reframing of the problem that suddenly sees a way to achieve one's ends by discerning or creating favorable asymmetries is rarely, if ever, the product of the formal processes depicted in Figure 
1
1
102
aSSeSSing areaS of CoMParative aDvantage (#8). If strategy is fundamentally about identifying or exploiting asymmetries in the competitive situation, then an important aspect of strategic thinking is to understand one's areas of comparative advantage. Attrition, in which one simply grinds down the other side by pitting strength against strength, may be a strategy, but it is not a particularly good one. The asymmetries at the core of good strategies generally have to do with focusing one's areas of strength or competence against the opponent's areas of weakness or competitive disadvantage. To recall a Cold War example, the potential NATO strategy of trying to match the Warsaw Pact tank for tank and division for division never made much sense either economically or politically. What did make sense was exploiting US advantages in technology to offset Warsaw Pact numbers. As William J. Perry recalled in 1997, . . . we were faced with the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact, and they had about three times as many tanks, artillery [pieces], and armored personnel carriers as we had, and we thought that they had a serious intent to use them, to send a blitzkrieg down through the Fulda Gap . . . . We had no conceivable way of increasing the size of the US or the NATO forces to deal with that, and so the "offset strategy" [devised by Defense Department officials] was no great leap of brilliance. It was simply a necessity. The only way we had of dealing with the three-to-one quantity advantage that Soviet forces had was to try to offset that with our superior technology. That was the key to our entire defense strategy in the late '70s and on into the early '80s. 
103
Putting Strategy in the right hanDS (#9). Individuals with the cognitive skills to do strategy well -particularly the requisite insight into competitive situations -tend to be rare, even among bright people with long experience in national security affairs or the military profession. American political and military elites have tended to ignore this reality. Too often we have put strategy in the wrong hands, or left it to large staffs and bureaucracies rather than talented individuals or small teams. Given the complex security challenges the United States now faces, the US government will surely need to do better in choosing the individuals in whose hands the crafting of strategy is to be entrusted. Hoping for strategic genius may be too much. But surely a degree of strategic competence is not too much to ask.  Of course, identifying those rare individuals with the mindset and talent to develop strategy will not be easy. Educational degrees and other credentials appear to be of no more than marginal value in selecting competent strategists. Franklin Roosevelt was perhaps the one of the four Anglo-American masters and commanders "who most influenced the course of the war," but he openly acknowledged that he knew the least about grand strategy. 
104
105
faiLing to unDerStanD the aDverSary (#10). This final strategy pitfall can be viewed as a corollary to failing to define the strategic challenge competitively (#5). The fact that the enemy's responses over time can affect the viability of one's own strategy points to the importance of making every effort to understand the opponent's likely goals, calculations of costs and benefits, assessments, willingness to take risks, and strategic framework or culture. These are not easily understood, and Americans have generally not excelled at developing an informed sense for how the enemy thinks. Consider the debate that erupted in early 1950 over the drafting of NSC-68, which established containment as the national security strategy of President Harry Truman's administration. Under Paul Nitze, who then headed the Policy Planning Staff at the State Department and was charged with drafting NSC-68, US strategy moved away from George Kennan's view that Soviet expansionist tendencies could be contained primarily through political and economic means. Instead, NSC-68 concluded that deterring overt Soviet aggression during the next four or five years (when the danger of a surprise Soviet nuclear attack would peak) demanded "substantially increased general air, ground, and sea strength, atomic capabilities, and air and civilian defenses." 107 This change generated significant dissent. Charles E. "Chip" Bohlen, who had served in the US embassy in Moscow during the 1930s and had been Roosevelt's Russian translator during World War II, argued that the Soviet leadership's overriding priority was to preserve their regime. 
108
As Soviet aims, Nitze had originally listed world domination first. Bohlen persuaded him to describe "protecting their own borders" as the Soviets' top priority. Second came controlling their satellites. Then only third came global expansion. 
109
112
What is striking here is how long fundamental disagreement among those involved in crafting or influencing American Cold War strategy persisted. Poor or inaccurate understanding of the opponent is generally not conducive to good strategy. Looking ahead, the United States unquestionably needs to develop a cadre of experts on militant Islamic groups, China, and other key areas of concern such as Iran, North Korea and Pakistan. Unfortunately, the record of past American performance in this area is not very encouraging.
In hindsight at least, it is fairly straightforward to use these various strategy pitfalls to assess historical cases of differential strategic performance such as 
108
113
War is the realm of uncertainty; three quarters of the factors on which action in war is based are wrapped in a fog of greater or lesser uncertainty. A sensitive and discriminating judgment is called for; a skilled intelligence to scent out the truth.
-Clausewitz, 1832 
116
-Henry Mintzberg, 1994 117
The central argument of this report is that, in light of the complex and varied security challenges the United States currently faces, the nation can no longer afford poor strategic performance. What steps might the US security establishment take to begin regaining a modicum of strategic competence, especially at the national level? In November 2007, Michèle Flournoy presented a paper at a Naval War College workshop in which she argued that what the US government desperately needs in this regard is "a more integrated approach to national security that includes the following elements:
> An NSC-led strategy and planning process for national security, > An NSC-Office of Management and Budget-led (OMB) process to develop an integrated, multi-year national security budget, and 
116
(3) creating a classified national security planning guidance in the first year of a new administration, to be updated biannually; (4) starting an annual tabletop exercise program for senior natural security officials to practice managing future challenges and identify capability shortfalls; and (5) instituting a scenario-based planning process to support resource planning. 
119
Flournoy, however, is right that the Eisenhower administration's approach to national strategy offers useful insights concerning how the United States might improve its strategic performance. The week before Eisenhower's inauguration as president on January 20, 1953, he announced that Robert Cutler, a Boston lawyer who had served on George Marshall's staff during World War II, would be appointed to the new position of special advisor for national security affairs. 
121
128
129
130
It was the forum in which twice or more often a week officials of great "stature and caliber" interacted and collaborated with one another in an effort to analyze trends, anticipated as well as identify problems, consider proposed solutions' advantages and disadvantage, and confront -explicitly -questions of means and ends . . . . The members not only had full access to their own departments and agencies, but they could request memoranda, staff studies, and other pertinent data from others when appropriate. 
131
132
129 NSC 162/2, "Basic National Security Policy," October 30, 1953, pp. 14, 18, 19. See also, Herman S. Wolk, "The 'New Look'," AIR FORCE Magazine, August 2003, pp. 80-83. According to Ambrose the term "New Look" was the creation of public-relation people at the Pentagon (Ambrose, Eisenhower: Solder and President, p. 356). 
130
131 Ibid.
132 Ibid.
There can be little doubt that the president himself played an active, direct and persistent role in developing the administration's "New Look" strategy.
20
20
33
33
77 78 Eisenhower, Eisenhower: At War 1943-1945, p. 499; Eisenhower, 79 Ibid., pp. 496-497; Perry, Partners in Command, p. 332.
106 While Lloyd Fredendall and Mark Clark were both identified in Marshall's black book as promising future commanders and given command positions, Fredendall failed as a corps commander in North Africa and Clark failed as the Avalanche commander at Salerno in Italy (Perry, Partners in Command, pp. 158-161, 217-228). 107 NSC-68, "United States Objectives and Programs for National Security," April 14, 1950, p. 1 of the section titled "Conclusions."
110 Michael Dobbs, One Minute to Midnight: Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2008), pp. 295-296, 324. 111 See Richard Pipes, "Why the Soviet Union Thinks It Could Fight and Win a Nuclear War," Commentary, July 1977, pp. 21-34. 112 John G. Hines, Ellis M. Mishulovich, and John F. Shull, Soviet Intentions 1965-1985, Vol. II, Soviet Post-Cold War Testimonial Evidence (McLean, VA: BDM Federal, September 22, 1993), p. 27.
117  
117  
121  
121  
Aaron L. Friedberg, "Strengthening U.S. Strategic Planning," The Washington Quarterly, Winter 2007-08, p. 47.
Dana Bash, "What Would War with Iraq Cost?" CNN.com, posted January 2, 2003.
Rumelt, "Some Thoughts on Business Strategy," slide 11 (with some reordering and rewording). 96 Hew Strachan, "The Lost Meaning of Strategy," Survival, Autumn 2005, p. 51.
The authors would like to thank 
Andrew Marshall
CSBA
Charlotte Brock
Eric Lindsey
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
Everything in war is very simple, but the simplest thing is difficult.
-Clausewitz, 1832 
92
Eisenhower, 1948 93
94
defense spending while containing Soviet power without accepting increased risk of all-out nuclear war, which Eisenhower judged suicidal for both the United States and the Soviet Union, later administrations looked long and hard for alternatives to massive atomic retaliation. There was also the practical matter of ensuring that the government carried out the administration's national security strategy, once it had been debated, decided upon, and approved by the president. This was the purpose of periodic progress reports from the NSC's Operations Coordinating Board. 
133
No president before or after Eisenhower . . . ever received such a systematic and focused briefing on the threats facing the nation's security and the possible strategies for coping with them. 
134
136
133
134