# ID: f5a1d01a306a4fb599e48d10d5c22cfd
# Title: Regaining Strategic Competence
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
faiLing to unDerStanD the aDverSary (#10).
This final strategy pitfall can be viewed as a corollary to failing to define the strategic challenge competitively (#5).
The fact that the enemy's responses over time can affect the viability of one's own strategy points to the importance of making every effort to understand the opponent's likely goals, calculations of costs and benefits, assessments, willingness to take risks, and strategic framework or culture.
These are not easily understood, and Americans have generally not excelled at developing an informed sense for how the enemy thinks.
Consider the debate that erupted in early 1950 over the drafting of NSC-68, which established containment as the national security strategy of President Harry Truman's administration.
Under Paul Nitze, who then headed the Policy Planning Staff at the State Department and was charged with drafting NSC-68, US strategy moved away from George Kennan's view that Soviet expansionist tendencies could be contained primarily through political and economic means.
Instead, NSC-68 concluded that deterring overt Soviet aggression during the next four or five years (when the danger of a surprise Soviet nuclear attack would peak) demanded "substantially increased general air, ground, and sea strength, atomic capabilities, and air and civilian defenses."
107 This change generated significant dissent.
Charles E. "Chip" Bohlen, who had served in the US embassy in Moscow during the 1930s and had been Roosevelt's Russian translator during World War II, argued that the Soviet leadership's overriding priority was to preserve their regime.