# ID: f5a1d01a306a4fb599e48d10d5c22cfd
# Title: Regaining Strategic Competence
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2009.0
# Fulltext:
The first major choice that the British and Americans agreed upon in January 1942 was a "Germany first" strategy.
This decision was based on the insight that defeating Germany first would make Japan's surrender a matter of time, whereas defeating Japan first would not materially weaken Germany, especially if the Germans succeeded in conquering Russia.
The next strategic decision the four Allied leaders faced was how to defeat Nazi Germany.
George Marshall argued from the beginning that Germany's defeat would require a cross-Channel invasion of northern France followed by a direct advance into Germany to confront the German army head on and, by capturing the Ruhr and Saar, deny Nazi forces the ability to fight on indefinitely.
Churchill and Brooke, however, ever mindful of the limits the First World War had imposed on Commonwealth resources and of the superior fighting power of the Germans, were inclined to pursue peripheral objectives in the Mediterranean.
The campaigns in North Africa, Sicily, and Italy eventually deferred the Allied landings in Normandy until June 1944.
In hindsight, these peripheral campaigns were not major strategic mistakes.
By mid-1944, the Allies' campaigns in the Mediterranean had given US forces, commanders, and staffs needed battle experience and had also tied down substantial German forces in Italy.
In addition, the Combined Bomber Offensive had placed increasing stress on Germany's war economy; the Allies had achieved air superiority over Western Europe; and the German disasters at Stalingrad and Kursk had kept Russia in the war while further weakening the Wehrmacht and limiting Hitler's capacity to move forces from the Eastern Front to Western Europe.
Churchill and Brooke were undoubtedly right to oppose a cross-Channel invasion in 1942 and even in 1943, but Roosevelt and Marshall were right to insist on one in 1944.