# ID: f5a2d2719b574523adc0696cd66c85ad
# Title: Grassroots and Civil Society Organizations as Partners in the Conduct of US Military Strategy: An Examination
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2021.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden to
We tend to see the world in terms of successes and failures, winners and losers. This default win-lose mode can sometimes work for the short term; however, as a strategy for how companies and organizations operate, it can have grave consequences over the long term.
-Simon Sinek, The Infinite Game
In Simon Sinek's work, The Infinite Game, he exhorted his readers to find a new perspective. Sinek's view breaks common approaches to problem sets by challenging the reader to expand strategy formation perspectives. While aimed at the general business population, Sinek's words apply to the formulation of US military strategy as well. The purpose of this study is to examine how Grassroots organizations and Civil Society organizations (GRO/CSO) impact the application of US strategy with regards to Sinek's infinite game. Sinek challenges his readers to look to the long term. This concept is not a new idea, as many international theorists posited similar theories. Kenneth Waltz, one of the leading theorists in the neorealist school of international relations theory, clearly understood this concept. His view of the anarchic world order to help describe how nation-states interact does not have a time component.0 F 1 Joseph Nye, a lead proponent of the neoliberalism school of international relations theories, also understood this concept. His concept of soft power does not contain a time component either. "The soft power of a country rests heavily on three basic resources: its culture (in places where it is attractive to others), its political values (when it lives up to them at home and abroad), and its foreign policies (when others see them as legitimate and having moral authority)."1 F 2 A key commonality among leading theories of international relations, how states interact in the global setting, and why they do so, is that time is not a dependent variable. As such, Sinek's concept of the infinite game is at home in international relations theory. The concept of the infinite game is also gaining purchase in US military doctrine. Instead of a series of win or lose engagements, military leaders are starting to look at strategy as a continuum. Everett Dolman referred to strategy as "an ongoing interaction that has no finality."2 F
3
The purpose of this study is to examine how Grassroots and Civil Society Organizations impact the application of United States strategy with regards to this strategic continuum, often referred to as the competition continuum. This monograph looks to answer this question through an analysis of two different historical examples. First, an examination of the roles of GRO/CSO in function provides an understanding of their strengths and weaknesses as potential partner organizations. Second, a review of the role and use of GRO/CSO by the Russian government in Crimea and eastern Ukraine provides a timely case study to examine GRO/CSO as partners in strategy execution. Third is an examination of how the partnership with GRO/CSO impacted the US' strategy in Syria combatting the Islamic State. Fourth is an analysis of several critical issues inherent in dealing with these organizations provides a more rounded view of the problem set.
Finally presenting a way forward regarding the potential of these organizations and key issues to consider when partnering with them in the competition spectrum provides useful tools to consider during work and engagments with this sector of civil society.
The 2018 National Defense Strategy states that, "We must use creative approaches, make sustained investment, and be disciplined in execution to field a Joint Force fit for our time, one that can compete, deter, and win in this increasingly complex security environment."3 F
4
Specifically, the strategy refers to the "reemergence of long-term, strategic competition by… revisionist powers" as the central challenge to US prosperity.4 F 5
The 2018 National Defense Strategy clearly calls for a force that will excel in complex environments. The development of doctrine in the US military over the past five years struggled to capture this requirement. The first recent forays into the timeless nature of competition are found in the recent explorations of the concept of Strategic Landpower. "What we know and project about the future operating environment tells us that the significance of the 'human domain' in future conflict is growing, not diminishing…In a word, the success of future strategic initiatives…will rest more on our ability to understand, influence, or exercise control within the 'human domain.'"5 F 
6
The most recent development of doctrine on the Gray Zone concept and the concept of never-ending competition is evident in Joint Doctrine Note 1-19 from June 2019 and is titled "The Competition Continuum." "Rather than a world either at peace or at war, the competition continuum describes a world of enduring competition conducted through a mixture of cooperation, competition below armed conflict and armed conflict."8 F 9 Furthermore, this joint 5 Ibid., 2.
6 Raymond Odierno, James Amos, and William McRaven, Strategic Landpower: Winning the Clash of Wills (United States Army, United States Marine Corps, United States Special Operations Command, January 2013). doctrine note states, "Within competition below armed conflict, joint force actions may include security cooperation activities, military information support activities…and other nonviolent military engagement activities."9 F 10 Joint Doctrine Note 1-19 established the competition continuum. However, there is no further information highlighting what type of nonviolent military engagement activities should be employed. More specifically, it does not explain how to navigate within competition to continue to maintain the US Government's positional advantage, "namely the ability to influence partners, populations, and threats toward achievement of our regional or strategic objectives."1 0F 
11
12
13
11 Votel et al., "Unconventional Warfare in the Gray Zone," 108.
12 United Nations, "UN Guiding Principles Reporting Framework," UN Guiding Principles Reporting Framework, accessed August 16, 2020, https://www.ungpreporting.org/.
13 Alexandria Bettencourt, "Grassroots Organizations Are Just as Important as Seed Money for Innovation," UNHCR Innovation Service, accessed August 16, 2020, https://www.unhcr.org/innovation/grassroots-organizations-are-just-as-important-as-seed-money-forinnovation/#:~:text=And%20how%20does%20it%20connect,%2C%20national%2C%20or%20internationa l%20levels. Do these organizations present an opportunity for strategy execution for the US military? The purpose of this study is to examine how Grassroots and Civil Society Organizations impact the application of US strategy with regards to the competition continuum.
To accurately explore how Grassroots and Civil Society Organizations impact the application of US strategy regarding the competition continuum, it is necessary to understand some of the underlying themes in existing research on the overall question. This section covers the literature's main trends regarding GRO/CSO. The literature presents a rich academic exploration of GRO/CSO formation. However, a gap exists regarding the efficacy of GRO/CSO in the conduct of US strategy. First, a review of literature and themes regarding the effectiveness of GRO/CSO allows for further understanding of these organizations. Second, a look at the evolution of the Competition Continuum concept in literature and doctrine provides a basis for examining case studies.
GRO/CSO provide a rich area of research. The term GRO/CSO encompasses a wide variety of organizations. Also, the nature of GRO/CSO makes them challenging to study, as there is no formal structure for either type of organization. As the world entered an era of unipolarity with the collapse of the Soviet Union, attention shifted from preparing and countering the USSR in the Cold War to US expansion of liberal values. One critical tool in this spread was the increase of aid (both non-military and military) to developing countries. With the rise in aid, academic exploration of GRO/CSO flourished in the 1990s. Most studies looked at how GRO/CSO organized and the success or failure of this endeavor. Ann Bettencourt, a Professor of Psychology at the University of Missouri, explored the themes of successful grassroots organizing in "Grassroots Organizations: Recurrent Themes and Research Approaches."1 3F 
14
15
16
17
18
Literature continued to center on the formation of GRO/CSO and their ability to achieve goals and maintain purpose during the first decade of the 21st century. The majority of research did not address the effectiveness of GRO/CSO in accomplishing their objective. Diana Mitlin, Professor and Managing Director of the Global Development Institute at the University of Manchester (England), addressed a portion of this in her article titled, "With and beyond the state -co-production as a route to political influence, power, and transformation for grassroots organizations." Mitlin studied the usefulness of GRO/CSO in cooperative actions with other entities in extending influence. The study demonstrated the effectiveness of GRO/CSO in partnering in co-production.1 8F 
19
21
22
Specifically, the rise of transnational terrorist organizations and criminal organizations that directly threatened global order.
Although most of the literature examined dealt with internal GRO/CSO structure and the organization's effectiveness, there was not a wealth of information regarding partnering with these organizations. Timothy Donais, Professor of Global Studies at Wilfrid Laurier University, sought to explore how external organizations partner with GRO/CSO. Donais, inspired by work in Bosnia during the 1990s, wanted to explore why externally driven peace processes failed to generate sustainable transformations. In his article, "Empowerment or Imposition? Dilemmas of Local Ownership in Post-Conflict Peacebuilding Processes," he looked at top-down partnerships with GRO, the more typical Western or liberal approach, and the bottom-up empowerment of GRO. He concluded that external entities (Western liberal governments) often over-rely on GRO/CSO in the post-conflict peacebuilding environment, which often led to the failure of peace-building efforts.2 2F 
23
24
Review of the Competition Spectrum: Development and GRO/CSO Involvement While the Competition Spectrum concept is more recent than the studies cited above regarding GRO/CSO, understanding the key themes and development of this concept is needed to explore the stated problem fully. The development of the term "competition spectrum" is a more recent phenomenon. As described in Joint Doctrine Note 1-19, the concept states, "rather than a world either at peace or at war, the competition continuum describes a world of enduring competition."2 5F 
26
27
28
While not specifically referred to as the competition spectrum, several studies and articles referred to the struggle in competition. Roger Cohen, author and journalist, explored specifically how one GRO helped to bring down Slobodan Milosevic, then president of Serbia, in his article "Who Really Brought Down Milosevic." Cohen links grassroots organizing to Milosevic's fall.
He further linked American partnership and funding to the Serbian GROs as a central reason for the success of the campaign.2 8F 
29
Stephan specifically explored civil resistance in their article, "Drop Your Weapons: When and Why Civil Resistance Works." The authors concluded that nonviolent resistance is more successful than violent resistance. Specifically, that "policymakers should prioritize a 'responsibility to assist' nonviolent activists and civic groups, rather than only seeking to protect civilians through military force."2 9F
30
31
32
Further exploration in landpower transitioned over to the Gray Zone concept, the area short of war in the conflict continuum.3 2F 33 GEN Joseph Votel, Commander of Special Operations Command, explored the theme in "Unconventional Warfare in the Gray Zone." The article highlighted the impact of Special Warfare through human domain-centric core tasks for SOF (Special Operations Forces).3 3F 
34
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) furthered the gray zone concept research in the two-part study titled "By Other Means: Campaigning in the Gray Zone." Hicks and his co-authors argued that the US lacks a concise effort to compete in the Gray Zone and that the competition for interests is playing out in a place beyond diplomacy and short of war.3 6F 
37
They proposed a list of considerations in planning efforts. Also, they suggested a more robust synchronization of these planning efforts at the whole of government level. The literature surrounding the Gray Zone idea established the concept and the requirement to consider activities in the Gray Zone to get after strategic ends. However, the literature did not explore the ways or methods.
As discussed above, the exploration and discussion of the Gray Zone often occurred in the past decade. A more recent development is the renaming of the Gray Zone as the Competition Space of the greater Competition Spectrum. The Army's lead operations manual, Field Manual (FM) 3-0, Operations, from 2017 identified the need to plan "shaping activities within an environment of cooperation and competition."3 7F 
38
To properly understand, the larger of the two sets of organizations we have linked under the moniker of GRO/CSO is undoubtedly the CSO portion. new solution to sanitation to address the … living conditions and … health problems"4 2 F 43 in Karachi. Another grassroots organization example is the Shack Dwellers Federation in Namibia.
"The federation is a grassroots organization made up of women-led saving schemes within very low-income settlements."4 3F 
44
GRO/CSO exhibit key characteristics. Further exploring these characteristics allows for an understanding of GRO through formation, operating characteristics, and internal dynamics.
Expressly, these categories set the stage for the analysis of GRO/CSO in the conduct of this study's thesis. Through an examination of each of these key aspects, a deeper understanding of these organizations can develop. This understanding also helps to set the stage for discussions in the way ahead about GRO/CSO classification and characteristics.
The first characteristic to examine is the formation of these organizations. Pilisuk, in his examination of Grassroots organizing, stressed the locality of the development. "The emphasis in locality development is upon the slower process of creating a web of continuing relationships so that people may indeed come together, share their supportive attentions and resources, and experience a sense of belonging in their community."4 4F 
45
46
43
44
45
46
existence is entirely framed by these particular needs. As these needs shift or conditions change, so do the organizations as they morph, change, come into existence, and also cease to exist.
As discussed above, these continual relationships, the network of relationships that form the basis for GRO/CSO formation, shape how they evolve. Pilisk highlighted that grassroots organizing is increasing, and the most stable groups often exist among the poorest and disadvantaged populations.4 6F 47 However, organizing GRO/CSO is only the first step. Internal and external dynamics provide strong forces that act upon these groups. These largely informal groups face the same external pressures that other organizations face. Pilisik described how some are building coalitions to bring multiple groups together across boundaries and how others look to create groups that help each other in mutual aid.4 7F 48 On the internal side, GRO/CSO groups still need to "set up an effective neighborhood meeting; enlist citizen participants…; develop an organizing plan; and find information."4 8F 49 Also, GRO/CSO must "address issues raised by the fragmentation of communities, identity politics, complex and concealed information about vested interests, and specialized knowledge."4 9F 
50
Bettencourt also understood this in her examination of Grassroots Organizations. "Because grassroots organizing is essentially a group-level phenomenon, intragroup process variables are central."5 0F 51 She continued to discuss "that social ties, both preexisting as well as those that develop between members of grassroots groups, are important predictors and consequences of grassroots involvement."5 1F 
52
47
48 Ibid., 25.
49 Ibid., 26.
50 Ibid. 
51
52
for GRO/CSO. "Movements may move between autonomy and dependency on party politics/or clientelist relations, and back again in a context that is often fluid."5 2F 53
As demonstrated, GRO/CSO form and exist in an extremely dynamic environment.
Understanding how they form and how they evolve makes it easier to draw on some models to understand their nature and further examine their usefulness as a partner in strategic execution.
Understanding some of the critical dynamics involved within GRO/CSO formation and functioning allows for a more in-depth exploration during the remainder of this study. Before growing problem in linking military action to achieving national objectives and describes the requirement for rigorous analysis to determine solutions that will ensure we provide the right capabilities for the nation in an era of fiscal austerity."5 3F 54 Furthermore, this concept started the conversation about linking activities in peacetime, those short of war, with the national objectives described above. Specifically, the idea of the human domain entered into the discussion for military doctrine. "Operations in the 'human domain' provide a unique capability to preclude and deter conflict through shaping operations that leverage partners and populations to enhance local 
53
54
and regional stability."5 4F 
55
56
Odierno continued, "Influencing these people-be they heads of state, tribal elders, militaries and their leaders or even an entire population-remains essential to securing US interests."5 6F 
57
Following this development, Colin Gray writing for the US Army Strategic Studies Institute, set to examine Odierno's concept of Strategic Landpower. Gray concluded that "the United States has a permanent need for the human quality in Landpower."5 7F 
58
The connection between the human domain's primacy in the strategic nature of Odierno's concept 56 Ibid., 3.
57 Ibid. 
58
59 Ibid. 
60
Zone continued to challenge the assumptions of the five-phase model. Votel captured this challenge as he laid out the concept of the Gray Zone, "our nation is entering a period where threats and our response to those threats will take place in a segment of the conflict continuum that some are calling the 'gray zone.'"6 0F 
61
62
63
Michael Mazarr continued the development and thought into the Gray Zone in his study titled "Mastering the Gray Zone: Understanding a Changing Era of Conflict." Mazarr saw that the gray zone will most likely contain the main areas of conflict with other nations in the near future.
"Large-scale operations in this indistinct landscape will be the dominant form of state-to-state rivalry in coming decades…international rivalry may be characterized by such campaigns."6 3F 
64
Joint Doctrine Note 1-19 continued this discussion. While not a prescriptive doctrine, a doctrine note begins the discussion on a topic for potential future inclusion into doctrine, typically 
61
62
63 Ibid., 108. 
64
done to address identified doctrinal gaps. This doctrine note specifically connected the gray zone into the overall competition continuum. "Rather than a world either at peace or at war, the competition continuum describes a world of enduring competition conducted through a mixture of cooperation, competition below armed conflict and armed conflict."6 4F 
65
66
The evolution of thought from strategic landpower, to gray zone, to the competition continuum is relatively straightforward and understandable. The Joint Doctrine note established the need to campaign throughout the competition spectrum. It discussed a 'supple' approach to reacting to rapid changes in conditions. As a critical part of the human domain, GRO/CSO permeate the competition spectrum. To truly understand the human domain and effectively campaign throughout the competition continuum, a further examination of GRO/CSO potential as partners to conduct US strategy is necessary. 68 Ibid. 
69
70
Zakem et al.,
Mobilizing Compatriots,
3. 71
Russia sought to leverage its compatriot population to accomplish its goals in both Crimea and Eastern Ukraine. "Russia's practical policy towards its compatriots abroad also appears to approach them as instruments…as tools to implement broader policies."7 1F 
72
73
74
Russia did count on its compatriots in many different organizations, often during Crimea and Eastern Ukraine actions. A specific example is the use of Russia backed proxy groups in both Crimea and Eastern Ukraine. One such group in Crimea was the Chetnik Guards.7 5F 
76
77
73 Ibid., 19.
74 "'Little Green Men'," 40. 
75
76 "'Little Green Men'," 44. 
77
78
79
There are several key lessons that derive from this example in the larger picture of using GRO/CSOs to execute strategy. First, the situation as of the writing of this study shows different results in each example. Crimea is now a de facto part of Russia, while the conflict in Eastern Ukraine continues to rage. The Russian plan for use of GRO/CSO in eastern Ukraine was much the same as in Crimea. One of the key reasons why there are drastically different results between the two examples is environmental or operational attributes found in each specific region. "The populations in the two eastern provinces were more divided-and less geographically isolatedthan Crimea, and those conflicts quickly became more complex."7 9F 80 A valid point, as 'compatriots' made up almost eighty percent of the population in Crimea. This was not so in eastern Ukraine, as the 'compatriots' composed a significantly smaller portion of the population.8 0F 
81
82
80 Zakem et al.,
Mobilizing Compatriots,
33.
82 "Identifying the Separatists Linked to the Downing of MH17," Bellingcat, last modified June 19, 2019, accessed January 13, 2021, https://www.bellingcat.com/news/uk-andeurope/2019/06/19/identifying-the-separatists-linked-to-the-downing-of-mh17/. compatriot population will support Kremlin foreign policy."8 2F 
83
84
85
86
Overall, this demonstrates how and why GRO/CSO usage in Crimea may have accomplished the Russian desired strategy. However, the attempts in Eastern Ukraine met with 
83 Zakem et al.,
Mobilizing Compatriots,
12. 84
85
86 "Russia's War on Ukraine Roils the Orthodox Church," accessed January 6, 2021, https://www.printfriendly.com/p/g/8W2vnh.
resistance and less than the same amount of success experienced in Crimea. From this, the case study offers several insights that apply to further exploration of the issues inherent in partnering with GRO/CSO in the conduct of strategy.
After the brief analysis of the Russian use of GRO/CSO in Crimea and eastern Ukraine noted above, it is important to examine an example from the US perspective. During the most recent actions in the Syrian Civil War from 2011 on, "donors have provided non-military aid to members of the Syrian opposition in an effort to bolster 'good' rebel governors."8 6F 
87
The US partnered with many different GRO/CSO in its strategy in Syria during the recent civil war. Carnegie points out that "USAID/OTI assistance was expressly intended to bolster public support for rebel institutions through service provision."8 7F 
88
91
92
93
94
External forces impact the GRO/CSO to partner and conduct with the US to execute strategy. Carnegie then looked deeper into if the aid accomplished its goals. Through this analysis, the authors determined that "Aid directed in support of these states as part of campaigns to subdue rebellion and violent extremism are likely to fail."9 4F 
95
Success in influencing the human domain relates directly to the ability to access the populace. 
91
92
93
94
95
Carnegie continues that there is a need "for careful consideration of the various forms of local contestation and cooperation at play…as part of any meaningful analysis about the impact of foreign aid in conflict systems."9 5 F 96 Risk mitigation for actions is essential to plan activities in the competition space successfully and requires as much knowledge as possible of the environment's actors and intentions.
Finally, the Syria case study demonstrates that these GRO/CSO remain independent.
They will change and adapt pending to internal and external pressures. This change might not agree with the intended strategy in the competition space. Carnegie discovered this in the Syria study. "Findings suggest that aid may improve the credibility of rebel governing institutions in the absence of contestation, but it may also facilitate the consolidation of politics at odds with democratic ideals held by many western donors."9 6F 97 Overall, this case demonstrates how the US strategy application through a GRO/CSO produced mixed results and the reasons behind these results. While this study concerned the post-conflict portion of the competition spectrum, it also translates and applies to the other parts of the spectrum. These studies also relate to the next section in this monograph, an in-depth exploration of additional issues to consider while working in and around GRO/CSO.
In the two limited examples explored above, partnering in executing strategy with GRO/CSO produced both positive and negative effects overall. Russia experienced both success and failures in its plans in Crimea and Ukraine. While the analysis demonstrates that GRO/CSO can be useful as partners in executing strategy, there are several important issues to explore prior to, and during, partnership with these organizations. Several significant issues must enter into planning considerations when seeking to potentially partner with GRO/CSO. These issues, 
96
97
The backfire effect in this study refers to the concept that by working with an organization, the partnership hurts the organization's ability to conduct its mission and, subsequently, the potential execution of US strategy. This effect is akin to the observer effect, often described in science as the mere interaction by observing a system changes the nature of the said system. The mere partnership with GRO/CSO has the potential to alter the system drastically. Using post-conflict studies of work with GRO/CSO as an analog for the potential work inside the Competition Spectrum provides examples of this effect. Donais stressed perspective in his study on the dilemmas of relationships with GRO/CSO. He cited Western liberalist tendencies as a primary root to many issues inherent in these relations. "According to this perspective, peacebuilding is about transforming war-shattered polities into functioning liberal democracies where the liberal democratic framework is seen not only as the gold standard of good governance, but also as the most secure foundation for sustainable peace."9 7F 98 This is a simple example of the equivalence fallacy; just because we are all exist in the human domain does not mean we all have the same experiences or background. This fallacy invites misunderstandings and potential failure by layering Western Liberalist theory and beliefs onto potential GRO/CSO partners. Furthermore, partnering with GRO/CSO is destabilizing to that organization, and therefore to a potential strategy implementation goal. Post-conflict studies demonstrate that imposed actions upon a GRO/CSO often result in instability internal to the GRO/CSO. The nature 
98
"Accusations of Western imperialism in Afghanistan and Iraq have made humanitarian practice even more difficult."9 8F 
99
In Afghanistan, I worked alongside incredibly dedicated Afghan individuals and organizations who truly wanted to make their country a better place. However, due to their relationship with the US, they faced persecution and violence. The act of partnering with GRO/CSOs can often result in this type of backfire effect. This effect impacts the relationship between the US and its potential GRO/CSO partners.
Outside interference can also feed intergroup tensions and weaken intergroup connections. Mary Anderson, the author of Do No Harm -How Aid Can Support Peace-or War, 
99
100 Ibid.
presented one of the Humanitarian Assistance Community's go-to references for dealing with aid in conflict zones. Anderson summarized the basic requirements for aid workers in a conflict zone. "In the complex conflict settings in which aid is provided, aid workers must be both realistic and humble enough to know what they cannot affect and what is not their responsibility, and they must be idealistic and bold enough to hold themselves accountable for the events they affect or cause."1 00F 101 This simple statement requires aid workers to have perspective and honesty. To help gain perspective and honesty in dealing in conflict zones, Anderson offered a framework that helps to provide this missing perspective. The framework, covered in more depth in the way forward section, seeks to group important information and highlight critical relationships in the information that predicts outcomes.1 01F 102 Without the perspective and honesty that Anderson refered to, the simple act of partnering with a GRO/CSO can often destabilize the relations that made the GRO/CSO function initially.
Akin to this destabilization of a GRO/CSO's internal relations, partnering with these organizations could remove the GRO/CSO as an entity of usefulness by separating the organization from the base of support in the population. In the analysis of the Syrian Civil War above, the Aleppo City Council demonstrated this effect. "Its reliance on external assistance may have actually undercut its reputation vis-à-vis competing service providers."1 02F 
103
101 Anderson,
Do No Harm,
68. 102
103
104
105
Donais, in his study on GRO/CSO empowerment, discussed the "complex relationship between insiders and outsiders [that] lies at the very heart of contemporary peacebuilding process."1 05F 106 While Donais explored the peacebuilding aspect, this complex relationship exists in any relationship between GRO/CSO and an outside entity. Donais concluded that GRO/CSOs should be wary of external intervening actors. "There are also dangers in accepting external interveners as unerringly benevolent and unfailingly committed to seeing peace processes through to their just, sustainable conclusion."1 06F 107 GRO/CSO understand that often these external interveners bring more issues than solutions. As Orbinski stated due to his experience as a veteran of the humanitarian conflict and post-conflict space, "even for the neutral and impartial humanitarian, politics matters, and matters a lot."1 07F 
108
106
107
108
109
110
There is a balance between the sponsor and the actor, which needs to be fully explored and understood. For this paper, the sponsor is the US military, and the actor is the partner GRO/CSO. Fox, in his report on the Theory of Proxy Warfare, outlined this as a circular model.
The nature of both the sponsor and the actor is exploitative in nature from both sides. As highlighted in the backfire effect above, no parties enter into these relationships with altruistic intentions. can decouple."1 14F 
115
116
The nature of the relationship brings several considerations for planning into focus. First, in working with GRO/CSO to conduct strategy, it is necessary to assess and understand the type of relationship paradigm over time. The principal, led by the agent, potentially adds risks of strategic missteps. Second, understanding potential decoupling conditions regarding relations with the GRO/CSO also helps plan strategy execution. Fox presented valuable considerations for planning in an environment dealing with the principal-agent effect.
Inherent Nature of GRO/CSO GRO/CSO are an incredibly varied set of organizations. Working with one provides little to no insight on working with another. It is essential to understand as much as possible about the organization; its cohesion, its makeup, its raison d'etre, and anything that helps improve understanding to make partnership easier and more effective. The nature of these organizations inherently makes it difficult to partner with them as a tool for conducting US strategy. Paul Staniland, in Networks of Rebellion, looked at what keeps insurgent groups together. His central question is, "why some insurgent groups are unified and disciplined while others struggle with splits and feuds?"1 16F 117 Specifically, Staniland developed a new "typology of insurgent groups, a social-institutional theory of insurgent organization…to explain how 
115
116
117
Donais' highlighted a similar point in his study. Each GRO/CSO is an individually different organization. "There are few guarantees that local owners (GRO/CSO) will possess either the capacity or the will to pool their efforts towards the recreation of a just and stable order."1 18F 
119
In conjunction with the observations above about GRO/CSO's nature, the organization partnering with the GRO/CSO must seek to understand as much as possible about the mission of said GRO/CSO. As discussed earlier, GRO/CSOs are independent organizations that form under 118 Ibid., 1. 
119
123
In this example, mission alignment between the principal and the agent overlapped almost completely. There was no principal-actor effect and minimal backfire effect since Otpor was largely an underground movement. The partnership succeeded in accomplishing the primary goal of overthrowing Milosevic. "Optor used its growing legitimacy as a popular grassroots movement to shame the fractured coalition parties into uniting behind a single opposition candidate to face Milosevic in the 2000 presidential elections."1 23F 124 When he refused to leave, 
121
122
123
124 "Otpor and the Struggle for Democracy in Serbia (1998-2000)," ICNC, February 2010, 1, Otpor action teams "developed a strategy for escalating pressure."1 24F 
125
These common issues that occur when working in, around, and with GRO/CSO are potential roadblocks that would prevent successful partnerships. Each needs consideration separately during the planning of any possible collaboration with a GRO/CSO. Furthermore, each needs constant monitoring during the life of the partnership to ensure risk mitigation. In the end, are these organizations useful tools to conduct strategy in the competition space of the competition spectrum? Summarizing the key findings of this study provide insights into potential ways forward.
accessed January 19, 2021, https://www.nonviolent-conflict.org/otpor-struggle-democracy-serbia-1998-2000/.
125 Ibid. 
126
127 "Resistance Millions $," Internet Archive Wayback Machine, last modified February 28, 2004, accessed January 19, 2021, https://web.archive.org/web/20120331153113/http://arhiva.kuririnfo.rs/Arhiva/2004/februar/28-29/V-05-27022004.shtml. Original source translated from Bosnian to English using Google translate.
GRO/CSO permeate the competition environment. They are the most numerous type of organization that exists in the human domain. As such, any entity interested in engaging the human domain, as a rule, will deal with GRO/CSO. The case studies discussed previously demonstrate that GRO/CSO are useful in specific situations regarding the application of strategy in the competition space of the competition environment. However, there are numerous issues to consider before working with these organizations. To truly tap into these organizations' potential and successfully navigate the competitive environment to attain what Votel mentioned as "maintaining the US Government's positional advantage,"1 27F 128 understanding each organization and taking nothing for granted is of utmost importance. There are no absolutes in the competition environment, and there are no absolutes when dealing with GRO/CSO. The following recommendations are expansive; they are a starting point for further discussion and consideration. These recommendations are not restrictive; they are not the only answer, only a starting point for exploration. The following models attempt to provide perspective and allow for this exploration to occur.
As discussed previously, Staniland's developed a typology for understanding insurgent cohesion. This typology explored insurgent groups inner workings to illuminate why some successfully transitioned to operational insurgencies while others failed. These groups are a type of GRO/CSO, so expanding on Staniland's typology sheds light on the cohesion present in GRO/CSOs. Staniland presented four categories of groups; integrated, vanguard, parochial and fragmented. He overlaid these four categories across three areas of comparison: the central process of control, the local process of control, and the nature of dissent. Staniland stated, "an organization with robust central control coordinates its strategy and retains the loyalty and unity 
128
138
Similarly, "Activists need the skills necessary for uncovering information about social and political structures as well as the capacity to understand them and apply expert knowledge."1 38F 
139
As discussed, Mary Anderson also presented a worthy model that helps to understand some of the complex factors that exist in conflict situations. Anderson's matrix dealt specifically with providing humanitarian aid in a conflict or post-conflict setting. It involved several steps.
The first step "involves identifying the dividers, tensions, and war capacities in the context of the conflict and assessing their importance."1 40F 
141
138
139 Ibid.
140 Ibid., 213.
141 Anderson, Do No Harm, 69.  in any area they are working."1 41 F 
142
143
Step two of this framework "involves identifying and assessing connectors and local capacities for peace in the context of the conflict."1 43F 144 She continued, "to identify genuine connectors and local capacities for peace in any specific location requires attentiveness to the actual systems, actions, and interactions in that setting."1 44F 
145
Step three of the framework "involves identifying the characteristics of an aid program according to the categories outlined and relating them to the analysis of the context to anticipate how each programmatic choice will affect the context."1 45F 
146
Secondly, it provides a system of organization for these factors. Third, it highlights relationships.1 47F 148 While designed for the aid context, Anderson's framework directly applies to understanding the human domain where the GRO/CSO exist. The framework provides a potential way to widen perspectives and explore relations between the sectors of the human domain. Also, 142 Ibid., 70.
143 Ibid.
144 Ibid., 71.
145 Ibid.
146 Ibid., 73.
147 Ibid., 75.
148 Ibid.
135  
135  
Joseph S. Nye, The Future of Power (New York: Public Affairs, 2011), 84.
Everett Carl Dolman, Pure Strategy: Power And Principle In The Space And Information Age, Cass series: Strategy and History (New York: Routledge, 2005), 5.
Jim Mattis, "Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military's Competitive Edge," 11, last modified 2018, accessed July 19, 2020, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf.
Paul Staniland, Networks of Rebellion: Explaining Insurgent Cohesion and Collapse (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2014).
Timothy Donais, "Empowerment or Imposition? Dilemmas of Local Ownership in Post-Conflict Peacebuilding Processes," Peace & Change 34, no. 1 (January 2009): 3-26.
US Department of Defense, Competition Continuum, v.    
Michael J Mazarr, Mastering the Gray Zone: Understanding a Changing Era of Conflict (Carlisle Barracks, PA: United States Army War College Press, 2015), 3.
Mark Galeotti, "I'm Sorry for Creating the 'Gerasimov Doctrine'," Foreign Policy, March 5, 2018, 1, accessed January 21, 2021, https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/03/05/im-sorry-for-creating-thegerasimov-doctrine/.
Roger Cohen, "Who Really Brought down Milosevic?," New York Times, November 26, 2000, accessed November 1, 2020, https://www.proquest.com/docview/215487476?accountid=28992.
Erica Chenoweth and Maria  Stephan, "Drop Your Weapons: When and Why Civil Resistance Works," Foreign Affairs 93, no. 4 (August 2014): 1.
United States Army Special Operations Command, "Army Special Operations Forces Strategy," 3, accessed August 26, 2020, https://www.soc.mil/AssortedPages/ARSOF_Strategy.pdf.
US Department of Defense, Competition Continuum, 4.   
Robert Kaplan, "It's the Tribes, Stupid!," The Atlantic, 1, last modified November 2007, accessed August 20, 2020, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2007/11/its-the-tribesstupid/306496/.
110 Ibid., 2.
The most important thanks go to my family. My wife, Sidonie and my daughter Milena, who have supported me on my journey in the military and without complaint have weathered multiple deployments and missions and moves from station to station. I would also like to thank 
Dr. Barry M. Stentiford
Dr. Stentiford Syndicate
COL Dan Swanson, COL Zac Kerns
Lt Col Fraser Auld
LtCol Wade Reaves
by: __//signed/26 April 
21/BMS//___________
Monograph Director Barry M. Stentiford
21/BAP//___________
School of Advanced Military Studies Brian A. Payne, COL
complex and counterproductive at times. Management of US strategic expectations in these potential partnerships needs to account for the uniqueness of these organizations.
GRO/CSO of its key leaders as it implements strategy."1 28 F 129 Furthermore, "it establishes and maintains institutions for monitoring cadres, creating ideological 'party lines' that socialize new members, engaged in diplomacy, and distributing resources."1 29F 
130
131
132
133
129
130 Ibid.
131 Ibid.
132 Ibid., 9.
133 Ibid.
the framework helps to assess the risk of activities in the human domain. It reaffirms the concept Oderino started with Strategic Landpower; the human domain matters most.1 48F 149
These three theoretical frameworks offer suggestive methods with which to understand GRO/CSO better. They are expansive, not restrictive, and serve as potential tools to help determine if partnership with GRO/CSO in the conduct of US strategy in the competition space makes sense overall. GRO/CSO do not exist to implement other organizations' strategies. Pilisuk described the paradox that outside assistance to a GRO/CSO sometimes causes the GRO/CSO to fail.1 49F 
150
Partnering with GRO/CSO as a tool to conduct US strategic goals in the competition space is fraught with unknowns. The nature of these organizations presents many opportunities.
GRO/CSO offer the most direct route to tap into and understand the human domain, as discussed throughout doctrine examination above. However, the case studies and individual explorations throughout the monograph demonstrate that success in partnering with GRO/CSO to conduct strategic goals is difficult unless there is a direct overlap of the principal's and actor's goals.
Understanding these organizations' nature provides a wealth of information to better navigate the competition space and the human domain. US doctrine identifies the human domain as critical to the success of US strategy throughout the competition spectrum. Partnership with GRO/CSOs is not easy for all of the reasons and case studies discussed previously. The relationship can be 
149
150
151