# ID: f5dcee67912548b7919d3666e95b410c
# Title: Hybrid warfare: The 21st century Russian way of warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Russia has never fully accepted Ukrainian independence, and instead views it as a subordinate state.
Although it gained its independence following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia has continued to try and exert influence over the country-politically, militarily, socially, and economically.
Additionally, many ethnic Russians are located within Ukraine, primarily located in the Donbas Region (Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts) and Crimea.
Nevertheless, this situation is one largely of Russian creation.
While Crimea has traditionally been part of the Russian empire, it was given to Ukraine for political purposes in 1954 by Soviet Premier, Nikita Khrushchev.
On the other hand, the Donbas' ethnic diversity was created by Joseph Stalin following World War II as he relocated thousands of Russian citizens to the area in order to create an enclave in the region which enabled social and political manipulation of Kiev.
43 Information warfare, the foundation of Russia's hybrid campaign for Crimea and the Donbas, began at this time.
Russia used the political situation in Kiev to agitate ethnic Russians, alleging the western learning government in Kiev was unresponsive to and unrepresentative of ethnic Russians in Ukraine.
Russia used a variety of means to wage information operationsfrom television, to the Internet, to unconventional forces on the ground spreading the message word-of-mouth.
Information operations were successful in further exacerbating the political situation, which Russia used as pretense to annex Crimea under the guise of seeking to protect ethnic Russians.
Russia formally annexed Crimea on March 18, 2014.