# ID: f5dcee67912548b7919d3666e95b410c
# Title: Hybrid warfare: The 21st century Russian way of warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
In 2014, Russia unleashed a new form of warfare, the likes of which had yet to be seen on the international stage. The form of warfare, called a variety of things to include, hybrid warfare or new generation warfare, is a whole-of-government approach to war that links the elements of national power and small-scale tactical action. Russian hybrid warfare, examined throughout this monograph, is a whole-of-government approach to warfare that seeks to operate covertly or through the use of partisan forces, but is more than capable and willing to operate overtly with conventional combat power to achieve its ends. To do so, Russian hybrid warfare synergizes conventional, unconventional, information, and cyber operations into an effective effects package that enables tactical formations to generate far greater battlefield effects than comparable formations in other armies. Russia uses the Russian Identity-ethnicity, language, religion, geography, and history-to build consensus and justify its provocations. The idea of hybrid warfare germinated in the Russo-Georgian War of 2008, but came into its own during the Russo-Ukrainian War, of which the annexation of Crimea and the seizure of the Donbas are the two most visible campaigns. Hybrid warfare, as demonstrated by Russia in Ukraine, is a powerful tool for an era of limited war, and is arguably the modern Russian way of warfare.
15.
As Montenegro sought to join NATO in 2015, an attempted coup erupted within the country in October of that year. The Telegraph's Ben Farmer reported that, "An officer with Russia's GRU military intelligence service, is accused of running a web of Serbian and Russian nationalists and paramilitaries who plotted to assassinate the Montenegrin prime minister." 
1
2
Russia's operations in Eastern Europe and its Near Abroad since 2008 signal an evolving approach to the contemporary conduct of war. Speaking on the specter of Russian hybrid operations in Eastern Europe, Lt. Gen. Michael Williamson commented, "In terms of state-based challenges, Russia's purported annexation of Crimea and invasion of Ukraine demonstrated a sophisticated combination of diplomatic, informational, military, and economic means to achieve objectives below a threshold that the Russian leadership believe would elicit a concerted NATO response." 3 Russia's contemporary approach to war is characterized by the use of information, unconventional forces, conventional forces, cyber operations, electronic operations, and partisan forces to achieve military objectives aligned with political aims. Russia's actions have gone beyond the exclusive use of military force and have steadily increased the employment of the other instruments of national power in the pursuit of political objectives, thus shrinking the distance between the strategic and tactical levels of war. Furthermore, Russia's actions indicate a temporal component which seeks to operate within the international community's reaction time.
Simultaneously, Russian actions embody restraint through the employment of covert methods to achieve its political and military objectives. However, what makes Russia's actions unique is the role that conventional forces and conventional combat play within its hybrid model of warfare. Military theorist J. F. C. Fuller suggests, "If secure frontiers cannot be gained by peaceful methods, powerful nations will seek to secure them by war."
4
5
6
7
Nonetheless it is imperative to understand that Russia is not the sole proprietor of hybrid warfare. Russian actions have many implications not only for Europe and the United States, but for nations and polities the world over. The Russian model of hybrid warfare illuminates several critical innovations to warfare that transpired while the United States was committed to operations in Afghanistan, Iraq, and throughout many other parts of the world. The most powerful implication is not necessarily in a resurgent Russia, but in providing the world with a modern approach to warfare that merges the instruments of national power within operational design-all of which is nested in time, space, and purpose to achieve political objectives. The approach aggregates Information Age technology within this construct in an effort to achieve victory without the formal commitment of forces. Information Age technology can cover a wide variety of items, but for purposes of discussion herein, Information Age technology includes improvements to information and communications technology, nascent and improved cyber and electronic capabilities, and improved anti-area/area-denial capabilities. In short, hybrid warfare is a bourgeoning theory of warfare that exploits adversarial vulnerabilities.
Many of the peculiarities of hybrid warfare described herein are inextricably linked to Russia's social, political, and economic conditions. Yet Russia's success, coupled with the international community's inability or unwillingness to meaningfully deter its aggression, could embolden other nations or polities with comparable means to institute a similar approach. In doing so, Russian hybrid warfare possesses the potential to reshape the face of modern war in such a way to make war perpetual, in the shadows, but always capable of escalating to full-scale attritional combat.
The Russo-Ukrainian War, predominately fought between April 2014 to March 2015, is the most noticeable example of hybrid warfare. Prior to analyzing the war, the thoughts of Gen.
Valery Gerasimov, Chief of the Russian General Staff, must be evaluated. Gerasimov's thoughts, known as the "Gerasimov Doctrine," form the intellectual foundation of Russia's approach to hybrid warfare. The Gerasimov Doctrine describes the evolving character of war in relation to evolving technology, international policy, strategy, and international relations. Furthermore, it reflects Russian experience, education, and adaptation following the post-Soviet conflicts with Transnistria, Chechnya, and Georgia.
Russian hybrid warfare, as illustrated by the war in eastern Ukraine, is the embodiment of Information Age warfare. Many of the war's operations lurk in the shadows of unconventional operations, or in the zeros and ones of the digital domain. Yet as the war unfolded a very conventional war presented itself. The physical battlefields of the Russo-Ukrainian War resemble those of World War I's Western Front, more so than one would expect to find in the twenty-first century. 
8
The potential influence of hybrid warfare on modern conflict is vast, and yet fundamentally dependent on the observer's analytical perspective, or at which level of conflict they choose to focus their attention. At the strategic level, the hybrid theory of warfare can be seen as the employment of information operations and diplomacy in conjunction with cyber and electronic operations to weaken an opponent, or to sow the seeds of chaos in relation to an adversary. Russian hacking into US political parties during the 2016 presidential campaign is an example of this idea. Several US intelligence agencies assess that Russia utilized cyber and electronic forces to locate information which could be used to influence the US election. Then they utilized various means of media to distribute that information with the goal to discredit the US political process and political institutions, and politically weaken the United States. Similarly, the strategic component of hybrid warfare in relation to Ukraine can be seen during the precursor to annexation of Crimea and offensive action in the Donbas, as Russia used information operations and diplomacy to weaken the government in Kiev.
Operationally, the hybrid theory of warfare can be seen as the arrangement of tactical actions in time, space, and purpose in pursuit of strategic objectives. In hybrid warfare, tactical actions are more than just the combination of offensive, defense, and stability operations. In several key respects, these actions include cyber and electronic operations targeting an opponent's movement of troops, targeting an opponent's ability to communicate across the front, and targeting an opponent's information. In fact, many of the operational cyber and electronic operations prey on the same targets as operational fires, albeit with different means. Concurrently, hybrid operational level operations are not solely found in the cyber and information domains, but also found on the ground and in the area. The battalion tactical group, or BTG, is the sole Russian land formation present in Ukraine. The BTG, while a tactical formation, is also capable of achieving operational effects and employing operational capabilities normally found at echelons far above a tactical battalion. Robert Leonhard suggests, "As the Cold War receded into the history books, the day-to-day reality of operations was making it clear that political, economic, and cultural factors were intruding further and further into the operational level and down into the ranks of even tactical formations." 
9
Tactically, hybrid warfare represents a return to high-intensity combat operations in which armor, infantry, and artillery fight for local dominance of significant terrain. In the hybrid theory of warfare, tactical action is a continuance of a campaign in the event that information, cyber, electronic, and unconventional operations are unsuccessful in achieving the operational and strategic objectives. The absence of tactical conventional action during the annexation of Crimea signifies this concept, while Russia conventional warfare in the Donbas illustrates the latter. While not discussed within this monograph, other tactical actions, such as guerrilla warfare, are also related to the tactical component of hybrid operations. Nonetheless, to gain a better appreciation for hybrid warfare, it is imperative to analyze the theoretical underpinnings in which the construct develops.
Viewed collectively, hybrid warfare represents a whole-of-government approach to war, which is fought in multiple domains. Operationally and tactically, the concept represents the rebirth of siege warfare. Moreover, much like the phoenix rising from the ashes, the Russian flavor of hybrid warfare represents the return of attrition-based battle in which victory goes to the side that can exact the highest toll in men, materiel, and political capital.
Contemporary US Army and Joint definitions, in relation to military terminology, are used within this work. Nevertheless, the definition of hybrid warfare is a major point of contention. Neither US Army doctrine nor Joint doctrine defines hybrid warfare, whereas US Army doctrine provides a definition for hybrid threat, which it defines as "the diverse and dynamic combination of regular forces, irregular forces, terrorist forces and/or criminal elements unified to achieve mutual benefitting effects."
10
Recent TRADOC G-2 publications have attempted to further illuminate the character of hybrid warfare and the participants therein. TRADOC G-2 defines hybrid warfare as "the use of political, social, criminal, and other non-kinetic means employed to overcome military limitations." 11 However, this definition is far too loose to effectively capture the essence of hybrid warfare because it focuses primarily on social institutions as tools for overcoming military weakness, thus negating the role of military power in hybrid warfare. As Russia's capital investment in its conventional military capabilities, coupled with its conventional combat during the war demonstrate, conventional military strength is a major component to hybrid warfare.
Accordingly, a broader, more holistic definition is required.
Frank Hoffman, a contributor at the Potomac Institute, suggests, "Hybrid wars incorporate a range of different modes of warfare, including conventional capabilities, irregular tactics and formations, terrorist acts . . . and criminal disorder." 
12
However, defense analyst and military theorist Robert Leonhard offers a different definition of hybrid warfare. Leonhard suggests that hybrid warfare and its supporting operations 
11 TRADOC G-2, Threat Tactics Report Compendium: ISIL, North Korea, Russia, and China (Fort Leavenworth, KS: TRADOC G-2 ACE Threat Integration, 2015)
12 Frank G. Hoffman, Conflict in the 21st Century: The Rise of Hybrid Wars (Washington, DC: Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, December 2007), 14. 
13
are driven by the notion of obtaining asymmetric advantages to enable the attainment of political aims. Hybrid operations are characterized by undeclared action, that combines conventional and unconventional military operations, while coupling military and non-military actions in an environment in which the distance between strategy and tactics has been significantly reduced, and where information is critically important. 
14
The connection between a theory of action, such as a theory of warfare, and the context of war cannot be underestimated. The two concepts are reciprocal and cannot exist exclusive of one another. Hence, prior to analyzing Russian hybrid operations in Ukraine, hybrid theory of warfare must be defined, and the context of war must be defined. Only then can logical deductions be made of Russia's hybrid warfare and the implications of hybrid warfare disaggregated from Russia's application thereof.
Contemporary hybrid warfare is a theory of action that is built upon the Information Age definition of force. 
15
16
15
16
Contemporary hybrid warfare is a theory of warfare that is a result of an era of limited war in which nuclear weapons serve as the governor to prevent nations or other polities from driving headlong into total war. What is more, hybrid warfare is a derivative of the Clausewitzian notion that war is a continuation of politics by other means. As such, the theory is sensitive to the political tempests associated with the overt use of military force; consequently, hybrid warfare seeks to operate on the margins, in the shadows, and in such a way that fosters deniability of action for the perpetrator. Nevertheless, when the conditions are right, contemporary hybrid warfare seeks to employ rugged ground forces for conventional operations that are capable of operating dispersed, conducting effective integrated (ground and air) reconnaissance, bring a suite of indirect fire capabilities to the bear at points of opportunity to achieve temporary local or zonal dominance, in pursuit of larger military and political objectives. Ground forces on the hybrid battlefield are able to operate dispersed through increasing capabilities in lower echelon formations, much like the Russian BTG.
Understanding the context of war is essential to understanding the evolution of theories of warfare, of which Russia's hybrid warfare is one of the most recent. Writing over two thousand years ago, Sun Tzu stated, "The art of warfare is deceit." 17 Sun Tzu continued, stating that the "highest excellence" in war was not in winning every battle, but in subduing the enemy's force without having to engage it in battle. 
18
Carl von Clausewitz indirectly expands upon Sun Tzu's thoughts. Clausewitz defines war as an inherently human endeavor -an act of which he defines as a duel, a contest of wills, and an act of force to compel the enemy to conform to one's will. 
19
20
In surveying military success and failure throughout history, military theorist B. H. Liddell Hart suggests, "Throughout the ages, effective results in war have rarely been attained unless the approach has had such indirectness as to ensure the opponent's unreadiness to meet 
18 Ibid.,
111.
22
Moreover, Liddell Hart suggests leveraging an opponent's momentum against them to enhance one's own operations. Here, as with Clausewitz's idea on the use of force, momentum now extends beyond the tangible world and can be found in multiple, intangible domains, such as the information, cyber, and electronic domains. To be sure, due to the Information Age technology and the contemporary operating environment, in which the digital, interconnected world is connected twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, the idea of "operations" have shifted too. "Operations" are no longer just the realm of combat, but extend to targeted uses of force in the information, cyber, and electronic domains, seeking to influence populations, governments, and the international community. Therefore, the use of an opponent's effort, or operations, which no longer reside only in the physical state of combat operations, can be turned against them, or as Liddell Hart states, "So that, as in ju-jitsu, his own effort is turned into the lever of his overthrow." 
23
21 B. H. Liddell Hart, Strategy (New York: Meridian Books, 1991)
22
23
Theorist Robert Leonhard suggests that the best path to victory in war is through the sequencing of operations, a process he posits as the ordering of events in time, space, and purpose. 
24
25
27
Moving beyond military theory, it is instructive to identify the manner of wars in which the world is engaged. Clausewitz suggests that if left unchecked, the use of force will escalate to the point of absolute war. 
28
Historian Ronald Wright builds upon such an idea, warning that "progress has an internal logic that can lead beyond reason to catastrophe. A seductive trail of successes may end in a trap." 
29
30
31
30
means and that war is conducted through the use of force. Yet, the use of force no longer resides in only the physical domain, but in multiple domains. Deception is a central component to a successful war and applying force indirectly is vital to deceiving an opponent as to the true objective of one's aims. Furthermore, one must not destroy oneself in pursuing victory and one must not lose the advantage in the information domain. Nuclear weapons have placed parameters on the willingness of nations to engage in total wars, ushering in a return to limited warfare, focused on the incremental pursuit of limited political and military objectives. The aforementioned characteristics serve to energize modern hybrid warfare and give it form. 
To gain a better understanding of hybrid warfare, one must be grounded in the fundamentals of strategy. One problem with strategy is that there is no clear or universally accepted definition of the term. Carl von Clausewitz defined strategy as the use of engagement to achieve the objectives of war. 32 US Joint doctrine defines strategy as, "A prudent idea or set of ideas for employing the instruments of national power in a synchronized and integrated fashion to achieve theater, national, and/or multinational objectives." 33 Meanwhile, the US Army lacks a clear term for strategy, but heavily relies on the work of US Army War College professor Arthur Lykke. The US Army's primary staff school, the Command and General Staff College, at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, teaches Lykke's model as its primary method for understanding and applying strategy. Lykke's model is quite simplistic, stating that strategy is the balanced application of ends, ways, and means to accomplish or achieve policy aims. 34 However, neither of those discussions on strategy provide the granular insight to understand the how and why nations approach war in the way they do. A more detailed understanding of strategy will facilitate a better appreciation for the utility of the concept of hybrid warfare.
Historian Lawrence Freedman provides an enhanced model for understanding strategy. In his work, Strategy: A History, Freedman writes that the purpose of strategy is to transition from short-term, trivial thinking, to long-term and essential thinking in relation to a problem set and to address causes, rather than symptoms of those problems. 
35
32
37
Russian security thinking assumes that the nation is surrounded by enemies and therefore must maintain a territorial buffer to protect Russian sovereignty. 
38
39
37
41
42
Russia has never fully accepted Ukrainian independence, and instead views it as a subordinate state. Although it gained its independence following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia has continued to try and exert influence over the country-politically, militarily, socially, and economically. Additionally, many ethnic Russians are located within Ukraine, primarily located in the Donbas Region (Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts) and Crimea. Nevertheless, this situation is one largely of Russian creation. While Crimea has traditionally been part of the Russian empire, it was given to Ukraine for political purposes in 1954 by Soviet Premier, Nikita Khrushchev. On the other hand, the Donbas' ethnic diversity was created by Joseph Stalin following World War II as he relocated thousands of Russian citizens to the area in order to create an enclave in the region which enabled social and political manipulation of Kiev. 43 Information warfare, the foundation of Russia's hybrid campaign for Crimea and the Donbas, began at this time. Russia used the political situation in Kiev to agitate ethnic Russians, alleging the western learning government in Kiev was unresponsive to and unrepresentative of ethnic Russians in Ukraine. Russia used a variety of means to wage information operationsfrom television, to the Internet, to unconventional forces on the ground spreading the message word-of-mouth. Information operations were successful in further exacerbating the political situation, which Russia used as pretense to annex Crimea under the guise of seeking to protect ethnic Russians. Russia formally annexed Crimea on March 18, 2014.
Economics played a large role in the situation with Ukraine and Crimea. As the Euromaidan movement gained steam, Russia forgave $15 billion in Ukrainian debt to help Yanukovych's political situation. However, when Yulia Tymoshenko was put in office, fearing that Ukraine would not remain within its sphere of influence, Russia eliminated the discounted rate at which it sold natural gas to Ukraine from GazProm. 
45
46
However, the annexation also occurred during pre-planned Russian military exercises in the area, which obscured troop movements during the annexation. 
47
45
46
48 TRADOC G-2, Threat Tactics Report Compendium, 117-123. 
49
As previously mentioned, the Russian General Staff synthesized these ideas-deniability, covert action, tapping into disaffected Russians, and overt action-and developed a framework around the construct in the Gerasimov Doctrine. In the doctrine, Gerasimov outlines an invigorated approach to warfare, leveraging history, technology, and the realities the contemporary operating environment. Gerasimov's doctrine can be summarized in the following ideas.
First, Gerasimov states that modern wars are no longer declared because Information Age technology has reduced the distance (spatial, temporal, and informational) between forces and those who control the forces, a byproduct of which is the shrinking of distance between the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of war. Additionally, technology has increased the nonmilitary means for achieving political and strategic goals, and those means have largely surpassed common weaponry in terms of utility in that environment. The Information Age has created a much larger information space than previously existed in the past; this space is largely nascent, ill-defined, and not well understood. Therefore, the information space creates an arena in which asymmetric advantages can be attained. 
50
51
50
51
52
Moreover, Gerasimov states modern deep operations are the framework for contemporary operations, but the approach must seek to leverage the capabilities of modern technology, and seek to strike from long distances, with contactless action. 
53
Understanding the doctrinal environment in which many of Russia's central military leaders of today grew up assists in explaining the evolution of Russian doctrine. Further, it assists in understanding how Information Age technology, such as drones, cyber and electronic capabilities, and untethered communications, is interwoven with previous Russian doctrine. 57 Able Squadron, "Russian New Generation Warfare," 3. capabilities. Furthermore, Russia's recent wars have shown that they are not fearful of waging a conventional, land-based war. 
58
59
60
There are many ways in which to approach a study of the Russo-Ukrainian War and its connection with Russian hybrid warfare. For example, Russia's actions in the Donbas shed light on many nascent technologies in the cyber and electro-magnetic fields. Additionally, Russia's actions in the Donbas reveal innovative methods for manipulating public opinion and swaying the support of a given populace. Further, Russia's actions in eastern Ukraine demonstrate the manifestation of mechanized combined arms warfare on a contemporary battlefield by a world power-something which many pundits presumed to be dead for the foreseeable future. 
58 Anderson,
et al.,
Strategic Landpower and a Resurgent Russia,
100.
60
Nonetheless, the major question to answer in scrutinizing Russia's campaign in the Donbas is: "What is the character of Russian hybrid warfare?" Many of the topics associated with Russia's hybrid warfare in the Donbas quickly lead to problems with information classification. Therefore, the focus herein is on the implications that can be drawn from examining open-source information regarding the campaign in the Donbas, largely from the time period between March 2014 to March 2015.
Before beginning the analysis, a brief discussion on terminology is needed. The term "partisan" is used throughout the case study to define the Russian partners operating in Ukrainethis term is used instead of proxy or separatist, which is the term most often found in other analysis of the war. Nonetheless, the term "partisan" is used because it best defines the role of Russia's complicit partners in the Donbas. Political theorist Carl Schmitt offers a granular and definitive construct in his definition of the partisan. Schmitt argues that a partisan is an irregular fighter who works in conjunction with a regular force to achieve a similar political purpose.
Schmitt also states that partisans are telluric 61 , mobile, and political in nature, all of which are characteristics that precisely describe the forces supporting Russia in the Donbas. 
62
Disorganizing the enemy provided a window for tactical exploitation, which is the foundation for operational and strategic success. The initial goal of Russia's action was to disorganize Ukraine-61 Telluric is defined as "being of the earth," or "terrestrial." Merriam-Webster Dictionary, s.v. "telluric," accessed April 1, 2017, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/telluric. 
62
63
Russia's operational approach was deeply rooted in multi-domain battle. The approach was nested with Russian strategy and was therefore terrain The unique nature of the conflict, underwritten by the Gerasimov Doctrine's axiom that modern war shrinks the space between the strategic and tactical levels of war, demanded that operational art be exercised at unconventional levels of command. Russian forces, seeking to obscure their true involvement in Ukraine, exercised operational art within the Southern Military District, the 49th Army, and at BTG-level. 66
In Ukraine, the higher end of operational art-the linkage of tactical actions with strategic objectives-occurred at the Southern Military District in Rostov-on-Don, which equates to the theater army headquarters and is commanded by Colonel General Alexadr Galkin. 
67
66
68
The Russo-Ukraine War consisted of four major phases. The initial phase began in midto late-February 2014. The phase consisted of unconventional covert actions and the establishment of the DPR and LPR in April 2014. 
69
Classifying the actions of the partisans as terrorist operations and the perpetrators as terrorists, the Ukrainian government launched a series of actions they called Anti-Terrorist Operations, to retake seized territory by the DPR and LPR. The second phase bled into the third phase, which consisted of a series of major battles between Ukrainian forces and those of Russia and their partisan supporters. The final phase, which is ongoing, is essentially a stalemate with forces from both sides dug into defense positions along the entirety of the front who engage in sporadic, small-scale skirmishes and artillery or rocket attacks. The third and fourth phases of the war, as journalist Thomas Gibbons-Neff writes, are more reminiscent of World War I battlefields than of what one would expect to find in the twenty-first century. 
70
71
72
Deniability was critical during the initial phase because it allowed Russia to pursue its goals without drawing the ire of the international community, or as a recent report suggests, "Russia's ambiguous warfare creates challenges for deterrence because they do not invoke a NATO Article 5 response, nor does the West view Russia's actions as grave enough to intervene directly with the military instrument of national power." 73 While Ukraine is not a member nation of NATO, and thus, not entitled to protection from the alliance, it appears that Russia's actions in 
70
71
72
73 Anderson,
et al.,
Strategic Landpower and a Resurgent Russia,
13.
Little direct combat occurred during the first phase, the only traditional combat being sporadic and limited uses of physical force. In most cases, Russian and partisan forces established road blocks, checkpoints, and blockades to prevent, or inhibit Ukrainian forces from retaking seized infrastructure. At the height of the Russian and partisan advance in April 2014, they had taken nearly all territory within the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts and key political infrastructure in the Kharkiv and Dnipropetrovsk oblasts. The city of Mariupol served as an important objective due to its position on the Black Sea and its ports, which would allow it to augment the Russian Navy's Black Sea Fleet based in Sevastopol, Crimea. 
74
75
76
74 Thomas,
Russia Military Strategy,
394.
77
78
80
81
83
84
The early battles of the Russo-Ukrainian War demonstrated Russian advancement in cyber and electronic warfare capabilities, and a reorienting of focus towards information operations in order to influence public and political opinion, while covering military action. Few battles better exemplify the utility of these capabilities than the battle of Zelenopillya-although the term "battle" is a bit of a misnomer, as Ukrainian forces were destroyed without being able to get into the fight to counter Russian aggression. Further, the Potomac Institute's Dr. Phillip Karber states that the strike at Zelenopillya clearly exhibits that, "The Russian's have broken the code on reconnaissance-strike complex, at least at the tactical and operational level." 
85
Specifically, the battle of Zelenopillya demonstrated that the absence of joint operations is not a vulnerability, but can in fact serve to enhance the lethality of one's force through tightly coupled reconnaissance-strike packages that can employ massive salvos of devastating indirect fires.
The battle of Zelenopillya occurred on July 11, 2014. This attack was a concerted Russian attempt to offset Ukrainian success, and became the impetus for the transition to fullscale conventional warfare. The battle also ushered in the transition from the second phase of the war, to the third phase. 
86
84
85
86
87
With their communications systems disrupted, Ukrainian soldiers used their cellular phones to receive situation reports and issue orders. In doing so, they illuminated the electromagnetic spectrum which enabled Russian cyber forces to precisely identify the location of the Ukrainian forces. Russian forces, organized into the BTG and in conjunction with partisans from the LPR then launched a massive rocket attack, consisting of upwards of forty salvos of multiple launch rockets on the Ukrainian brigades. Reports differ, but it has been said Russian forces employed the BM-21 Grad and the 9A52-4 Tornado, both of which employed a mixture of DPICM and thermobaric warheads on Ukrainian forces. 
88
89
90
91
92
93
Moreover, the battle demonstrated that Russian forces were unconcerned with the employment of precision weaponry, demonstrating their preference for area fire coverage. Additionally, the attack illustrated the Russian's appetite for employing a variety of munitions, to include DPICM, thermobaric munitions, white phosphorous, and high-explosive munitions. Lastly, the attack highlighted a shift in attitudes towards the latitude provided to soldiers and tactical formations. In Russia's Soviet past, control was highly centralized, but as the battle at Zelenopillya highlights, not only has decision making been pushed down to lower levels of command, which is guided by 
91
92
93
Zabrodski's Raid: The First Major Ukrainian Counteroffensive Brigade fought conventional ground combat with Russian and partisan forces at Bakhmat, Debal'tseve, Saur-Mogila, and Luhansk. The 95th Brigade, being an Air Assault brigade, was significantly augmented with tanks, mechanized infantry, and self-propelled artillery to support the operation. 
95
The 95th Brigade's combat at Luhansk centered largely at the airport and was conducted from July 13-24, 2014. 
96
97
98
99
95
96
97 "Ukraine Conflict: Fighting Flares Near City of Luhansk," BBC News, July 14, 2014, accessed September 11, 2016, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-28285208. 
98
99 "Ukraine Conflict: Airstrikes Hit Luhansk Targets," BBC News, July 14, 2014, accessed September 11, 2016, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-28292338. so that on August 24, 2014 Russia committed additional troops from the Southern Military District to turn the tide in the deteriorating situation. 
103
104
105
The Second Battle of Donetsk Airport: Further Evolutions in Siege Warfare
The second battle of Donetsk Airport began on September 28, 2014, shortly after the ceasefire of the Minsk Protocol. Russian and partisan forces took advantage of the pause in action afforded by the Minsk Protocol to quietly seed Spetsnaz, GRU, and BTGs into the area surrounding Donetsk and the airport. Prior to the Russo-Ukrainian War, the Donetsk airport was one of the most modern airports in Europe. However, the first battle of Donetsk Airport and the ensuring action of the second battle of Donetsk Airport would quickly reduce the compound to little more than ruble as Russian and Ukrainian forces jockeyed for control of the facility.
The battle began as BTGs from the Southern and Western Military Districts launched coordinated attacks that aggregated information collection, indirect fire, and ground forces to overwhelm the Ukrainian 98th Airborne Brigade, which was defending the airport. 
106
107
Ukrainian force as possible before launching the ground assault. The Russian artillery and rockets employed a mix of high-explosives, thermobarics, and top-attack, bomblet munitions. Russian BTGs also used their self-propelled artillery in a direct fire mode, often out to range of six thousand meters, to suppress or disrupt Ukrainian forces prior to launching attacks and to screen the movement of other BTG elements. 
108
109
Shortly after the resumption of hostilities, the Vostok Battalion reemerged. The battalion, composed almost entirely of Chechens, is reported to have not taken prisoners, unlike their Russian and DPR-counterparts, but instead tortured Ukrainian soldiers they encountered on the battlefield. The Vostok Battalion was also rumored to have slit the throats of several helpless Ukrainian soldiers at the Donetsk Airport. 
110
The impact of the airport changing hands was largely symbolic because it had been rendered useless by the time it fell to the Russians. The runways and terminals were destroyed and the air traffic control tower razed. However, the versatility of the BTG emerged as a result of the second battle of Donetsk Airport, as well as the importance of combined arms battle.
Conversely, the Ukrainians walked away from the airport with an information victory in their own right. The battle for the airport demonstrated Ukrainian soldiers' willingness fight on in the face of overwhelming odds and with insufficient resources, against an overwhelming enemy; their action earned them the moniker, the "cyborgs" of Donetsk airport. 
111
112
113 "Ukraine Conflict: Rebels Celebrate Victory in Debaltseve," CBC News, February 19, 2015, accessed September 17, 2015, http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/ukraine-conflict-rebels-celebrate-victory-indebaltseve-1.2962875.
The battle of Debal'tseve began as DPR, LPR, and Russian forces moved to encircle the city. Debal'tseve was the last territorial piece needed to complete the goal of a unified Novorossiya. At the time, the northern portion of the city, which linked Debal'tseve to government-controlled territory was the only surrounding area under control by Ukrainian forces.
The situation created a salient in the lines. Russia and its partisans sought to complete the encirclement of the bulge, severing the city from Ukrainian controlled territory. As the Ukrainian government became aware of the vise closing around the Debal'tseve, they sent in reinforcements, providing eight thousand soldiers in which to defend the city against fifteen thousand soldiers reported to be attempting to seize the city. The Ukrainian army's 128th Mechanized Brigade and the volunteer "Donbas" Battalion made up the preponderance of the defense at Debal'tseve. 
114
withdrawal was yet another embarrassment for the government and armed forces of Ukraine, while serving to provide affirmation of the supremacy of the DPR and LPR, thus continuing to advance Russian information and diplomatic objectives.
Much like the second battle of Donetsk Airport, the defining feature of the battle of Debal'tseve is that it showcases the usefulness of the BTG organization. The battle demonstrates the linkage between drones, information collection, targeting, offensive use of artillery and rocket fire to set up the advance of ground forces and to soften the defense, and then the supporting armored strike to infest the objective. The use of the BTG, its organization, and equipment demonstrate the utility of conventional warfare within hybrid warfare, as it relates to the execution of limited wars. The BTG, as the battle of Debal'tseve illustrates, is ideally suited to operate in a multi-domain environment.
Continuing the Russo-Ukrainian War trend, the battle is yet another example of the role of the siege on the modern battlefield. Of the six battles analyzed herein, all but two were sieges, the exceptions being Zabrodski's Raid and the Battle of Zelenopillya. The Russians multi-domain capability packaged within the BTG, and when necessary, supported with fires or air defense by Colonel General Alexandr Galkin's Southern Military District, capitalized on the Ukrainian's willingness to act. This concept goes back to Liddell Hart's concept of ju-jitsu, or using an opponent's momentum against them. The Russians, having learned that Ukrainian forces quickly committed forces when an area was threatened, intentionally provoked a fight by threatening an area. The intention being to isolate the responders, and then slowly erode their capabilities and personnel over time, thus exhausting the Ukrainian ability to resist physically and morally.
The siege also benefited Russia from an informational and diplomatic standpoint. The battle of Debal'tseve demonstrated how exerting pressure through siege warfare on the local populace can benefit the aggressor by eroding the faith and confidence of people in their https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/18/ukrainian-soldiers-share-horrors-of-debaltseve-battleafter-stinging-defeat. government and their own armed forces. The compounding situation, for the civilians and soldiers in Debal'tseve, drove diplomacy between the two nations. The diplomacy, embodied in the Minsk II Protocol, facilitated Russia's continued pursuit of its policy objectives. 
118
To conclude the analysis of the Russo-Ukrainian War, it is critical to understand that definitions matter. The battle of Debal'tseve was the last major battle of the Russo-Ukrainian War. Many experts suggest that the conflict is now a "frozen conflict" and point to the Russian venture into the Donbas as a strategic failure. That point of view fails to understand the political and strategic goals of Russia. The People's Republics in Donetsk and Luhansk, while initially supposed to be united into Novorossiya, are Russian "allies" and serve as a counterbalance to Kiev. Russia has cleaved away a significant portion of Ukrainian territory. The DPR and LPR, coupled with the annexation of Crimea, serve to exert Russian dominance in Eastern Europe and show a willingness to fight both covertly and overtly to attain political and strategic objectives, namely the overturning of the Western dominated world order, the encroachment of NATO into Russia's Near Abroad, and achieving hegemonic status in Eurasia. All of this demonstrates that, while not victorious in the traditional sense of the word, Russia is certainly winning. Russia's actions in Ukraine have stopped NATO's advance to its periphery and has weakened Kiev politically.
The Russo-Ukrainian War brought modern hybrid warfare to the fore as a revised theory of action that incorporates Information Age technology, to operate in multiple domains, using all the components of force, within all the instruments of national power. The Russo-Ukrainian War embodies Gerasimov's idea of compressing the levels of war. The Russian military's exclusive use of the BTG is the physical embodiment of this idea as it is a tactical formation which 
118
possesses operational fires and air defense, and operates both tactically and operationally by synchronizing tactical actions in time, space, and purpose in the pursuit of strategic objectives.
The BTG, disaggregated from a headquarters on the Ukrainian battlefield, serves the theater headquarters in Russia's Rustov oblast. The Russian BTG's performance and participation at the battles of Donetsk airport, Luhansk airport, and the strategically vital cities of Ilovaisk and Debal'tseve demonstrate this feature, as does its participation at Zelenopillya.
The Russo-Ukrainian War, highlighted by cross-domain hybrid warfare, brings forth the idea of systems warfare in which competing national systems meet on physical and non-physical battlefields in the pursuit of primacy. In systems war, the diversified capabilities located throughout domains and levels of war create systems so robust that they all but neuter the traditional idea of centers of gravity. Further, open, adaptive systems, such as the militaries of contemporary nation-states, are fundamentally focused on survival because they serve no purpose if unable to fight. Therefore, open and adaptive systems possess the capability and intent to reallocate or reposition internal critical capabilities or vulnerabilities when those are threatened with destruction. In future battles, in which hybrid warfare is employed in multi-domain fashion, center of gravity analysis will likely be an exercise that is largely academic and not germane to defeating the adversary's system. Defeat of the adversary's system will likely involve slowly hacking away at its capabilities to the point at which the system has suffered irreparable damage and collapses. Put another way, hybrid, multi-domain battlefields of the future will likely be epitomized by attrition warfare.
The Russian hybrid warfare model provides the operational artist many valuable lessons.
First, it demonstrates that most nation-states are still inclined to invest in powerful conventional capabilities, centered upon rugged ground forces for the purpose of deterring potential threats, lending legitimacy to the government, and defending their borders if threatened. 
119
Moscow. 120
The Russian version of hybrid warfare demonstrates an evolution in warfare in which there is not a center of gravity. Russia has woven its political and military objectives together and is utilizing all the instruments of national power to pursue those objectives. At the operational level, Russia is blending the use of force into a multi-domain approach that uses conventional, unconventional, cyber, information, and electronic warfare in a synergistic effort to overwhelm an opponent's capacity to handle the quantity of presented dilemmas. At the tactical level, Russia has reorganized their ground forces into robust, highly integrated combined arms formations capable of finding the opponent, bringing vast amounts of firepower to bear in time and space to pulverize the opponent, and then rapidly exploit with conventional ground forces.
It is critical to remember that the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of war are interconnected and actions or innovations in one level influence the other levels. Furthermore, these innovations do not occur in isolation and are often direct responses to conditions or perceived conditions from the battlefield or from threat analysis. In addition, its critical to acknowledge Russia's penchant for studying history, analyzing forms and methods of warfare in order to develop thoughtful strategies and operational approaches that balance ends, ways, and means. As paradoxical as it may appear, Russia's pursuit of innovation largely aligns with the 119 Bettina Renz, "Why Russia is Reviving Its Conventional Military Power," 24. 
120
121
Hiding beneath the veneer of hybridity are powerful conventional capabilities, as Russia demonstrated in Ukraine in 2014. 122 Russia's tactical innovation in relation to their ground combat formation as one such instance where tactical innovation influences operational thought, specifically in the area of campaign planning and the sequencing of operations. Analysts Philip Karber and Joshua Thibeault suggest that Russia has reorganized its tactical formations, specifically, their battalion and brigade level organizations to generate forces that possess the ability to punch well above their relative echelon. 
123
124
121
122 Andrew Monaghan, "Putin's Way of War: The 'War' in Russia's 'Hybrid Warfare ',"  Parameters 45, no. 4, (Winter 2015-2016): 68. 
123
124
125
Next, the idea of sequence surfaces. Leonhard suggests, "Victory in warfare is linked inextricably with positive control of sequence. Nor is the link spurious or coincidental: the side that successfully strives to order future events will be the side that emerges victorious." 
126
Conversely, sequence is the key for defeating an integrated defense. As Russian operations illustrate, nation-states with integrated defense systems, typically established after incremental territorial advances over time, will be able to establish a robust defensive position to retain their territorial conquests and to retain freedom of maneuver. The US military has not had to account for this situation in decades and largely lacks the experience and requisite knowledge to plan accordingly.
127
By extension, US forces could face a variety of options in dealing with hybrid opponents in relation to defeating them on the ground, but the options primarily boil down to two major approaches: a contested landing, close to primary military objectives, or an uncontested landing well outside of the integrated defense, knowing the fight that lays ahead. The answer to the question of which approach to take hinges upon the immediacy of the situation, the time available, and the theater's physical terrain. However, both cases warrant the need for a rugged, multi-domain advanced guard formation that is capable of defeating enemy counterreconnaissance forces, answering the commander's information requirements, locating passable terrain, locating the enemy forces, fixing the enemy for follow-on forces, and covering the main body of friendly forces.
As discussed in Latvian defense documents, "To what extent is NATO's legal framework ready to deal with modern warfare?"
128
Although Ukraine is not a member of NATO, nor provided with Article 5 protection, the effectiveness of the Crimean annexation will encourage future situations to unfold in a similar manner in which one nation or polity seeks a limited military objective within another and uses hybrid warfare to conceal the offensive, before quickly transitioning to an operational or strategic defense after achieving those objectives, to put themselves in a position of advance in pursuit of the political aim.
Coinciding with operating below the threshold of NATO retribution of that of the international community, is the idea of not operating as a joint force. The Russo-Ukrainian War illustrates the efficacy of non-joint operations in relation to hybrid warfare in that it minimizes an aggressor's footprint, increasing the ability to deny involvement in combat operations in pursuit of strategic or political objectives. The absence of joint operations is not to say that operations in the air domain are not being conducted, for hybrid warfare demonstrates quite the contrary. To make up for the absence of joint air power or army aviation, hybrid threats will increasingly rely on drone, unmanned aircraft. These drones will continue to serve as reconnaissance platforms and will likely become equipped with firepower as hybrid threats continue to evolve. Additionally, one can expect to see the use of armed drones exported to proxy or partisan forces to enable the hybrid aggressor to continue to pursue a policy of deniability. These armed drones will work in tandem with proxy, partisan, and unconventional forces for information collection and targeting purposes, in pursuit of strategic objectives.
Similarly, the BTG's viability on the hybrid battlefield will likely give rise to similar formations and force design adjustments for those nations or polities seeking to conducted offensive hybrid campaigns or operations. The BTG's capability to operate dispersed, while leveraging operational firepower and air defense capabilities, or physically concentrate its combat power at a time and place of its choosing makes it ideally suited to the ever-evolving hybrid operational environment. In fact, Russia has seen the importance of the BTG as a result of its action in the Russo-Ukrainian War and its looking to increase the number of BTGs in the Russian army. As of 2016, there are 66 BTGs in the Russian army, but General Gerasimov stated the Russian army is increasing the number of BTGs to 125 by 2018, and all of those formations will be manned by professional soldiers, removing all conscripts and placing them in administrative units that will largely stay behind friendly lines in Russia. 
129
The hybrid warfare paradigm is a theory of warfare, an offset strategy, and a tool to exploit an adversary's vulnerabilities, to include internal political, social, and economic divisions.
Hybrid warfare is a theory of war that embraces strategist Everett Dolman's concept of strategy, which posits, "Strategy, in its simplest form, is a plan for attaining continuing advantage," the purpose of which is continued advantage for the state. Furthermore, Dolman's position postulates, "Stringing together anticipated outcomes is the essence of applied strategy." 
130
131
The concept of hybrid warfare is built upon the idea of perpetual conflict and that tactical or operational victory is less important than maintaining a position of perpetual advantage.
Russia's Novorossiya movement in the Donbas reflects this idea by carving out a polity that is sympathetic, if not subservient to Russia in the Donbas while significantly weakening Ukraine. Some view the Russian expedition into the Donbas as a failure, its result being "frozen conflict."
Others view the campaign and its resulting conditions a success as it has significantly weakened the Ukrainian government and its armored forces, providing a pliable neighbor on NATO's periphery.
Hybrid warfare is operates on the assumption that wars of annihilation are a thing of the past due to the governing factor that nuclear weapons play. Furthermore, wars of annihilation, or regime change, often create more turmoil for the aggressor, and therefore, the goal of hybrid warfare is to not topple existing regimes, but instead to create national ulcers, that perpetually suck resources and political power away from an opponent's capital. Additionally, these ulcers are tools in which the aggressor can ratchet up, as needed, to apply political pressure on its opponent. These ulcers, or frozen conflicts, are alive and well in many parts of the world and have been a tool of the Russians since the end of the Soviet Union. However, as more local powers seek to expand regionally and beyond, they will likely use hybrid warfare to create enclaves of support within their neighbors, using things such as similar ethnic heritage or interests as a pretense for involvement. -Too much negative pressure from the international community. Risk -International community reacts with military force to support Ukraine.
-Mitigation: Use unmarked forces and equipment to create deniability of involvement. -BTGs becoming isolated and destroyed piecemeal.
-Mitigation: BTGs possess overmatch capability. -Ukrainian air force or an assistance force providing air support capability.
- 
Source: Phillip Karber, "The Russian Military Forum, Russia's Hybrid Warfare Campaign: Implications for Ukraine and Beyond" (lecture, Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, DC, March, 10 2015).
Ben Farmer, "Montenegro to Indict Russian Spy Behind Coup Plot," The Telegraph, February
26, 201726,  , accessed March 5, 2017, http, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/02/26/montenegro-indictrussian-spy-behind-coup-plot/. 2 Gordona Knezevic, "Montenegro's NATO-Russia Chess Match," Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, January 2, 2017, accessed March 5, 2017, http://www.rferl.org/a/montenegro-nato-russia-chessmatch/28210094.html. 3 Lt. Gen. Michael Williamson, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, Lt. Gen. Joseph Anderson, and Lt. Gen. John Murray, statement to the Subcommittee on AirLand, Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate, on Army Modernization in Review of the Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2017, Second Session, 114th Congress, 5 April 2016.
J. F. C. Fuller, The Foundations of the Science ofWar (London: Hutchinson, 1926; reprint, Fort  Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute, 1993), 317.    
Jonathon Masters, "How Powerful is Russia's Military," Defense One. November 14, 2014. Accessed May 9, 2016. http://www.defenseone.com/threats/2014/11/how-powerful-russias-military/99062.
Amos C. Fox, "Russian Hybrid Warfare and Its Relevance to the US Army's Infantry," Infantry 105, no. 2 (April-July 2016), 13.
Bettina Renz, "Why Russia is Reviving Its Conventional Military Power," Parameters 46, no. 2 (Summer 2016): 26.
Thomas Gibbons-Neff, interview by Ryan Evans, War on the Rocks, August 26, 2015, accessed September 29, 2016, http://warontherocks.com/2015/08/podcast-infantry-combat-from-modern-ukraineback-to-world-war-i/.
Robert R. Leonhard, "From Operational Art to Grand Strategy," in Rethinking the Principles of War, ed. Anthony D. McIvor (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2005), 214.
Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 1-02, Terms and Military Symbols (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2015), 1-42.
Sun Tzu, The Art of War, trans. Roger Ames (New York: Ballantine Books, 1993), 104.
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1987), 75.
Clausewitz, On War, 75.   
Robert R. Leonhard, Fighting by Minutes: Time and the Art of War (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1994), 92.
Ibid.    
Ibid.,[91][92][93][94][95][96][97] 
Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, "Harbingers of Future War" (lecture, Pritzker Military Museum and  Library, Chicago, April 12, 2016).
Clausewitz, On War, 75.   
Dmitry Adamsky, "Cross-Domain Coercion: The Current Russian Art of Strategy," Proliferation Papers 54 (Paris: Institut Francais des Relations Internationales Security Studies Center, 2015), 9.
James R. Clapper, director of National Intelligence, speaking to the Senate Armed Services Committee on Worldwide Threat Assessment of the United States Intelligence Community on February 9, 2016, 17-18.
For a more detailed description of Russian policy and military strategy, see Appendix 1.
Lawrence Freedman, "On Strategy and Strategists," War on the Rocks, December 4, 2014, accessed September 29, 2016, https://warontherocks.com/2014/12/on-strategy-and-strategists/.
Igor Sutyagin, "Russian Forces in Ukraine," Royal United Services Institute Briefing Paper,  March 2015, 4.    
Leonhard and Philips, "Little Green Men,[58][59][60] 
Thomas, Russia Military Strategy, 393.   
discuss the role of the elements of operational art and Russia's operational approach in Ukraine, respectively. Appendix
provides further detail on the timeline associated with the Russo-Ukrainian War, to include highlighting battles not formally discussed or mentioned in the subsequent case study.
Thomas, Russia Military Strategy, 394.   
"Ukraine Conflict: Fierce Battle for Town of Ilovaisk," BBC News, August 20, 2014, accessed September 13, 2016, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-28866283.
Judah, "Ukraine: A Catastrophic Defeat."
Catherine Fitzpatrick, "The Battle of Ilovaisk: A Turning Point in Russia's War in Ukraine," The Interpreter, September 14, 2014, accessed September 15, 2016, http://www.interpretermag.com/thebattle-of-ilovaisk-a-turning-point-in-russias-war-on-ukraine/.
Karber, lecture.   
Phillip Karber and Lt. Col. Joshua Thibeault, "Russia's New-Generation Warfare," Army 66, no. 6 (June 2016): 62.
Ibid.,[62][63][64] 
Karber, lecture.   
Sergei L. Loiko, "How Ukraine's Outgunned 'Cyborgs' Lost Donetsk Airport", Los Angeles Times, January 28, 2015, accessed September 16, 2016, http://www.latimes.com/world/la-fg-c1-ukrainedonetsk-airport-20150128-story.html.
Hugo Spaulding, Putin's Next Objective in the Ukraine Crisis (Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of War, 2015).
Ibid.   
Leonhard, Fighting by Minutes, 103.   
Gen. Mark A. Milley, "Priorities for Our Nation's Army" (lecture, Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, DC, June 26, 2016).
Berzins, Russia's New Generation Warfare in Ukraine, 8.   
"The Number of Battalion Groups Consisting of Contractors in the Russian Army to Reach 125 in Two Years," Military News-Russia, last modified September 14, 2016, accessed September 20, 2016, http://militarynews.ru/story.asp?rid=1&nid=425709.
Everett Carl Dolman, Pure Strategy: Power and Principle in the Space and Information Age (New York: Routledge Press, 2005), 5.
Berzins, Russia's New Generation Warfare in Ukraine, 5.   
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12
To make matters worse, Russian and partisan forces cut the city's utilities in mid-January, exacerbating an already deteriorating situation. The result of these actions was the death of 6,000 civilians, while an additional 8,000 civilians fled the city. In looking at those numbers it is critical to remember that Debal'tseve had a population of 25,000. 
115
116
The Ukrainians held out for a day, but surrendered shortly thereafter. The city of Debal'tseve fell to Russia, the DPR, and the LPR on February 18.
The governments in Kiev and Moscow came to an agreement to establish a corridor to allow the Ukrainian forces to peacefully withdrawal from Debal'tseve. However, much like Ilovaisk, Russian and partisan forces failed to honor the agreement, and ruthlessly attacked retreating 128th Mechanized Brigade, Donbas Battalion, and other Ukrainian forces, causing many soldiers to abandon their vehicles and escape on foot through wooded areas. 
117
-Air superiority via A2/AD coverage and BTG-organic air defense capabilities.
-Air LOCs -Donetsk Airport, Luhansk Airport, Kramatorsk air base -Ground LOCs -Rail and highway system in Donbas -Sea LOCs -Sevastopol, Mariupol, Odessa Appendix 3: Russian Operational Approach
The Russian operational approach was deduced from assessing terrain, infrastructure, and Russia / partisan action early in the Donbas campaign. Some of the items listed above, such as control of the port of Mariupol were not achieved by the Russians.
Appendix 4: Selected Timeline of the Russo-Ukrainian War Dates for timeline selected on the initiation of reported hostilities and the end of major battles and operations. The information for the timeline was pulled from a variety of sources, to include those listed in the bibliography, plus periodic information reports from the Institute for the Study of War. 