# ID: f625d986e1174f2e935547e7d52676d5
# Title: The nature of Russia's threat to NATO's enhanced forward presence in the Baltic States
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
In the wake of Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea and subsequent military support to separatists fighting in Eastern Ukraine, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has deployed Enhanced Forward Presence (EFP) forces to Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland to reassure NATO's members and deter Russian aggression.
The EFP suggests policy makers consider a Russian incursion into the Baltic States a significant possibility.
Prior to the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the U.S. Army maintained a series of field manuals that analyzed the organization, doctrine, operations, tactics, and equipment of the Soviet Army.
These field manuals served as the basis for how U.S. and NATO ground combat forces organized and trained to fight a Soviet adversary.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the U.S. Army now maintains only a generic, non-country-specific, opposition force (OPFOR) series on adversary organization, operations, tactics, and equipment.
While the Army's current OPFOR publications are based on post-Soviet forces and account for many changes in Russian force structure and organization, the Russian military continues to modernize, experiment, and reorganize.
These reforms began with an attempt to transition from a mobilization force built upon conscripts to a professional force.
Following Russia's poor yet effective 2008 performance in Georgia, Russia instituted its "New Look" reforms to address organizational and battlefield deficiencies.
In response to NATO's EFP in Poland and the Baltic States, however, the Russian military is reverting back to Soviet-era formations.
As security experts, defense officials, and policy makers are considering the possibility that NATO and Russian forces may engage in combat within the Baltic States, contemporary analysis of Russia's order of battle (OOB), tactics and lessons-learned in current conflicts within Syria and Ukraine, and combat preparations through jointstrategic exercises (JSE) is prudent for NATO ground forces to understand the nature of the Russian threat.