# ID: f625d986e1174f2e935547e7d52676d5
# Title: The nature of Russia's threat to NATO's enhanced forward presence in the Baltic States
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
A.
In the wake of Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea and subsequent military support to separatists fighting in Eastern Ukraine, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has deployed Enhanced Forward Presence (EFP) forces to Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland to reassure NATO's members and deter Russian aggression. The EFP suggests policy makers consider a Russian incursion into the Baltic States a significant possibility. Prior to the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the U.S. Army maintained a series of field manuals that analyzed the organization, doctrine, operations, tactics, and equipment of the Soviet Army. These field manuals served as the basis for how U.S. and NATO ground combat forces organized and trained to fight a Soviet adversary. With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the U.S. Army now maintains only a generic, non-country-specific, opposition force (OPFOR) series on adversary organization, operations, tactics, and equipment. While the Army's current OPFOR publications are based on post-Soviet forces and account for many changes in Russian force structure and organization, the Russian military continues to modernize, experiment, and reorganize. These reforms began with an attempt to transition from a mobilization force built upon conscripts to a professional force. Following Russia's poor yet effective 2008 performance in Georgia, Russia instituted its "New Look" reforms to address organizational and battlefield deficiencies. In response to NATO's EFP in Poland and the Baltic States, however, the Russian military is reverting back to Soviet-era formations. As security experts, defense officials, and policy makers are considering the possibility that NATO and Russian forces may engage in combat within the Baltic States, contemporary analysis of Russia's order of battle (OOB), tactics and lessons-learned in current conflicts within Syria and Ukraine, and combat preparations through jointstrategic exercises (JSE) is prudent for NATO ground forces to understand the nature of the Russian threat.
sphere of influence. 2 These two schools are informed by opposing views of the Crimean affair. One side views it as Russian opportunism during a period of instability on its border. The other sees it as the calculated manifestation of Russian hybrid warfare doctrine, attributed to Russian General Valery Gerasimov, and applying all the instruments of national power against an enemy in a non-linear fashion. 
3
4
Several think tanks have participated in wargames to investigate the outcome of a
Russian invasion of the Baltic States, however, ongoing Russian military reorganization, modernization, and tactical refinement beg the question of how the Russians would actually fight in such a scenario. 
5
3 Rod Thornton and Manos Karagiannis, "The Russian Threat to the Baltic States: Problems of Shaping Local Defense Mechanisms," The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 29, no. 3 (2016): 343, https://doi.org /10.1080/13518046.2016.1200359.  4 Van Herpen, "Russia's Nuclear Threats," 7.
5 Vladimir Shamanov, "By 2021 Non-nuclear Forces in the Russian Federation will be able to completely replace Nuclear in Matters of Deterrence," Interfax-Agency for Military News (AVN), 20 February 2017, http://militarynews.ru/story.asp?rid=1&nid=442450; Vadim Shtepa "Russian First Guards Tank Army as an Instrument of Hybrid War Against Baltic States," Eurasia Daily Monitor, The Jamestown Foundation, 22 June 2016, https://jamestown.org/program/russian-first-guards-tank-army-as-an-instrumentof-hybrid-war-against-baltic-states/. insurgency fought by Russian-backed separatists (RBS). 
6
7
8
9
10
11
The most compelling argument for whether or not Russia will invade the Baltic
States is articulated best by retired U.S. diplomat Kirk Bennet. He postulates that a
Russian invasion of the Baltic States would simply be too costly for Russia. It would jeopardize Russia's operations in Ukraine, the Caucuses, and Syria. 12 Additionally, Russia's military, unable to maintain readiness across the force due to failure to meet its contract goals and a weak talent pool for conscripts, would not be able to fulfill its domestic and regional missions. 
13
To fulfill the aims of this thesis, however, there must be an assumption that Russia would invade. Any protracted attempt at state capture through hybrid means, using special operations forces and intelligence operatives in a covert, unconventional campaign to support an ethnic Russian separatist movement, would likely draw a NATO buildup, diminishing Russian chances for success. Therefore, Russia's most likely course of action will be an armor heavy Blitzkrieg from Belarus into the Baltic States, carried out by the WMD's newly reconstituted 1st Guards Tank Army, with the goal of securing permanent geographic access to the Kaliningrad Oblast.
13 "Jane's Sentinel Security Assessment-Russia and the CIS," Jane's by IHS Markit, March 14, 2017, http://janes.ihs.com.libproxy.nps.edu/Janes/Display/russs010-cis; Roger N. McDermott, Russia's Strategic  Mobility: Supporting 'Hard Power' to 2020? (Stockholm: Försvarsdepartementet (FOI)-Swedish Defense Research Agency, 2013), 50; Rod Thornton, Military Modernization and the Russian Ground Forces (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2011), 31.
A.
In 2014, when Viktor Yanukovych abdicated his presidential responsibilities and fled Ukraine in the face of the Euromaidan Revolution, the Kremlin seized the opportunity to intervene militarily amidst the turmoil. Russia's Crimean campaign was fueled by fears of both Russian regime instability vis a vis the Euromaidan "color revolution" movement, and the implication that Russia's Black Sea Fleet anchorage in Crimea may have been threatened by the deteriorating civil and security situation in Ukraine. 
14
15
16
Royal United Services Institute Researcher Dr. Igor Sutyagin observes that "the main strategic objective of Russian troops [in the Donbas] is to secure the continued resistance of Russian-controlled 'republics' in eastern Ukraine." 
17
14 McDermott, Brothers Disunited, 6.   15 United States Army Special Operations Command, Little Green Men: A Primer on Modern Russian Unconventional Warfare, Ukraine 2013-2014 (Fort Bragg, NC: The United States Army Special Operations Command, June 2015), 39.
16 Ibid., 35.
Russia likely began developing plans to seize Crimea following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. These plans would have been updated during the 2004 Orange Revolution, and the 2013 Euromaidan movement. 
18
19
20
21
Russia's Crimean operation began in force in the early morning on 27 February 2014. Plain-clothes members of the Special Operations Command (KSO, alternatively known as the Special Operations Forces Command -KSSO) and the Airborne Forces'
(VDV) 45th Guards Separate (Sep) Spetsnaz Regiment (Rgt), which has since been upgrade to brigade strength, seized Crimea's parliament building. In the afternoon, 300 personnel, likely Marines from the 382nd Sep Naval Infantry (Marine) Battalion (Bn), disembarked in Crimea from the Azov landing ship. 
22
22 Ibid., 164; The Russian designation "отдельный" Is typically translated as "detached" in British and Commonwealth analysis, and "separate" in U.S. analysis. It often denotes a unit which Is not under the direct tasking authority of the unit to which it Is subordinate, but rather, under the C2 of a higher-echelon command; Georgian intelligence officer; email communication with the author, 19 March, 2017.
Moskva, and corvette escorts to deny the Coast Guard freedom of movement, but was not willing to use force to that end. 
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
Naval Aviation Bde at Novofedorivka airfield were unable to prevent the unit from flying five helicopters and three fixed-wing aircraft off the installation and into Ukrainiancontrolled airspace. Although this occurred over a five-day period, these were the only Ukrainian aircraft to flee Crimea. 
30
31
32
33
34
The Russian units at Perekop, reinforced with artillery and multiple-launch rocket systems (MLRS), were the primary defense against a Ukrainian counterattack. On 14 28 Lavrov, "Russian Again," 168-9; McDermott, Brothers Disunited, 16.   29 Little Green Men, 51.   30 Lavrov, "Russian Again," 168-9.   31 Ibid., 170.   32 McDermott, Brothers Disunited, 12.   33 Lavrov, "Russian Again," 171.   34 McDermott, Brothers Disunited, 12.  March, the 291st Arty Bde, armed with 2A65 Msta-B howitzers and 9P140 BM-27 Uragan MLRS, entered Crimea. On 15 March, Russia deployed a battery of S-300PS surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) at the Gvardeiskoye airfield near Simferopol'. Russia also deployed the 96K6 Pantsir-S1 air defense system. 
35
Concurrently with its covert invasion of Crimea, Russia began its military intervention in the Donbas. Sutyagin argues that Russia's goal in Ukraine is maintaining control over a reintegrated Donbas, giving the Kremlin influence within the Ukrainian political process. 
37
38
49 "NATO Response Force / Very High Readiness Joint Task Force" NATO, January 2016, https://www.shape.nato.int/nato-response-force--very-high-readiness-joint-task-force. subordinate to the NRF, provides a rapidly deployable, joint, combined-arms brigade with conventional, special operations, naval, and aviation capabilities, able to respond within two to seven days of notification.
Pursuant to the RAP, NATO established Force Integration Units (NFIU) in the member states along its eastern flank with Russia. The NFIU serve to facilitate C2 and improve infrastructure for the reception, staging, onward movement, and integration (RSO&I) in case of NRF, VJTF, and alliance-member deployment. A wide base of alliance members increased air and maritime patrol and policing in the Baltic Sea. Along the vein of Baltic security, NATO increased bilateral partnerships with Sweden and Finland, while increasing the frequency and size of its exercises in the region. 
50
51
The Kremlin's overarching foreign policy goals are to become a regional hegemon and global great power. It relies on its nuclear deterrent to underwrite its revisionist goals. The Kremlin is pursuing these goals through: building alliances to balance against the United States, trade and proliferation of military technology throughout Eurasia, engagement in the periphery of the Middle East and Global South, and supporting the political will of Russia's diaspora in the post-Soviet space. 
55
65 Mikhail Tsypkin, email message to the author, 2 December, 2017. deterrence and a modernizing conventional military capability. Strategic deterrence in Russian security thought includes not only nuclear forces, but a whole-of-government approach that uses the entirety of the instruments of national power. 
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
Post-Soviet Russian policies toward the greater Baltic Sea region are focused on two primary concerns: maintaining stability and continued access to Kaliningrad, St.
Petersburg, and its other Baltic ports; and maintaining Baltic pipeline access to Germany. buffer-states for Russia has resulted in a Russian arms build-up and increased nuclear rhetoric. 
126
127
128
129
130
a Nazi-occupied Baltic region would have been preferable to a Soviet-occupied region.
Nazis. 
133
NATO faces a hybrid threat from Russian revisionist, ideologically expansionist aims in the Baltic States. Western observers contend that Russian national security thought perceives a permanent state of hybrid war with the West, and the Baltic States are a primary battlespace for this conflict. 
135
Contemporary thought on Russian warfare focuses on the phenomenon of hybrid Gerasimov observed the changing nature of military means for obtaining political objectives. He observed the spread of democracy, and subsequent disorder that occurs when democracy overtakes authoritarianism, and he postulated that these events were a form of warfare perpetrated by the West. Many Western observers of Russian security issues cite his thoughts on the future of warfare as a doctrine that will guide Russia through waging undeclared information wars to achieve its goals. However, hybrid is a Information warfare (IW) is an important, some consider the pre-eminent, method of conducting a hybrid campaign. 
145
146
Conventional force is primarily used for its deterrent effect. 
147
148
Emmanuel Karagiannis see hybrid warfare as the natural reaction of a relatively weak military. Thornton's view is that hybrid practitioners have adapted to exploit their conventional weakness, while Lanoszka's view is that a hybrid strategy can only be effective if the practitioner's conventional deterrent is effective. 
149
Thornton marks the distinguishing characteristic between conventional and hybrid warfare as wherein conventional tactics seek to affect the terrestrial battlefield, hybrid 
143 Lanoszka,
"Russian Hybrid Warfare,
" 178. 144 Ibid.,
179;
Radin,
Hybrid Warfare,
20. 145
146 Lanoszka, "Russian Hybrid Warfare," 5; Thornton, "Russian Threat," 338. 
147 Radin,
Hybrid Warfare,
6,
8. 148 Lanoszka,
"Russian Hybrid Warfare,
" 180.
150
The goal of Russian hybrid actions against the Baltic States is to render NATO ineffective at fulfilling its defensive role. 
152
Russian influence into the EU to counter the United States and assert itself as a regional hegemon. 154 
150 Thornton,
"Russian Threat,
332,
334,
350. 152 Lanoszka,
"Russian Hybrid Warfare,
" 176. 153 Thornton,
"Russian Threat,
" 331. 154 Ibid.,
335,
340,
342
155
156
157
158
160
161
163
Russia seeks to influence Rossotrudnichestvo, as well as citizens of the Baltic States through IW. Its goals are to erode faith in the legitimacy and veracity of democratic public institutions and non-Russian-backed media. 
164
165
166
167
168
170
171
Abandonment of the divisional model streamlined C2 from the operational command, to OSK, to brigade. 
201
196 Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992
-2016, 22. 197 McDermott, Russia's Strategic Mobility, 27, 29, 35. 198
Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992
-2016, 29. 199
throughout the post-Soviet space, while Russia would rely on the strategic nuclear deterrent to counter NATO. Although the primary rationale for this transition was a shift in focus from Cold-War era units poised for confrontation with the West to a force poised for rapid deployment to secure regional stability and counter separatists within Russia, this was largely a shell-game. The underlying cause was unit readiness. Russia's military was unable to meet its volunteer enlistment goals and unable to staff its readiness goals across the force. The majority of Russian divisions were cadre-only shells, ghost units waiting for conscripts to be mobilized. Transitioning from a division and regiment to brigade and battalion model allowed the Russian Army to provide the previously regimental-level fire support and combat service support to BTGs under brigades, as battalions were in-effect the only level of unit which could be filled with appropriate personnel, notwithstanding the VDV. The VDV retained the division construct, was staffed with a higher proportion of volunteer professionals, and enjoyed higher personnel readiness than regular forces. Additionally, the VDV needed divisions to provide the extra CS and CSS that VDV forces required for operating forward of friendly lines. 
202
203
204
205
212
213
214
McDermott notes that now "Russian Ground Forces do not move or conduct operations without EW support." 
215
216
217
218
219
220
221
In addition to reliance on the VDV's rapid air-deployment capability, Russian prepositioning operates on the concept of deploying ground forces by rail, emphasizing speed through leaving heavy equipment and weapons in garrison, to be shipped a month or two after the initial deployment. 222
Organizational Reforms
Russian order of battle (OOB) is in a state of flux. The military is not completely abandoning the New Look brigade model, but it is reactivating divisions and deactivating brigades. 
223
224
225
Guards Kantimarovskaya Tank Div as formations with regiments as subordinate units.
This was widely viewed as a balance against NATO's growing presence in the former Soviet Union, as well as a morale boost for both the public and military. Both divisions To address manning shortfalls while also providing rapidly-deployable professional forces, The MoD has created Territorial Defense Divisions (DTO) and Territorial Defense Battalions (BTO). 
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240
Bde. These forces undertake national command authority missions, and would go on to be highly influential in Crimea. 
241
259
260
In 2010, the MoD created new logistics and maintenance (material and technical support-MTO) units in an attempt to rectify the military's shortcomings in providing adequate food and water; petroleum, oil, and lubricants; and ammunition during 2008 in Georgia. 
265
266
267
268
269
270
Part of the problem was that battalions within the newly formed brigades were encumbered by fire support assets that had previously been the purview of regiments $425 billion for the GPV, while the MoD requested $1.2 trillion. 
276
277
278
279
293
294
295
Koalitsiya-SV self-propelled artillery, MLRS, and BMO-2 thermobaric flamethrower variants. 
296
297
307
308
309
310
[those units] could normally commit no more than two-thirds of their strength, leaving conscripts drafted last autumn…back at base." 
339
340
341
342
343
344
347
348
Additionally, Russian forces in the Donbas suffered increasing casualties due to the lack of deployed and disaggregated medical capability. 
349
353
354
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and Electronic Warfare Russian forces use commercial and military UAVs in Ukraine for (ISTAR) (to include signals intelligence -SIGINT) and EW. Karber notes that Russia is employing at least "13 fixed wing (UAVs) and at least one quad-copter design" in the Donbas. 
355
Borisoglebsk-2, RB-341V Leer-3, R-330Zh Zhitel, and R-934UM were operated from 15 to 30km from the front; and the Shipovnik-Aero, 1L269 Krasukha-2-O, 1RL257
Krasukha-S4, and A-50 EW aircraft were used at ranges from 60km up to 240km from the front. 
363
364
359 Harvey, Rebel Drones, 2-3; Karber, "'Lessons Learned' from the Russo-Ukrainian War," 14. 
360 McDermott, Russia's Electronic Warfare Capabilities to 2025, 25-26. 361 Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and
Implications for International Security, 32-3. 362 McDermott, Russia's Electronic Warfare Capabilities to 2025, 25. 363 McDermott, Brothers Disunited, 30;
McDermott, Russia's Electronic Warfare Capabilities to 2025, 26. 364 Ibid., 21.
365
372
379
380
Russia's intervention in the Syrian civil war consists primarily of an air campaign against the Islamic State and other insurgent forces that are battling the Syrian regime.
The air campaign is coordinated on the ground by Spetsnaz performing terminal attack control. Although the air campaign has been augmented with occasional cruise missile strikes, these were not out of necessity, but rather, to advertise and demonstrate that capability.
Russia specialist Dmitry Gorenburg notes that Russia's aviation operations demonstrated an "over-used and aging aircraft fleet" that nonetheless successfully implemented the post-Georgia reform goals of joint integration between terminal attack controllers and strike aircraft pilots. 
381
383
384
385
386
Russia has four military districts. With the addition of OSK-N, the districts are operationalized into five OSKs. The WMD has the largest concentration of forces, comprising 40 percent of total Russian Forces. Additionally, it shares a border with the NATO member-states Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, and Poland. This section provides an open source assessment of the Russian Federation's ground-combat forces that could be deployed against the Baltic States without significant warning. It is prudent 382 Ibid., 3.
383 Giles, "Assessing Russia's Reorganized and Rearmed Military."
384 Gorenburg, "What Russia's Military Operation in Syria Can Tell Us About Advances in its Capabilities," 3. 
385 Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992
-2016, 36.
The WMD, operationalized as OSK-West (OSK-W), is headquartered in St.
Petersburg. It is comprised of three army headquarters: the 1st Guards Tank Army, 6th
Combined-Services Army (alternatively known as the 6th CAA), the 20th Guards CAA. 
388
399
Military Construction (MilCon) Bn, and 413th Communications (Comm) Bn. 
400
The 1117th AirDef Rgt in Kobyakovo, Moscow Oblast' is also subordinate to the 2nd Guards MRDiv. 
401
402
403
404
400 Igor Sutyagin, email message to the author, 23 October 2017.
401 Perrson, "Russian Military Capability," 81; "Jane's World Armies: Russian Federation-Army;" Igor Sutyagin, "Zapad-2017: Why do the Numbers Matter?" RUSI, 12 September 2017, https://rusi.org/ commentary/Zapad-2017-why-do-numbers-matter.
402 "Jane's World Armies: Russian Federation-Army;" Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for International Security, 97-98. 
403
404 "Jane's World Armies: Russian Federation-Army."
The principal combat power in the 6th 
The principal combat power in the 20th Guards CAA, headquartered in Mulino, but moving to Boguchar, is the 3rd Guards Vislenskaya MRDiv in Boguchar; and a motorized rifle division of unknown designation at Valuyki, Belgorod Oblast'. The 3rd
Guards MRDiv, recently formed on the basis of the 9th Sep MRBde, contains the 252nd
MRRgt in Boguchar, 752nd MRRgt in Valuyki, 237th Guards Tank Rgt in Valuyki, and the 99th Arty Rgt in Boguchar. 
407
408
Guards CAA is also comprised of: the 9th Guards C3 Bde in Voronezh; 288th Arty Bde 405 Ibid.
406 Frolov, "Russian Army in 2014 and Western Military District," 15; Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992-2016, 30; "Jane's World Armies: Russian Federation-Army;" Perrson, "Russian Military Capability," 81; Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for International Security, 90-91.
407 "Jane's World Armies: Russian Federation-Army;" "'New'" Divisions in the West;" Sutyagin, email message to the author.
408 "Jane's World Armies: Russian Federation-Army;" "'New'" Divisions in the West;" Sutyagin, email message to the author; Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for International Security, 99. 
The 11th AC is the WMD's major subordinate command in Kaliningrad Oblast'.
The 11th AC's principal combat power is the 79th Guards Sep MRbde in Gusevo and the 7th Guards Sep MRRgt, which may now be at brigade strength. Subordinate to the 11th Army Corps are: the 244th Guards Arty Bde, 152nd Guards Missile Bde in Chernyakhovsk, 22nd Sep Guards AirDef (alternatively referred to as either SAM, or anti-aircraft-AA) Rgt, and the 214th Sep EW Rgt. 
410
Additionally, the VKS' 44th Air Defense Div in Kaliningrad is composed of the 183rd
Guards AirDef Rgt in Gvarkeysk, 1545th AirDef Rgt in Znamensk, and the 81st Radar Rgt in Pereslavskoye. 
411
412
The principal combat power of the 98th Guards VDV Div is the 217th 
The MOD is moving away from Serdyukov's New Look brigades, returning to a division model based on four maneuver regiments. 
417
418
419
420
Brigades each have radar and intelligence platoons. Brigade structure is completed with the commandant's company. Tank brigades have a similar structure, with an inverted ratio of motorized rifle to tank battalions. 421 A brigade's motorized rifle battalions each have three companies, while the tank battalions have four. Overall, a motorized rifle brigade has approximately 3,800 personnel, while a tank brigade has approximately 3,000. 
422
Additionally, regiments contain a self-propelled artillery battalion. 
423
424
425
426
427
428
Tank Bns typically have 31 tanks and 151 personnel, and a company typically has 10 tanks. 
429
430
433
434
435
436
BTGs comprised of up to 43,000 troops, approximately 530 tanks, 300 IFVs, and 1280 to 1430 APCs.
The culminating annual training event for the Russian military is the JSE.
Strategic exercises typically involve an entire military district, and each district participates in a JSE on a regularly scheduled, quadrennial basis. Russia's JSEs since 2011 have each occurred in parallel with a smaller, regional exercise in other military districts, indicating that Russia's strategic training goal is the command and control of two simultaneous, multi-front joint combat operations. 
437
438
439
440
447
448
449
450
The nature of security relations between the Baltic States and Russia has changed following the Ukraine crisis. When Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania joined NATO, Russia was no longer viewed as the enemy. The nature of the alliance was of promoting democratic ideals. The post-Ukraine climate, however, is characterized by the Baltic States' view that Russia is an existential threat to their independence and sovereignty. 
529
530
The keys to Russia's success in Crimea were the speed and surprise of its forces.
In the Donbas, the integrated use of air defenses, ISR, and fires have given Russia the demonstrate that non-military means are insufficient for coercing a determined, armed force.
Regarding Russia's military means, New Look reforms aimed at a force structure of one million personnel, but as of the end of there were only 930,000 uniformed billets. 
532
533
534
535
536
538
539
The Kremlin most likely cannot, as a result of operational overstretch and manpower shortfalls.
Russia's ability to redeploy units from other military districts theoretically enables it to support large-scale combat operations with nine combined arms armies. However, these forces would not be immediately available in one military district. FOI points out that Russia has never mobilized that many formations at once, that it is unlikely such a large force could be mobilized without signaling Russia's intentions to intelligence agencies, and that this would leave no strategic reserve aside from the minimum formations in each military district. Additionally, even Russia's formidable logistical assets would preclude such an operation occurring in a time-critical environment. 
589
614
Guards CAA is relocating to Voronezh to focus on operations in Ukraine. 
615
616
621
622
624
625
As far as securing economic stability is the Kremlin's goal in the Baltic States, it seems like Russia has reached its terminus towards this end. The Kremlin has little rational interest in occupying the Baltic States, as Russia has sunk considerable cost into developing bypass energy and shipping transportation infrastructure to nullify the value of Estonia and Latvia's ports for Russia. 
626
Russian policy towards the Baltic States post-Ukraine is likely to incorporate softpower in lieu of military might. Despite tactical military victories in Ukraine, RBS, and the Kremlin in general, have failed to achieve their political goals. The conflict is an expensive stalemate, diverting resources that Russia could use for power-projection, or to develop its own economy. Furthermore, Russia's imbroglio in Ukraine has been a strategic failure through its diplomatic and economic consequences. The U.S. and EU-led embargo, falling oil prices, rising inflation, and a lack of investor confidence is eroding Russia's economy. 
627
628
629
627 Lo, New World Disorder, 56. 628 Iwona Wisniewska, Maria Domanska, Jan Strzelecki, et al., "Kaliningrad Oblast 2016:
629
Guards CAA focused on Ukraine, the 6th CAA likely to remain on-hand in the WMD as a reserve, and the 11th AC left defending Kaliningrad's A2AD, Russia's only realistic option for achieving surprise while initiating a conventional operation in the Baltic States is to deploy elements of the 6th CAA and 1st TAA. This would likely occur in tandem with airborne and air assault operations, likely from elements of the 76th Guards and 98th Guards VDV Divs. This course of action could include the WMD's separate, subordinate BTGs, allowing for a total of up to 2 reconnaissance, 9 mechanized infantry-heavy, 7 armor-heavy, and 10 VDV BTGs under the command of OSK-W and the VDV. Sutyagin theorizes that if Russia were to invade the Baltic States, it would be precipitated by either the 11th AC establishing a separate reconnaissance brigade, or the newly forming 237th Rgt (to be upgraded to a brigade) deploying to Kaliningrad as a detached, separate brigade. This would allow Russia to project diversionary reconnaissance (direct action) forces behind NATO front lines, viewed as foundational to operational success.
630
The RAND study recommends bolstering the Baltic States' defensive capabilities with a seven-brigade tripwire force. NATO's EFP is a meager effort along those lines, offering no deterrence through denial. From 2017 throughout 2018, NATO is establishing its EFP through four rotational multi-national battalions, one in each of the three Baltic
States and Poland. The force ratio is in Russia's favor. U.S. and NATO doctrine calls for a 3:1 force ratio for successful offensive combat, which would require up to 84 battalionlevel combined-arms task forces to counterattack if Russia deployed its available combat power from the WMD. This would require a tremendous national effort from every NATO Member State, and that effort would have to be preemptively stationed along Russia's border. After one week, Russia would be able to mobilize its remaining military district's forces, further upping the force ratio required from NATO.
The Baltic States have no organic armor assets. Estonia has two infantry and three However, Russian forces prefer to mass their artillery against point targets, using infantry and armored maneuver only after direct and indirect fires enable a breakthrough. Fiore also cites force regeneration issues with Russian BTGs that suffered casualties in Ukraine. 
635
636
637
638
Throughout this campaign, Russia deployed 40,000 to 50,000 ground combat troops and an additional 45,000 to 50,000 combat support (CS) and combat service support (CSS) forces on the border with Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova. These forces were deployed via snap exercises at the battalion level. Deploying battalion-sized forces for exercises skirts the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe's (OSCE) Vienna Document requirement for transparency, remaining in the letter of the document, but outside of its spirit
Throughout this campaign, Russia deployed 40,000 to 50,000 ground combat troops and an additional 45,000 to 50,000 combat support (CS) and combat service support (CSS) forces on the border with Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova. These forces were deployed via snap exercises at the battalion level. Deploying battalion-sized forces for exercises skirts the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe's (OSCE) Vienna Document requirement for transparency, remaining in the letter of the document, but outside of its spirit
Concurrently with ERI, the Undersecretary of the United States Army sponsored a RAND study examining the prospects for NATO's defense of the Baltic States against a conventional Russian ground attack.
Concurrently with ERI, the Undersecretary of the United States Army sponsored a RAND study examining the prospects for NATO's defense of the Baltic States against a conventional Russian ground attack.
for calculated reclamation, Russia analyst Bobo Lo contends that, "The Kremlin understands…that its prospects of pursuing a successful imperial agenda are slim to nonexistent."
for calculated reclamation, Russia analyst Bobo Lo contends that, "The Kremlin understands…that its prospects of pursuing a successful imperial agenda are slim to nonexistent."
priorities it identifies include many socially-oriented themes such as preserving Russian culture and improving the economy and living standards. However, it also includes the dubious interest of social and political stability, signaling regime fears of domestic dissent, and providing precedent for government intervention in civil discourse.
priorities it identifies include many socially-oriented themes such as preserving Russian culture and improving the economy and living standards. However, it also includes the dubious interest of social and political stability, signaling regime fears of domestic dissent, and providing precedent for government intervention in civil discourse.
120 Ibid., 82; Martin Malia, The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia, 1917-1991 (New  York: The Free Press, 1994), 481.  121 Malia, Soviet Tragedy, 488-9.  
warfare, characterized primarily by unconventional and non-military means of obtaining political objectives. General Gerasimov is often viewed as Russia's chief hybrid warfare ideologue. As Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, he is responsible for writing Russia's military doctrine.
warfare, characterized primarily by unconventional and non-military means of obtaining political objectives. General Gerasimov is often viewed as Russia's chief hybrid warfare ideologue. As Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, he is responsible for writing Russia's military doctrine.
171 Lanoszka, "Russian Hybrid Warfare," 192; Radin, Hybrid Warfare, 19; Thornton, "Russian  Threat," 342.  172 Radin, Hybrid Warfare, 21
171 Lanoszka, "Russian Hybrid Warfare," 192; Radin, Hybrid Warfare, 19; Thornton, "Russian  Threat," 342.  172 Radin, Hybrid Warfare, 21
182    
182    
Yet, while the Baltic States, and the EU as a whole, are largely dependent on Russian energy imports, Russia is also dependent on EU markets for its energy exports.
Yet, while the Baltic States, and the EU as a whole, are largely dependent on Russian energy imports, Russia is also dependent on EU markets for its energy exports.
under Serdyukov, went on to prioritize improving procurement and combat training, forming a military police force; trading CSS, such as messing, for combat billets by switching to civilian providers; as well as equipping the Aerospace Defense Forces (VKO); and increasing the number of contract professionals. 208
under Serdyukov, went on to prioritize improving procurement and combat training, forming a military police force; trading CSS, such as messing, for combat billets by switching to civilian providers; as well as equipping the Aerospace Defense Forces (VKO); and increasing the number of contract professionals. 208
on the Chukotka peninsula, proximal to Alaska via the Bering Strait, is intended to balance NATO's EFP. This balancing with the 14th AC and 99th MRDiv is less about Arctic adventurism than insecurity.
on the Chukotka peninsula, proximal to Alaska via the Bering Strait, is intended to balance NATO's EFP. This balancing with the 14th AC and 99th MRDiv is less about Arctic adventurism than insecurity.
244 While some accounts of Russian snipers in Ukraine claim snipers are operating en-masse, conventional tables of organization place snipers in two-man teams. Additionally, the reconnaissance groups of Spetsnaz battalions and Ground Forces reconnaissance battalions each have two-man sniper teams, although these snipers are not employed as a team. 245 b. Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Defense Under the New Look, the MoD established NBC brigades under each military district. NBC forces provide aerosol concealment to disrupt intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance (ISTAR) and weapons guidance systems, as been 251 The 6th Combined-Arms Army's (CAA) 30th Combat Engineer Rgt was reestablished after 2013's Zapad JSE highlighted an insufficient pontoon bridging capability to operate in the terrain in vicinity of the Baltic States and Finland. 252 By 2020, each CAA plans to reintroduce combat engineer regiments, each with an assault pioneer battalion. 253 Also, each military district's combat engineer brigade will establish assault pioneer battalions, employing UR-77 or UR-07M mine-clearing line-charge (MCLC) capable vehicles, as well as IMR-3 obstacle-clearing 330KPK automated command post and R-330K automated control station. Each jamming platoon is trained and equipped to target a specific frequency band or capability: one is dedicated to HF, employing the R-378B automated jammer; another is dedicated to VHF, employing the R-330B; and one is dedicated to VHF frequencies used by tactical aircraft for communications and navigation, employing the R-934B automated jammer in its two squads. There is a platoon dedicated to jamming cellular and Global Positioning System (GPS) signals, as well as radio communications and munitions that employ radiocontrolled fuses. 258 It has five squads: one employs the R-330Zh Zhitel automated jammer, which targets mobile Inmarsat and Iridium satellite communications, as well as GPS; another employs two 1L262E SPR-2M Rtut-BM MT-LB-mounted jammers, which target VHF and UHF communications and radio-controlled munitions; and three each
281  
281  
310 Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992-2016, 52, 55
310 Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992-2016, 52, 55
345 Sutyagin, "Russian Forces in Ukraine," 8-9.  
model ISR UAV, as well as the RB-341V Leer-3 and Shipovnik-Aero are some examples.
model ISR UAV, as well as the RB-341V Leer-3 and Shipovnik-Aero are some examples.
Russian forces prefer massed fires and area fires over precision fires. They increasingly use MLRS over standard tube artillery in the Donbas, at a ratio of 3:4, which results in substantially more MLRS than conventional tubes.
Russian forces prefer massed fires and area fires over precision fires. They increasingly use MLRS over standard tube artillery in the Donbas, at a ratio of 3:4, which results in substantially more MLRS than conventional tubes.
420 Grau, Russian Way of War, 33.  
608  
608  
621 Ibid., 25.   
Igor Sutyagin, "Russian Forces in Ukraine" (briefing paper, Royal United Services Institute, London, UK, March 2015), 9
Shlapak, "In Defense of a Wargame: Bolstering Deterrence on NATO's Eastern Flank."
Hedenskog, "Russian Security Policy," 110.   
Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power  Aspirations,[16][17] 
Hedenskog, "Russian Security Policy, 
Hedenskog, "Russian Security Policy," 114.   
Robert Brannon, Russian Civil-Military Relations (New York: Routledge, 2016), 27.   
Vladimir Putin, The Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, 26 December 2014, Unofficial translation as presented by the Embassy of the Russian Federation to the Republic of Thailand, http://thailand.mid.ru/en/military-doctrine-of-the-russian-federation.
Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power  Aspirations, 17, 22.   
Ibid., 23; Hedenskog, "Russian Security Policy," 109.   
Agnia Grigas, "Russia's Motives in the Baltic States," Foreign Policy Research Institute, 7 December 2015, https://www.fpri.org/article/2015/12/russias-motives-in-the-baltic-states/.
Ibid., 178, 194; Thornton, "Russian Threat," 332.   
Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992-2016, 42.    
McDermott, Russia's Strategic Mobility, 30.   
Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2017), 184.
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security,[27][28] 
Ibid., 48.   
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 23.   
"Jane's World Armies: Russian Federation-Army," Jane's, 20 April 2017, http://janes.ihs.com.libproxy.nps.edu/Janes/Display/jwara226-cis; Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for International Security, 20-22; Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance, 51.
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 49.   
Charles K. Bartles, "The Significance of Changes in Russia's Military Doctrine," OE Watch 5, no. 6, (June 2015): 83. https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/oe-watch-past-issues/195455.
Mark Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992-2016 (New York: Osprey, 2017), 45.    
Ibid., 50.   
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security,[50][51][52] 
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 90.   
Ibid., 53.    
Dmitry Gorenburg, "The State of the Airborne Troops," Russian Military Reform (blog), 12 March 2012, https://russiamil.wordpress.com/tag/vdv/;Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities,  Limitations, and Implications for International Security,[51][52][53] 
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 48.   
Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992-2016, 54-55.   
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 66.   
McDermott, Russia's Strategic Mobility, 37.   
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 49.   
McDermott, Russia's Strategic Mobility, 73.   
Ibid., 14.   
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 46.   
Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992-2016, 54, 61.   
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 
Karber, "'Lessons Learned' from the Russo-Ukrainian War," 37.
Czuperski et al., Hiding in Plain Sight, 19, 29.    
Karber, "'Lessons Learned' from the Russo-Ukrainian War," 36.
Ibid.,[18][19][20] 
Karber," 16, 18,[19][20][21] 
Karber, "'Lessons Learned' from the Russo-Ukrainian War," 37-38.
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 73.   
Dmitry Gorenburg, "What Russia's Military Operation in Syria Can Tell Us About Advances in its Capabilities," PONARS Eurasia Policy Memo No. 424, March 2016, 2, http://www.ponarseurasia.org/ memo/advances-russian-military-operations.
Gorenburg, "What Russia's Military  Operation in Syria Can Tell Us About Advances in its Capabilities," 3.
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security,[103][104] 
Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance, 212; Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces:  Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for International Security,[91][92] 
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 92.   
Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance, 184.
Kofman, "Zapad  Watch-Summary of Day Three."
Persson, Russian Military Capability, 85.   
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 100.   
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 33.   
Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for  International Security, 54;[93][94] 
CPT Nicolas J. Fiore, "Defeating the Russian Battalion Tactical Group," Armor 128, no. 2 (Spring 2017),9-11.   
BCT Brigade Combat Team BDA battle-damage assessment 
Bde Brigade BKhRVT
BTG Battalion Tactical Group CAST Centre for Analysis of Strategies
Technologies C-IED counter-improvised explosive device CAA Combined-Arms Army CAS
ERI Factsheet
CONTEMPORARY PERFORMANCE 1. Ukraine
Observers note that Russia relied on highly-disciplined contract soldiers, predominantly Spetsnaz, to carry out the Crimea operation with speed and surprise. 
312
313
314
315