# ID: f63e94e603ff40adb1a638a754851cd5
# Title: Strategy, Requirements, and Forces: The Rising Imperative of Air and Space Power
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2003.0
# Fulltext:
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings, originally passed in 1985 and modified in 1987, allocated budget reductions automatically by predetermined formula in any year when the government failed to meet a pre-set deficit ceiling.
The Aerospace Education Foundation (AEF) is dedicated to ensuring America's aerospace excellence through education, scholarships, grants, awards, and public awareness programs. The Foundation also publishes a series of studies and forums on aerospace and national security. The Eaker Institute is the public policy and research arm of AEF.
AEF works through a network of thousands of Air Force Association members and more than 200 chapters to distribute educational material to schools and concerned citizens. An example of this includes "Visions of Exploration," an AEF/USA Today multidisciplinary science, math, and social studies program. To find out how you can support aerospace excellence visit us on the Web at www.aef.org.
After 20 years of service in the US Air Force, John Correll joined the staff of Air Force Magazine, journal of the Air Force Association, in 1982. He was editor in chief from 1984 to 2002. He continues to study and write about national defense and air and space and a reduced force structure. Throughout the Cold War, US forces were based overseas in large numbers under an operational doctrine of forward defense. He thought it was time to reduce the numbers of forces permanently stationed abroad and to rely more on periodic deployments to demonstrate commitment and protect American interests.
The new concept Powell proposed was "Forward Presence/Crisis Response." Initially, the Army, supported by the Air Force, vigorously opposed abandoning the concept of forward defense. 
3
In the ensuing months, Powell overcame the objections of the services and convinced Secretary of Defense Richard B. Cheney. In June 1990, Cheney endorsed Powell's proposal, and President George W. Bush agreed to the new strategy and force structure. 
4
5
These views would soon look prophetic. They were also consistent with Powell's "Crisis Response" theme, although Powell, no great fan of airpower, may not have seen it that way. Years later, hen the Berlin Wall fell in November 1989, the Cold War was not quite over yet, but the end was in sight. Big changes lay ahead for the armed forces of the United States:
For more than 40 years, US forces had defined themselves in terms of a global confrontation with the Soviet Union. Anything else was regarded as a "lesser included contingency." Even Vietnam, which cost 47,000 American lives, was strategically a secondary consideration. The Pentagon never lost its focus on deterring and containing the military power of the USSR.
In 1989, however, the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact were tottering, and the US forces faced fundamental questions about the future of their missions, size, force structure, and budgets.
Glasnost ("openness") and perestroika ("restructuring") had swept the Soviet Union. On Nov. 9, the East German government opened its borders and tore down barriers in the Berlin Wall, which had long stood as the most visible symbol of Soviet domination of Europe.
Celebrations of peace were underway.
Francis Fukuyama, a mid-level official at the State Department, created a sensation in the summer of 1989 with his theory of the "End of History," in which he argued that alternatives to "Western liberalism" had been exhausted and that the centuries of ideological struggle were over. 
1
Unbeknown to the public, similar thoughts were in the mind of the new Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Army Gen. Colin L. Powell. Within a month of taking office in October 1989, he was developing a slide presentation entitled "Strategic Overview-1994: When You Lose Your Best Enemy." 
2
"In a world less driven by an immediate threat to Europe and the danger of global war-in a world where the size of our forces will increasingly be shaped by the needs of regional contingencies and peacetime presence-we know that our forces can be smaller," Bush said, forecasting that "by 1995 our security needs can be met by an active force 25 percent smaller than today's." 
8
The United States initiated Operation Desert Shield, pouring forces and equipment into the Gulf area over the next six months. Bush began recruiting a coalition of nations to join the effort of ejecting Saddam from Kuwait.
Bush continued to reposition US foreign policy. In September, looking beyond the gravity of the crisis in the Gulf, Bush cited a new relationship with the Soviet Union and declared the emergence of "a new world order." 
9
In November, the UN Security Council, which had already condemned the invasion of Kuwait, authorized the use of "all necessary means" if Iraq did not withdraw by Jan. 15. The resolution passed, 12-2-1. Cuba and Yemen voted against it, and China abstained.
Saddam did not withdraw, and the Gulf War-Operation Desert Storm -began on Jan. 17, 1991. Airpower pounded Iraq for 42 days, during which almost half of Iraq's armor was destroyed outright. Between 50 and 75 percent of Iraq's troops in the first two echelons were either casualties or deserters.
On the first night of the war, B-52s took off from Barksdale AFB, La., conducted attacks in Iraq, flying 35 hours before landing again at Barksdale. ("Projecting power from American shores," although the full demonstration was still eight years in the future, in Serbia.)
In the final four days of the war, coalition ground troops, supported by airpower, surged into Kuwait and drove out the staggering Iraqis, inflicting more damage on them in the "Mother of All Retreats."
The fighting stopped on Feb. 28. Iraq agreed on April 11 to accept all of the terms imposed by the United Nations. Saddam had been thrown out of Kuwait, as the UN had authorized, but the settlement and the outcome of the Gulf War left him in power in Iraq. Ten years later, that decision would have dire ramifications.
US leaders, both in the White House and the Pentagon, studied what had happened in the Gulf and drew conclusions. For his part, Bush said that "Lesson number one from the Gulf War was the value of airpower." 10 That was fairly obvious at the time, although it would soon come under challenge and heavy reinterpretation by ground power advocates.
It was further noted that the Gulf War-in sharp contrast to Vietnamprecisely followed the Weinberger Doctrine (referred to often but erroneously as the "Powell Doctrine").
In 1984, Caspar Weinberger, then Secretary of Defense, announced a new policy on the use of military force. Troops would not be committed to combat unless a vital national interest was at stake, and until other options had been exhausted. Political and military objectives had to be clearly defined and achievable. If we went to war, it would be with sufficient force and a determination to win. There should be "some reasonable assurance" of support from the American public and Congress. 
11
Unfortunately, the nation did not absorb all of the lessons indicated or confirmed by the Gulf War. For example, the United States has a history of underestimating in peacetime the forces that it will require in wartime. The Gulf War ultimately required a third more fighter forces than the strategy estimated. It required most of the Air Force's best aircraft and the largest coalition air fleet to see combat since World War II. 
12
The Gulf War was the only war the United States had ever fought in the middle of a force drawdown. The Administration stuck to its Base Force plans, which held that, by 1995, operations would end or forces would be drawn down at 314 European sites, and forces in Europe would be cut in half. 
14
15
16
18
The issue of strategy and force requirements took a critical fork when Les Aspin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee and a future Secretary of Defense, swung into action.
Aspin had been a Rhodes scholar, an economics professor, and for a short time in the 1960s, was a systems analyst in the Pentagon for Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara. He had been in Congress since 1970, and was a leading voice on defense matters.
Not satisfied with the Base Force projections, Aspin developed four options for sizing the armed forces. Some of his options were more extreme than others, but Aspin signaled that the one to be taken seriously ("the most prudent and promising," he called it) was Option C. 
19
20
21
Powell and others objected to Aspin's numbers and conclusions. Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, the Air Force Chief of Staff, said that Aspin's figure of 24 fighter squadrons amounted to "Desert Drizzle," not Desert Storm. He said the actual Desert Storm force had about 11 US Air Force fighter wing equivalents (33 fighter squadrons) plus eight FWEs from allies for a total of 57 land-based fighter squadrons. 
22
23
24
1989
-1992
," OJCS, July 1993. 25
The As it turned out, the people working on the Bottom-Up Review did not know either where the cuts were to be found. Through the summer of 1993, the Joint Staff worked on force structure options that might fulfill Aspin's arbitrary budget projections. Details soon leaked to the press. resident William J. Clinton came to office without much interest in foreign policy and spring-loaded to cut defense. When a member of Congress sought to engage him in a discussion about Russia and China, Clinton interrupted, saying, "I just went through the whole campaign and no one talked about foreign policy at all, except for a few members of the press." 
27
28
Defense cuts had begun in 1986, but the federal deficit continued, with no politically acceptable way to resolve it. At a "Budget Summit" in 1990, the Administration and Congress suspended the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction act 29 and in its place established reduction targets for specific categories of spending.
The Budget summit projected defense cuts of $325 billion between FY 1993 and FY 1997. However, the Bush Administration ordered more cuts. Bush's final five-year budget, proposed
The biggest cold war relic of all is the excessive size of American forces. ... Unless Mr. Clinton finds the courage to trim defense, he will be forced to shortchange domestic investment for years to come."
-New York Times editorial, Feb. 9, 1994 26
One of the possibilities under consideration was a concept called "Win-Hold-Win," 35 in which US forces would fully prosecute one regional conflict and conduct a holding action on a second front. The second front would not get full attention until victory on the first front.
Win-Hold-Win was subjected to withering criticism, ridiculed as "Win-Lose-Lose" and "Win-Hold-Oops." Within weeks, it became an untenable position. Aspin soon gave up on Win-Hold-Win, declaring that "After much discussion, we've come to the conclusion that our forces must be able to fight and win two major regional conflicts, and nearly simultaneously." 
36
37
Phase 1: Halt the Invasion. Minimize the territory and critical facilities an invader can capture. US forces deploy rapidly to the theater and enter battle as quickly as possible.
Phase 2: Build up US combat power in the theater while reducing the enemy's.
Phase 3: Decisively defeat the enemy in large-scale air-land counteroffensive.
Phase 4: Provide for postwar stability.
Of these tasks, Aspin said, "achieving an ability to stop an attack quickly is the most critical element in dealing with multiple contingencies." 39 Airpower was obviously critical in this formulation.
The Joint Staff studied requirements for response to two major regional conflicts (MRCs) simultaneously, one MRC at a time, and Win-Hold-Win. Their initial conclusions are shown on the accompanying "Three Alternatives" chart.
When Aspin moved from Win-Hold-Win to two MRCs, he was cornered. On the one hand, he could not walk away from his budget cuts. On the other hand, the two-MRC standard was the minimum he could get away with. But the reduced budget he had announced in March was not enough to pay for the two-MRC force.
In the formal publication of the Bottom-Up Review, this problem was covered by a fig leaf of sorts. "Simultaneous MRCs" had become "nearly simultaneous MRCs." (See chart, "A Fourth Choice.") There were now four options instead of three for the force sizing standard. 
41
The Bottom-Up Review would go, as Aspin said, with the standard of 2 nearsimultaneous MRCs. However, the number of Air Force fighter wing equivalents was now the same as for Win-Hold-Win. The previously-calcu-lated requirement for 24 wings had been shifted to the new "Plus" level Aspin's Bottom-Up Review force was basically the same as the Win-Hold-Win force, except for the addition of one active and one reserve aircraft carrier. The Bottom-Up Review found 10 carriers sufficient for two nearly simultaneous MRCs, but added the others for "overseas presence."
Even with the cutting and re-labeling, the Bottom-Up Review failed to produce a credible defense program to match the arbitrary budget cuts. Aspin revealed in October that his budget ("the President's target") was still $13 billion short of covering the Bottom-Up force. 42
It soon became obvious to almost everyone, that neither the budgets not the forces projected were sufficient to cover two MRCs. Defense analyst Anthony Cordesman reported that, "Senior officials in the Comptroller's office of the Department of Defense and the Office of Management and Budget privately admit that the Bottom-Up Review is underfunded by at least $100 billion in outlays over the period through FY 1999, or by a total of at least seven percent to 10 percent." 
43
44
45
52
Shortly thereafter, the United States almost went to war in Haiti. In the summer of 1994, the Pentagon was told to begin planning for an invasion of Haiti. The purpose was to restore President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, whose regime had been overthrown by a junta. There was considerable dissent, hose who wondered how the armed forces would occupy themselves after the end of the Cold War got their answer in the 1990s.
Hard on the heels of the Gulf War, Saddam Hussein began flexing the military power he had left, using it against dissidents in his own country.
On April 10, 1991, to carry out UN mandates, the US established a no-fly zone (the future "Northern Watch") in the airspace north of 36 degrees north latitude. A corresponding "Southern Watch" no-fly zone was established over the area south of 32 degrees north latitude on Aug. 26, 1992.  In addition, the Clinton Administration lowered the threshold of combat. It began with Aspin. During the Presidential election campaign of 1992, he drew a distinction between two schools of military employment. He described them as "Limited Objectives vs. "All or Nothing." 
46
Aspin cited the rise of the Limited Objectives school, which he favored, and disparaged the All-or-Nothing school. "This school says that if you aren't ready to put the pedal to the floor, don't start the engine," he said. "People may not be willing to pay $250 billion or even $200 billion a year for a military that is not very useful. It may be that to maintain a military for the extreme contingencies, it will be necessary to show that it is useful for the lesser contingencies, too." 
47
48
Operation Restore Hope (Dec. 9, 1992-May 4, 1993) overlapped the Bush even within Clinton's own policy ranks, to this move, but the armed forces prepared to carry out the operation. 
53
54
55
In the important-but-not-vital category, he said, "Options range from using US military assets for logistical operations to employing US combat forces."
Shalikashvili's first national military strategy, published in February 1995, was subtitled "A Strategy of Flexible and Selective Engagement." 56 It reflected the national security strategy of "Engagement and Enlargement." There was also an echo of Aspin's "Limited Engagement" beliefs. Shalikashvili recognized that "On occasion, US forces may be directed to participate in peace enforcement operations or other operations which stand in the gray zone between peace and war."
The notion of "Military Operations Other Than War" gained considerable currency in the 1990s. MOOTWpronounced "Mootwah" by its detractors-grew out of the low-intensity conflict theories of the 1980s. It was relabeled because the Joint Staff thought the "low-intensity conflict" term was "potentially offensive to host nations" where such conflict might occur. 
57
Combat MOOTW-the curious phenomenon of combat operations that were not war-included "active combat operations and employment of most combat capabilities." Confirming the suspicion of Mootwah critics, these operations were declared to be more sensitive to political considerations and were subject to more restrictive rules of engagement. Among the specified types of MOOTW operations were "strikes and raids." 
58
Between 1991 and 1995, the number of Air Force military operations other than war nearly doubled in comparison to the previous five years, and the level of effort rose to 150,000 to 170,000 flying hours per year. 
59
He took his cue from Clinton's "National Security Strategy for a New Century," May 1997, which also referred to shaping, responding, and preparing. Shalikashvili acknowledged the force structure proposed that year by the Quadrennial Defense Review as "the Total Force required to carry out the President's 1997 National Security Strategy and this supporting military strategy at prudent risk."
Military action continued at a brisk clip through the Clinton years. There were two main arenas for conflict: the former Yugoslavia and Iraq.
In June 1991, civil war broke out in what used to be Yugoslavia. 
60
61
62
Operation Deliberate Force, Aug. 30-Sept. 14, included some artillery, but it was mostly airpower. For three weeks, the Serbs watched their military power being destroyed before their eyes before deciding they would rather talk than fight.
As reporter John Tirpak noted, "It took just 3,515 NATO air sorties-about a day's work in the 1991 Gulf War-to get the Serbs to negotiate in earnest." 63 Ambassador Richard C. Holbrooke, special US negotiator in the Balkans and primary architect of the Dayton peace accords, said that "Deliberate Force" was the primary factor in bringing the Serbs to the peace table.
In November 1995, Clinton decided to send US troops to Bosnia, saying that, "Our Joint Chiefs of Staff have concluded that this mission should-and will-take about one year." 
64
In 1998, the Yugoslav civil war spread to the southern province of Bosnia, whose independent status had been revoked in 1989 by the Serb regime in Belgrade. In February 1999, the warring factions met for peace talks at Rambouillet, France, but could not reach agreement. By March, the United Nations estimated that the number of displaced persons-internal refugeesin Kosovo at 240,000, more than a tenth of the population of the province. 
65
In the first three weeks, aircrews flew an average of only 84 strike sorties a day. The operation escalated slowly. Politicians and lawyers reviewed and voted on everything, including targets. Predictably, Milosevic did not cave in as promptly as anticipated. 
66
Despite claims that would be made later by advocates of ground warfare, Operation Allied Force was almost completely an airpower action. Among those who acknowledged it was John Keegan, the eminent British military historian, who had often been a hard critic of airpower.
Keegan said that his earlier views had been wrong and that June 3, 1999, marked a "turning point" in history when "when the capitulation of President Milosevic proved that a war can be won by airpower alone." 
67
When the operation ended after 11 weeks, the Air Force needed a period of reconstitution in which to recover.
Soon after the Gulf War, Saddam Hussein resumed his recalcitrance. He provoked a major crisis in 1997 by ordering all American inspectors on the UN team out of the country, demanding that the UN set a timetable to lift its sanctions against Iraq, an excluding from inspection "palaces and official residences," some of them several square miles in size.
The United States issued one "dire warning" after another and talked of American-led bombardment, but objectives were expressed in hedged terms, such as "substantially reduce or delay" Iraq's capability to develop and use non-conventional weapons. 
69
70
71
The UN Special Commission (UNSCOM) inspection team left Iraq ahead of the bombing. In December 1999, the UN replaced it with UNMOVIC, the UN Monitoring Verification and Inspection Commission. Whereas UNSCOM had used professionals on loan from western governments, UNMOVIC was the creature of the UN bureaucracy. Iraq's friends on the Security Council, notably France and Russia, blocked strong leadership for the team. But even so, Iraq never let UNMOVIC into the country, and rejected various inspection proposals. 
72
73
The Air Force reported that, "We've reduced our personnel by one-third, fighter and ICBM forces by almost onehalf, and the bomber force by twothirds. Our budget is down by approximately 40 percent from its Cold War high."
In 1995, just to support peace operations in Iraq and Bosnia, the Air Force kept the equivalent of two fighter wings deployed, supported by two tanker squadrons and a large portion of the surveillance and electronic combat assets. 
76
Between 1995 and 1997, four experimental Air Expeditionary Task Forces deployed to Bahrain, Jordan, and Qatar. The first regular Air and Space Expeditionary Force cycle began October 1999. ("Expeditionary Air and Space Force" refers to the concept of operations. "Air and Space Expeditionary Force" refers to the units that deploy.)
The 15-month rotation cycle was divided into five periods of three months each. Two of the 10 AEFs were vulnerable for deployment during each three-month cycle. Two AEFS were seen as adequate to handle "steady state" peacetime deployments. Wartime would take more. 
77
The high-water mark of the Reagan era defense budgets was in 1985. Reductions began the next year, along with clamor for a peace dividend. Subtracting the projected defense budgets for subsequent years from a straight line projection of the 1985 defense budget yielded a cumulative difference-sometimes known as the he most famous part of the Bottom-Up Review was the stipulation that US armed forces should be able to fight two major regional conflicts, almost simultaneously.
This is often referred to as the "two-MRC strategy," but that is wrong. Two-MRC was a force sizing standard. The strategy was "Engagement and Enlargement."
From the beginning, though, the Clinton defense budgets were insufficient to cover two MRCs. Other requirements, including maintenance of equipment and facilities, was underfunded as well.
The Administration was unwilling to spend more on defense. At the same time, the "Engagement and Enlargement" strategy cut off the option of reducing military obligations and requirements. Instead, there was an increase in the pace of US military operations. Thus, the chronic defense imbalances of the 1990s were locked in. Resources and requirements were headed in opposite directions.
"We have from the very beginning of the Bottom-Up Review made no secret of the fact that the Air Force did not have the force structure required in the Bottom-Up Review," Gen. Ronald R. Fogleman, Air Force Chief of 
Staff, told Congress in 1996. 74
75
74
Fogleman, House National Security Committee, March 13, 1996. 75
The 1990s were the Golden Age of defense reviews. The Bottom-Up Review of 1993 was followed by the Commission on Roles and Missions, the Deep Attack Weapons Mix Study, and others. The search for answers continued in 1997 with the Quadrennial Defense Review, with the National Defense Panel Review waiting on deck .
The Quadrennial Defense Review was mandated by the defense authorization bill for FY 1997 and chartered to examine defense needs from 1997 to 2015. The review was carried out by the Department of Defense.
Among the main results were these: 79 It re-validated the two-MRC forcesizing standard, but changed the MRC terminology to MTW ("major theater war").
Despite assurances that it was "strategy driven," the Quadrennial Defense Review was essentially yet another reduction exercise. It noted a "chronic migration of funds" from procurement to operations and support, but said that increased funding for defense was not likely, It proposed more force cuts. In 1997, combined active duty strength stood at 1.45 million, down from 2.2 million in 1985. The QDR projected a further reduction to 1.36 million by 2003.
"Boots on the Ground" force structure-the number of active Army divisions and Marine Expeditionary Forces-as well as aircraft carriers and carrier attack wings survived the QDR intact. However, one active duty Air Force fighter wing was transferred to the Air National Guard, and reserve air defense squadrons were cut.
s Several aircraft programs were also cut: the Air Force's F-22 fighter from 438 aircraft to 339, E-8 Joint STARS aircraft from 19 to 13, and the Navy's F/ A-18E/F from 1,000 to 548.
Congress, having chartered the Quadrennial Defense Review, promptly chartered a second group, working independently, to give a second opinion. This group, the National Defense Panel, completed its work seven months after the Quadrennial Defense Review. It did not depart from the QDR in any significant respect. 
80
The National Defense Panel said that transformation would take an additional $5 billion to $10 billion a year. Otherwise, transformation was possible only by reducing operations tempo, canceling acquisition programs, and reducing force structure and end strength.
In 1998, the defense budget finally bottomed out at $258.6 billion (or, adjusted for inflation, $294.6 billion in constant FY 2003 dollars). 81 That was 36.2 percent below the Reagan era peak in 1985. Paying for the Kosovo air operation generated a real increase in the 16 
78
79
1999 program. Before that, the defense budget had fallen every year for 13 straight years. 
83
Jacques Gansler, Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition & Technology, said in August 1998 that, "We are trapped in a 'death spiral.' The requirement to maintain our aging equipment is costing us more each year. ... But we must keep the equipment in repair to maintain readiness. It drains ... resources we should be applying to modernization. ... So we stretch out our replacement schedules to ridiculous lengths and reduce the quantities of the new equipment we purchase-raising their costs and still further delaying modernization. Compounding this problem is the increased operations tempo ... which more rapidly wears out the old equipment." 
84
85
More than half of the shortfall was money needed to recapitalize the force, making up for a 10-year period in which the Pentagon repeatedly put off replacing aircraft and other systems. Other estimates of the shortfall were higher, in the range of $100 billion. 
86
87
The average age of the USAF aircraft fleet was almost 22 years. In 15 years, the average age would be 30 years, even if the Air Force executed every modernization program then on the books, Ryan said.
That was largely the result of a "procurement holiday," cited by the Quadrennial Defense Review, in which force modernization was postponed year after year. By 1997, the Department of Defense was spending 63 percent less on procurement than it did during the Cold War. The Air Force bought comparatively few aircraft in the 1990s (see chart) and almost half of those it did buy were trainers.
Air Force readiness bottomed out at 65 percent in February 2001. 
89
Colin Powell and other defense officials had predicted, according to two Washington Post reporters, a violent, bloody, overland warpossibly involving the greatest tank battle in the history of warfare in the Gulf.
Powell dismissed reliance on surgical air strikes, massive carpet bombing, and other "nice, tidy, allegedly low-cost, incremental, may-work options that are floated around with great regularity all over this town." Relying on airpower, Powell said, would leave the initiative to Saddam and allow him "to concentrate essentially on one threat ... an air threat." 
92
93
94
They concluded that a Revolution in Military Affairs was in progress, and that the United States was in the lead. Evidence of the phenomenon was seen in the results of the Gulf War in 1991. Major elements of the Revolution in Military Affairs were said to be information superiority and long-range precision attack. Some formulations also included stealth and space. 
95
However, as Lawrence Freedman said in a study for the International Institute of Strategic Studies, "Until 1990, there was a lack of hard evidence as to how the new technologies might work in practice." It was also a revolution in perceptions. "Up to 1991, the US seemed to have lost its grip on the art of warfare; after Desert Storm, it appeared unbeatable," he said. 
96
101
102
103
It was a bloody enterprise, and the winner might take higher casualties than the loser, as Ulysses S. Grant did in the Wilderness and at Cold Harbor. Nevertheless, the attrition model of warfare prevailed into the 20 th century. But destruction of the enemy was never more than the means to a strategic end, not an end in itself.. The Revolution in Military affairs introduced the possibility of effectsbased operations, in which success in armed conflict is measured by results, not by destruction. Did the operation compel a positive political outcome? Did it yield the desired strategic results? Did our will prevail over that of the adversary?
It is conceivable that in some cases, the strategic objective will still be to destroy the enemy's army and occupy his capital. Often, the goal is something else. Keep enemy armor from massing. Halt an invasion. Take away the enemy's ability to command and control his forces, as we did within hours at the beginning of the Gulf War. In other instances, it may be sufficient to inhibit, intimidate, or deter the enemy.
In 1996, Fogleman said that "we are on the verge of a new American way of war." 
104
Technology and circumstances were leading to unique military advantages, particularly in airpower, that could be employed "to compel an adversary to do our will at the least cost to the United States in lives and resources."
"America has not only the opportunity but the obligation to transition" from a concept of warfare "that places thousands of young Americans at risk in brute, force-on-force conflicts to a concept that leverages our military capabilities to achieve US objectives by applying what I like to refer to as an 'asymmetric force' strategy," Fogleman said.
In future conflicts, we might directly attack enemy strategic and tactical centers of gravity, "in short, an enemy's capability to effectively wage war."
Among the factors making the new American way of war possible are "the 20 100 Adapted from Brig. Gen. David A. Deptula, "Effects-Based Operations," Aerospace Education Foundation, 2001. 
101
102 "The Time Value of War," AF/XOX briefing, January 1992. 
103
104
extended range, the precision, and the lethality of modern weapon systems that are increasingly leveraging and leveraged by an agile C4I [command,  control, communications, computers,  and intelligence] capability that enables warfighters to analyze, to act, and to assess before an adversary has the capability to act," Fogleman said.
It was difficult to avoid the conclusion that air and space power were at the heart of the Revolution in Military Affairs. This point was not lost on the other services. Neither were the implications of what had been happening in the conflicts of the 1990s.
The relative burden in warfare had shifted. Airpower could still support surface forces, as it had done traditionally, but it could no longer be consigned only to that role. The experience of the 1990s said that sometimes airpower could achieve results independently or with surface forces in support.
This did not set well with some, especially in the Army. The surface forces could accept airpower in a supporting role-with the strategy and battle plans centered on the land force-but seeing airpower in the lead was a different matter.
More than service prestige and pride were at stake. Shares of the defense budget have not varied much for more than 30 years. The Revolution in Military Affairs threatened that balance.
It was not altogether surprising, therefore, to find the Revolution in Military Affairs under attack. Among the critics was Paul K. Van Riper, a retired Marine Corps lieutenant general and a relentless critic of airpower.
"After Operation Desert Storm, 'military technical revolution' came into fashion, followed shortly by 'revolution in military affairs,' " Van Riper said. "Now the operative term is 'transformation.' ... I have been involved for 10 years in many attempts to launch reforms and can attest to the futility of most of them." Van Riper dismissed such concepts as effects-based operations as "catch words." 
106
The prevailing pattern was that, before a conflict, predictions proliferated that airpower would fail. In the actual conflict, airpower did well, which was generally recognized. In due time, the critics waged a reinterpretation campaign, disparaging airpower's contributions. If repeated enough, the reinterpretation finds an audience and catches on, thus setting the stage for the next conflict.
After the Gulf War, for example, retired Army Gen. Frederick J. Kroesen, former commander in Chief of the US Army in Europe, made a flabbergasting claim in The Washington Post.
"The recent air campaign against Iraqi forces gained not a single one of the US or UN objectives in the Persian Gulf War," Kroesen said. "Four days of 21 
105
land combat-aided immeasurably by the air campaign-achieved every goal and victory." 
108
109
After Operation Allied Force in the Balkans, Lt. Gen. John W. Hendrix, commander of the US Army Fifth Corps and the commander of the Task Force Hawk helicopter contingent during the operation, said that,"The reason Slobodan Milosevic finally caved in-a primary reason -was the pressure of US Army ground forces in Albania."
Supporting that claim in an odd way was Army Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who commanded Operation Allied Force. 
110
But in his memoir, Waging Modern War, published in May 2001, Clark found a different reason for the Serb surrender. "Planning and preparations for ground intervention were well underway by the end of the campaign, and I am convinced that this, in particular, pushed Milosevic to concede," Clark said. 
111
Operation Enduring Freedom air strikes in Afghanistan began Oct. 7, 2001. Within the month, an outcry arose that the war was being lost and airpower couldn't get the job done.
The New Republic, curiously aspiring to military expertise, editorialized that "Airpower certainly has a rather impressive record of failure."
112
113
Fareed Zakaria, editor of Newsweek International, got it right: "Over the last decade, every time the United States has engaged in a strategic bombing campaign it has achieved its goals-think of the Persian Gulf War, the Bosnian air campaign (which persuaded Milosevic to sign the Dayton accords), Kosovo, and Afghanistan. And after each war, influential experts and journalists have emphasized that the central lesson of the operation is ... air power alone doesn't work. With the Taliban in ruins and American allies in control of three quarters of Afghanistan, expect to start hearing arguments about how our victory had little to do with bombing."
114
That statement and others in "Joint Vision 2010" were seen as threatening to the Army, whose stock in trade is the physical massing of forces. However, the Army wields enormous strength in the inner circles of the Pentagon. That was made obvious when "Joint Vision 2020" appeared, four years later, in June 2000.
The RMA concepts had vanished without a trace. In their place were 22 assertions about the rapid massing of forces. In addition, "Joint Vision 2020" said that "the presence or anticipated presence of a decisive force might well cause an enemy to surrender."
That sounds very much like the claim of Army officials and enthusiasts that it was the presence on an unengaged Army ground force in Albania, not the 11-week air campaign, that caused the Serbs to surrender to NATO in 1999.
"Instead of relying on massed forces and sequential operations, we will achieve massed effects in other ways.
"With precision targeting and longer range systems, commanders can achieve the necessary destruction or suppression of enemy forces with fewer systems, thereby reducing the need for time-consuming and risky massing of people and equipment." "We should be increasingly able to accomplish the effects of mass-the necessary concentration of combat power at the decisive time and placewith less need to mass forces physically than in the past."
"Overseas US-based units will mass forces or effects directly to the operational theater."
"The capability to rapidly mass force or forces and the effects of dispersed forces allow the joint force commander to establish control of the battlespace at the proper time and place." "Beyond the actual physical presence of the force, dominant maneuver creates an impact in the minds of opponents and others in the operational area. ... In a conflict, for example, the presence or anticipated presence of a decisive force might well cause an enemy to surrender after minimal resistance."
Completely purged from Joint Vision 2020 was the idea that the effects of mass might be achieved without the actual massing of forces. This pointed to a Pentagon staff victory for those with a vested interest in the massing of forces.
n 2000, for the first time in years, national defense was an issue in a Presidential election campaign, made that way by the Republican candidate George W. Bush.
Bush, speaking at the Citadel in September 1999, introduced his positions on defense. 
116
He said the Clinton Administration "wants things both ways: To command great forces, without supporting them."
In transforming the armed forces, he would go beyond marginal improvements and "use this window of opportunity to skip a generation of technology."
Among specific program intentions, he said that "At the earliest possible date, my administration will deploy anti-ballistic missile systems, both theater and national, to guard against attack and blackmail."
He promised to review the open-ended deployments: "Sending our military on vague, aimless, and endless deployments is the swift solvent of morale. ... I will work hard to find political solutions that allow an orderly and timely withdrawal from places like Kosovo and Bosnia. We will encourage our allies to take a broader role. We will not be hasty. But we will not be permanent peacekeepers, dividing warring parties. This is not our strength or our calling."
But the declaration that got the most notice was from Bush's running mate, Vice Presidential Candidate Dick Cheney: "Rarely has so much been demanded of our armed forces, and so little given to them in return," Cheney said. "George W. Bush and I are going to change that, too. I have seen our military at its finest with the best equipment, the best training, and the best leadership. I am proud of them. I have had the responsibility for their wellbeing. And I can promise them now, help is on the way." 117
There was already considerable momentum for a defense increase, in Congress and elsewhere. Even Clinton, on his way out of office, proposed a 2002 defense budget $14.2 billion higher than the FY 2001 level. 
118
119
120
In actuality, Rumsfeld had put more than a dozen study panels to work behind closed doors, but only a few people knew that at the time. The panels consisted mostly of outsiders. Security was extraordinarily tight. The result, not altogether surprising, was rampant rumor, confusion, and discord. Rumsfeld didn't confirm the rumors, but he didn't deny them either.
By the middle of May, the uproar reached the point that Rumsfeld went on a media blitz, holding 14 press interviews and media availabilities in three weeks.
He said the review wasn't that big, that the work by his panels was just exploratory, that there was no big plan to reorganize the armed forces. He said the panel findings would be rolled into the next Quadrennial Defense Review, which had earlier slowed down its efforts in deference to the panels. The QDR was revived and put on what the Pentagon called "a forced march" to produce results by the middle of the summer.
Rumsfeld recognized the magnitude of the problem. 6 Transformation and Terrorism I "First, because we have underfunded and overused our forces, we find we are short a division, short airlift, we have been underfunding aging infrastructure and facilities, we are short high-demand/low-density assets, the aircraft fleet is aging at considerable and growing cost to maintain, the Navy is declining in numbers, and we are steadily falling below acceptable readiness standards. ... "Second, we have skimped on our people, doing harm to their trust and confidence, as well as to the stability of our force. ... "Third, we have under invested in dealing with future risks. We have failed to invest adequately in the advanced military technologies we will need to meet the emerging threats of the new century."
Fortunately, Rumsfeld said, transforming part of the force would be sufficient. "The blitzkrieg was an enormous success, but it was accomplished by only a 13 percent transformed German Army," he said.
As the QDR moved forward, the Administration sent Congress an amended FY 2002 budget, proposing $328.9 billion for defense. 
122
Rumsfeld told Congress that it would take $347 billion in 2003-another increase of the same size as the big one just proposed-"to keep the department going next year on a straight-line basis with no substantial improvements" and "before addressing important transformation issues." 
123
124
"North Korea invades South Korea. And what did we do? We said we couldn't afford an $18 billion budget when it was a $15 billion budget, and Omar Bradley was asking for $18 billion. They said they couldn't afford it, and the next thing you knew, we had $48 billion and we could afford it just fine because we were in a war," Rumsfeld said. 125
The "4-2-1" Standard By law, 126 a new President must send Congress a national security strategy within 150 days of taking office. For the Bush Administration, the due date came and went. The National Security Strategy would not appear until September 2002.
The National Defense Strategy, published by the Pentagon, normally follows the National Security Strategy. This time the defense strategy came first. It was not a separate document, as usual, but rather part of the Quadrennial Defense Review. 
127
128
The short title of the defense strategy was "Assure, Dissuade, Deter, Defeat." Assure allies and friends. Dissuade other nations from future military competition with US. Deter threats and coercion against US interests. If deterrence fails, decisively defeat any adversary. 
129
The orientation of strategy had changed from threat based to capabilities based. It focused on how an adversary might fight instead of on who the adversary might be or when and where the war might occur. It gave special attention to capabilities that adversaries might possess or could develop, and on capabilities that we would need ourselves.
In the change that attracted the most public attention, the new strategy dumped Aspin's force-sizing standard from 1993, in which forces were supposedly structured to fight and win, almost simultaneously, two MRCs -later called MTWs. 
130
Swiftly defeat aggression any two theaters at the same time.
Preserve the option for one major counteroffensive to occupy an aggressor's capital or replace his regime 
131
Conduct a limited number of smaller-scale contingencies.
The new standard was more demanding than two MTWs, and it was more reliant on airpower. The force still had to stop aggressors in two theaters at the same time. What the standard eliminated-as Rumsfeld made clearwas one occupation force.
"By removing the requirement to maintain a second occupation force, we can free up new resources for the future and for other, lesser contingencies that may now confront us," Rumsfeld said. 132
Then came Sept. 11, 2001. Airliners hijacked by terrorists struck the World Trade Center towers in New York at 8:45 a.m. and 9:03 a.m., and a third aircraft hit the Pentagon at 9:38 a.m. 
133
On the morning of the attacks, the North American Aerospace Defense Command was a vestige of its former self. Air defense of the United States was widely regarded as an obsolete mission.
Air defense fighters were on alert at only seven locations around the perimeter of the United States. The attention of the air defense system was directed outward, watching for airplanes approaching US borders, not at internal flights. 
134
Over the next year, the total number of Noble Eagle sorties would reach 25,100, of which 17,600 were fighter sorties. 
135
136
137
"Every nation, in every region, now has a decision to make," Bush said to a joint session of Congress. "Either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists. From this day forward, any nation that continues to harbor or support terrorism will be regarded by the United States as a hostile regime." 
138
Within the month, an outcry arose that the war was being lost. Airpower couldn't get the job done. It would not be possible, the critics said, to take Kabul or any of the other cities with airpower and indigenous forces. The operation was bogged down. The Taliban would hold on through winter. 
139
140
141
142
More and more, our weapons can hit moving targets. When all of our military can continuously locate and track moving targets-with surveillance from air and space-warfare will be truly revolutionized."
The air campaign tapered off after January 2002. The Navy had flown 70 percent of the strike sorties, but the Air Force had delivered 74 percent of the tonnage. 
143
144
145
In a November 2002 status report, the White House said that more than 60,000 US troops were deployed against terrorism around the world. Of these, 9,000 were in Afghanistan. Thirty one nations had supported Operation Enduring Freedom by sending forces to Afghanistan. Worldwide, about 2,290 terrorist-related arrests were made in 99 countries between 
Sept. 12, 2001, and
Oct. 28, 2002. 146
147
With operations still in progress in Afghanistan, Bush introduced major initiatives on missile defense and nuclear weapons. In December 2001, he announced US withdrawal from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, giving Russia formal notice that the with-drawal would be effective six months later.
"I have concluded the ABM Treaty hinders our government's ability to develop ways to protect our people from future terrorist or rogue state missile attacks," Bush said. "We know that the terrorists, and some of those who support them, seek the ability to deliver death and destruction to our doorstep via missile. And we must have the freedom and the flexibility to develop effective defenses against those attacks." 
148
149
The famed Strategic Triad of the Cold War (ICBMs, bombers, SLBMs) would be replaced by the "New Triad," consisting of (1) offensive strike systems, i.e., the old Strategic Triad; (2) active and passive defenses; and (3) a revitalized defense research and development and industrial infrastructure to "provide new capabilities in a timely fashion to meet emerging threats."
Three times in 2002, the world was reminded forcefully of the dangers inherent in the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
India and Pakistan, both possessing nuclear weapons, went to the brink of war.
The Israel-Palestine crisis intensified. Prime Minister Ariel Sharon warned that if attacked by Iraq with non-conventional weapons, Israel would "exercise its right to self defense." It would not restrain itself, as it did when attacked by Iraq during the 1991 Gulf War. 
150
151
152
Through the fall and winter of 2001-2002, a proposition gathered steam to oust Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq and end to his efforts to develop weapons of mass destruction. Most of the early advocates of such action were Republicans, but staunchly among them was Sen. Joseph I. Lieberman, the Democratic candidate for vice president in 2000. 
153
154
155
An October 1998 resolution, adopted overwhelmingly by both houses of Congress and signed into law by President Clinton, said: "It should be the policy of the United States to support efforts to remove the regime headed by Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq and to promote the emergence of a democratic government to replace that regime." 
156
In some cases, Bush said, the Cold War doctrines of deterrence and containment would still apply, but deterrence meant nothing to terror networks with no nation or citizens to defend, and containment was not possible when "unbalanced dictators with weapons of mass destruction can deliver those weapons on missiles or secretly provide them to terrorist allies."
"If we wait for threats to fully materialize, we will have waited too long," Bush said. "We must take the battle to the enemy, disrupt his plans, and confront the worst threats before they emerge." Some saw preemption as the equivalent of what the Japanese did at Pearl Harbor. Others saw it as more akin to what the Israeli Air Force did in 1981, when it attacked and destroyed the Iraqi nuclear reactor at Osirak. In retrospect, the consensus is that destroying the Iraqi reactor was a good thing, although there was a great deal of moral hand wringing about it at the time.
Preemption was not a policy intended solely for Iraq, although Iraq was clearly a candidate. Hawkish elements in the Administration and in the news media argued that the President had all of the authority he needed to strike Iraq, and that he should do so lest Saddam Hussein succeed in the near future in his determination to obtain nuclear weapons.
In the midst of this, Bush finally sent his first national security strategy to Congress in September 2002. 
157
In a signed preface, Bush said "The gravest danger our Nation faces lies at the crossroads of radicalism and technology," weapons of mass destruction in reckless and irresponsible hands.
The strategy repeated the doctrine of preemption: "Given the goals of rogue states and terrorists, the United States can no longer solely rely on a reactive posture as we have in the past. The inability to deter a potential attacker, the immediacy of today's threats, and the magnitude of potential harm that could be caused by our adversaries choice of weapons, do not permit that option. We cannot let our enemies strike first."
Preemption is also necessary because of the way adversaries regard weapons of mass destruction: "In the Cold War, weapons of mass destruction were considered weapons of last resort. ..."Today, our enemies see weapons of mass destruction as weapons of choice," and "their best means of overcoming the conventional superiority of the United States."
The strategy said that preemption would not be automatic. "The United States will not use force in all cases to 28 preempt emerging threats," but "cannot remain idle while dangers gather."
The great emphasis on multilateralism that characterized the Clinton strategy was gone. "While the United States will constantly strive to enlist the support of the international community, we will not hesitate to act alone, if necessary, to exercise our right of self defense by acting preemptively against such terrorists," the new strategy said.
It confirmed Rumsfeld's "Assure, Dissuade, Deter, Defeat" defense strategy and called specifically for "developing assets such as advanced remote sensing, long-range precision strike capabilities, and transformed maneuver and expeditionary forces." It cited the need "to defend the homeland, conduct information operations, ensure US access to distant theaters, and protect critical US infrastructure and assets in outer space."
Bush's strategy did not address peacekeeping or nation building missions, which had been recurring themes in the election campaign. In July 2002, the United States had voted in favor of a UN resolution extending the Stabilization Force in Bosnia for another year. 
158
Nevertheless, and under pressure to build a broader consensus, Bush promised to seek Congressional authorization before taking any military action against Iraq. 
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
159 Bradley Graham, "Pentagon Plans a Redirection in Afghanistan," 
Washington Post, Nov. 20, 2002. 160
162 Karen DeYoung and Jim VandeHei, "Bush Delivers Iraq Resolution," with text of the proposed resolution, Washington Post, Sept. 20.  2002.   163 Glenn Frankel, "Blair: Iraq Can Deploy Quickly," Washington Post, Sept. 25,  2002; Tony Blair, "Iraq's  Weapons of Mass Destruction: The Assessment of the British Government," Sept. 24, 2002.
164 "A Shallow Disagreement," Washington 
Post, Oct. 2, 2002. 165
Congress, Oct. 10, 2002. 166
Post, Oct. 11, 2002;
Glenn Kessler, "A Muscular First Step: Bush Gains Freedom, Negotiating Power," Washington Post, Oct. 11, 2002
. 167 United Nations Resolution 1441
, Nov. 8, 2002.
170
Soon after he came to the Pentagon, Rumsfeld wrote down his guidelines for committing US armed forces to combat, updating the paper from time to time. When the existence of his memorandum was discovered and disclosed in October 2002 by the New York Times, 
172
173
"Is the proposed action achievable? ... When the US commits force, the task should be achievable-at acceptable risk. ... To the extent possible, there should be clear, well-considered, and well understood goals."
"Is it worth it? ... If an engagement is worth doing, the US and coalition partners should recognize that lives will be put at risk. ... If public support is weak at the outset, the US leadership must be willing to invest the political capital to marshal support to sustain the effort for whatever period of time may be required."
"If there is to be action, act early. If it is worth doing, US leadership should make a judgment as to when diplomacy has failed and act forcefully, early, during the pre-crisis period, to try to alter the behavior of others and prevent the conflict. If that fails, be willing and prepared to act decisively to use whatever force is necessary to prevail, plus some. ... Authorities should not dumb down what is needed by promising not to do things (i.e., not to use ground forces, not to bomb below 15,000 feet, not to risk lives, not to permit collateral damage, etc.)."
Obviously, Rumsfeld had studied the Weinberger Doctrine of 1984 174 as well as the open-ended, poorly defined, often tentative employment of military force during the Clinton years.
Rumsfeld's guidelines steered a middle course, more flexible than Weinberger's list, but with a reasoned consideration, lacking in the limited engagements of the 1990s, of when and how the United States would commit forces to combat. 171 Mike Allen and Barton Gellman, "Preemptive Strikes Part of Strategy, Officials Say," Washington Post, 
Dec. 11, 2002.
173 Donald Rumsfeld, "Guidelines When Considering US Forces," March 2001.
174 Caspar Weinberger, "The Uses of Military Power," 1984. The Weinberger Doctrine said that troops would not be committed to combat unless a vital national interest was at stake, and until other options were exhausted. Political and military objectives should be clearly defined and achievable. If we went to war, it must be with sufficient force and a determination to win. There should be "some reasonable assurance" of support from the American public and Congress.
n presenting the 2003 defense budget to Congress, 
175
Win the war on terrorism.
Restore the vitality of the armed forces, worn thin by a decade of neglect.
Transform the forces to prepare for the future.
"Each of these tasks must be donenone can be put off," Rumsfeld said. "We have no choice but to fight and win today's war on terror; but we must also modernize our forces for the wars we may have to fight later in this decade; and because of the long-lead times in bringing new capabilities online, we must prepare now for the wars we may have to fight in the next decade -in 2010 and beyond."
The situation was difficult, even before the terrorist attacks. The underfunding of the 1990s had left the Pentagon in a deep hole. Then came the war on terror, with an additional expense of $30 million a day. Overnight, a big job became an enormous one.
In constant dollars (adjusted for inflation), the proposed defense budget for 2003 was $41.4 billion above the previous year's budget. It was billed, rightly, as the largest increase since the early 1980s. However, of the total increase, some $24 billion-almost 60 percent of it-was allocated to the war on terrorism, homeland security, increased air patrols over the continental United States, and related matters. The amount left over for new ventures, including transformation, was not that much.
Nevertheless, in a Feb. 6, 2002, editorial entitled "The Pentagon Spending Spree," The New York Times hit its predictable theme: "Congress must summon the courage to reshape and reduce this undisciplined budget."
The goal of providing more adequately for defense was further set back by the deterioration of the federal budget situation. In January 2001, the Congressional Budget Office had forecast a cumulative surplus of $5.6 trillion between 2002 through 2011. In just 12 months, the projected surplus fell to $1.6 trillion-a drop of $4 trillion. CBO said that 60 percent of the drop was attributable to legislation, particularly a tax cut and new federal For two reasons, the defense funding recovery does not go as far as these numbers might otherwise suggest:
(1) The huge, overdue bill for recapitalization and force modernization, carried forward from the 1990s, and (2) the additional cost since 2001 of the war on terrorism.
spending. The souring economy and other causes accounted for the rest of it. 
177
When CBO updated its report in August 2002, the surplus of $313 billion for the current year had turned into a deficit of $157 billion-a whopping $470 billion worse than predicted 18 months earlier. The report said that tax revenues were down 6.6 percent in 2002, the largest annual percentage drop since 1946. 
178
How much can the nation realistically afford to spend on defense? History provides some perspectives.
The percentage of the Gross Domestic Product collected as tax revenue has risen over the past 40 years, ranging from a low of 17.0 percent in 1965 to a high of 20.6 percent in 2000. 
179
However, defense spending as a percentage of GDP has decreased steadily. In 2000, it was at the lowest level since 1940. To put that into further perspective, the United States in 1940 ranked 14th in military power among the nations of the world, behind Germany, France, Britain, Russia, Italy, Japan, China,
Belgium, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. 
180
The deficit projected in the intermediate term is far from unusual. The budget has been in surplus for only five of the past 40 years. Except for 1968 and from 1998-2001, the budget was in deficit for that entire 40-year period, 
181
The armed forces are again hearing the old familiar admonition to "do more with less," to address their shortages in people and money with internal economies, tradeoffs, rearrangements, and program cancellations.
Before the terrorist attacks, the armed forces had told the House Armed Services Committee that they needed more active duty personnel to meet their current obligations The Army stated a need for 40,000 more people, the Navy, 14,000 more, and the Marine Corps, 5,000. The Air Force requirement was for 10,000 more. In a single year, the federal budget surplus turned into a deficit. The budget balance is expected to recover in the long run, but the net 10-year surplus is now projected to be $4 trillion less than forecast previously.
In January 2002, the Secretary of the Air Force repeated the requirement for 10,000 additional airmen. 
186
187
188
189
The issue appeared to be largely one of funding, since Rumsfeld was very well aware of the problem. In a memo obtained by Newsweek, Rumsfeld told his service secretaries that, "The entire force is facing the adverse results of the high-paced Optempo and Perstempo. ... We are past the point where the Department can, without an unbelievably compelling reason, make any additional commitments. ... It is time [to] begin to aggressively reduce our current commitments." 
190
191
192
193
194
195
Faced with the relentless deployments of the 1990s, the Air Force reorganized its operational forces into 10 force packages called "Air and Space Expeditionary Forces." (The concept behind the AEFs is the "Expeditionary Air and Space Force," or EAF.) "Our 10 AEFs represent buckets of capability," Secretary of the Air Force James G. Roche explained to Congress. "A nominal AEF has about 12,600 people supporting 90 multirole combat aircraft, 31 intratheater and air refueling aircraft, and 13 critical enablers. The enablers provide command, control, communications, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, as well as combat search and rescue. AEFs are composed of squadron and sub-squadron elements, which are on call for a period of three months in a 15-month cycle. If deployed, forces from AEFs make up Air and Space Expeditionary Task Forces." 
196
197
In 2002, a "Dynamic Commitment" war game in the Pentagon determined that the full wartime demand for air and space power under the "4-2-1" standard was double the requirement in Operation Allied Force.
The Air Force could not sustain that, any more than it could meet the standard of two simultaneous major theater wars. Even the "steady state" peacetime demand is cutting it close with the current force. The reason why becomes clearer with an understanding of deployment math as calculated by RAND. 
198
For example, the Air Force goal is a maximum of 120 days a year TDY (temporary duty away from home station) for active duty fighter aircrews and 50 days for the Guard and the Reserve. Out of the yearly TDY total, US-based aircrews typically spend 50 days on training, exercises, and other activities not related to contingency operations. Europe-based crews train more often at ranges away from home. That leaves USbased crews available for contingency operations 70 days a year, Europe-based crews, 60 days. On average, Guard and Reserve crews will be available about 10 days a year for participation in overseas contingencies.
In 1996, the baseline period in the RAND data, the Air Force had 20.2 fighter wing equivalents, about the same number it has today. That total included 8.16 active duty FWEs in the United States, 7.63 in the Guard and Reserve, and 2.25 based in Europe. The 2.17 FWEs in the Western Pacific were not available for contingency operations elsewhere.
Following the TDY maximum standard, the force structure could provide no more than 2.14 FWEs for contingency operations on a continuing basis. At the time (1996), the Joint Staff's
Baseline Engagement Force was 2.03 FWEs, almost totally utilized in support of ongoing overseas operations. RAND described the supply of fighter forces as on the "ragged edge" of adequacy.
Since 1996, the requirement has risen for Air Force people of all kinds, not just fighter crews. In fact, the burden has fallen heaviest on combat support specialties. In extreme cases, some airmen spent 179 days-one day short of six monthsdeployed. (The particular significance of 179 days is that this is the outer limit of TDY permitted by the Air Force personnel system. Anything more must be a PCS, or permanent change of station.)
The traditional means of rapid wartime expansion is to mobilize the Guard and Reserve. Like the active duty force, though, the reserves have been heavily tapped in peacetime.
In the Air Force, the Guard and Reserve routinely provide 65 percent of the tactical airlift, 35 percent of the strategic airlift, 60 percent of the aerial refueling, and 38 percent of the fighters, plus contributions in other areas, from bombers to space.
Until recently, however, the reserve components did not carry much of the contingency deployment workload. Through 1995, active duty units handled more than 90 percent of all peacetime operations sorties and flight hours. 
199
200
In Operation Allied Force in Yugoslavia in 1999, some 43 percent of the targets were "emerging" or "flex" targets, meaning the coordinates were not known to the aircrews when they launched. In Afghanistan, 83 percent of the total targets were emerging or flex targets. 
205
One of the major trends in the Air Force of the 21 st century will be the migration of numerous missions, especially intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, to space.
The next big step is space-based radar. Today's airborne radars are limited by altitude and geography. An aircraft flying at 30,000 feet can see for a few hundred miles, but everything further away than that is beyond the curvature of the earth. Terrain also blocks the view. In Kosovo, for example, the Serbs were able to hide SAMs in the mountains, where the slant-range angle of the airborne radars could not see them.
Space-based radar, looking down from orbit, will be able to see great sweeps of the globe at a glance. It will also be able to watch some areas, such as the interior of China, that are not visible to today's radars.
The space-based radar constellation would consist of 20 to 25 satellites, the first of them launched about 2010. Initially, the system would augment, and perhaps gradually replace, the ground moving target indicator (GMTI) data he Revolution in Military Affairs-and to great extent, transformation-is defined by airpower and space power. Airpower is America's unique and asymmetric strength. In the Gulf War, in Bosnia, in Serbia, and in Afghanistan, it was airpower that gave us the overwhelming advantage. The enemy couldn't match it and couldn't defend against it.
Air and space power brings several things to the joint force.
Air and space superiority, providing not only freedom from attack but also the freedom to attack.
Information superiority: electronic, visual, and radar intelligence from platforms in air and space and the disruption or destruction of the enemy's information networks.
Long-range precision strike, the central capability of global power projection, which is the cornerstone of the national defense strategy.
Rapid global mobility. Tankers and airlifters can build an "air bridge" to any point on earth.
In the 21 st century, the combination of these capabilities will enable the Air Force to find, fix, track, target, engage, and assess anything of significance on the face of the earth. 203
In the early days of aerial bombardment, the challenge was to hit fixed targets. In World War II, even with the fabled Norden bombsight, most bombs fell wide of the mark. Only about 20 percent of the bombs designated for "precision attack" hit within 1,000 feet of their aimpoint. 
204
The problem has also shifted away from fixed targets. The Air Force can 
became increasingly concerned about two kinds of assumptions-time and access-in US war plans. It was often assumed that the armed forces would have time to deploy to a crisis, as they did in the six-month Desert Shield prelude to the Gulf War, and that when they got to the war zone, they would have access to ports, bases, airfields, and coastal waters.
In actuality, a theater crisis is likely to move faster than Desert Shield did, and the access problem will probably be substantial. Part of the question is political access, whether nations will permit use of their territory, but the more difficult aspect is military.
A regional adversary is likely to have not only the contested area but also the land and sea approaches covered, hundreds of miles out, with theater ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, submarines, anti-ship mines, and weapons of mass destruction. The enemy will also be protected by a solid wall of overlapping air defenses. 
211
212
213
Long-range bombers, once the mainstay of the Air Force, steadily lost prominence in the last half of the 20 th century. "Between 1962 and 1975, the force mix in the Air Force changed from a ratio of just more than two fighters per bomber to nearly eight presently obtained from Joint STARS radar aircraft. Airborne targets are more difficult, and it may be 20 years or so until they can be tracked by space-based radar.
206
In general, our ability to gather data is greater than our ability to translate it into usable information. The Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. John P. Jumper, believes the targeting loop can be shortened substantially. He says that the "kill chain"-the time from when the target is spotted by a sensor until a shooter locks onto it-can be reduced to 10 minutes or less. 
207
He prescribes the "horizontal integration" of aircraft and spacecraft, enabling them to exchange data with each other, directly and immediately. A preview was seen in Afghanistan, where Predator reconnaissance drones provided a streaming live feed from their video cameras to AC-130 gunships.
Sometimes targeting can be swift and uncomplicated. In one such instance, Taliban troops and tanks had massed on a ridge in Afghanistan, within view of a US forward air controller on the ground, who scanned the position with a laser range finder and relayed the coordinates to the theater command center. A B-52, guided by a signal from space, struck with deadly precision. Time elapsed: 19 minutes. 
208
209
210
In the 1990s, defense planners fighters per bomber," said Gen. Richard E. Hawley, former commander of Air Combat Command. 
215
In 1999, the Air Force announced that it would rely on its existing fleet of bombers, with upgrades, until the year 2037. It said that a program to develop a replacement for those aircraft would begin "no later than 2013." Furthermore, the Air Force announced in 2001 that it would retire a third of the B-1B fleet and use the savings to upgrade the capability of the B-1s that remain.
For various reasons-stealth, precision, flexibility in projecting heavy bombardment power to any point on earth within hours-bombers have made a comeback.
The B-52 round-trip mission on the first night of the Gulf War, taking off from Barksdale AFB in Louisiana, striking in Iraq, and returning to land at Barksdale, was essentially a demonstration, not a continuing part of the war plan. Even so, B-52s, representing just four percent of the force, delivered 32 percent of the bomb tonnage in the Gulf War, more than twice as much as the entire carrier force combined. 
216
218
219
220
One possibility is the "FB-22," a larger, two-seat version of the fighter. It would have a larger wing to give it more range-two and a half times the range of the fighter-and carry 30 small diameter bombs internally (compared to eight carried by the fighter). The satellite-guided small Diameter Bomb, weighing 250 pounds, will be ready within the next five years.
Nothing enrages defense cutters and critics more than the fighter force. They depict fighters as small airplanes that engage in dogfights with each other but which are not very important to the outcome of battle.
It is true that the first mission of the fighters is air superiority and suppression of enemy air defenses, and that is critical. Unless the fighter force clears the skies of advanced enemy fighters and knock out the air defense networks, the rest of the joint attack force-including the bombers and the ground forces-will not survive. Fighters must also perform escort for slower, more vulnerable surveillance, reconnaissance, and transport aircraft.
Most of the fighter force has an attack or close air support mission as well. When armed with the smalldiameter bomb, the F/A-22 will be able to strike eight separate targets on a single sortie, which is better than the best bombers could do until recently.
The workhorses of the present fighter fleet, the F-15s and F-16s, are aging, wearing out, and falling behind the threat, especially "double digit" SAMs. In regional conflicts thus far, US aircraft have faced only single-digit SAMs, but in the near future, nations that now field SA-2s, -3s, -5s, and -6s will replace them with SA-10s, -11s, -12s, and -20s. Not even the F-15 can operate against the most advanced SAMs.
The plan is to replace the F-15s and the F-117s with the F/A-22, and to replace the F-16s and A-10s with the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter and the Unmanned Air Combat Vehicle, or UCAV.
The F/A-22 will be able to thread the defenses because of its combination of fourth generation stealth, speed, operating altitude, and advanced avionics. It will penetrate and survive in airspace deadly to any other aircraft.
Compared to F/A-22, the F-35 will not be as stealthy or as fast, and it will not fly as high. However, it will be very effective once the worst of the defenses are suppressed. The F-35 will be available in larger numbers than the F/ A-22, and it will be expected to fly the bulk of the attack missions if a conflict persists.
The size of the In the popular image, fighters are inextricably linked with the air superiority mission. In actuality, more than half of the fighter fleet has other assignments as well, including ground attack and suppression of enemy air defenses.
Review cut it again, to 442 (438 production and four pre-production aircraft). The Quadrennial Defense Review in 1997 cut it further, to 341 (339 production, two pre-production) aircraft. 
223
For the most part, the reductions have been budget-driven. How many F/A-22s does the Air Force really need? Replacing the F-15s and F-117s on a basis of one-for-one is neither necessary or feasible.
In recent years, the Air Force has deployed an average of 1.5 squadrons of F-15Cs and one squadron of F-15Es and F-117s per Air and Space Expeditionary Force-or 2.5 squadrons of aircraft per AEF. The F/A-22 is more capable than these fighters, though, so fewer are needed. The adjusted requirement, according to one analysis, would be two squadrons per AEF, meaning a total buy of more than 750 aircraft. 
224
Unmanned aerial vehicles, or UAVs, have begun to make their mark. In 2001, Global Hawk flew nonstop, unpiloted, unrefueled, and navigating on its own, from California to a precision landing in Adelaide, Australia. The propeller-driven Predator has flown surveillance missions in Iraq, Kosovo, and Afghanistan. More recently, Predator made headlines by chasing down and blowing away six al Qaeda terrorists traveling in a car in Yemen. 
226
The basic concept for the UCAV, however, has changed rapidly. At first, the Air Force envisioned it as a comparatively small craft, to be shipped in containers and stored in forward locations, where it could be unpacked and assembled quickly when the need for it arose.
The UCAV is now seen as an unmanned bomber, larger, with more range, capable of aerial refueling, and deploying from US bases to strike targets anywhere in the world. It would be able to carry a dozen 250-pound small-diameter bombs, the same load as the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter.
The UCAV will have a human supervising operator, who must give consent before the aircraft can release its bombs, but the UCAV will do its own flying, from takeoff to landing. The Air Force will delay the retirement of some of the old C-141s and is conducting a test to determine whether it will upgrade and re-engine more of the C-5s than it had planned to keep, but meeting the level of airlift specified by the Mobility Requirements study depends on the newest airlifter, the C-17.
Originally the Air Force planned to buy 210 C-17s. Then the number was reduced to 120, reduced again to 40, increased to 80, then to 120, and is probably headed for 222. That program turbulence added about $18 billion to the cost of the program.
A fleet of 180 C-17s will cover the 54.5 MTM/D with four airplanes to spare-if upgrade efforts can improve the reliability of the C-5s. 
231
The situation with air refueling aircraft is even more acute. Most of the tankers are KC-135s, military variants of the Boeing 707. They are old, hard used, and a maintenance problem.
As of April 2002, 24 percent of the KC-135 fleet was in depot maintenance. 232 Furthermore, when these airplanes get to the depot, they are in such bad shape that they need a considerable amount of work. Chief of Staff Jumper told Congress in 2002 that it took more than 300 days, on average, to take KC-135s apart to fix the corrosion and the other problems. 
233
For the past two years, the Air Force has been embroiled in a controversy with Congress over whether it should buy tankers outright or lease them. The Pentagon is also getting some economizing pressures from within the Administration. The White House Office of Management and Budget suggested that money could be saved by reengining the oldest tankers-the KC-135Es, which have already been reengined once. 234
In November 1996, the Air Force brought forth, with considerable fanfare, a new vision statement. It said that "we are now transitioning from an air force into an air and space force on an evolutionary path toward a space and air force." 
235
Not everyone saw it that way. In 1998, for example, Sen. Bob Smith of New Hampshire, a fiery advocate of space power, said that the Air Force had not stepped up to the mission and that Congress might establish the space force as a separate service. He said that for the Air Force to embrace space power it must "shed big chunks of today's Air Force to pay for tomorrow's" space force. 
236
(It should be noted that although all of the services depend critically on support from space, the Air Force has long carried almost the full load in the military space program, providing about 90 percent of the people, systems, and money. Its relative share of the defense budget has never been adjusted to reflect that.)
The Air Force revised its vision statement in 2000, declaring itself to be "an integrated aerospace force" whose "domain stretches from the earth's surface to the outer reaches of space in a seamless operational medium." 
237
238
239
240
"We also realize," said Secretary of the Air Force James G. Roche in September 2002, "that soon will come a time when space systems will grow beyond their traditional role as force enhancers and then will play a more active role in preventing, fighting, and winning wars." 241 more extensive and longer lasting than anyone had imagined.
The missions were loosely defined and open-ended, and they were covered by smaller, underfunded forces, operating mostly from garrison bases in the United States. When these forces deployed, they had to take their infrastructure along with them, because most of the overseas bases were gone.
Peacekeeping operations, including no-fly zones in the former Yugoslavia and over northern and southern Iraq, began to look more and more like permanent missions.
Standards were relaxed for committing US forces to combat, blurring the borderline between peace and war. The armed forces were sent into combat on missions that were not vitally important to the nation, and to which the nation was not fully committed.
Far from experiencing a reduction in employment, the armed forces found themselves four times busier than before-and a third smaller. The Shortfall Persists. The "Decade of Neglect" left a problem so big that even the pro-defense Bush Administration has not stepped up to it. It will take years and a great deal of money to repair the damage.
In the 1990s, the use of the armed forces increased while their numbers and budgets fell. Aging equipment wore out and was not replaced. Force modernization programs were curtailed and postponed. Facilities and infrastructure crumbled, and readiness deteriorated.
The Bush Administration came to office promising that "help is on the way." There has been some help, but not enough. Bush's budget proposals were short of actual need before the war on terrorism, which introduced massive new requirements.
Resources in the Clinton years were not sufficient for an "Engagement and Enlargement" strategy and the "Two-MTW" force-sizing standard. In the Bush Administration, requirements increased-especially for air and space n theory, the national defense program is the product of a process that begins with national security policy, which identifies the nation's interests, concerns, aspirations, and judgments. National security policy is a product of the White House, and foreign policy and defense policy are derived from it.
The formal expression of defense policy is the national defense strategy, which supposedly governs Pentagon plans, programs, and budget proposals. The defense program is then shaped and sized by Congress and the Administration in the political arena.
The process can be evaluated in two ways: Does it meet the actual needs of national security? And are the elements of the process-policy, strategy, requirements, and forces-in reasonable balance so the process can be made to work?
The post-Cold War period gets a low score on both counts. The process outlined above could better serve as a description of what did not happen.
In the 1990s, national security policy was ambitious, but military power was often used half-heartedly and for objectives that were not always clear. The Administration was unwilling to support a defense program adequate to carry out the national security policy. Arbitrary budget cuts left the armed forces with a strategy they were unable to execute. Strategy and requirements were in chronic imbalance with forces and resources.
Assumptions vs. Reality. Defense cuts began in a rush of optimism as the Cold War was ending. The United States pulled back from overseas bases and cut the armed forces sharply. Unfortunately, the underlying expectations were not borne out in the actual experience of the 1990s.
The Base Force reductions, structures, and budgets proposed by Cheney and Powell might have worked, but the additional cuts piled on by Clinton and Aspin wiped out the possibility.
In the 1990s, the armed forces deployed overseas more frequently than expected, and the deployments were A Force for the Mission Some conclusions from the experience of 1989-2002 and from analysis of the present situation I forces-with the adoption of the "Assure, Dissuade, Deter, Defeat" strategy and the "4-2-1" force sizing standard.
Thus, the imbalance between requirements and resources continues. The Bush Administration has covered part of the gap with budget increases, but hopes, unrealistically, to fill the rest of it through internal economies and realignments, privatization, and reduction of missions.
The defense budget has been cut too much. So has force structure. There is no easy way out of this.
Bush's national security strategy is sound. The ultimate test will be whether he can fund it. There is little margin for playing off the needs of today against the needs of tomorrow. We must attend to them both.
The Future Requires Investment. The military imperatives of the war on terrorism are in addition to, not instead of, requirements identified earlier. In the months immediately following 9/11, the popular assumption was that future military actions would be of the Afghanistan variety, against primitive adversaries who might not have borders or regular forces. Within the year, the prospect loomed of a major theater conflict in Iraq.
In Afghanistan, exceptional circumstances allowed 50-year-old bombers and 30-year-old fighters to operate freely, but anyone who believes they can dominate the skies of the future is seriously deceived.
The military successes of recent years were made possible by R&D and weapon system investments in the 1970s and 1980s. Those investments had a powerful effect. They secured world military leadership for the United States despite declining defense budgets and force structure.
The nation did not invest in force modernization in the 1990s. We cannot sustain our technological advantage forever on yesterday's investments. Force modernization is critical, and it is overdue. We have already skipped a decade. Superpower Responsibilities. The critics like to point out that the US defense budget is bigger than the combined military spending of several other nations. That is true, but it is less relevant than it sounds.
When trouble breaks loose in the world, nobody looks to those other 44 nations. They look to the United States. When NATO wanted to stop Serb aggression in Yugoslavia, US armed forces took the lead, although any number of Alliance members were closer to the scene. We are the world's only superpower, with responsibilities we cannot evade.
The world may sometimes resent the power of the United States, but it is well served by it. What other nation would the world prefer to see in the leadership role? If US military capabilities were ever scaled back to the world average, there would be panic in many a foreign capital.
Affordability. How much can we afford to spend on defense? The cost of the current program works out to 3.3 percent of the Gross Domestic Product and 17.3 percent of all federal outlays. This is less than half the defense percentages of GDP and federal outlays in the 1960s, and appreciably less than was allocated as recently as the middle 1990s. The federal government spends as much or more than it ever did. It just spends less of it on defense. Thus, the question is about our spending priorities, not about what we can afford.
The nation can and should decide that at least four percent of GDP will be available to support national defense.
The Revolution in Military Affairs. We are witnessing a major change in warfare, brought on by primarily by information technology and long-range precision strike capability. This Revolution in Military Affairs offers an alternative to the attrition model of war, with the clash of force on force and heavy casualties on both sides.
Incredibly, there is great resistance to the idea of a Revolution in Military Affairs and to related concepts, such as effects-based operations. It is not a coincidence that the resistance is greatest among those with a vested interest in traditional forms of warfare.
Contrary to often-heard accusations, there is no claim that airpower can win wars by itself. However, the relative burden in warfare has shifted. Airpower carries more of the load than it once did. It is no longer an automatic assumption that the land battle will be the focal point. Close integration of air and space power with the land and sea forces yields the strongest combat capability for the nation.
The nation needs a balance of land, sea, and air forces. Single-threaded strategies are risky and inflexible. However, it is foolish to disparage airpower, which has been our single best capability in recent conflicts, and we should carefully examine the possible motives of those who do so.
It is time to revisit the conclusion of Joint Vision 2010-suppressed by interservice politics in Joint Vision 2020-that precision targeting and long range systems have made it increasingly possible to achieve the effects of mass without the actual massing of forces within range of the enemy's guns. Migration to Space. One of the strong trends of the 21st century will be a migration of military missions to space, beginning with information, surveillance, and reconnaissance functions. Space systems are already in extensive use to support and enhance military operations on earth. In time, other missions will be conducted from orbit as well.
The command of space will become as important as command of the air is today. It will be critical to preserve our own space access and capabilities while denying similar access and capabilities to the enemy.
When our national interests in space are challenged-and they will be-the nation will expect the armed forces to be ready to defend them. We should be working now on the means to ensure control of space in the years ahead.
Mission No. 1. Defense strategy identifies homeland security as Mission No.1. However, the main military contribution to homeland security is not going to take place in this country. It is not possible to defend everything, everywhere, all of the time.
We want to move the war to the enemy's homeland, to his training camps and sanctuaries. To the extent possible, we want to fight over there, not over here. In the war on terror, as in other military operations, the strategy relies fundamentally on long-range precision strike, global situational awareness, and mobility. A large share of the responsibility for that falls to airpower.
There Is No Substitute for Air and Space Power. The United States is the world's preeminent military power mainly because of its superiority in air and space. Our land forces are better than the armies of other nations, but that is not the big difference between our position and theirs.
What sets the United States apart is global reach, global awareness, and global power derived from our capabilities in air and space. These are the forces the nation will look to first for global power projection and for rapid response in times of crisis abroad.
Air and space are also the most promising venues for transformation. More transformation is likely to take place there than anywhere else.
There is no substitute for air and space power.
77
David Halberstram.  War in a Time of Peace: Bush, Clinton, and the Generals.Scribner,  2001, p 42.   
Les Aspin, Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs (JINSA),Sept 21, 1992.   
With the active duty force 34 percent below the 1990 level, the Air Force puts greater reliance on the Guard and Reserve, but these forces have taken reductions as well. There are also problems with the civilian force, which was cut deeply.
Gen. James P. McCarthy, Chairman, Transformation study panel, Pentagon news briefing, June 12, 2001.
Letter to the editor,Washington Post Nov. 7,  1994.    
"Desert Victory: The US Army in the Gulf," Institute for Land Warfare, Association of the US Army, February 2001.
Rebecca Grant, "Wesley Clark's War," Air Force Magazine, September 2001.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark,  Waging Modern War, p. 425.    
"Hit the Ground," NewRepublic, Nov. 19, 2001.    
William Kristol, "The Wrong Strategy," WashingtonPost, Oct. 30, 2001.    
Fareed Zakaria, "Face the Facts: Bombing Works,"Newsweek, Dec. 3, 2001.   
JCS, "Joint Vision 2010," July 1996; "Joint Vision 2020," June 2000.
  131  The provision for "regime change" attracted little attention at the time. However, within the year, it would be of intense interest.132 Donald Rumsfeld, "Transforming the Military," Foreign Affairs, May/June 2002.
Rebecca Grant, "The Afghan Air War," Air Force Association, September 2002.
Rebecca Grant, "The Airpower of Anaconda," Air Force Magazine, September 2002.
Office of Homeland Security, "National Strategy for Homeland Security," July 16, 2002.
"Fact Sheet: News About the War Against Terror," White
House, Nov. 16, 2002.
Bush, Radio Address, Nov.  16, 2002.    
Bush, Remarks on National  Missile Defense, Dec. 13,  2001.    
Nuclear Posture Review, submitted to Congress Dec. 31, 2001, released Jan. 9, 2002; Robert S. Dudney and Peter Grier, "Bush's Nuclear Blueprint," Air Force Magazine, March 2002; Rumsfeld, Annual Report, 2002.
Nina Gilbert, "Sharon:  Israel Will Respond If  Attacked By Iraq," Jerusalem  Post, Oct. 29, 2002.    
Peter Slevin and Karen  DeYoung, "N. Korea Reveals  Nuclear Program,"  Washington Post, Oct. 17,  2002.   
John McCain, "No Time to  Sleep," Washington Post, Oct.  24, 2002.    
Steve Mufson, "10  Leading Lawmakers Urge Targeting of Iraq," WashingtonPost, Dec. 6,  2001.    
George W. Bush, State of the Union Address, Jan. 29, 2002.
Todd S. Purdum, "US Weighs Tackling Iraq On Its Own, Powell Says," New York Times,
Feb. 7, 2002.
Iraq Liberation Act of 1998,  Public Law 105-338, Oct. 31,  1998.    
George W. Bush, "The National Security Strategy of the United States of America,"Sept. 19, 2002.   
George W. Bush, Remarks onUN Resolution," Nov. 8,  2002.    
Donald Rumsfeld, briefing  at Foreign Press Center, Nov.  26, 2002.   
Donald Rumsfeld, media availability at the Air Force Academy, May 29, 2002.
Tamar Mehuron, "Leaning Hard on the Guard and Reserve," Air Force Magazine, October 2002.
John Tirpak, "The Space Based Radar Plan," Air Force Magazine, January 2002.
John Correll, "From   Sensor to Shooter," Air Force Magazine, February 2002.
Lt. Gen. Charles Wald, USAF Deputy Chief of Staff for Air & Space Operations, interview with John Tirpak, Air Force Magazine, Dec. 10, 2001.
Rebecca Grant, The B-2 Goes to War, Iris, 2001.
Seymour M. Hersh, "King's Ransom: How Vulnerable Are the Saudi Royals?" The New Yorker,
Oct. 22, 2001.
"Rethinking US Combat Airpower Modernization," Hicks & Associates, April 2000.
Gen. Charles A. Horner, House National Security Procurement Subcommittee, Sept. 12, 1996.
John Correll, "Breakthrough Force," Air ForceMagazine, April 2001.   
The 2001 Bomber Road Map projected a fleet of 96 mission ready bombers, out of a service total of 157, through the middle 2020s. Mission ready aircraft are kept in constant readiness for combat, with the rest of the fleet in maintenance, testing, or training. ANG = Air National Guard; AFRC = Air Force Reserve Command.
The Air Force would like to have two combat-coded squadrons-a squadron is 24 aircraft-of F/A-22s for each of its 10 AEFs. That would require a total buy of more than 750 airplanes. USAF says the "bare bones" requirement is one squadron per AEF and a total buy of 382.
John Tirpak, "A Clamor for Airlift," Air Force Magazine, December 2000.
Gen. Charles T. Robertson, US Transportation Command,
," Washington Post-1998 (
In Current $ Billions
FYDP $(FWE = Fighter Wing Equivalent
MRC National Guard Air Force Reserve Command
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or