# ID: f65d7a43add348ee9e4f4e82b832d230
# Title: Beyond Utility Targeting: Toward Axiological Air Operations
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2000.0
# Fulltext:
A hot topic in aerospace discussions today is targeting-what, where, how, and when to do it in order to achieve the desired effects. This piece argues that today the dominant mechanism and measurement for targeting is industrial-age utility and that in the future an equally important method should be targeting based on adversary leaders' values, depriving or holding at risk their ability to ful fill human needs.
The outcome of the air war was the destruction of the Kosovo we wanted to safeguard, renewed political tensions between the U.S. and Russia and an openended deployment of peacekeepers.
The single most important lesson of the conflict is that there is no cheap, easy way to prevent genocide or mass killing. Airpower alone will not generally de termine what transpires on the ground. Only when paired with ground forcesand only if used decisively-can airpower be expected to work.
-Ivo H. Daalder and Michael E. O'Hanlon
The targeting process in Operation Allied Force was incoherent and inept.
--Dr. Earl H. Tilford
In an extraordinary paradox, a war based on the notion of discriminate force using dazzling information-age technology-B-2 bombers, cruise missiles, and joint direct-attack munitions-sacrificed the Albanian Kosovars to indiscrimi nate death at the hands of Serb forces using methods we associate with the Dark Ages. In humanitarian terms, the air war was an unmitigated disaster, and a cautionary warning for the West in employing force in future intra-state con flicts. This humanitarian failure will not prevent Western air force theorists from arguing that the war was a decisive victory for air power.
-Dr. Michael Evans If there's somebody in this town [Washington, D.C.] who can speak to lessons learned from Kosovo, I'd like to meet him. There are lessons from Kosovo, but nobody's learned them, as far as I'm concerned.
-Lt Gen Michael C. Short, USAF, Retired "He's finished!" --Placards at postelection rallies in Belgrade A ND SO IT goes, continuing even with Slobodan Milosevic unseated. Airpower advocates argue, as they must, that Kosovo was an air war and that airpower "won" this war in Kosovo. 
1
2
Our entry point is targeting. We probably take a rather broader view of targeting than others. To us, targeting is the activity that transforms a theory of conflict or conflict ter mination into behaviors-diplomacy, coalitionbuilding, propaganda, engagements, strikes, electronic combat, cyberwarfare, and supporting activities-that intend to affect the targeted objects and thereby intend to prove the theory's hypotheses. "Targets" in this view are the objects that our behaviors aim to affect. 
3
4
5
6
We call our concept "axiological aerospace operations," and we assert the need to move airpower "toward" that capability. Axiology is a fancy word, the combination of the Greek axios meaning "worthy" or "of like value" and logos meaning "reason" or "theory." Axiology is the study of values--the philosophical in vestigation into the nature, criteria, and meta physical status of value. We contrast value and values to "utility." In decision theory, as in our conception, "utility" and "value" are different, and each is quite complex. 
7
It would be more appropriate to assert that val ues are "unreal qualities," although not ideal, inasmuch, as we have seen, they do not add re ality or substance to objects, but only value. Re gardless of the designation, what is certain is that values are not things nor elements of things, but properties, qualities, sui generis, which certain objects called "goods" possess. . . . Because they are qualities, values are parasitic beings which cannot live without being supported by real objects, and lead a fragile exis tence, at least while they are adjectives related to "goods." 8 Current operational theories such as "full spectrum dominance," "rapid halt," "rapid dominance," and "rapid decisive operations" are the manifestation of theories of conflict resolution. 9 They ascribe value to speed, to the ability to exercise control across a spec trum of activities, and to the ability to force a decision. But unless there is a change in the logic of targeting, none of these theories is likely to be proven in future conflicts. Why?
In second-wave or industrial-age warfare, the way we made war was the way we made wealth. 
10
11
12
13
Thus, war in the age of mass, the industrial age or second wave, tended to be state-versusstate total war. By "total" we mean, for example, that airpower killed more civilians in Germany than all American and British (in cluding Commonwealth) wartime casualties, and in "Japan more people were killed in six months of heavy aerial bombardment than in the whole United States war effort." 
14
15
16
The epitome of utility targeting theory probably is found in the influential thinking of John Warden. 
17
1
18
19
The thing that differentiates the "system" that is a belligerent nation or militarily ag gressive group is that these are human orga nizations. The philosopher-historians Will and Ariel Durant go so far as to say that
The enemy is a system that must be rendered dysfunctional or paralyzed.
"Enemies, whether they be states, criminal organizations, or individ uals, all do the same thing; they almost always act or don't act based on some kind of cost-benefit ratio. The enemy may not as sess a situation the way we do, and we may disagree with his as sessment, but assessments are part and parcel of every decision. From an airpower standpoint, it is our job to determine what price (positive or negative) it will take to induce an enemy to accept our conditions."  we are; they write our natures in bolder type, and do our good and evil on an elephantine scale. We are acquisitive, greedy, and pugna cious because our blood remembers millenni ums through which our forebears had to chase and fight and kill in order to survive and had to eat to their gastric capacity for fear they should not soon capture another feast. War is a na tion's way of eating. 
20
21
22
2
In the great wars of the twentieth century, Western nations fought against what they be-  This means that in the future, and like lier than not, democratic regimes will be pit ted against totalitarian regimes or leaders in "rogue states." 
23
Through Maslow's lens, popular support may reside at the safety and security level of leaders' needs. Safe and secure, the leader can then move up in the hierarchy to satisfy the need for belonging and social activity, or affiliation, where he can then expand his small circle of friends and feel even more se cure. If needs at this level are met, the need for satisfying the next higher level-esteem and status-becomes a powerful motivator. Finally, the leader will strive to satisfy the need for self-realization. All the while, leaders will act to avoid danger to their "selfish genes" to get food and to have the capacity to repro duce (fig. 
3
24
The "enemy" is a person or an organization of people that must be compelled to change their mind.
Targeting is about affecting the will of leaders.  It then becomes our job to deny the ability to meet those needs, to attack what leaders value, either electronically or by use of kinetic force. Moreover, we believe that this must be done quickly and repeatedly to rapidly force the behavior shift that signifies that a leader has had a change of mind. 
25
26
4
27
The elegance of utility targeting is that it is simple to understand and simple to execute. In fact, its only shortcoming as a theory or in practice may be that it does not always work against all adversaries. 28 Destroying stuff, even to the point of significantly diminishing the utility of a war-fighting system, does not necessarily stop belligerence. The leaders or the people may still misbehave. Value target ing, on the other hand, while more difficult to comprehend and riskier to execute, may increase the likelihood of conflict resolution. 
29
The enemy is an organization of people that must be compelled to change their mind.
Targeting is about affecting the will.  what Watzlawick, Weakland, and Fisch call "a second-order change" in the enemy's leaders. 
30
31
The aim of axiological aerospace opera tions is to use air, space, and information power to force a behavior shift in belligerent leadership in the quickest and most econom ical ways possible. Why aerospace forces and why airpower? Because airpower-air, space, and information power-has the reach and potentially has the technological tools to do this remotely, to conduct expeditions against adversary leaders from afar. 
32
5
Let us begin that maturation by going far afield and then returning to the center. Let us consider states and their leaders. This is far afield, we believe, because these are the least likely threat in the future. Even so, most democratic nations forbid the assassination of heads of state. They do not seem to forbid the killing of the head of a subnational "group" or an enemy head of state when that head of state is also the commander in chief of the enemy armed forces in wartime. Moreover, the statutes that forbid assassination of a head of state do not seem to prohibit other forms of hurt. For example, in wartime there is no prohibition against causing an enemy head of state to be hungry, or anxious, or depressed. Assassination is inflicting mortal injury. Would not some lesser form of injury, such as maiming, be allowed? That is a thought at the edge of the envelope. Closer to the center, but still a second-order change in the way we think about targeting, are the target sets of value targeting.
In addition to engaging (but not necessar ily destroying) the kinds of targets depicted in the illustrations to achieve these kinds of ef fects in state-to-state warfare, Col Charles J. Dunlap Jr., USAF, theoretically adds "resorts, along with other entertainment, sports, and recreational facilities," and "factories, plants, stores, and shops that produce, sell, or dis tribute luxury products or, indeed, anything not absolutely indispensable to noncombatant survival" along with "their associated lo gistics systems." 
33
No targeting schema is without risks. Some are obvious, some more subtle. The predomi nant risk associated with utility targeting is that enemy leaders may not use or value their stuff in the same way we use or value our stuff. We might find ourselves (and usually do) "mirror-imaging" the adversary and puzzled when our notions of causality are frustrated by effects not achieved. Surely we have learned to live with this risk; even today "in telligence" is dominated by "counting" and not by "measuring effects." The more subtle and more critical risk is that we remain mentally and militarily unprepared for value attacks against us. For example, how would we cope with a deliberate attack on Disney World? Worse, how would we cope with a tele vised mass suicide of hundreds of people killing themselves rather than dying at the hands of allied airpower? 34 How would we cope with a totalitarian leader who surrounds himself or herself with hundreds of women and children wherever the leader felt at risk? Our values-our need for esteem or affilia tion-would be held at risk in such a case.
The dangers of value targeting are more numerous. First, we have an immature understanding of what others, including other cul tures, value. Second, even if we understand what the main leader values, we may not un derstand what an adversary successor values. Third, there are leaders at every level and in many categories. Fourth, we may encounter the leader-sociopath, bereft of values, quite willing to live underground in hiding and insensitive to the absence of human comforts upon which others depend. Finally, we may find ourselves transformed by the process of understanding and attacking the lives and minds of adversary leaders. In hunting the so ciopath, we may become pathological.
Some dangers can be mitigated, and some cannot. To try to mitigate these dangers, we must begin the process of trying to better un derstand national and group leaders everywhere, but especially in those states, among those groups, and in those geographical areas where success eluded us in the past: the Balkans, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, and some places in Africa. Next we must capitalize on the attributes of the third-wave information age and the global connectivity that charac terizes it. Just as there is a movement toward "transparency" in the physical realm, there is a corresponding move toward greater visibil ity and greater intelligibility in the psycholog ical realm.
Every move or action in the physical world, either directly or through proxies, is an indi cation of "revealed preference," or value. One's investment portfolio, for example, re veals one's preferences for risk, the value one places on risk and return. One's choices of books, or automobiles, or friends telegraph one's values. The meals one eats, the restau rant one frequents, and the places one avoids all illuminate value and values. Concerns re garding privacy on the Web are motivated by awareness of the revelations each of us makes through our actions. If there are 10 worri some countries and each has 50 worrisome leaders with two potential successors each, that is a mere one thousand value-analysis problems to begin solving. A more difficult problem to solve is the problem of the leadersociopath. These leaders may just have to perish. 
35
It is not an intractable problem to count tanks and troops and missiles and, given po litical will, courage, and technology, it is pos sible to strike them, as allied airmen demon strated. But one must be prepared for the real likelihood that the actual utility of these target-objects of utility targeting may diminish in the future and that there may be substitutes for some capabilities. 
36
37
6
Utility Targeting intends to deny functions necessary to protect what leaders value.
Value, or Human-Needs Deprivation Utility, or Functional Denial
Value Targeting intends to deprive humans of higher-order needs and threaten lower-order ones.
Desired Effects are the enemy's cessation of fighting, locally or at large.
The effects we desire from targeting are a cessation of fighting, either locally or totally. Utility targeting engages physical objects, presuming them to be of value to the adver sary. Value targeting engages the minds and needs of leaders at all levels, knowing that they, and not their war-fighting stuff, are the real source of the conflict and its prolonga tion and the essential ingredient to its resolu tion. If we begin by utility targeting to deny functionality, we must do this with an eye toward threatening the adversary's ability to use "stuff" to meet some higher-order need. Thus, we actually do value targeting if we focus on the desired effect and if that effect is tightly coupled to the larger effect of changing the minds of enemy leaders. Today we work the problem from the bottom up: kill tanks to prevent the conquest of territory. We need to work the problem, as Warden has long ar gued, from the top down. In this case we would argue that we ought to "target" needs that lead to the acquisition or production of tanks. If we fail to prevent the acquisition or production of tanks, then we target the needs that might be satisfied by summoning their use in aggression. We believe we need to move forward with implementing the capa bility to do robust value targeting, to conduct axiological aerospace operations.
Imagine an axiological tasking order (AxTO) developed hand in glove with the more conventional air tasking order (ATO). Our ability to imagine is frustrated by aware ness that the work of developing the staff of regional or area experts, psychologists, finan cial services consultants, media experts, com munications specialists, physician-psychiatrists, and others needed to develop the target sets of value targeting probably are chores so dif ferent, so idiosyncratic when compared to fleshing out the utility targeting staff, that they are chores likely to remain undone, at least for awhile. The "interagency process" seems ill equipped to create a Bletchley Park, 38 dedicated not to enemy code-breaking but to enemy leader-breaking. Thus, the first steps are transitional steps. There are at least three of these transitional steps.
First, reexamine the effects of utility target ing in Desert Storm and in Operation Allied Force and compare its effects to the effects of any targeting done to engage the unconven tional targets that the main leaders held dear. 
39
Second, use the vehicle of war games to ex ercise different notions and variants of a cell dedicated to value targeting. Essential to these exercises is exploring ways the value tar geteers might or should interact with the util ity targeting staff. Analyze the target sets and engagement alternatives that the value target ing cell, alone and acting in concert with the utility targeting cell, developed and advanced in games. Upon identifying affinities and cat egories or classes of actions, vet and establish requirements for developing the engagement 5. If this were the case, then clearly some theories worked better than others in practice. See "Chinese Embassy Bombing: A Wide Net of Blame," New York Times, 17 April 2000, 1:
As with most attacks during the war, especially the strikes in Belgrade, planning and execution were done by Americans. In raids involving the stealthy B-2's and F-117 fighters, many details about the attacks were classified as "U.S. only," mainly for fear of revealing secrets about those aircrafts. After the war, some allies questioned the practice. The French Ministry of Defense's report on the war last November complained of military operations "conducted by the United States outside the strict NATO framework and procedures."
A senior NATO diplomat said the United States identified 75 to 80 targets in this way. The Chinese Embassy was one of them.
6. For a theory of conflict termination applied to states and consistent with these views, see Joseph A. Engelbrecht Jr., "War systems necessary to prosecute value attacks in the future.
Finally, look to the potentially misbehaving states and groups of the world to provide a fertile ground for actual value-targeting analy sis. Then, begin the analysis. Understanding leaders in states will be relatively easier than understanding what substate and nonstate group leaders value and how they go about meeting their needs. After the analysis, the rest will follow apace. The "rest" is the happy future day when aerospace axiological opera tions and value-targeting contribute all that they can to deterring and resolving conflict. s Termination: Why Does a State Decide to Stop Fighting?" (PhD diss., Columbia University, 1992).
7. Craig W. Kirkwood, Strategic Decision Making: Multiobjective Decision Analysis with Spreadsheets (Boston: Duxbury Press, 1997).
In the decision analysis discipline, utility is a function of risk pref erence for the levels of a measurable attribute. Decision makers for a decision have one of three risk preferences: they are risk neutral, risk seeking, or risk averse regarding the decision to be made. The preferences for levels of a measurable attribute (tanks, CEP, casualties, or something similar) are assessed using lotteries (i.e., questions involving the uncertainties or probabili ties). For example, how many tanks destroyed for certain are equivalent to a 50-50 chance of destroying one hundred or zero tanks? If the number is expected value (50), the decision maker is risk neutral. If the number is less than the expected value, the decision maker is risk averse. If the number is greater than the ex pected value, the decision maker is risk seeking. Value, on the other hand, measures the returns to scale of each increment of an attribute. Value assumes certainty. If the attribute has constant returns to scale, the value function is linear. If the attribute has diminishing returns to scale, the value function is concave. If the attribute has increasing returns to scale, the value function is convex.
8. Risieri Frondizi, What Is Value? trans. Solomon Lipp (LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court, 1963), 6-7. 9. "DOD Leaders to Approve Revised Long-Term Vision," Jane's Defence Weekly, 10 May 2000.
For example, Joint Vision 2020 will re-emphasise the require ment for "full spectrum dominance," ranging from major force-on-force engagements to small-scale contingencies, hu manitarian operations and the variety of other crises short of war for which US forces are in high demand. Although this has been a mantra of the Department of Defense (DOD) for some time, "we felt as though that was one thing that got lost" in Joint Vision 2010, which focused primarily on the high end of operations, according to a senior military official who briefed Jane's Defence Weekly on the new document. What kind of civilian objects would be added to target lists? None that are genuinely indispensable to the survival of the noncombatant population. Not struck, for example, would be many of the infrastructure targets suggested in the Airman magazine article. However, almost everything else of any value would be fair game. The new target sets would include such things as banks and financial institutions. Factories, plants, stores, and shops that produce, sell, or distribute lux ury products or, indeed, anything not absolutely indispens able to noncombatant survival, might be wonderfully reward ing targets--as could be their associated logistics systems. Reducing the middle and upper classes to a subsistence level through the destruction of access to all but essential goods might pressure the very groups best positioned to effect the desired change.
Additional targets under this proposal could include selected cultural, educational, and historical sites whose existence provides support-to include psychological sustenance-to the malignant ideology that stimulates the behavior the use of force is intended to stop. Furthermore, resorts, along with other entertainment, sports, and recreational facilities could be slated for destruction. Of course, government offices and buildings of every kind would be subject to eradication, even if they do not directly support military activities (except those whose destruction would seriously impede the delivery of BEYOND UTILITY TARGETING 59 services indispensable for noncombatant survival). Finally, to the extent it is feasible to do so, the personal property of the sentient, adult population ought to be held at risk so long as it is not, again, indispensable to human survival. Milosevic's bank accounts would be high on the target list under the revised model. 31. For press reporting on alleged information operations during Operation Allied Force, see Lisa Hoffman, "U.S. Opened Cyber-War during Kosovo Fight," Washington Times, 24 October 1999, C1; and William M. Arkin, "The Cyber Bomb in Yugoslavia," 25 October 1999; on-line, Internet, available from http://www. washingtonpost.com. For a judgment on the legality of informa tion operations, see Department of Defense, Office of General Counsel, "An Assessment of International Legal Issues in Infor mation Operations," May 1999.
32. We appreciate that if one will not concede that airpower, which to us includes information operations-exercised through the air, space, and cyberspace-does not have a pivotal role in tar geting and engaging the things that make it possible for adver sary leaders to meet their needs, then one cannot accept that ax iological operations are necessarily "aerospace" operations.
33. Dunlap, "The End of Innocence." 34. This scenario was described to one of us by a senior gov ernment official to illustrate the strength of our values and the weaknesses those values may cause in some instances.
35. "Barr Calls for End to Assassination Ban: Says Terrorist Leaders Should Be Eliminated," 25 August 1998, n.p.: on-line, In ternet, available from http://www.house.gov/barr/p_ban.html, "U.S. Representative Bob Barr (GA-7) called for an end to the ban on assassinating foreign leaders who murder U.S. citizens and sponsor terrorism." 36. Future C 2 or C 4 I attacks, for example, have to consider the utility of copper, coaxial cable, fiber, wireless, narrow-band from space, wideband from space, radio, semaphore, smoke, drums, and couriers. Some of these things may be sanctuaried as "noncombatant," "civilian," or "nonbelligerent" state entities. 38. The home of an eclectic and by all accounts idiosyncratic group of code breakers in World War II Britain.
39. The following excerpt is taken from "The Lies Of War: NATO's Balkan Bombing Tally," Colorado Springs Gazette, 2 June 2000:
The actual numbers, as reported by a Munitions Effectiveness Team (MEAT) sent to inspect bombing sites in helicopters and on foot: 14 tanks, not 120; 17 armored personnel carri ers, not 220; 20 artillery pieces, not 450, according to Newsweek. Out of 744 "confirmed" strikes by NATO pilots, the Air Force investigators, who spent weeks combing Kosovo by helicopter and by foot, found evidence of just 58. Yugoslav forces turned out to have been rather skillful at "spoofing" bomber pilots. "The Serbs protected one bridge," Barry and Thomas wrote, "from the high-flying NATO bombers by con structing, 300 yards upstream, a fake bridge made of polyethylene sheeting stretched over the river. NATO "destroyed" the phony bridge many times. Artillery pieces were faked out of long black logs stuck on old truck wheels. A two-thirds scale SA-9 antiaircraft missile launcher was fabricated from the metal-lined paper used to make European milk cartons."
The exaggeration about destruction of military targets pro vides a bookend to exaggerations that set the stage for the war. Before the bombing began, U.S. and NATO spokesmen insisted that "cleansing" of Kosovo Albanians was occurring on a massive scale. Estimates of 10,000 or more civilians mur dered by Serb-dominated Yugoslav forces were bandied about to justify starting the bombers on their way. After the war, NATO investigators uncovered evidence of about 3,000 Koso vars killed, with a significant amount of the slaughter occurring after the bombing had begun. By comparison, between 3,000 and 5,000 Serbs and Albanians, most of them civilians, were killed by NATO bombing attacks.
Two fundamental lessons of war experience are--never to check momentum; never to resume mere pushing.
--B. H. Liddell Hart, 1944  
Source: Adapted from Abraham Maslow, Motivation and Per sonality (New York:
Source: Adapted from Abraham Maslow, Motivation and Per sonality (New York:
Source:
Source:
Source: Adapted from Abraham Maslow, Motivation and Personality (New York:
Source: Adapted from Abraham Maslow, Motivation and Personality (New York:
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or