# ID: f6c9d4d7abcf4d5593a6f8ac3a45b635
# Title: Break the Kill Chain, Not the Budget: How to Avoid US Strategic Retrenchment
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
In order to avoid an economic collapse and strategic retrenchment similar to what the Soviet Union went through at the end of the Cold War, the United States needs to adopt a blended defense acquisitions strategy. As the Cold War began and facing mounting Western military strength, the Soviet Union needed to grow their defense forces. The Soviets decided on an offset strategy that sought a quantitatively superior force designed to break individual links in the United States and Western kill chains. The decision had detrimental impacts on Soviet foreign policy and its economy. In contrast, the United States invested in a qualitatively superior military manifested by advanced technologies. However, unlike the Soviet Union, the United States had a sufficiently resilient economy to back the qualitative offset strategy. The United States addiction to advanced technologies enabled the asymmetric military advantage it helped build during the Cold War and enjoys today, but the fiscal reality of perpetuating such a trend is bleak. In order to escape the Cold War fate of the Soviet Union, the United States must continue to utilize existing military platforms with added off the shelf technologies, complete existing advanced programs such as the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, DDG-1000 Zumwalt class destroyer, and the Long-Range Strike Bomber, as well as increase unmanned systems utilization. Additionally, the Unites States must remain committed to investing in research and development in order to feed the American innovation machine that draws the envy of allies and adversaries alike.
From catapults to precision guided munitions, the quest for technological advancements on the battlefield is timeless and while innovative ideas abound, fiscal limitations present obstacles to their development. The challenge lies in discerning the appropriate balance between the technology required as an instrument of war to defeat the enemy and the associated budgetary commitment. This challenge has vexed ruling powers for centuries. Over the decades some nations have shown a proclivity for costly technology in warfare. The conscious decision to focus on advanced technology intended to offset the capabilities of the enemy theoretically gives an asymmetric advantage in warfare. Pursuing the offset is known as an offset strategy. This offset strategy, as defined by H.R. McMaster, is a strategy that develops military capabilities in an effort to offset or overcome the capabilities of the enemy. 
1
2
Surviving within the enemy's battlespace involves breaking the enemy's kill chain. The kill chain, as explained by Gen Hawk Carlisle, is the time between when "you [a combatant] arrive in the battle space and when the enemy weapon approaches you." 
3
In order to survive in an enemy's battlespace, one needs to break the enemy kill chain at any point and by any means necessary. 
4
The debate over quality, cost, and quantity is at the heart of the offset strategy decision. The debate begins with the fundamental choice on the balance between high quality but low quantity weapons systems, designed to break multiple links in a kill chain, versus lower quality but higher quantity weapons that tend to break only a single link. Fiscal constraints normally limit either bookend of the quality versus quantity continuum. An uninformed disregard or inattention to these associated financial aspects can have significant geopolitical and economic impacts such as strategic retrenchment or economic collapse. Strategic retrenchment, as defined by Matthew Harris, "emphasizes the [nation's] need to reduce military expenditures, reallocate resources at home, and 3 AF: Stealth 'Incredibly Important, ' Air Force Times, No. 22, 2015, http://search.proquest.com.nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/docview/1663520254?accountid=12686 (accessed October 10, 2015). 
4
5
The purpose of this paper is to examine the United States and its Cold War foe, the Soviet Union, through the lenses of offset strategies, their intended effects on kill chains, and the resultant economic and geopolitical impacts. In doing so, the desire is to further enhance intellectual discourse on the future U.S. defense acquisition philosophy.
In order to avoid an economic collapse and strategic retrenchment similar to what the Soviet Union went through at the end of the Cold War, the United States needs to adopt a blended defense acquisitions strategy. This blended strategy includes utilizing existing military platforms with added off the shelf technologies, continuing development of existing advanced programs such as the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, DDG-1000 Zumwalt class destroyer, and the Long-Range Strike Bomber also known as the B-21, as well as increasing unmanned systems utilization.
This paper begins with a chapter of historical analysis on the Soviet Union during the Cold War that details Soviet offset strategies, kill chain philosophies, and how these contributed to the Soviet Union's economic collapse and strategic retrenchment. The next chapter follows the same historical analysis structure for the United States during the Cold War and concludes with a discussion on U.S. defense spending and the potential for U.S. strategic retrenchment. The last chapter provides a potential solution to the technology, cost, and quantity dilemma with the aim of avoiding U.S. strategic retrenchment and economic collapse due to runaway defense expenditures.
In a post WWII environment that trended towards bipolarity where the Soviet Union sat opposite the United States on the global stage, the Soviet Union found itself at odds ideologically with the West. The United States positioned itself well geopolitically with the Truman Doctrine adopted in 1947, the Marshall Plan passed in 1948, and the North Atlantic Treaty signed in 1949 which became a collective shield of democracy against communism, particularly in tumultuous countries that were economically and politically weak. 
6
7
8
Quantitative Offset: Joseph Stalin, referring to the buildup of the Red Army, stated that "Quantity has a quality all of its own." 
9
10
11
13
14
15
16
15
16
the iron curtain which posed a forbidding threat to U.S. forces. 
17
With a layered and costly defense network involving overlapping radar and missile coverages, Soviet defense forces focused their efforts on negating inbound missile and aircraft threats, disrupting the U.S. kill chain. The Soviet defense challenge, as previously mentioned, involved the protection of immense borders with incredible separation complicated by access across the polar cap from a plethora of U.S. threats of varying ranges and capabilities. These variables logically pointed to a defense force able to span great distances with overlapping capabilities that allowed for the disruption of inbound U.S. missiles and aircraft at multiple points in their profile from launch to target destruction, described here as a kill chain. The quantitative superiority of Soviet forces allowed for disruptions at single points in the kill chain but came with significant economic consequences.
Catalyst to Economic Collapse and Strategic Retrenchment: John F. Kennedy once proclaimed that "The cost of freedom is always high, but Americans have always paid it." 
18
19
Financially, the Soviet's Cold War offset strategy contributed to eventual economic collapse and strategic retrenchment for the Soviet Union. 
20
1
21
24
2
25
26
28
The economic fall of the Soviet Union under Brezhnev was more complex than a myopic view of military equipment overspending would allow. Other key factors, although not the focus of this paper, warrant a cursory mention. It is important to note the costs associated with the USSR's geopolitical positions around the globe.
Afghanistan in particular, contributed to the Soviet's power decline and eventual economic collapse. 
29
30
In his analysis on the Soviet Union's military during the Cold War, Gerhard Wettig states that the "imminent danger of war proved the necessity of strengthening the fighting force of the Warsaw Treaty so that it can crush any oppressor at any frontier" and that an overwhelming Soviet defense force was critical in defeating Western powers. 
31
32
Acknowledged by the United States and Western powers, the Soviet buildup during the Cold War was not a state secret. In August, 1981, President Reagan eloquently stressed in several iconic White House addresses that the Soviet Union built up unprecedented offensive military forces to use against the United States and its NATO partners. 
1
3
As the Cold War progressed into the 1970s and 1980s, analysts professed that the numerical superiority of Soviet and Warsaw Pact militaries could overwhelm United States and NATO forces that relied heavily on firepower and qualitative superiority. 
4
5
6
Qualitative Offset: The U.S. has a fascination with and addiction to technology.
It is an addiction pervasive at all levels of government and leadership. Testifying before the U.S. Senate in October of 1945, General Henry "Hap" Arnold stated that "We must remember at all times that the degree of national security rapidly declines when reliance is placed on the quantity of existing equipment instead of quality." 
7
The future strength of U.S. military capabilities must be assured." 
9
10
11
12
13
Survival Vol. 41, No. 4, 1999, 101-123. 12
13
adversaries. 
14
15
16
17
Kill chain annihilation: Sun Tzu wisely stated: "Know the enemy and know yourself; in a hundred battles you will never be in peril." 
18
Knowing the enemy, their instruments of war, employment techniques, strengths and weaknesses, and most importantly their vulnerabilities empowers an adversary to exploit the kill chain. 
19
22
23
24
25
26
Technology, National Debt, and Avoiding Retrenchment: With an established proclivity for and dependence on advanced quality instruments of war that greatly increase survivability and kill chain disruption, the U.S. must remain cognizant of the associated economic impacts of developing and producing such devices. Defense expenditures since WWII, although varied over time and greater than any other nation, have been tenable. To date, whether by astute forethought or by sheer luck, the U.S. has avoided the economic collapse and associated retrenchment experienced by the Soviet Union at the end of the Cold War. Yet as U.S. national debt grows, such a scenario is not outside the realm of the possible.
The U.S. spends more money on its military than any other nation in the world. In FY 2000 the U.S. spent $280.8 billion on defense, almost 50% more than all of its allies combined, with $87.4 billion of that going to research and development. 
27
3
28
The price of technology is rising. Advanced composite materials and infinitely smaller and more powerful electronics create quantum leaps in capabilities but often carry large price tags. Incorporating these materials and electronics into robust and resilient warfighting instruments is correspondingly expensive. Over the last fifty years one can see an exponential trend for this increasing cost (reference figure 
4
1
Fighting Falcon, considered an economical and low-priced fighter, cost just over $15 million each and the more capable F-15E Strike Eagle carried an associated price of over $30 million each in the late 1980s and 1990s. 
4
5
Ford. 
6
In order to realize U.S. desires for a technologically superior military inventory while avoiding economic collapse and forced retrenchment, the U.S. should adopt a blended solution for future military equipment acquisitions. This solution should involve completing current and viable acquisition programs that have already become a program of record, upgrading already advanced platforms in the inventory with existing and offthe-shelf technologies as they become available and required, and advancing more costeffective drone programs to include swarm technologies. This is not to advocate that all future research and development projects should disappear; quite the opposite. Along with the balanced approach proposed, the U.S. must still invest in future research and development even if it is not for a specific platform. This will keep innovative ideas and concepts moving forward and will safeguard the U.S. conventional asymmetric advantage.
The U.S. maintains a bullish attitude towards acquiring advanced military equipment. As part of its offset strategies in the past, as well as the current strategy, the U.S. intends to maintain technological advantages in order to dissuade and defeat, if required, its adversaries and reassure its allies. 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
The F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, also known as the F-35 Lightning II, has taken welldeserved criticism as a program that is behind schedule and well over-budget. However, the fact remains that the F-35 is still on track to replace multiple platforms such as the U.S. Marine Corps AV-8B Harrier, U.S. Air Force F-16 Fighting Falcon and A-10 Thunderbolt, and the U.S. Navy F/A-18 Hornet. 14 It will be the most advanced aircraft on the planet incorporating the best attributes of all U.S. technologies. The F-35 will combine stealth, the ability to supercruise above Mach 1.0 without afterburner, the world's most advanced radar and electronics suite, and a weapons complement all in a platform that maintains 80 percent commonality amongst its variants. 
15
The U.S. Navy is waiting diligently for completion of its three new Zumwalt Class destroyers. These destroyers, much like the F-35, will contain technologies far superior to anything else on the high seas. The DDG-1000 Zumwalt destroyers will have stealth technology that reduces their radar signature to that of a life boat while their own advanced radar systems will have pinpoint accuracy on adversaries. 
16
17
18
19
Of the three defense acquisition programs mentioned, the B-21 Long-Range Strike Bomber (LRS-B) is more controversial as it is still in its infancy. After recent programs such as the B-1B Lancer, B-2 Spirit, F-22 Raptor, and F-35 Joint Strike Fighter experienced significant delays and cost overruns, skeptics are quick to critique another advanced aviation acquisition project. Not to repeat the mistakes of the past, the B-21 program will focus on a cleaner and more efficient procurement process than those of its cost and timeline plagued predecessors. More importantly the B-21 will complete a modern, fifth generation aviation fleet that spans all the U.S. military services and incorporates the latest technologies, which will have impacts on future generations of aircraft.
The B-21 Long-Range Strike Bomber will augment and replace an aging fleet of bombers such as the B-52 Stratofortress, originally flown in the early 1950s, the B-1B Lancer from the 1970s, and the B-2 Stealth Bomber introduced in the 1990s. 
20
Air Force has stated its intent to purchase 80 -100 aircraft at an estimated cost of approximately $550 million per aircraft and a delivery date in the mid-2020s. 
21
23
20
21
22
23
The U.S. enjoys an asymmetric conventional military equipment advantage over its nearest perceived adversaries, notably China and Russia. The advantage gained required extraordinary efforts and cost more than is fiscally sustainable in the future.
After current programs of record reach maturity, such as the ones previously mentioned, the U.S. should take a 'tactical pause.' The length of the tactical pause on 'next generation' platform development will depend on the assessments of adversary capabilities, both on a like-platform basis as well as an adversary's ability to influence the U.S. kill chain. The assessments must, if possible, remain free of service parochial biases, from intelligence overstating adversary capabilities, and from attempts to gain business and jobs merely for political constituencies and reelection purposes. The assessment must also consider the potential ramifications to the military industrial base if production lines are shut down, as some experts argue that a cessation in military platform production may lead to an exodus of intellectual capital and skilled laborers that could cost more to regain than maintaining a low-rate production of unneeded equipment. 
24
The blended solution does not propose that every platform should undergo an infusion of new technology. Only those platforms that have both sufficient life expectancy and capacity should do so. For example, upgrading the U.S. military High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV) may greatly improve current capabilities, but since Oshkosh Defense System's Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV)
program is in low-rate production, it makes better fiscal sense to hold off on funding such improvements to the old HMMWV.
27
Using existing and emerging technology in current platforms is not a novel concept. U.S. Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter spoke on this topic and stated that "Innovation is largely directed towards embedding new capabilities in the old platforms.
The important underlying technologies spring from a technology base that is commercial and increasingly global. The trends of commercialization and globalization, if embraced by the DOD, could act to the benefit of U.S. military capabilities in the future." 
28
29
30
31
As the procurement of new weapons systems within the U.S. military becomes more cost prohibitive, measures such as incorporating existing technology into established platforms becomes a more fiscally palatable alternative. The concept is not new, but its appeal should grow in environments trending towards austerity.
Although not yet in an entrenched austerity environment, heavy public scrutiny and sequestration measures have forced the U.S. Department of Defense to reevaluate certain spending trends and habits.
In doing so, completing current programs of record and using off the shelf technology in existing platforms comprise two of the three parts of the blended procurement solution triad. The final component is expanding drone technologies.
Expanding Drone Technologies: Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs) already provide critical capabilities to U.S. military forces across the globe. UASs come in a variety of sizes, shapes, and capabilities. The U.S. Army operates drones such as the 
29
30
31
hand-launched RQ-11 Raven worth $170 thousand while the U.S. Air Force operates much larger aircraft. 
32
33
34
35
As previously noted, since the conclusion of WWII the U.S. has focused heavily on high quality technology-infused weaponry over lower quality and higher quantity instruments of war. With drones, the quantity versus quality pendulum shifts back towards center. Although many drones do have advanced incorporated technologies, the argument here is to advocate for drones no larger than the MQ-1 Predator which is slightly larger than the F-16 Fighting Falcon and less than one-fourth the cost. 
36
37
Breaking the kill chain, discussed earlier, advocates exploiting a vulnerability in the enemy kill chain in order to survive within the adversary's battlespace. With drone swarm technology it is possible to completely overwhelm the enemy to the point where the enemy can no longer defend against every potential threat. The same technology can also aid in providing a formidable defense and kill chain in one's own battlespace. The swarm technology mentioned may seem overly futuristic, but it is here now, if only in its infancy.
Before proceeding further, it is important to define what swarm technology is. To fall into the category of swarm technology, UAVs or drones "must communicate with one another to perform tasks as an intelligent group. UAV swarms can interpret what is happening in real time, self-organize and get the job done." 38 Coordinated tasks could 36 Sheet, US Air Force Fact, "MQ-1 Predator Unmanned Aerial Vehicle." 37 Debra Werner, "Drone swarm," C4ISR, July 8, 2013, 26, http://search.proquest.com.nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/docview/1418399020?accountid=12686 (accessed November 6, 2015). 
38
39
40
41
With drones executing swarm tactics it is possible to overwhelm an enemy's kill chain. As a Naval Postgraduate Professor conveyed, "No individual high school player could possibly beat Swiss [tennis] champion Roger Federer. But if 50 high school players were lobbing balls onto his court, poor Roger wouldn't be able to defend against that." 42
The analogy is simple but makes an effective point. Even the most sophisticated Integrated Air Defense Systems (IADS) would struggle to engage and defeat 1,000 39 Debra Werner, "Drone swarm," C4ISR, July 8, 2013, 26, http://search.proquest.com.nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/docview/1418399020?accountid=12686 (accessed November 6, 2015). 
40
inbound drones in an autonomous and coordinated attack. Allowing just one drone to cut through the defenses could impact the overall effectiveness of the IADS system. The same could be said for missile defense. Utilizing several hundred drones in a defensive and coordinated swarm could prove very effective against an inbound missile foray. At a minimum, swarm technology enabled drones could saturate surveillance pictures to the point where distinguishing between a low-cost drone and a high-cost fighter-bomber becomes impossible.
Without any significant advancements in swarm technology in the near future, a strong case still exists for increased numbers of lower cost UAVs as part of the blended solution. Lacking the artificial intelligence to operate autonomously, large numbers of drones, albeit individually controlled by human operators, still retain the capability to heavily task and even, depending on the numbers, saturate enemy defenses. Without swarm technology it is a considerably more complicated communications and bandwidth intensive situation, but still within the realm of the possible. It is a far more acceptable scenario to lobby the U.S. political body and public on the use of unmanned aerial vehicles to penetrate and assault a heavily defended and fortified geographic area than it is to send a squadron of manned assets to impending peril. In a risk averse and results oriented society, the former is the more palatable option.
UAVs are the final component of the blended solution triad. As UAVs are already a growing component of the U.S. military, it is necessary to continue to increase the number of drones acquired. Although a ramped up UAV inventory shifts the U.S. more towards a quantity versus quality force, it does not detract from the other two components of the quality focused blended solution. With respect to the kill chain, increased drone numbers enhance the ability to saturate and overwhelm an adversary's kill chain. Adding advanced swarm technology to the mix enhances the ability to saturate the kill chain in a more coordinated and efficient manner, but that advanced swarm technology does not yet exist. Swarm technologies need urgent and aggressive research and development.
The decision to invest in research and development (R&D), such as that required for swarm technology, remains a prominent dilemma in the Department of Defense. Military and defense R&D produced products and technologies benefitting both the military and civilian sector on innumerable occasions throughout history. 
43
44
Defense and military research and development has been a significant foundation of technology development in the commercial sector that supports a notable portion of industrial production in the United States. 
45
46
47
48
The methods for military research and development to ensure future dual-use technologies will likely remain consistent with those of the past. More prevalent in earlier military R&D was the research conducted within military organizations themselves, without interaction with the civilian sector. 
49
52
It is almost impossible to properly address the military research and development question in just a few pages. Suffice to say, military R&D and procurement obtains a high level of public scrutiny and debate. This scrutiny is warranted but should not discourage the overall military R&D effort. Technology and innovative ideas gained in the R&D process are useful. Even if the technology or innovation gained is not used on a current project, the likelihood of that breakthrough adding value in either the military or civilian sector is noteworthy. This symbiotic relationship between the military and civilian research and development sector must continue or the American innovative spirit will slowly wither, leaving only a weakened nation clamoring to copy the creativity of once inferior adversaries.
produced their war materials on the cheap as it cost the Soviets dearly to produce their numerically overwhelming force. The level of military spending coupled with costly operations in areas such as Afghanistan and paired with a faltering economy, led to an overall economic collapse of the Soviet economy. This started a chain reaction within the Soviet Union that forced marked military reductions, both in funding and external operations. The internal collapse of the Soviet Union led to an internal shift in foreign policy known as retrenchment that approached isolationism. The U.S. fashioned an offset strategy that was diametrically opposed to the Soviet strategy. The U.S. strategy focused on developing lower quantities of high technology equipment designed to penetrate Soviet defense and obliterate the Soviet kill chain. It was an incredibly costly strategy that required a robust U.S. economy and widespread political and public support. Although major technological breakthroughs such as stealth technology and precision guided munitions did not come to fruition until the end of the Cold War, they began to feed an insatiable U.S. appetite for supreme war machines capable of demolishing enemy kill chains. It is a presumptuous goal that is ultimately unsustainable due to fiscal limitations. In order to avoid economic collapse and forced strategic retrenchment similar to that of the Soviet Union during the Cold War, the U.S. Although higher end drones such as the RQ-4 Global Hawk are extremely capable platforms, it is the middle and lower end platforms that are sought in this solution.
The blended solution keeps lower quantities of high-end acquisitions like the F-35, DDG-100, and B-21, but offsets this with higher quantities of lower-technology drones.
The former tend to obliterate enemy kill chains while the latter, with one swarm caveat, tend to isolate single kill chain links for exploitation. The swarm caveat is that with mass numbers of drones coordinating with each other independently, it is possible to completely overwhelm and essentially annihilate the enemy kill chain. The major dilemma with swarm technology is that it may push the limits of acceptable ethical standards wherein drone swarms may make decisions to target and kill without a man in the decision loop.
That dilemma is a topic for further discussion elsewhere.
What prevents swarm technology from achieving practical use and application in the military today is a lack of technological development, which highlights the military research and development dilemma. Although the military R&D machine made quantum leaps during the twentieth century, it faces increased scrutiny in a fiscally constrained environment. Austerity aside, research and development must continue in the military, in collaborative efforts with the civilian sector, and within the civilian sector alone via competition for defense contracts. Doing so ensures that research and creativity continue to fuel the American innovative machine, producing both tangible products and intangible concepts for future development and to ensure a distinct military edge.
The United States military maintains an asymmetric conventional military advantage over its peers. The advantage is funded by the largest defense budget in the world but the funding trend is not sustainable without potentially disastrous consequences for the U.S. economy. As the global hegemon with an aggressive foreign policy posture and presence throughout the world, the U.S. must accept an alteration to its defense spending course or it could face economic collapse and strategic retrenchment. The alteration to that course has to be guided by a blended solution.
46  
46  
H. R. McMaster, "The Uncertainties of Strategy," Survival 57, No. 1,
2015, 197-208.  2  Who's Afraid of America?; Weapons Technology, The Economist, No. 57, June 13, 2015, http://search.proquest.com.nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/docview/1688011216?accountid=12686(accessed  October 19, 2015).
Matthew J. Harris, "Strategic Retrenchment and Renewal in the American Experience," Comparative Strategy Vol. 34, No. 2, 240, 2015, http://search.proquest.com.nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/docview/1685383357?accountid=12686 (accessed September 23, 2015).
Ben R. Rich and Leo Janos, Skunk Works: A Personal Memoir of My Years at Lockheed (Boston: Little, Brown), 1994.
John F. Kennedy, The Cuban Missile Crisis: President Kennedy's Address to the Nation, October 22,
1962, National Archives and Records Administration, 1988.  19  Edwin Bacon andMark A. Sandle, eds., Brezhnev Reconsidered (Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave  Macmillan, 2003).
Matthew J. Harris, "Strategic Retrenchment and Renewal in the American Experience," Comparative Strategy Vol. 34, No. 2, 240, 2015, http://search.proquest.com.nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/docview/1685383357?accountid=12686 (accessed September 23, 2015).
 21  Gerald K. Haines and Robert E. Leggett, eds., Watching the Bear: Essays on CIA's Analysis of the Soviet Union, Government Printing Office,
2003. 22 Patrick J. McDonald, "Complicating Commitment: Free Resources, Power Shifts, and the Fiscal Politics of Preventive War," International Studies Quarterly Vol. 55, No. 4, 2011, 1095-1120, https://nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=tsh&A N=67057177&site=ehost-live&scope=site (accessed
September 23, 2015).23  Gerald K. Haines and Robert E. Leggett, eds., Watching the Bear: Essays on CIA's Analysis of the Soviet Union, Government Printing Office, 2003.
Matthew J. Harris, "Strategic Retrenchment and Renewal in the American Experience," Comparative Strategy Vol. 34, No. 2, 240, 2015, http://search.proquest.com.nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/docview/1685383357?accountid=12686 (accessed September 23, 2015).
25 Megan Mcardle, "A Real Domestic Threat: How Health-Care Spending Strains the U.S. Military," The Atlantic, March 12, 2012, http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2012/03/a-real-domestic-threathow-health-care-spending-strains-the-us-military/254350/ (accessed November 3,
2015).26  Edwin Bacon and Mark A. Sandle, eds., Brezhnev Reconsidered (Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2003).27  Megan Mcardle, "A Real Domestic Threat: How Health-Care Spending Strains the U.S. Military," The Atlantic, March 12, 2012, http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2012/03/a-real-domestic-threathow-health-care-spending-strains-the-us-military/254350/ (accessed November 3, 2015).
Thomas G. Mahnken, Technology and the American Way of War (New York: Columbia University Press, 2008).
Ibid.   
Roy M. Worden, "The Rise of the Fighter Generals: The Vietnam Era and the Problem of Air ForceLeadership (1945Leadership ( -1982))," Duke University, 1993, http://search.proquest.com.nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/docview/304030550?accountid=12686 (accessed October 21, 2015).
Ben R. Rich and Leo Janos, Skunk Works: A Personal Memoir of My Years at Lockheed (Boston: Little, Brown), 1994.
Jonathan White and Sean Filipowski, "Know The Environment, Know The Enemy, Know The Target," United States Naval Institute Proceedings, No. 7,
2014 , 30-35,  http://search.proquest.com.nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/docview/1555349284?accountid=12686 (accessed  October 7, 2015)).20  Thomas G. Mahnken, Technology and the American Way of War (New York: Columbia University Press, 2008).21  Ben R. Rich and Leo Janos, Skunk Works: A Personal Memoir of My Years at Lockheed (Boston: Little, Brown), 1994.
Colin Clark, In A Dogfight: JPO, Air Force Weigh in on Who's Best," Breaking Defense.com. July 2, 2015, http://breakingdefense.com/2015/07/f-16-vs-f-35-in-a-dogfight-jpo-air-forceweigh-in-on-whos-best/?_outbrain (accessedOctober 9, 2015).
Jeremiah Gertler, "F-35 joint strike fighter (JSF) program: Background and issues for congress," Library of CongressWashington DC Congressional Research Service, 2009.   
Ronald O'Rourke, "Navy DDG-51 and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress," Library of Congress Washington DC Congressional Research Service, 2009.
Kable, "DDG-1000 Zumwalt Class Multi-Mission Destroyer," Naval-Technology.com, 2015,  http://www.naval-technology.com/projects/dd21 (accessed November 3, 2015).
Daniel Lake, "Technology, Qualitative Superiority, and the Overstretched American Military," Strategic Studies Quarterly Vol. 6, No. 4, 2012, https://nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=tsh&AN=84590800&site=ehost-live&scope=site (accessed October 23, 2015).
Daniel Lake, "Technology, Qualitative Superiority, and the Overstretched American Military," Strategic  Studies Quarterly Vol. 6, No. 4, 2012, https://nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=tsh&AN=84590800&site=ehost-live&scope=site (accessed October 23, 2015).
5
.
6
Gordon Yefim and Dmitriy Komissarov, Russian Air Power: Current Organisation and Aircraft of All Russian Air Forces (Midland Publishing, 2011).
Matthew J. Harris, "Strategic Retrenchment and Renewal in the American Experience," Comparative Strategy Vol. 34, No. 2, 240, 2015, http://search.proquest.com.nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/docview/1685383357?accountid=12686 (accessed September 23, 2015).
Jeremiah Gertler, "F-35 joint strike fighter (JSF) program: Background and issues for congress," Library of CongressWashington DC Congressional Research Service, 2009.   
Jeremiah Gertler, "F-35 joint strike fighter (JSF) program: Background and issues for congress," Library of CongressWashington DC Congressional Research Service, 2009.   
Ronald O'Rourke, "Navy DDG-51 and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress," Library of Congress Washington DC Congressional Research Service, 2009.
Ibid.
Ibid.   
Daniel Lake, "Technology, Qualitative Superiority, and the Overstretched American Military," Strategic  Studies Quarterly Vol. 6,
No. 4,
2012, https://nduezproxy.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=tsh&AN=84590800&site=ehost-live&scope=site (accessed October 23, 2015).
Mackenzie M. Eaglen and Eric Sayers, "Maintaining the Superiority of America's Defense Industrial Base," BackgrounderVol. 2276Vol.   (2009)), http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2009/05/maintaining-thesuperiority-of-americas-defense-industrial-base (accessed February 14, 2016).
Andrew Feickert, "Joint light tactical vehicle (JLTV): Background and issues for Congress," Library of Congress Washington DC Congressional Research Service, 2012.
Ashton Carter, "Adapting US Defense to Future Needs," Survival Vol. 41, No. 4, 1999, 101-123.   
Vernon W. Ruttan, Military procurement and technology development, Department of Applied Economics, College of Agricultural, Food, and Environmental Sciences, University of Minnesota, 2005.
I would like to pass on specific gratitude to my thesis advisors 
Dr. S. Mike Pavelec
Colonel Kevin Therrien
Mr. Jeffrey Turner
Joint Forces Staff College Writing Center
x Intentionally left blank
9. SPONSORING / 
MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved
Upgrade Current Systems with Existing Technology: Given the recent history of Department of Defense acquisitions programs that often run behind schedule and well over budget, such as those just discussed, it is imperative that the U.S. have alternate means for upgrading and updating its fleet of weapons systems. It simply is not possible to continue to buy new advanced platforms off the production line to replace current platforms without spending the U.S. into extreme debt, which is already the trend. A significant cost savings measure places current and emergent technologies into existing platforms in an upgrade scheme that would cost a fraction of what a new instrument would cost to develop and produce. There are tradeoffs to this aspect of the blended solution, but the viability of the practice and cost savings could be substantial.
The practice of incorporating new technology into existing platforms is not a new concept. All the U.S. military services accomplish this in some way, shape, or form. The U.S. Navy improves its surface warfare fleet through the Surface Electronic Warfare Improvement Program (SEWIP) and other like-programs. 
25
The United States maintains a strong affinity for technology in its military instruments of war. It is a trend which accelerated during the Cold War that witnessed the world superpowers square off against each other. The two nations had opposing offset strategies of military buildup where the U.S. focused on high quality instruments of war infused with advanced technologies while the Soviets focused on mass quantities with lower technology. Both strategies had their merits and pitfalls and associated effects on the kill chain. Notably, both offset strategies placed significant demands on their nation's economy. While the U.S. had a robust and resilient economy able to weather the spending fury, the Soviet Union struggled to do so. The aggressive Soviet offset strategy spending profile contributed to economic collapse at the end of the Cold War and led to a period of forced retrenchment. The U.S. emerged victorious from the Cold War, assumed the role as the global hegemon, and continued its trend of heavily investing in technologically advanced military platforms. It is now facing a fiscally unsustainable acquisition trend.
In order to avoid economic collapse and forced retrenchment, akin to the Cold War Soviet
Union, yet maintain an asymmetric conventional military advantage, the U.S. should adopt a blended procurement solution for military platforms.
In a Cold War effort to offset the U.S. strengths of intercontinental ballistic missiles and long-range strategic bombers, the Soviet Union focused on producing large quantities of weapons that did not incorporate expensive advanced technologies. The Soviet defense platforms, such as plentiful air defense radars and surface-to-air missiles, intended to prevent Western penetration of vast Soviet borders by breaking single links in the U.S. kill chain. This is not to say that the Soviet defenses were inadequate or that they 