# ID: fa8741bf51f84481971115605e08009a
# Title: United States Air and Space Power in the 21st Century: Strategic Appraisal
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2002.0
# Fulltext:
Two issues from this volume highlight the continued salience of Cold War experience to current dilemmas.
The first is the issue of nuclear weapons.
These weapons were the foundation of U.S. strategy during the Cold War and, according to some, the technological innovation that spared us the horrors of a third world war.
Yet as Glenn Buchan documents (Chapter Seven), current U.S. nuclear policy is an unfortunate combination of stasis and neglect.
Nuclear weapons are often seen as an irrelevant and even immoral anachronism in the post-Cold War world.
Official U.S. policy toward nuclear weapons encourages this view by encompassing apparently contradictory undertakings: eliminating the U.S. nuclear arsenal in keeping with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty yet, at the same time, espousing continued adherence to a policy of strategic deterrence against Russia and maintaining U.S. nuclear forces on alert.
Prudence requires maintaining the U.S. nuclear arsenal in a world in which nuclear knowledge cannot be unlearned, yet public relations require downplaying the existence and utility of nuclear weapons in the national military strategy.
The result is a policy that, as Buchan demonstrates, is slowly being crushed under the weight of its own contradictions, as weapons deteriorate and nuclear knowledge is lost.