# ID: fa8741bf51f84481971115605e08009a
# Title: United States Air and Space Power in the 21st Century: Strategic Appraisal
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2002.0
# Fulltext:
Although Serbia ultimately failed to gain Russian support for its cause in Kosovo, the attempt demonstrates the potential of this strategy for resisting coercion.
Had Serbia won strong Russian support, it would have gained a means of resistance and diplomatic escalation.
The price to NATO of continued war in Kosovo would have meant alienating a major power whose goodwill most Western states eagerly sought.
Initially, Russia pressed NATO to end the bombing as a prelude to a diplomatic settlement, and, as late as the ______________ end of May 1999, Russia publicly touted its opposition to NATO.
12 Although evidence is not available, Milosevic probably looked at Russia's rhetorical support and condemnation of the NATO campaign as an indication that Moscow would champion Belgrade's cause on the international arena.
Russia's switch from Serbia's friend to NATO's de facto partner prevented Milosevic from imposing diplomatic costs on NATO, eroding Serbian leaders' hopes of a potentially favorable settlement to the conflict.
13   There is little that airpower or any other military instrument can do directly to neutralize such diplomatic efforts.
Russia's unwillingness (or inability) to help Belgrade was most likely a product of Moscow's own limits and Serbia's unattractiveness as a diplomatic ally.
At the same time, diplomacy is in no way isolated from battlefield events.
Without the constant battering of the air campaign, Russia's pressure on Belgrade probably would have accomplished little.
On the other hand, the most significant diplomatic windfall for Serbia occurred when a U.S. warplane hit-very precisely-the Chinese embassy.
These events only highlight that all U.S. coercive efforts are likely to take place in a diplomatic crucible, where seemingly small events can easily affect both U.S. and adversary alliances, and thus the ultimate success of the coercion attempt.