# ID: fb3a137fff664e65a0a1f8a8fafc055b
# Title: Enduring Strategic Rivalries
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
In Britain, the "Ministry of All the Talents" came to power in early 1806.
Willing to grant greater concessions to France than any previous British administration, it favored a negotiated peace with Napoleon that would have left France possessing far more territory than it had at the height of Louis XIV's power.
Reversing London's policy of sponsoring plots, typically by French royalists to assassinate Napoleon, the Cabinet initiated a dialogue with France by warning him of an impending attack.
Needing to stabilize Joseph's Neapolitan regime in the face of a British counteroffensive in Calabria that resulted in a redcoat victory over the French at Maida on 4 July 1806, Napoleon secretly discussed the return of Hanover to George III, as long as London dropped its support of the Neapolitan Bourbons.
Although British forces withdrew to Sicily before the end of July, they continued to support a violent insurgency in Calabria against French rule.
All this diplomatic posturing came to naught as Napoleon harbored no sincere interest in peace and only sought to cause dissension between London and St. Petersburg, which was conducted its own concurrent talks with the French emperor.
Napoleon's plan partially backfired when the Prussians learned of his offer to return Hanover, Berlin's only compensation for going to war with Britain.
Discovering the limits of Napoleon's friendship, the Prussians opted for war against France in August 1806.