# ID: fb3a137fff664e65a0a1f8a8fafc055b
# Title: Enduring Strategic Rivalries
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
For their part, the post-Bismarck Germans were witlessly alienating every great power that mattered: the French in the Moroccan Crises and outrages like the Zabern Affair of 1913; the British with their Navy Race and colonial offensives; and the Russians with their tariffs on grain, military build-up and unyielding support for Austria-Hungary in the Balkans.
The figure of Kaiser Wilhelm II loomed large.
Group-think dominated his councils, where ministers and service chiefs were selected for their tractability, not their sound advice.
The Kaiser wanted his "place in the sun," and his generals, admirals, and ministers would have to provide it, at almost any cost.
This, then, accelerated the rivalry toward war.
Neither side had a firm grip on the tiller, for both sides were milking the rivalry for domestic-political benefit; concessions were viewed on both sides as weakness and cause even for a change of government.
The Germans had used "fleet policy" and "world policy" to try to drum up popular support for an increasingly unpopular regime.
The réveil national pointed less to the strength of the republic in France than to the weakness and tenuousness of republican institutions: the need to attire them in pomp and glory that could be found only in the army.
This period was rife with strategic miscalculations and just plain nonsense.
French diplomacy was generally strong-making sure to lock in British and Russian support-but French military planning did not keep step.
This was in part because of the purges undertaken after the Dreyfus Affair.
Many good French officers were driven into the wilderness along with the bad ones.
To make the army "politically correct," officers' eating habits (did they eat fish or meat on Fridays?)
and church attendance (a bad thing in a determinedly secular republic) were cause for demotion or dismissal.
Fewer bright thinkers remained to contest the tactical innovations of General Joseph Joffre (named General Staff chief in 1911) and the head of the French war college Colonel Louis Grandmaison.
Joffre was stolid not brilliant; a deputy said of his choice to lead the army, "in a democracy, every fat man is a good man."
He'd been chosen for his girth and amiability as well as his willingness to play the game.