# ID: fb3a137fff664e65a0a1f8a8fafc055b
# Title: Enduring Strategic Rivalries
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
There were other points of strength as well.
First was natural resources, and these the United States had in abundance; what it lacked for much of the nineteenth century was a wide range of domestically manufactured goods, and for many of these it depended on imports from Britain.
Conversely, except for coal and iron, Britain was depended considerably more on imports of raw materials, such as timber for its ships before steel was used and cotton for its textile industry, than was the United States.
But this hardly mattered, because where the British empire was supreme was in its financial and commercial power, and it could purchase what it needed.
During the nineteenth century, the City of London was the world's financial centre, while the pound sterling was the world's primary transaction and reserve currency.
Not only did the city finance, for example, the building of the Argentine railway system and the movement of the Southern US cotton crop to market, it was the home of the Bank of England, essentially the manager if not the controller of the gold standard.
But there is another important point about this financial strength, which is that it enabled Britain to carry out a wide-ranging and influential foreign policy, including the wherewithal to subsidise allies.
At the Battle of Waterloo in 1815, the Prussians helped to turn the tide, and the Prussians were subsidised by Britain; during the First World War, Britain financed or guaranteed the purchases in the United States of France, Russia, Italy, Belgium, Greece, and Rumania.