# ID: fb3a137fff664e65a0a1f8a8fafc055b
# Title: Enduring Strategic Rivalries
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
The Franco-German Rivalry great square of German territory on the left bank of the Rhine annexed by France during the wars of the French Revolution and returned to the German states after Waterloo.
Bismarck ignored the demand; how could he sell the imperative of German unification to the German people if he was prepared even to discuss the cession of Karlsruhe, Mannheim, Koblenz and Luxembourg to the French?
Bismarck then dictated peace to the Austrians, abolished the German Confederation and drew new borders in Germany without consulting the great powers.
Prussia annexed 1,300 square miles of German territory, adding 7 million subjects.
It also took indirect control of Saxony, Hessia, Thuringia, Mecklenburg, Hamburg, Bremen and Lübeck in a new "North German Confederation" in which Prussia controlled military and foreign affairs.
Whereas Prussia had counted just one-third the inhabitants of France in 1820 and less than half in 1860, the Austro-Prussian War and the annexations almost evened the score: giving the North German Confederation a population of 30 million to France's 38 million and a Prussian army one-third larger than France's (many times larger in wartime) thanks to the Prussian use of universal conscription.
It also added greatly to Prussian economic muscle.
France, once Continetal Europe's great economic power slid down the ranks.
Already in 1867 the coal mines of Prussia and the North German Confederation were out-producing French mines three-to-one.