# ID: fb3a137fff664e65a0a1f8a8fafc055b
# Title: Enduring Strategic Rivalries
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
Although he smashed another coalition, Napoleon could not end the war that continued to rage in Spain and Portugal.
Rather than cross the Pyrenees again, he left the war in Iberia to his marshals and his brother, Joseph.
Despite the situation in Iberia, Napoleon's control of Central Europe appeared incontestable after 1809.
Allied with Russia and tightly controlling Prussia, Napoleon also hoped he had permanently settled his differences with Austria by marrying into the Habsburg family.
Yet, one year later, everything began unraveling as Russia ended its French alliance.
The events between 1808 and 1811 that culminated in Napoleon's 1812 invasion of Russia are beyond the scope of this study.
Those that proved particularly egregious to Napoleon included Alexander's cool demeanor at the Congress of Erfurt followed by his less than enthusiastic support of French interests during the War of the Fifth Coalition.
Conversely, the lack of French diplomatic pressure on the Ottoman Empire to end its war with Russia as well as Napoleon's ambiguity over his intentions regarding Eastern Europe and the Eastern Mediterranean embittered Alexander.
As a result of the crippling effects of the Continental System, Alexander issued a decree on 31 December 1810 to tax luxury goods and wines, some of France's largest exports.
Moreover, the decree opened Russian ports to neutral ships carrying British exports.
British goods soon flooded the markets of Eastern and Central Europe.
Napoleon had few choices other than to force Alexander's continued participation in the Continental System.
Thus, in 1811, both emperors started preparing for war.