# ID: fb3a137fff664e65a0a1f8a8fafc055b
# Title: Enduring Strategic Rivalries
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
Second, during a rivalry, an assortment of strong, generally self-supporting allies is always important, but during a conflict they are crucial.
At times, however, the dominant power is tempted to push too much of the burden onto allies.
This is particularly dangerous during a conflict where the leading power is tempted to conserve its strength or more often substitute cash for "boots on the ground."
As Michael Leggiere states, Before 1808, the British mainly contributed to the successive coalition wars against France by funding in the form of loans, subsidies, and credits to allies such as Austria and Russia whose armies would shoulder the main burden of fighting the French.
Total domination of the seas then allowed the British to conduct limited military operations against secondary targets such as the Netherlands and Naples either unilaterally or in conjunction with the Russians.
However, London's 1808 decision to commit the British army to the Iberian Peninsula marked a monumental policy change for the maritime economic power.
Yet this was not enough.
Although the British distracted Napoleon and tied down vital imperial resources in Iberia and the Mediterranean, they realized that Napoleon's hegemony over the Continent could only be broken in Central Europe.
For this reason, the British could not turn their backs on Austria, Prussia, and Russia even after all three counted among Napoleon's allies following the failed Franco-Austrian War of 1809.
The British understood that when the time came for Europe to a rise against France, Britain would be expected to support it both with arms and money.