# ID: fb3a137fff664e65a0a1f8a8fafc055b
# Title: Enduring Strategic Rivalries
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
Acknowledging that British gold had financed the three previous coalition wars, Napoleon targeted the heart of Britain's power: its maritime economy.
Lacking the resources either to invade Britain or decisively defeat the Royal Navy at sea and unable to compete 9-9 Striking at Britain by closing the French-controlled ports of Europe to British trade dated back to the third Revolutionary government of France, the National Convention (1792-95).
During the War of First Coalition, the French forced their conquered "sister republics" to close their ports to the British.
At that time, because of holes in the System, the Republic's economic attack produced only marginal success.
Napoleon returned to the idea in 1806 with renewed determination; the changes France made to the map of Europe considerably strengthened his ability to wage economic warfare against the British.
France now controlled the Low Countries and the Hanseatic cities of North Germany, so by extension Europe's North Sea Coast, most of Italy, the Dalmatian coast of the Balkans, and was allied with Spain and many of the German states.
To make his Continental blockade more effective and gain an ally against Great Britain, Napoleon presented the Prussians with the February 1806 Treaty of Paris as punishment for their forfeiture of neutrality during the War of the Third Coalition.
The treaty forced the Prussians to close all North German ports to British shipping.
As a reward for joining France's war against Britain, Napoleon ordered the Prussians to immediately occupy Hanover, a possession of the British crown.
He also hinted that he would support Berlin's long-standing goal of creating a Prussian-dominated confederation in North Germany.
Facing a war with either the shark or the tiger, Berlin chose to face the former.