# ID: fb3a137fff664e65a0a1f8a8fafc055b
# Title: Enduring Strategic Rivalries
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2014.0
# Fulltext:
As suggested in the opening paragraphs, the ties between Britain and Germany should have provided these competing powers with some sense of "the other."
For the most part, they did not.
In the First World War, only obdurately stupid behavior on the part of the Germans forced the British to commit themselves to the struggle.
The interwar period saw the British pile illusory assumption on top of illusion.
Only when they were looking over the brink into the catastrophe of absolute defeat with the fall of France, did the British finally recognize the nature of the German menace.
But even then it took the extraordinary intellectual toughness and perceptions of Winston Churchill for the British to hang on in the face of the existential threat that the Third Reich represented.
This essay should warn those who make strategy and policy in the future, how extraordinarily difficult it is to understand "the other," even when that "other" is by history, culture, and economics intimately connected to their world.
Where that is not the case and a vast gulf of history, culture, and intellectual understanding exists between two powers in a long-term competition in the international arena, the problem of understanding "the other" becomes exponentially more difficult.
There facile assumptions and hopes for the future inevitably will lead to disaster.
In the West, we think of peace as the norm and war as the aberration.
In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, however, war was the norm for Asia.
China and Russia generally rejected the Westernizing global order and, with varying degrees of determination, sought to overturn it.
Japan typically tried to adapt but, when that proved impossible, it too tried to create an alternate order.
Sweeping changes in the global economy set the context for the diplomacy and wars among China, Russia, and Japan.
Occasionally these changes were of such a magnitude and the effects so long lasting that they constituted framing events-they decisively influenced what followed by introducing new constraints and by opening new opportunities and their sweeping nature ultimately forced all to alter their previous courses of action.