# ID: fb719c9245b2408c8624826157865caf
# Title: Strategic Deterrence for the Future❙ 4
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
O ur nation's investment in effective and credible strategic forces has helped protect our country for nearly seven decades. That proud legacy continues today as we deter adversaries and assure our allies and partners of the US commitment to collective defense, even as our security environment is more diverse, complex, and uncertain than ever.
Other states are investing in their strategic arsenals, developing or modernizing nuclear forces as well as cyber and counterspace capabilities, and thus presenting real challenges to strategic stability. Nation-states and nonstate actors are seeking asymmetric capabilities and are preparing to employ them as options for achieving
\1 SENIOR LEADER PERSPECTIVE their objectives during crisis and conflict. Perhaps most troubling are trends associated with proliferation of these advanced capabilities and how mobile, hardened, and underground they have become.
Russia is investing and modernizing across all legs of its nuclear triad and is demonstrating selective compliance with international accords and treaties. Russian military operations include the illegal occupation of Crimea and ongoing activities in Ukraine as well as routine demonstrations of its strategic forces. These actions, when considered along with an active information warfare campaign of provocative rhetoric and misinformation, are clear signals for the international community.
China is also seeking regional dominance militarily and economically, and for the first time in history, its gross purchasing power recently exceeded ours. 
1
Both Russia and China are developing strategic capabilities beyond their nuclear forces and are exploiting vulnerabilities in the cyber domain. Both nations have stated their ambitions regarding counterspace capabilities that could threaten US space assets in multiple orbits. Given the international community's dependence on space, this is concerning not just to the United States but to like-minded spacefaring nations that depend on unfettered access to space.
North Korea continues to advance strategic capabilities and to increase tensions with threats of more nuclear tests. It also claims to have possession of a miniaturized warhead and has been noted for parading a road-mobile ICBM KN-08 missile that it says is capable of reaching the western United States.
Iran's nuclear program remains a concern and provides an important impetus for the ongoing PS + 1 negotiations to shut down Iran's pathway to a nuclear bomb. 
2
In a day-to-day context, the United States strives to deter regional aggressionspecifically, military conflict. Its nine combatant commands are functionally or geographically focused and ensure that the combined posture, readiness, and partnerships enhance regional and transregional stability and deterrence efforts. My command, US Strategic Command, is unique in that it is additionally tasked with leading strategic planning and executing strategic deterrence operations. The command's primary mission is to detect and deter strategic attack against the United States and our allies and to provide military options to the secretary of defense and the president of the United States should deterrence fail. Our efforts are tailored to maximize senior leadership decision space.
While strategic deterrence is underpinned and reinforced by our nuclear capabilities, it is more than the nuclear triad. An effective twenty-first-century deterrent includes foundational intelligence, space-and ground-based radar sensors for necessary indications and warning, and systems that support national nuclear command and control. It also includes missile defense and cyber protection; a more efficient and responsive nuclear infrastructure that does not require explosive testing; the international arms control and nonproliferation regime, which includes verifiable and achievable treaties and policies; and synchronized plans that orient all of our assigned capabilities toward a common daily purpose.
US Strategic Command works its efforts very closely in coordination with other combatant commands, our interagency teams, and allies and partners to address the challenges across the spectrum of conflict. Although understanding an adversary's military doctrine and force composition is critical, it is only part of the equation. Our approach also includes emulation and war gaming so that we gain a deeper understanding of our adversaries' thought processes, perceptions, and probable next moves.
Conflict may occur along the spectrum at any point, in varying degrees of intensity, with more than one adversary, and in multiple domains. At all phases, whether in peacetime or crisis or conflict, our planning and operations are designed to deter and develop "off-ramps" to de-escalate the conflict at the lowest intensity level while dissuading our adversaries from considering the use of cyber attacks, counterspace activities, or nuclear weapons. Adversaries and potential adversaries alike must understand they cannot escalate their way out of a failed conflict; that they will not reap the benefits they seek; that our nation is prepared to manage escalation risk using a cross-domain, whole-of-government approach which may include all elements of national power; and that restraint is always the better option.
Given the diverse, complex, and uncertain world in which we live, we must ask how our nation can maintain a credible strategic deterrent for the foreseeable future. The answer to this critical question centers on how we have evolved over the decades and builds upon the groundwork done by revered strategic thinkers like Albert Wohlstetter, Bernard Brodie, Thomas Schelling, Herman Kahn, and Henry Kissinger. Their foundation for deterrence remains valid and is based on the premise of deliberate actors who consider the costs and benefits of decisions they are contemplating. To ensure that our deterrent remains effective for future generations, we must continue to apply those basic tenets of deterrence.
President Obama has directed steps that reduce the role of nuclear weapons in our national security strategy. At the same time, the president made clear in his 2009 Prague speech and on other occasions since then that as long as these weapons exist, the United States will maintain a safe, secure, and effective arsenal to deter any adversary and to guarantee that defense to our allies. 
3
4
5
6
Tb prevent extreme circumstances and to ensure a safe, secure, effective, and crechble strategic deterrent for the future, we must sustain and modernize our nucleat; space, and cyber forces and their associated delivery platforms-many of which have been in service far longer than was originally planned or designed. The president's fiscal year 2016 budget request calls for sizeable investments necessary to pursue our plans to fully modernize our strategic deterrent and enhance space and cyber security.' Through investments in the enduring deterrent and supporting infrastructure, we can maintain an effective deterrent while not developing new nuclear warheads. In the coming years, our budget strategy should continue careful and deliberate investments in strategic deterrent concepts and capabilities. This effort is critical and must match the current and future strategic security environment ifwe are to build upon the stable foundation that benefits us all.
As the commander of US Strategic Command, I am proud to lead the dedicated professionals, both military and civilian, whose courageous service deters our adversaries, assures our allies, and enables our democratic way of life. For seven decades, they and others before them have been the heart of our nation's strategic deterrent forces. I salute their service. 0 Notes 1. Mike Bird, "China Just Overtook the US as the World's Largest Economy, • Business Insider, 8 October 2014, http:/ /www.businessinsider.com/ china-overtakes-us-as-worlds-largest-economy-2014-10.
2. The P5 + 1 includes the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (United States, United Kingdom, France, Russia, and China) plus Germany.
3. "Remarks by President Barack Obama, Hradcany Square, Prague, Czech Republic" (Washington, DC: White House, Office of the Press Secretary, 5 April2009), http:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/the__press _office/Remarks-By-President-Barack-Obama-In-Prague-As-Delivered. 
4
In particular, these treaties have focused on strategic (intercontinental-range) delivery vehicles and their nuclear weapons payloads. The 1988 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty-a notable exception-bans the entire category of ground-launched ballistic and cruise missiles with ranges from 500 to 5,500 kilometers. However, completely unconstrained are all other types of nonstrategic nuclear weapon systems.
The United States has withdrawn from Europe the great majority of its nonstrategic nuclear weapons, which now number several hundred, while Russia maintains thousands in its current arsenal. Understandable strategic reasons exist for both US and Russian choices, but the implications of the resulting imbalance are not well understood and are thus potentially dangerous.
The United States started deploying nuclear weapons in Europe in 1954 and accelerated deployments after 1956 during a period of increasing tension with the Soviet Union. West Germany had just gained admission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) while the Soviet Union's transparent ploy for membership was soundly rejected. In short order, the Soviet Union formed its own alliance of mutual defense and assistance that included eight central and eastern European states known as the Warsaw Pact. Over the next decade, the national armies of the Warsaw Pact states were consolidated into a formidable fighting force under Soviet leadership. NATO could ill afford to match the Warsaw Pact's conventional forces, banking instead on the numerically superior US nuclear arsenal to deter Soviet aggression in Europe. This asymmetric deterrence strategy was amplified by the gradual deployment of thousands more nuclear weapons to Europe, distributed among eight NATO member states. Concurrent with this dramatic rise in nonstrategic nuclear weapons, by the mid-1960s the Soviet Union had essentially achieved parity in strategic weapons with the United States, resulting in a perilous stalemate maintained by the specter of mutual assured destruction (MAD).
Fearful that a conventional conflict in Europe would inevitably trigger a nuclear Armageddon, NATO adopted a policy of "flexible response" in 1967. The premise behind flexible response was that in an attempt to avoid an all-out nuclear conflict, a limited number of US nonstrategic nuclear weapons would be used in a situation in which NATO forces found themselves in danger of being overrun by superior Warsaw Pact conventional forces. Notwithstanding the dubious presumption of being able to maintain escalation control in such a scenario, flexible response was largely regarded as a stabilizing influence on the uneasy standoff between NATO and Warsaw Pact forces throughout the remainder of the Cold War.
The number of US nonstrategic nuclear weapons deployed in Europe peaked in 1971 at more than 7,000, including aircraft-delivered gravity bombs, artillery rounds, atomic demolition munitions, gun projectiles, and warheads on surface-to-air \1 SENIOR LEADER PERSPECTIVE missiles and short-as well as medium-range surface-to-surface missiles (Pershing I and IA). Later, in the 1980s, the United States deployed ground-launched cruise missiles (GLCM) and the intermediate-range Pershing II in response to Soviet deployments of the SS-20. Significant unilateral reductions also started in the 1980s, driven in part by physical security concerns but also in response to public opposition to nuclear weapons in many NATO countries. The INF Theaty contnbuted to further reductions, importantly including the Soviet S~4, SS-5, and SS-20 together with US Pershing II ballistic missiles and the US GLCM. With the end of the Cold War, the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and the disappearance ofthe Warsaw Pact, the United States turned its attention to further bilateral strategic arms reductions while continuing its unilateral reductions of nonstrategic nuclear weapons, removing all but the B-61 bombs by 1991. Further reductions in the intervening years have resulted in a present-day arsenal of only several hundred forward-deployed nonstrategic nuclear weapons-a still-tang:tble sign of the continuing US commitment to European security.
In the post-Cold War period, Russia has come to rely on its nonstrategic nuclear arsenal as the only affordable means to offset superior NA1D conventional forces and to protect its extensive borders from potential military incursions-a reversal of the US and Soviet postures during the Cold War. Although both the United States and Russia appear committed to maintaining the strategic balance, Russia also seems intent on modernizing its nonstrategic nuclear arsenal, unconstrained by self-imposed numerical or technological limitations.
Policy makers and experts alike are evidently divided in their reactions to the current situation. Many are not concerned, arguing that US conventional superiority has obviated the need for nonstrategic nuclear weapons, that strategic nuclear forces continue to provide all of the necessary deterrent, and that the likelihood of Russian nuclear aggression is extremely low. Others are much more concerned, pointing to recent Russian bellicosity in Ukraine, Russian doctrinal reliance on nonstrategic nuclear weapons, and the continuation of Russian modernization efforts. We are not convinced by either side's arguments, but we believe that concern is sufficiently warranted and that debate at the national level, supported by in-depth analysis, is imperative.
Our concerns are amplified by the fact that the current situation is by no means static. How the future of nonstrategic nuclear weapons will evolve and the degree to which it may represent an increased or reduced threat are largely unknown. Nevertheless, at least one development appears predictable: the asymmetry in current stockpile numbers is likely to grow. Faced with the push of Russian insistence on the withdrawal of all forward-deployed US nonstrategic nuclear weapons and the pull of continuing unilateral drawdown, America could find that a "nuclear zero" might well be a realistic prospect for at least this component of its nuclear arsenal.
Russian military doctrine for the use of nuclear weapons has also continued to develop, even disavowing the long-standing Soviet pledge of no first use. Indeed, Russian military planners have argued that limited use oflow-yield nuclear weapons could reasonably be expected to de-escalate a conflict and curtail a conventional war of attrition. If the United States eliminates its remaining nonstrategic nuclear weapons, it must rely on threats of direct escalation to strategic nuclear war if Russia vows to use its nonstrategic nuclear weapons. MAD has been the hallmark of nuclear deterrence throughout most of the Cold War and is still generally considered sufficiently credible for attacks against the United States. However, it is not as easy to credit the notion that the United States might respond to first use of a nonstrategic nuclear weapon on a battlefield with either a civilization-ending barrage or even a single strategic nuclear weapon.
A second future development, potentially also extremely important but the subject of less commentary, concerns innovation in the design of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Up until about 20 years ago, the United States was in the vanguard of exploring and extending the boundaries of such design. Since then the US nuclear design community has been constrained merely to sustain the aging remnants of the Cold War stockpile during an era that has seen billionfold strides in computing power, quantum leaps in precision navigation and timing, and striking improvements in engineering methods and material fabrication. It should come as no surprise that nuclear capabilities under development in other countries could be approachingand in the case of Russia, could have surpassed-those of the United States. Most notably, Russia has made no secret of its intent to pursue highly accurate, low-yield nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Public statements by senior Russian officials have hinted at the possibility that these weapons might represent a new generation of high-fusion fraction weapons with lethal effects considerably more discriminate than those of current weapons.
The effects of advanced high-fusion fraction nuclear weapons can be markedly different than those from fission weapons of equivalent yield, with attributes that give them a decided advantage in certain war-fighting scenarios. Of particular significance, high-fusion fraction weapons have enhanced lethal-radiation footprints and reduced blast and shock footprints compared to those of fission weapons of equivalent yield.
The possibility that high-fusion fraction devices could undergo further refinement to attain pure fusion status poses additional dilemmas. Current legal proscriptions may not even cover such hypothetical designs. The United States has been resolute about excluding fusion research from all arms control treaties so as not to hinder research in inertial confinement fusion, most notably at the National Ignition Facility. Thus, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), signed but not ratified by the United States, contains no provisions for limiting any testing involving nuclear energy release from pure fusion reactions. This treaty loophole opens the unintended possibility that treaty parties could legally develop and test pure fusion designs.
In any event, such tests would lack the standard radionuclide signature, effectively evading the only nuclear-unique CTBT monitoring protocol. Thus, pure fusion designs, if achievable, would also be inherently subversive of prospects for negotiating arms control treaties by undermining traditional verification regimes.
A pure fusion device would also pose a complementary detection problem for global surveillance efforts during development and production. The extant global nuclear detection architecture, designed to recognize the radiative signatures of uranium and plutonium, would prove totally ineffective against pure deuteriumtritium fusion devices. Currently no US investment exists in developing detection systems tuned to deuterium-tritium fusion fuel.
Nonstrategic weapons have largely been ignored in the drive to control the strategic arms competition, resulting in a significant numerical disparity in current US-Russian arsenals. We are aware that other individuals have expressed concerns about this asymmetry and that this subject is on the US agenda for consideration in a potential successor to the New START Theaty. Th provide a proper assessment of these concerns and evaluate candidate policies to address them, we see the need for much more in-depth analysis. We call for a concerted intellectual focus on the full spectrum of issues raised by nonstrategic nuclear weapons-of which the US-Russian imbalance is the primary, but not the only, one-before any further reductions in strategic or nonstrategic nuclear weapons occur. Studying these issues requires appropriately challenging the conventional wisdom about nonstrategic nuclear weapons, much of which was born and honed during the Cold War. Examples of such conventional wisdom include the following:
• The asymmetry in US and Russian nonstrategic nuclear forces does (or does not) matter. Without justification supported by analysis, either assertion is vacu- ous. Most worrisome is the unjustified extrapolation of the argument that since asymmetry does not matter, we can and should unilaterally remove all nonstrategic nuclear weapons from Europe.
• The strategic nuclear balance trumps the nonstrategic nuclear imbalance. This statement places extreme confidence in the prediction that Russian leaders will believe that their use of nonstrategic nuclear weapons will inevitably lead to strategic nuclear war and thus be deterred from such use.
• We have conventional superiority, so nonstrategic nuclear weapons are not important. We do not have conventional superiority everywhere, at all times, and in all circumstances. Further, even if the location, time, and circumstances all align in our favor, higher Russian stakes in any conflict on its border could motivate Russia to use nonstrategic nuclear weapons because of our conventional superiority.
• US nonstrategic nuclear weapons in Europe help maintain cohesion within the NATO alliance, discourage other NATO states from acquiring their own nuclear weapons, and represent a critical rung, short of Armageddon, in the escalation ladder. An alternative plausible perspective is that they are an anachronism from the Cold War without strategic purpose.
• An important distinction exists between strategic and nonstrategic weapons. Much was made of this distinction during the Cold War although it was never entirely clear just what the distinction was. It is increasingly apparent that the terminology is artificial and serves more to muddy thinking than clarify it.
We cannot rely forever on what we once thought was true. The world is continuously changing, and our thinking must do so as well.  At its core, deterrence involves the act of influencing behavior by manipulating an adversary's cost-benefit analysis. Still, following the attacks of 11 September 2001 (9/11), many policy makers and academics were quick to dismiss the strategic role that deterrence could play in counterterrorism policy. This lack of confidence has been continually echoed by policy makers and scholars alike. Chiefly, former president George W. Bush concluded that the traditional concepts of deterrence were meaningless in dealing with terrorist networks, which had no nation to claim as their own and whose members were willing to die for their cause. 
1
2
Alternatively, many people contend that the road to real success in foreign policy entails hard power alone, often in the form of military strength. However, we believe that it is not solely military power that leads to successful deterrence but the calculated and complementary application of each instrument of power. 
3
Fighting for Space
Initial responses to deterrence strategies in the war on terror labeled them relics of the Cold War era, considering them "too limiting and too naïve" to be applicable for this type of warfare. 
4
5
6
7
8
The lack of diplomatic counterterrorist deterrence became widely evident following the declared success in Iraq and victory over al-Qaeda. Unfortunately, the rebranding of al-Qaeda and the emergence of ISIL/DAESH have led many analysts to believe that the withdrawal from Iraq was premature and that the lack of diplomatic counterterrorist deterrence in-country precipitated the rise of this new, more dangerous threat. This unexpected emergence resulted in the resumption of operations (i.e., Operation Inherent Resolve) in the region as a means to destroy the threat and deny regional influence. To ensure that a similar unraveling of achievements in Afghanistan does not occur, we must put careful thought into counterterrorist deterrence strategies. These should continue to delegitimize terrorist organizations that threaten to undermine regional and global security, while simultaneously offering to citizens alternative pathways that carry local legitimacy.
One of the major issues with counterterrorist deterrence strategies is the presence of differentiated goals that accompany power changes. The confrontational approach of former president Hamid Karzai and diplomatic quarrels with the West, along with a regional war of rhetoric with Pakistan, proved costly to his previously earned goodwill with America. 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
After all, terrorists are highly motivated and willing to risk nearly anything for their goal. The political objectives of these groups must be acknowledged and examined in detail, for they are often broad, idealistic, unclear, and/or ambiguous. These groups and their members are also difficult to locate, operating transnationally with little central control. Additionally, this threat is supported by many different entities, both passive and active, and can even include the support of US allies (e.g., Pakistan's intelligence services and military). This fact complicates the ability to effectively use traditional deterrence strategies like the ones from the Cold War era. Besides state supporters, a number of other elements comprise a terrorist organization, including recruiters, religious leaders, financiers, and other levels of leadership. Ultimately and ideally, all must be deterred. 
16
17
New strategies like this work more effectively at deterring terrorist organizations because they not only affect their support structures within the nation but also hinder strategic interactions at the international level. 
18
19
20
Terrorists have crossed international borders, attacked from within, established cells, chosen targets, and executed attacks with ease. This ability has become apparent in the last few months when the world witnessed terrorist activities by Boko Haram in Nigeria, where hundreds of thousands of citizens are at risk; strikes on innocent civilians and businesses in Paris; the kidnapping and execution of Japanese and Jordanian citizens by ISIL/DAESH; an attack against Parliament Hill in Ottawa, Canada, and a comparable strike in Sydney, Australia; "lone wolf" attacks in New York City and Copenhagen; and the continuation of tensions in Egypt, Mali, Afghanistan, and Pakistan. It is incredibly difficult to prevent these attacks when the most explicit strategies are reactive ex post facto military responses rather than preemptive counterterrorist deterrence strategies that seek to enlist local populations and co-opt them positively to the antiterrorist agenda and interests of global peace.
Many differing opinions and schools of thought exist regarding the deterrence of terrorism. A number of individuals believe that such deterrence is simply not possible, concentrating instead on degrading terrorist capability after the fact. They consider deterring terrorism in any form a waste of valuable resources and a fruit-less effort. Others think it possible to use classical deterrence theory against terrorism, and still others maintain that although it is feasible to deter terrorism, the strategy must be modified significantly to have any chance of success. This article finds itself squarely in the latter camp.
People who claim that deterrence is either ineffective or impossible against terrorists have the idea that counterterrorism campaigns depend on three main beliefs: (1) that terrorists are irrational and therefore unresponsive to the cost-benefit calculation required for deterrence; (2) that because some terrorists are willing to die for their cause, they cannot be deterred by any means, even if rational; and (3) that even if terrorists were afraid of punishment, they cannot be deterred because after they have carried out an attack (most notably with suicide bombers), there is no physical location subject to retaliation. 
21
22
Another school of thought-cumulative deterrence-is not the deterrence utilized during the Cold War but a hybrid form whose success does not depend on an allor-nothing approach. Rather, it considers the overall impact of the threat and allows for some failings against terrorist activity. This strategy is utilized through the considered application of threats and military force, along with a range of assorted incentives. It relies on the belief that the war on terrorism will not be decided with a single overwhelming blow and that deterrence efforts will not fail if terrorist activity takes place. Instead, it acknowledges that deterrence requires extreme patience, unshakable resolve, international cooperation, and a creative, harmonized mix of defensive and offensive measures with an acceptance of occasional "failures. 
"23
24
25
26
27
28
The United States must take a step back in the push towards democracy in terroristharboring states in favor of strengthening moderate Muslims in these regions by continuing homeland deterrence strategies and reallocating resources for multinational partnerships that aid in building the legitimacy of local governments. Finally, the effective deterrence of terrorists demands a significant change in the media's portrayal of these groups and their attacks. This deterrence strategy is by no means quick and depends on taking stock in short-, medium-, and long-term trajectories.
To legitimize governments where terror groups operate, one must offer alternatives to terrorism-for instance, the enactment of robust programs that run parallel to schools, hospitals, and mosques run by Islamic extremists. The programs will work in much the same way that after-school programs provide legal alternatives to crime in the United States. Small movements elsewhere around the globe have enjoyed success of this kind, including establishment of the Basque Autonomous Community in the post-Franco Spanish constitution and the Turkish army, which attempted to eliminate extremist recruitment among Turkish Kurds in the mid-1990s by opening health and educational facilities. 
29
30
These governments should also consider deradicalization/rehabilitation programs for recruited terrorists and offer assistance to their families, allowing them to reenter society. Such programs will need financial support, education, and job training for women and children. The reintroduction of detainees into the community must be accompanied by strict oversight and opportunities for them to succeed. There were similarly successful programs in Europe during the 1980s when Spain pardoned members of the ETA Basque separatist organization and again when the Italian government offered leniency to members of the Red Brigades in exchange for information that led to the apprehension of nonreformed members. 
31
32
33
34
All of these deterrence measures must occur in tandem with a removal of the global media's focus on terrorists, which fuels and/or glorifies their actions. Global media and local governments must work together towards the common interest of deterring terrorism. Terrorists need publicity to gain attention, inspire fear, and secure a favorable community standing for their cause, all of which the media tends to offer unwittingly. Any publicity of their capabilities alerts the world to the existence of a problem that cannot be ignored, leading to the legitimizing of their group and/or the romanticizing of their cause. Terrorists also need this coverage to amplify panic, spread fear, and facilitate economic loss, such as a decline in investment and tourism, causing members of the local population to lose faith in their government and the latter's ability to protect them. 
35
36
37
Diplomatic counterterrorist deterrence strategies that rely less on reactive military force and more on preemptive intelligence gathering, the rule of law, cooperation with the media, and promotion of domestic security-alongside the building of civil society alternatives to terrorist organizations-will diminish the widespread appeal of terror organizations. This strategy is far from the all-or-nothing, do-or-die approach to deterrence during the Cold War and is more efficient and oriented towards the long term than today's militaristic, reactionary strategies to terrorist acts. This approach builds on victories achieved over the short, medium, and long term, designed to wear down the resolve of the enemy and to develop fully functional societies with an actively included citizenry. Such a deterrence strategy requires multilayered processes structured to create the greatest number of obstacles to terrorist organizations, making it too formidable a challenge to carry out operations, severely undermining recruiting opportunities, and ultimately destroying terrorists' ability to survive by depriving them of operational and personnel assets. Diplomatic counterterrorist deterrence does not eliminate the need for a strong military capability, but it does go a long way in reclaiming deterrence as a concept and a policy for an area that sorely needs new ideas and innovation.  Notes SSgt Megan J. Munoz, USAF Sergeant Munoz (BA, American Military University) is currently a graduate student at Bellevue University, Bellevue, Nebraska, where she is earning a master of science degree in international security and intelligence studies. She has served as an intelligence analyst for the US Air Force and section chief of the Expeditionary Intelligence Support program for the 423rd Mobility Training Squadron, Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, New Jersey. Having accumulated more than 1,000 teaching hours, she is also a key instructor at the US Air Force Expeditionary Center, providing instruction and intelligence support for individuals, courses, and customers dealing with combat, mobility, and counterterrorism operations. She previously served as an analyst at the National Air and Space Intelligence Center, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, where she collected, managed, analyzed, authored, and briefed critical intelligence. Furthermore, she issued products that offered predictive analysis for threats faced by US Department of Defense missions taking place in the Pacific, Europe, the Middle East, and Southeast Asian regions. Additionally, Sergeant Munoz has served on multiple deployments to Afghanistan as an intelligence analyst and a regional counterterrorism/political analyst.
Dr. Crosston (BA, Colgate University; MA, University of London; PhD, Brown University) is a professor of political science, holder of the Miller Chair for Industrial and International Security, and director of the International Security and Intelligence Studies program at Bellevue University, Bellevue, Nebraska. He has authored two well-received books, several book chapters, and over 20 peer-reviewed articles in numerous peerreviewed journals. His research agenda continues to address counterterrorism, intelligence analysis, failed democratization, and cyber war / ethics. His works have been translated into Russian, Arabic, Chinese, Hebrew, Spanish, and Uzbek. He has worked across the globe promoting interaction between intelligence agencies that share common interests but have trouble overcoming ideological, cultural, and historical obstacles; further, he has tried to foster improved collaboration between the academic and intelligence communities. In 2013 Professor Crosston was named Outstanding Instructor by the International Association for Intelligence Education and received the Commander's Coin for Integrity, Service, and Excellence from the 97th Intelligence Squadron for facilitating foreign language study for Airmen at Offutt AFB, Nebraska. In 2014 he was invited to be a key speaker on "intelligence student best practices" at the Defense Intelligence Agency for the Intelligence Community's Centers for Academic Excellence Senior Advisory Board. T he Department of Defense faces a time of transition as it works to address today's crises while preparing for tomorrow's threats. 
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Overlooking regional variations in threats can cause a multitude of problems for American defense planners. First, they may overlook opportunities that exist in SWA. Basing fighters outside effective Iranian TBM attack could be a powerful component of an American war plan, but one would first have to recognize it and then act upon it to create any benefit. By misdiagnosing the Iranian TBM threat, planners could overlook this opportunity. Second, misunderstanding the regional variation of threats can produce misallocation of resources. For example, if the threat to air bases is much severer in East Asia than in SWA, then that situation implies that scarce resources for improving the resilience of air bases should be spent first in East Asia. 
10
The remainder of this article proceeds in five main sections. First, it discusses why defense planners worry about Iran's TBM forces. Second, it examines the capabilities of Iran's and China's TBMs as a means of evaluating their effectiveness at striking key targets on air bases such as runways and parking ramps. Third, the article compares and contrasts Iranian and Chinese ballistic missile doctrine, noting how each country envisions using its TBMs. Fourth, it analyzes how each country's TBM capabilities interact with the bases available to US forces in each region in order to assess the degree to which the TBM threat constrains US basing options in each theater. Finally, the article discusses conclusions drawn from this analysis and implications for US force posture, force structure, and ability to project force globally.
Iran's ballistic missile capabilities represent an ongoing concern for defense planners in the Middle East, Europe, and the United States. In 2009 Secretary of Defense Robert Gates stated that "the threat from Iran's short-and medium-range ballistic missiles . . . is developing more rapidly than previously projected." 
11
Even though the role of Iran's TBMs as a coercive tool has been discussed and although defense analysts frequently mention their war-fighting utility, no operational analysis of the ability of those missiles to accomplish military missions has been conducted. 
12
[Iran is] actively testing and fielding new ballistic missile systems. Many of these systems are more accurate and have greater ranges than the Scud-class missiles used by Iraq in the 1991 Gulf War. As the inventories and capabilities of such systems continue to grow, U.S. forces deployed forward will Heim no longer enjoy the relative sanctuary that they have had in conflicts since the end of the Cold War. Air bases, ports of debarkation, logistics hubs, command centers, and other assets essential to hightempo military operations could be at risk. 
13
14
15
16
17
Iran has the largest ballistic missile force in the Middle East. Overall inventory estimates vary, but sources generally agree that Iran has more than 1,000 ballistic missiles of various types. The capabilities of this inventory, however, are uneven. Most of the Iranian ballistic missile force is derived from Soviet Scud missiles, which, in turn, were derived from the German V-2. These are liquid-fueled missiles, which are less mobile and less responsive than solid-fueled missiles. Jane's Strategic Weapon Systems reports that the guidance systems of these missiles have improved, compared to those of the Soviet Scuds, but they remain relatively inaccurate. 
18
19
20
21
22
1
Although Iran has the largest ballistic missile force in the Middle East, China currently has the most active and advanced ballistic missile program in the world. It has fielded more than 1,000 highly accurate conventional SRBMs and is currently expanding its conventional MRBM force. All of these missiles are solid-fueled, roadmobile systems that possess high accuracies (less than 50 m CEPs). China has de-Heim veloped a wide range of payloads for these missiles, including a variety of submunitions. (Table 
2
24
26
27
This analysis compares Iranian and Chinese TBM capabilities across two dimensions: accuracy and flexibility, with the bulk of the analysis focusing on the differences in accuracy. These characteristics play key roles in determining the ability of ballistic missiles to fulfill a military goal such as hitting the runways or parking ramps of an air base.
Accuracy. The first operational consequence of the differing Chinese and Iranian ballistic missile capabilities arises from their relative accuracies. Most Iranian systems are so inaccurate that they likely could not hit military targets. To illustrate, we begin by considering how many missiles would need to be fired to hit a notional target of 100 m in diameter (e.g., a sizable building on an air base, such as a very large hangar). As figure 
1
28
29
30
31
2
32
3
Therefore, missiles would have to make two cuts on each runway in order to deny a nominal fighter MOS of 5,000 feet, as illustrated in figure 
3
33
34
35
3
36
Minimum operating surface 0 TBM submunition dispersal footprint
Since Iran's TBMs seem so poorly suited for striking military targets, what are they good for? Specifically, their accuracy is sufficient to hit large targets like cities. The downtown area of Dubai, for example, is at least 5 km in diameter-greater than or equal to the CEP of all of Iran's missiles. A TBM falling inside this area would create a great deal of fear, regardless of how many people died directly as a result of the TBM strike. 
37
Flexibility. In addition to their greater accuracy, Chinese TBMs are more flexible than Iran's arsenal because China's entire force is solid fueled, possessing satellite navigation capabilities and a high degree of mobility. The following discussion briefly considers each of these three factors in turn.
Solid-fueled systems enjoy multiple advantages over liquid-fueled systems, which must be fueled before they can fire, therefore complicating the launch process and requiring more support vehicles than those needed by solid-fueled missiles. This additional time can give an adversary a greater opportunity to find and attack the missiles before they fire. The fact that liquid-fueled missile batteries must have propellant vehicles can increase the signature of a unit, making it easier for an adversary to find. Solid-propellant missiles are also safer (highly energetic liquid rocket fuels can be extremely toxic) and easier to maintain in the field, producing a more effective force. Further, solid-fueled missiles can be fired more quickly than liquid systems, helping them strike fleeting targets (assuming adequate accuracy and targeting). Solid systems also accelerate more quickly during their boost phase, making them harder to hit with boost-phase intercept systems and thus more survivable. Clearly, China's all-solid-fueled force is more responsive, flexible, and survivable than Iran's largely liquid-fueled force.
Satellite navigation updates enable a missile to know its position precisely, based upon an external frame of reference. Therefore, missile accuracy is less dependent upon presurveyed sites and precise azimuth alignment before firing, leading to more potential launch sites, harder-to-find sites, faster launches, and more accurate missiles.
All of China's conventionally armed TBMs are fired from transporter erector launchers, but some of Iran's Shahab 3 MRBMs launch from fixed sites and others from mobile erector launchers. An adversary can presurvey fixed sites and attack at the onset of hostilities. Because mobile missiles are harder to find, they are more difficult to attack, but all mobile missiles are not equal. Mobile erector launchers can have less off-road capability than transporter erector launchers, shrinking their potential operating area and possibly making it easier for an adversary to find them. 
38
The threat posed by ballistic missiles depends at least partially upon how a country plans to employ these weapons. Iran's ballistic missile program dates back to the mid-1980s. Spurred by Iraqi attacks on Iranian cities, Iran obtained Scud B SRBMs from Libya and North Korea, ultimately launching approximately 100 TBMs at Iraqi cities over the course of the war. 
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
In contrast to Iran, China's People's Liberation Army (PLA) has developed a doctrine for employing conventional TBMs as part of integrated military campaigns. The Second Artillery Corps was established in 1958, and until the early 1990s it was primarily concerned with nuclear-armed ballistic missiles. 
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
The Second Artillery serves as a critical enabler for many PLA operations. For example, in a Taiwan scenario, it could use its SRBMs to make a massed and simultaneous strike on all Taiwanese air force bases at the outset of the conflict. 
53
54
Realist international-relations theorists focus on capabilities rather than intentions since the latter are inherently uncertain, difficult to discern, and more quickly changeable than capabilities. On the one hand, in theory a cataclysmic event or sudden shift in threat perception could cause intentions to change overnight. On the other hand, developing, testing, and fielding a new military capability can take years. Concentrating on the capabilities of a potential adversary and ignoring intentions constitute a conservative, risk-averse approach that errs on the side of overestimating vulnerability. Given the stakes involved in potential wars, this approach is prudent. For this reason, this article first considered capabilities.
Addressing capabilities exclusively, however, can ignore the importance of organizational culture. How militaries talk and think about using force shapes their actual employment of capabilities. In the case of Iran and China, a stark contrast exists between how they have talked about the utility of conventional TBMs. Iran discusses them as a psychological deterrent with effects in excess of their physically destructive power while China's doctrine views them as a war-fighting capability expected to destroy military targets and thus attain objectives as part of an integrated military campaign. Both forces could be seen as deterrents, but the Iranian approach seeks to deter through cost imposition while the Chinese approach seeks to deter through denial. This difference implies that, without a major discontinuity (examined by the worst-case analysis in the following section), one would expect Iran to continue to develop a threat-in-being while China will continue to develop a war-fighting capability. 
55
Although the capabilities and inventories of TBMs can change, geography is largely immutable. The geography of SWA makes it more difficult for Iran to plan a TBM campaign against US air bases in SWA than for China to do so in the Western Pacific. SWA offers a host of possible basing locations. A total of 422 airfields with runways longer than 7,500 feet lie within 2,800 km of Iran. 
56
4
57
The results for Iran's current TBM arsenal are shown in figure 
5
58
6
59
3
7
A detailed analysis of the capabilities of Iran's existing ballistic missile force clearly indicates the size of the gulf between Iran's threat to US bases in SWA and China's in East Asia. Iranian claims to be able to "obliterate all . . . (US) bases" in SWA are bluster and bluff. 
62
Iran has previously made false claims about its military capabilities, but those concerning the ability of its TBMs to destroy regional air bases are particularly important to counter. 
63
64
Recognizing the limits of Iran's TBM force also illustrates a broader point about the variability of A2/AD threats around the world. Numerous studies and American defense policy documents list a host of countries developing A2/AD capabilities that challenge the ability of US military forces to operate. 
65
66
67
To clearly understand the broader military challenge posed by Iran, American national security planners must recognize that Iranian claims about its TBM force's current ability to deny US air operations are a bluff. Prudence demands that defense analysts continue to closely monitor Iran's ongoing efforts to modernize its TBM force, but neither the American public nor the Iranian leadership should mistake this attention for intimidation.  6. A similar comparative methodology could be used to assess the cross-theater variation in other A2/AD threats, including surface-to-air missile capabilities, submarines, and mining capabilities.
7. Of course, this conclusion depends upon the open-source assessments used to evaluate the capabilities of Iranian missiles.
8. This conclusion follows directly from the limited accuracy, payloads, and ranges of Iran's missiles and does not factor in any American active missile defenses such as Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) batteries, Patriot batteries, or sea-based SM-3 interceptors. Given that the United States and its partners possess these capabilities, it implies that air operations in the face of Iranian missile attack would be even more feasible than the analysis presented here would imply. Regarding US partners bolstering missile defenses, see David E. Sanger and Eric Schmitt, "U.S. Speeding Up Missile Defenses in Persian Gulf," New York Times, 30 January 2010, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/31 /world/middleeast/31missile.html. 9. This analysis does not explore the potential coercive effect that Iran's threatened or actual attacks on Gulf Cooperation Council members or Israeli cities would have on whether regional states decide to grant the United States access to air bases.
10. Some investments that improve air base resilience, such as rapid runway repair kits, could be deployed to different regions. Others, such as permanent hardened aircraft shelters, are tied to specific locations.
11. "DoD News Briefing with Secretary Gates and Gen. Cartwright from the Pentagon," US Department of Defense, 17 September 2009, http://www.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=4479. 55. Iranians' public statements that they plan to attack US air bases do not necessarily invalidate this perspective. A plausible Iranian strategy would be to bluff regarding the capabilities of their missiles in the hopes that doing so might deter the United States from resorting to force or might deter regional states from providing access to the United States for fear of becoming a target.
56. The figure 
2
57. Calculation of the number of runway aim points is based upon a simple formula: Ap = Rounddown(RW/5,000) where Ap is number of aim points per runway, RW is the length of the runway in feet, and 5,000 is the length of a nominal fighter MOS in feet. Because of the difficulty of getting high-resolution parking-area data for all of these airfields, we assume that each airfield has only two parking-apron aim points. This underestimate is very conservative because many airfields in the region would require more than two submunition-armed TBMs to cover all of their aircraft parking areas.
58. Of course, it is implausible that the US Air Force would be based at all of the air bases within a given range bin, but it is also implausible that Iran would fire only a single salvo at an air base. For example, runways must be reattacked because combat engineers can repair damaged sections of runway to reopen an MOS. 62. "Iran Missiles Can Hit." 63. For example, Iran unveiled a purported stealth fighter in early 2013 that was widely debunked as a fake. See, for example, Jeremy Binnie, "Iran Unveils 'Stealth Fighter'," Jane's Defense Weekly, 4 February 2013. It is also important to temper concerns voiced by American defense analysts regarding the potential threat to air bases from Iranian TBMs.
64. If Iran developed a nuclear warhead and integrated it onto an SRBM or MRBM, then this new capability would threaten unsheltered aircraft much further afield, representing a more credible punishment threat. Nuclear-armed ballistic missiles would be less dependent upon precision to destroy their targets, but Iranian leaders would likely have a higher threshold for their use; consequently, threats to use them in minor crises would be less credible. 67. For example, a recent study of the Iranian A2/AD issue concluded that in the future, US forces would need to be able to "fight from extended ranges." Gunzinger and Dougherty, Outside-In, 94. As this article has shown, however, air bases more than 500 km away from Iran currently enjoy effective
In addition, interest in nuclear weapons appears to be growing in the Middle East, South Asia, and East Asia, along with the increased possibility of a nuclear crisis in those regions. For these and other reasons, the Eurocentric deterrence regime and paradigm that characterized the definition of nuclear threats during the Cold War have been superseded by a twenty-first-century matrix of widely distributed regional threats in which nuclear arsenals are commingled with nationalism and other potentially virulent strains of political destabilization. This shifting international context also affects our understanding of prompt nuclear attack, previously conceptualized in a bipolar context. Now things have changed-and might change even more.
From the preceding perspective, this study revisits the problem of prompt or fast attack with respect to nuclear deterrence and crisis stability. 
2
Prompt military attacks are essentially defensive strategies carried out by offensive means. Motivations for prompt attacks can be diverse, and the following list is not exhaustive: (1) the actor's expectation that an enemy attack is inevitable although not necessarily imminent, (2) the actor's expectation that an enemy attack is both inevitable and imminent, (3) the actor's estimate that a "window of opportunity" exists during which a defender may be caught unawares and thereby disarmed or militarily disadvantaged to great effect, (4) the actor's military predilection and operational codes are such that military-strategic surprise commends itself as a strategy au courant for the nation's high command or its political leadership, and (5) the actor's expectation that offensive military technology is superior to defensive technology, especially if employed to great effect during the initial period of war. 
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Kennedy's statement was a message to Moscow not only about US deterrence of any Soviet attack but also about the Soviet Union's responsibility to prevent any unsanctioned or accidental launch of Soviet weapons from Cuban soil. The president's concern was not misplaced. As we now know, Cuban president Fidel Castro assumed the United States had already made a decision to invade Cuba and urged Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev to take the nuclear initiative. As Khrushchev recounts in his memoirs, Castro suggested that in order to prevent our nuclear missiles from being destroyed, we should launch a preemptive strike against the United States. He concluded that an attack was unavoidable and that this attack had to be preempted. In other words, we needed to immediately deliver a nuclear missile strike against the United States. When we read this I, and all the others, looked at each other, and it became clear to us that Fidel totally failed to understand our purpose. 
12
The world has never witnessed a two-sided nuclear conflict, but the Cold War was marked by nuclear competition between the Americans and Soviets that taught hard lessons. Among them was the fact that leaders could not avoid an outbreak of nuclear war simply by amassing larger numbers of weapons. The composition of nuclear forces and the performance attributes of various long-range delivery systems (missiles and bombers) figured into operational and political aspects of deterrence. Then, too, military doctrines for the prevention or deterrence of war-and their relationship to assumptions about nuclear war fighting if deterrence failed-played into the likelihood for crisis and arms-race stability between the Americans and the Soviets. 
13
14
Paradoxically, the predominance of offensive over defensive technology during the Cold War did not lead to more surprise attacks, as it might have prior to nuclear weapons, but to a protracted military stalemate. The inability of either the Soviet Union or the United States to write a plan for a credible first-strike capability (denying to the defender his second-strike capability) made preemption or preventive war seem unappealing. This perception remained true even during periods of US nuclear monopoly or clear superiority in numbers of weapons and delivery systems. With regard to preemption, the Cuban missile crisis provided a tutorial for leaders about the dangers of a competition in risk taking that could lead to a mistaken decision for nuclear first strike due to fears based on misperception. As the expressive Premier Khrushchev ruminated in his secret letter to President Kennedy on Friday, 26 October, If you have not lost your self-control and sensibly conceive what this might lead to, then, Mr. President, you and I ought not now to pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knot of war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter the knot will be tied. And a moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight that even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it, and what that would mean is not for me to explain to you, because you yourself understand perfectly of what terrible forces our countries dispose. 
15
It was left to Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev to make official what nuclearweapons scientists and knowledgeable military planners had understood for several decades: a nuclear war cannot be won and should never be fought. To some extent, this declaration was gratuitous, given the scientific knowledge available for a long time about the effects of nuclear weapons. 
16
Although the construct or policy option of a preventive nuclear war became institutionally unthinkable in Washington and Moscow, the possibility of inadvertent nuclear war or escalation to nuclear from conventional war was very real during the Cold War. This legacy has carried forward into the post-Cold War and twentyfirst-century world. The term inadvertent means something other than accidental war, such as the possibility of a test misfire or other technology failure that leads to war. Inadvertent nuclear war is the result of an unforeseen combination of human Cimbala and technical factors, pulling both sides in a nuclear crisis over the brink despite their shared interest in avoiding war.
The likelihood of inadvertent nuclear war between two states is based on their political intentions, military capabilities, approaches to crisis management, the personalities of leaders, standard operating procedures for the management of nuclear forces during peacetime and in crisis, and other variables. 
17
For example, during Able Archer 83, a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) command and communications exercise that tested procedures for the release of alliance nuclear weapons in November 1983, an apparent mind-set among some Soviet intelligence officials led them to conclude (temporarily) that the exercise might be the "real thing"-an actual set of preparatory moves for NATO nuclear release and a possible first strike against Soviet forces and installations in Europe. 
18
19
20
A post-Cold War example of a scenario for inadvertent nuclear war occurred in January 1995 during the launch of a Norwegian scientific rocket for the purpose of studying the aurora borealis. The initial phase of the rocket's trajectory resembled that of a ballistic missile launched from a nuclear submarine and possibly headed for Russian territory. Russian early warning systems detected the launch and passed the information to military headquarters. Russian president Boris Yeltsin, the defense minister, and the chief of the Russian general staff were connected via their emergency communication network. For the first time, the Russian president opened his secure briefcase or "football" with nuclear codes for launch authorization. The crisis passed when the rocket trajectory eventually veered away from any possible threat to Russia. The operational misinterpretation of the Norwegian rocket launch was made possible by an earlier bureaucratic mistake. Norwegian officials had notified the Russian foreign ministry well in advance of the launch date that the rocket test was scheduled and had identified its mission. For unknown reasons, the Russian foreign ministry failed to pass that information to the defense ministry or other military headquarters in time to avoid confusion.
The Russian annexation of Crimea in March 2014 and subsequent destabilization of eastern Ukraine were not immediately seen as a nuclear confrontation between Russia and NATO or the United States. Nevertheless, the possibility of an expanded conventional war between Ukrainian and Russian proxy forces took place beneath the umbrella of US and Russian nuclear weapons. This nuclear shadow over the Russian use of unconventional warfare / political warfare in Ukraine and the responses from NATO and the European Union had two somewhat opposite effects. On the one hand, the presence of Russian and NATO nuclear weapons in Europe made any geographical expansion of the conflict beyond the borders of Ukraineespecially into any NATO country-particularly dangerous. On the other hand, each side could exploit the other's awareness-and fear-of that danger to obtain desired political objectives. Thus, the US-NATO and Russian proxy war over Ukraine was not only a contest in combat activeness and military effectiveness in Ukraine but also a competition in risk management and crisis manipulation. 
21
Another consideration relative to nuclear stability in the present century is that the Americans and their NATO allies shared with the Soviets and Russians a commonality of culture and historical experience. Future threats to American or Russian security from WMDs may be presented by states or nonstate actors motivated by cultural and social predispositions neither easily understood by those in the West nor subject to favorable manipulation during a crisis.
The spread of nuclear weapons in Asia (including those parts of the Middle East with geostrategic proximity or reach into Asia) presents a complicated mosaic of possibilities in this regard. States with nuclear forces of variable force structure, operational experience, and C2 systems will be thrown into a matrix of complex political, social, and cultural crosscurrents contributory to the possibility of war. In addition to the existing nuclear powers in Asia, others may seek nuclear weapons if they feel threatened by regional rivals or hostile alliances. Containment of nuclear proliferation in Asia is a desirable political objective for all of the obvious reasons. Nevertheless, the present century is unlikely to see the nuclear hesitancy or risk aversion that marked the Cold War, in part because the military and political discipline imposed by the Cold War superpowers no longer exists but also because states in Asia have new aspirations for regional or global respect. 
22
The spread of ballistic missiles and other nuclear-capable delivery systems in Asia-or in the Middle East with reach into Asia-is especially dangerous because plausible adversaries live close together and are already engaged in ongoing disputes about territory or other issues. The Cold War Americans and Soviets required missiles and airborne delivery systems of intercontinental range to strike at one another's strategic centers of gravity. However, short-range ballistic missiles or fighter-bombers suffice for India and Pakistan to launch attacks at one another with potentially "strategic" effects. China shares borders with Russia, North Korea, India, and Pakistan; Russia, with China and North Korea; India, with Pakistan and China; Pakistan, with India and China; and so on.
The short flights of ballistic missiles between the cities or military forces of contiguous states will leave very little time for warning and attack assessment by the defender. Conventionally armed missiles could easily be mistaken for tactical nuclear first use. Fighter-bombers appearing over the horizon could just as easily be carrying nuclear weapons as conventional ordnance. In addition to the challenges posed by shorter flight times and uncertain weapons loads, potential victims of nuclear attack in Asia may also have forces vulnerable to a first strike and C2 systems that increase decision pressures for rapid-and possibly mistaken-retaliation.
This potpourri of possibilities assails conventional wisdom about nuclear deterrence and proliferation on the part of policy makers and academic theorists. For policy makers in the United States and NATO, spreading nuclear and other WMDs in Asia could profoundly shift the geopolitics of mass destruction from a European center of gravity (in the twentieth century) to an Asian and/or a Middle Eastern center of gravity (in the present century). 
23
24
25
For theorists, the argument that the spread of nuclear weapons might be fully compatible with international stability, and perhaps even supportive of international security, may be less sustainable than hitherto believed. 
26
These arguments for a less alarmist view of nuclear proliferation take comfort from the history of nuclear policy in the "first nuclear age," roughly corresponding to the Cold War. 
27
28
29
30
This article offers few words of consolation. On the evidence of past behavior, preemptive nuclear attacks are more likely and therefore more in need of deterrence or other means of avoidance than are preventive nuclear strikes. This finding has special pertinence during the present century, in which nuclear decision making is not as "locked down" by strategic nuclear bipolarity as it was during the Cold War. Existing nuclear weapons states will need to work out joint mechanisms for handling possibly destabilizing crises in the Middle East and in South or East Asia that might otherwise boil over due to regional actors with grievances, nukes, and insufficient experience in crisis management. Stability of a regional balance of nuclear terror resides mainly in the policies of states and in the intentions of their leaders.
The numbers of nuclear-armed states in a region do not by themselves determine the probability of nuclear crisis or war.
Another issue with respect to current and future nuclear deterrence is that although nuclear adventurism and fatal attraction to prompt attacks may start in the regions, they may not end there. For example, a crowded nuclear Asia also threatens to expand "regional" rivalries into global confrontations because the Asian nuclear club includes nuclear weapons states with global ambitions. This concern about horizontal escalation from a regional nuclear conflict has led some experts to recommend that the United States adopt an unconditional "no-first-use" policy for its nuclear weapons and urge other nuclear weapons states to do likewise. An agreed multilateral no-first-use policy would allegedly help prevent an outbreak of nuclear war in Asia and contain such a war if it occurred. 
31
32
2. The term anticipatory attacks is used instead of prompt attacks in some analyses (see the following discussion and notes).
3. As Charles Glaser has pointed out, disagreement among theorists about the requirements of deterrence does not necessarily imply disagreement about the basic logic of deterrence. 
Realist versus Utopian Thinking© Dr. Keith B. Payne \-/V IEWS A debate over the future of the US nuclear arsenal is at a pivotal moment. The Obama administration has proposed to Congress a budget that calls for modernization of the US "nuclear triad" of missiles, submarines, and bombers. This proposal is notable because presidential administrations and Congress have largely neglected US nuclear forces for over two decades; consequently, each part of the triad has aged or is aging rapidly, and according to National Security and Nuclear Weapons in the 21st Century (2008), "The United States does not have the ability to produce new nuclear weapons. " 
1
2
The fissure between nuclear utopians and nuclear realists has at various times been attributed to greater and lesser concern about nuclear war, respectively, or greater or lesser intellectual maturity. 
4
5
Utopians tend to believe that international cooperation, norms, and institutionsnot nuclear deterrence-have prevented nuclear war and can do so in the future. As Rose Gottemoeller, undersecretary of state for arms control and international security, claimed in a recent speech, "We have been spared that fate because we created an intricate and essential system of treaties, laws and agreements." 
6
7
These and countless similar examples reflect the powerful international norm of raison d'État (the primacy of state interest over opinions regarding cooperation, morality, or international law). Realists do not celebrate this norm but recognize its existence and potency. The perceived requirements of national security ultimately trump the constraining effect of international opinion, norms, and law and create an essentially anarchic "self-help" security environment. 
8
9
Utopians claim that the imperative of national security underlying the felt need for nuclear protection can be superseded by the rise of an alternative countervailing norm and international institutions that buttress global collective security, peaceful conflict resolution, and nuclear disarmament. As noted, this unprecedented global norm would, they say, be established via international political will, leadership, and faith. 
10
It is not an overstatement, however, to observe that the global establishment of a powerful, effective cooperative norm and corresponding international institutions that can be trusted to control aggression and provide protection globally would represent an unprecedented reordering of the international system. Once such a reordering is in place, utopians are correct in saying that it could create the international security context necessary for nuclear disarmament. History, however, gives no indication of its possibility, and in its absence Thucydides and the norm of raison d'Etat will continue to prevail. As the bipartisan Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture of the United States (Perry-Schlesinger Commission) recognized, "The conditions that might make possible the global elimination of nuclear weapons are not present today and their creation would require a fundamental transformation of the world political order. " 
11
12
But has not everything changed in the twenty-first century? Has not the end of the Cold War ushered in a new global commitment to cooperation, the rule oflaw globally, and benign conflict resolution? The unarguable answer is no. Russian military actions against Georgia in 2008 and Ukraine since 2014 (the latter in direct violation of the 1994 Budapest Memorandum signed by Russia, Great Britain, and the United States) are sufficient empirical evidence to demonstrate that Thucydides' stark description of reality is alive and well. China's expansionist claims and military pressure against its neighbors in the East and South China Seas teach the same lesson.
Why is this reality significant in the consideration of nuclear weapons? Because in the absence of reliably overturning the powerful norm of raison d'Etat and Thucydides' explanation of international relations, states with the capability and felt need will continue to demand nuclear capabilities for their own protection and, in some cases, to provide cover for their expansionist plans. To wit, if Ukraine had retained nuclear weapons, would it now fear for its survival at the hands of Russian aggression? Former Ukrainian defense minister Valeriy Heletey and members of the Ukrainian parliament have made this point explicitly, lamenting Ukraine's transfer of its nuclear forces to Russia in return for now-broken security promises of the Budapest Memorandum. 
13
14
15
Opponents of the administration's plan to modernize the US triad now double down on the utopian narrative by insisting that the United States instead lead the way in establishing the new global norm by showing that Washington no longer relies on nuclear weapons and does not seek new ones. Washington cannot expect others to forgo nuclear weapons if it retains them, they say, and thus it must lead in creation of the new norm against nuclear weapons by providing an example to the world. For instance, "by unilaterally reducing its arsenal to a total of 1,000 warheads, the United States would encourage Russia to similarly reduce its nuclear forces without waiting for arms control negotiations." 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
The basic reason, realists point out, is that foreign leaders make decisions about nuclear weaponry based largely on their countries' strategic needs, raison d'Etat, not in deference to America's penchant for nuclear disarmament or some sense of global fairness. A close review of India by S. Paul Kapur; for example, concluded that "Indian leaders do not seek to emulate US nuclear behavior; they formulate policy based primarily on their assessment of the security threats facing India.' 
123
Nations that are a security concern to the United States seek nuclear weapons to intimidate their neighbors (including US allies), to counter US conventional forces, and to gain a free hand to press their regional military ambitions. They see nuclear weapons as their trump cards and do not follow the US lead in nuclear disarmament. A bipartisan expert working group at the Center for Strategic and International Studies concluded accordingly that "U.S. nuclear reductions have no impact on the calculus oflran and North Korea.'' 
24
25
Nuclear utopians and nuclear realists simply perceive international relations differently, with corresponding great effect on their views of nuclear deterrence and weapons. Seeing an orderly system that functions predictably and increasingly amicably, utopians make two confident predictions as the basis for further deep US nuclear reductions. The first is that US deterrence will work reliably even with a relatively small nuclear arsenal or nuclear zero. Specifically, they offer confident claims that a specific number or level of US nuclear weapons will be adequate for America's deterrence goals. That number often is associated with the capability deemed adequate to threaten an opponent's societal infrastructure with destructiona relatively small number of nuclear weapons: "From a practical perspective, several second-strike nuclear weapons are more than enough to keep the most aggressive adversary at bay." 
26
28
Yet, such predictions simply assume that a specific number of weapons or specific type of threat will produce the desired deterrent effect on the premise that all rational opponents should be deterred by such a threat. The capability for posing a threat, though, does not equate to a predictable deterrent effect-or indeed any deterrent effect. In truth, no one, however credentialed, can make such promises with any credibility because the functioning of deterrence is shaped by many factorssome known and others opaque, including enormous variations in leadership perceptions and calculations. Only an omniscient observer could claim to know that a specific number of nuclear weapons will be adequate for deterrence, now or in the future. As a recent National Academy of Sciences study noted in this regard, Finally, models of human beings and their individual and collective behaviors must necessarily include a large amount of inherent uncertainty. This uncertainty is not a flaw of the model and cannot be designed out of the model. Human behavior is dynamic and adaptive over time, and it is impossible at the moment (and into the foreseeable future) to make exact predictions about that behavior. 
29
The second typical prediction is that Russia and China will pose no severe military threats to the United States and its allies and that their differences with the United States will be resolved without reference to nuclear capabilities. For example, the 2012 report by the Global Zero Commission claimed that "the risk of nuclear confrontation between the United States and either Russia or China belongs to the past, not the future." 
30
Instead of the utopians' vision of an orderly, predictable, and benign world order, realists see international relations as fluid, often dangerous, and unpredictable, as they have been for millennia and as described by Thucydides. Realists point to the frequent history of international relations worsening rapidly and surprisingly; they see no indication of an emerging and amicable new world order. The current unexpected Russian aggression in Europe is a cold reminder of this reality. In January prominent Russian journalist Alexander Golts warned that "the West had forgotten how it had used nuclear deterrence to coexist with the Soviet Union. Now it will have to open up that playbook once more." 
31
The realist response is clear but not fully satisfactory because realism offers no infallible, complete solution to conflict in the international system and the related question of deterrence and its nuclear requirements: deterrence must be made as effective as possible to prevent war and the escalation of hostilities. This goal likely requires (1) as complete an understanding as is possible of opponents' perceptions and values so as to tailor US deterrence strategies appropriately to the opponent and deterrent goal and (2) a broad spectrum of fleXIble and resilient US conve ntional and nuclear capabilities to help the United States deter as effectively as possible across a broad spectrum of contingencies and potential opponents with varying goals, values, perceptions, and modes of decision making. The number of US weapons and platforms is one, but only one, potentially important measure of a flexible and resilient force structure. 
32
In summary, contemporary evidence and all ofhistory argues against the utopians' predictable, amicable world in which a potent cooperative norm and international law have supplanted raison d'Etat and Thucydides' description of international relations. Decisions made now that would cause further erosion of the US nuclear arsenal would take decades to reverse, create fear among key allies, and likely inspire foes to challenge a United States that appears less able to deter in the hard times ahead. These are the stakes in the current debate. 0
The Dangers of Relying on Conventional Forces for Nuclear Deterrence
To put an end to Cold War thinking, we will reduce the role of nuclear weapons in our national security strategy, and urge others to do the same.
-President Barack Obama I n his now-famous Prague speech in 2009 shortly after taking office, President Obama laid out his vision for a world without nuclear weapons. 
1
2
Arguably, these two are the United States' most important relationships and should serve as the cornerstone of US nuclear deterrence policy. Although Russia and China are not identified as adversaries of the United States, neither are they considered allies. Potential always exists for the relationship to sour, and in the case of Russia, that is exactly what has happened over the past year. The US decision to meet the needs of deterrence by relying less on nuclear weapons and instead developing conventional weapons that can have strategic effects may not have had the intended deterrent effect on Russia and China. Far from encouraging them to reduce the importance of nuclear weapons in their national security strategy, it may have inspired them to rely more on nuclear weapons to meet their security needs. Doing so could create dangerous instability in deterrence relationships.
The views and opinions expressed or implied in the Journal are those of the authors and should not be construed as carrying the official sanction of the Department of Defense, Air Force, Air Education and Training Command, Air University, or other agencies or departments of the US government. This article may be reproduced in whole or in part without permission. If it is reproduced, the Air and Space Power Journal requests a courtesy line
The Simplicit y of Det errence Theory Deterrence theory is beautiful in its simplicity. At its essence, the theory is a military strategy in which one power uses the threat of assured retaliation to convince an enemy not to attack. Some people have the misconception that deterrence did not com e into existence until after the invention of nuclear weapons, but it has been used as a tool of statecraft, with varying degrees of success and failure, since ancient times. 
3
4
As simple as deterrence is to define, its actual practice is far more complicated, having many potential pitfalls for failure, essentially because it is a psychological function in the mind of the adversary. Consequently, success is difficult to predict or prove, and deficiencies may become apparent only when deterrence fails. Further, the definition of deterrence theory is evolving to m eet the challenges of the current security environment. Scholars recognized that the Cold War deterrence framework focused solely on deterring the Soviet Union and was inadequate to address the national security issues of the twenty-first century. 'Ibday, because the United States faces deterrence problems from multiple actors, our strategy needs to be "tailored to the perceptions, values, and interests of specific adversaries. " 
5
6
As mentioned above, at its core, deterrence is a psychological function. Understanding the adversary, including his leadership characteristics, historical and cultural influences, decision-making structures and processes, and national security strategy and doctrine, is essential to crafting a deterrence strategy. Because deter-rence happens in the mind of the enemy, "the requirements for deterrence will differ with each party that we might try to deter and may well differ in each circumstance or scenario." 
8
9
The first priority of the NPR was to reduce the dangers of nuclear proliferation and the threats of nuclear terrorism. Part of the road map to this goal involved diminishing the reliance on nuclear weapons in US security strategy. The rationale was that by demonstrating its commitment to downsizing the role and numbers of nuclear weapons, the United States would "persuade our NPT [Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty] partners to join with us in adopting the measures needed to reinvigorate the non-proliferation regime and secure nuclear materials worldwide against theft or seizure by terrorist groups." 
10
11
12
13
To bridge the gap between the reduced reliance on nuclear weapons and capabilities needed to meet US security needs, the NPR proposed that the United States continue to strengthen its unrivaled conventional capabilities. 
14
15
16
17
18
The significance of the assertions of the commission's report is the suggestion that nuclear weapons could be replaced by advanced US conventional capabilities having the same strategic--level effects but with more usable weapons. 
19
The security environment has changed dramatically in the :6 ve years since the NPR's publication-but not for the better, as the policy document hoped for. Although the downturn in the security environment cannot be correlated to the change in US nuclear policy, some dangerous implications regarding both Russia and China are linked to the United States' decision to lower its emphasis on nuclear weapons in its security strategy. Arguably, the nuclear deterrent relationships with Russia and China are the ones most important to the United States, so it is imperative to continue to monitor their health and status.
As the NPR has been implemented over the last five years and the United States has decreased its emphasis on nuclear weapons while increasing its investment in advanced conventional weapons, Russia and China have responded in ways that the US government may not have anticipated. As outlined above, deterrence occurs in the mind of the adversary, and as adjustments to deterrence policy and strategy occur, they should be evaluated to determine their effect on the enemy's decision making.
Much was made in the NPR of the improved dealings between the United States and Russia. With the end of the Cold War rivalry, the United States no longer needed to rely on nuclear weapons to meet its security needs. Further, even though it recognized the policy differences that remained between both nations and that Russia continued to modernize its nuclear forces, the growing cooperation between the United States and Russia on shared interests as well as the low probability of conflict was enough for the NPR to declare that Russia was no longer an enemy. 
20
21
22
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia's conventional military capabilities atrophied and deteriorated. In 2000 to compensate for perceived conventional weakness, Russian military doctrine potentially lowered the threshold for nuclear use, declaring that Russia "keep[s] the right to use nuclear weapons in response to the use of nuclear weapons or other WMD [weapons of mass destruction] against Russia or its allies, as well as in response to large-scale conventional aggression in critical situations for Rus sian national security." 
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
The value that Russia places on its status as a nuclear power was brought into sharp relief after its annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014. On multiple occasions, Russian leadership used nuclear signaling, such as President Vladimir Putin declaring that "Russia is one of the most powerful nuclear nations" as a way of deterring the United States and NA1D from intervening. 
30
31
The NPR paid much less attention to the deterrent relationship between the United States and China. Whether this tack was a function of asymmetry in the size of the two nuclear arsenals remains uncertain. China's nuclear arsenal is significantly smaller than that of the United States, but the NPR did acknowledge that China lacks transparency regarding its nuclear programs and is undertaking a wholesale modernization, both in quality and quantity, of its nuclear weapons arsenal. The policy document points out that China's future strategic intentions were unclear regarding both the strategy and doctrine that guide its nuclear deterrent force, as well as the eventual size and scope of those forces. The NPR addressed the interdependence between the United States and China, "their shared responsibilities for addressing global security threats, • and the need to promote strategic stability with China without ever defining the necessary ingredients for strategic stability or how it can be realized. 
32
33
34
35
36
How then did China react to the NPR's call to reduce US reliance on nuclear weapons and invest in conventional capabilities to bridge that gap in America's security needs? Chinese civilian and military strategists have regularly and consis-tently communicated their concern about a US conventional attack negating China's strategic deterrent prior to the US release of the NPR in 2010. 
37
38
39
40
41
Finally, the NPR repeatedly calls for the need to promote strategic stability with China. However, although that concept has been used in the context of nuclear relations for decades, it has no common, universally accepted definition. 
42
43
44
45
A gulf exists between how the United States and Russia/ China view the value of nuclear weapons. These adversarial perceptions are well documented, predating the development and release of the NPR, but were not taken into account during drafting of the new policy. The US decision to rely less on nuclear weapons to meet its national security needs, instead bridging the gap with advanced conventional capabilities, did not have the desired effect on our adversaries. Instead of inspiring confidence, it reinforced some of their worst fears.
The NPR overstated the improvement in US-Russia relations, and the US declaration that Russia was not an enemy did not consider how Russia viewed the relationship. Failure to take into account that country's deep-seated suspicion of the United States invalidated the NPR's assumption that improved ties would allow the United States to rely less on nuclear weapons. Further, US policy and Russian policy do not agree on the usability of nuclear weapons. The US desire to decrease the role of nuclear weapons and compensate with conventional weapons suggests that US policy makers do not feel that nuclear weapons are usable. However, this perception contrasts with Russia's nuclear doctrine and statements, which have been consistent for well over a decade, that these weapons are quite usable. These differences are further emphasized as the United States debates unilateral reduction in nuclear capabilities while Russia violates a landmark arms-control treaty to increase the types and capabilities of its nuclear arsenal to gain a strategic advantage. 
46
Both Russia and China are concerned with US use of advanced conventional capabilities in a strategic manner to negate their nuclear deterrent. According to the NPR, the United States has the strongest conventional capabilities in the world and an alliance system that further augments those capabilities. America has also demonstrated its willingness to use conventional power repeatedly over the last 25 years. The very usability of conventional precision-strike weapons capable of creating effects once reserved only for nuclear forces undermines deterrence by creating or reinforcing perceptions in our adversaries that their nuclear forces are vulnerable and that the United States may have an incentive to strike them. Both China and Russia are reevaluating their nuclear doctrines and relying more on nuclear weapons to counter this perceived threat.
From nuclear weapons' pinnacle of importance at the end ofthe Cold War to today, the United States has steadily decreased the attention paid to its nuclear arsenal and strategy, but nuclear deterrence has not decreased in its overall importance. It is clear that our adversaries place much more value in their nuclear arsenals than does the United States, precisely to deter America's unmatched conventional power. The US decision to rely more on conventional weapons to achieve nuclear deterrence has created dangerous potential for miscalculation in its deterrent relationships with Russia and China.
The United States has fallen into a "mirror imaging" trap by assuming that other nations place the same low value on nuclear weapons that it does and that they have the same priority of reaching "Global Zero." The Obama administration has even gone so far as to recommend unilateral nuclear reductions, which were made outside arms-control negotiations with Russia. 
47
Relations with other nuclear powers have been fairly cooperative and benign since the end of the Cold War. Crises that arose were managed, and peaceful solutions have been negotiated, contributing to the mistaken belief that nuclear weapons are no longer relevant. However, could it be that those weapons encourage leaders to be benign and cooperative? 
48
49
In drafting the NPR, the US government failed to consider the perceptions of our adversaries or to tailor strategy to the unique threat that each poses. As we have pointed out, deterrence is a psychological function in the mind of the adversary. Failure to acknowledge and account for how our enemies view their security environment, their relationship with the United States, their unique history and culture, or the value they place on nuclear weapons to meet their security needs has made our deterrence relationships potentially less stable. Increasing our emphasis on conventional weapons that adversaries view as more usable and a threat to their nuclear arsenals has caused them to feel insecure. To counter this trend, they have modernized and increased the size of their arsenals and rely more on nuclear weapons to meet their security needs.
Nuclear deterrence has always been a risky proposition, and the fact that it has not failed in the past 70 years may have as much to do with our deterrence strategy as plain luck. But as risky as relying on nuclear deterrence is, it is still the "least bad" option and has not lost its relevance. Therefore, it is important that we strive to understand our adversaries as we develop and implement our nuclear-deterrent strategies so that we do not undermine its effectiveness. Nuclear deterrence may be much more fragile than any of us realize. It is imperative that we do not take the "nuclear taboo" for granted by assuming that our adversaries place the same value on the relevance of nuclear weapons that we do.
Finally, in 1960 Herman Kahn came under heavy criticism for his book On Thermonuclear War (Princeton University Press, 1960) in which he outlined the possibility of enduring a nuclear war, reducing its likelihood, and coping with the consequences. In response to the criticism, he wrote, "In our times, thermonuclear war may seem unthinkable, immoral, insane, hideous, or highly unlikely, but it is not impossible." 
50
Paul I. Bernstein * I t is now commonplace to hear or read about the urgent need for fresh thinking on deterrence and for rebuilding the intellectual and analytic enterprise that produced concepts which guided the West through the existential dangers of the Cold War. We hear this admonition from senior civilian and military leaders, subject-matter experts, and commentators-and we hear it with good reason. No one paying attention would disagree that we face deterrence challenges that are different and in some ways more complex than those we encountered in the Cold War or even the first phase of the post-Cold War period. In the emerging security environment, we confront a broader array of antagonists armed with a wider range of conventional and unconventional capabilities; consequently, we must consider the possibility of crises and conflicts with which we have little experience and that could unfold in ways difficult to predict and rehearse. Questions that preoccupied us during the Cold War-how to promote stability, deter nuclear attacks, and manage the risks of escalation-are still with us, although in very new contexts that now encompass novel factors such as cyber weapons and "hybrid warfare."
The institutional response to this set of challenges in the Department of Defense (DOD) is a work in progress in key areas such as concept development, planning, capabilities, leader awareness, and education. We have made progress in acquiring a stronger understanding of adversary doctrine and developing deterrence concepts that can guide operational planning; moreover, complex escalation scenarios increasingly are the focus of tabletops and war games in the strategic forces community. Nevertheless, significant deficits exist at the regional level, where geographical combatant commands still struggle to understand how conventional conflicts could escalate to the nuclear level and what that would mean for US campaign plans. Important emerging concepts for regional deterrence and defense quite rightly address such issues as conventional power projection in contested operational envi-* The views expressed in this article are the author's and not necessarily those of either National Defense University or the Department of Defense. The author wishes to acknowledge the contribution of his colleagues Charles Lutes and Robert Peters.
The views and opinions expressed or implied in the Journal are those of the authors and should not be construed as carrying the official sanction of the Department of Defense, Air Force, Air Education and Training Command, Air University, or other agencies or departments of the US government. This article may be reproduced in whole or in part without permission. If it is reproduced, the Air and Space Power Journal requests a courtesy line \ / COMMENTARY ronments, but they have yet to wrestle adequately with the ways in which these concepts could shape-or be shaped by-regional nuclear dynamics. Slowly, awareness of these considerations is growing in the necessary communities, as is the recognition that any assessment of future capabilities to underwrite deterrence and defense must account for those that can deliver advantages not only in power projection but in all aspects of strategic warfare.
Professional military education (PME), however, lags in the attention it gives to contemporary deterrence problems. One reason for this is that senior-level guidance to the PME community does not emphasize or even call out these issues. The Officer Professional Military Education Policy (OPMEP), issued by the Joint Staff, provides a comprehensive framework for officer education across the strategic, operational, and tactical domains but curiously fails to highlight the need to teach deterrence in the PME classroom. 
1
Senior leadership is providing, at best, only a weak "demand sigrial" that would give PME schools the impetus to adapt their core curricula to include vital content on deterrence, escalation, cross-domain conflict, and crisis management under the nuclear shadow. These programs of instruction generally are fully committed to existing OPMEP requirements, and efforts to introduce new content often meet resistance from administrators and faculty. Th the author's knowledge, there has been no recent formal review of the PME system to assess how senior and intermediate joint and service schools address deterrence. Certainly, deterrence is not completely neglected in core curricula, yet substantial engagement in the PME community indicates that across the system as a whole, deterrence is treated neither in depth nor systematically as a major learning objective. Although individual academic or research faculty are free to offer electives, even first-rate elective classes-and good examples of them exist-reach only a relatively small number of students. Some institutions are further along than others. For example, the Air Force has established critical thinking on deterrence and assurance as a pillar of the "flight plan" for its nuclear enterprise. The goal is to sustain a formal program that will develop a cadre of Airmen with comprehensive knowledge of strategic deterrence and assurance theory, practice, and experience. Air University offers supporting courses such as a two-term elective consisting of intensive seminar discussion, field study, and independent research on nuclear strategy, technology, and policy. A professional continuing education program provides classroom instruction to individuals working in the nuclear enterprise, from junior officers to senior military and civilian leaders. At the Naval War College, the competitive Mahan Scholars program gives students an enhanced learning experience in strategic deterrence and escalation in the context of US national strategy and the conventional, nuclear, cyber, and space domains. It includes 90 hours of classroom engagement and a major research product.
Programs like these are vital to the overall goal of ensuring that PME treats deterrence in a serious and systematic way and should be encouraged. However, they are only one part of the solution. A comprehensive approach should include the following.
• Revise the Guidance. The next review and revision of the OPMEP should state an explicit requirement with respect to deterrence. Doing so will send a critical demand signal to the PME community that leadership wishes to see meaningful content on these issues. Realistically, though, the opportunity to take this step likely will not occur for a few years as a revised OPMEP was issued in May 2015. It is important that a range of other actions be pursued until the next revision process is undertaken. As an example, contemporary deterrence issues should be designated a Special Area of Emphasis in PME for the forthcoming academic year and beyond.  • Develop a Plan and Supporting Resources. STRATCOM should take the lead in preparing a plan to strengthen the deterrence content of PME and in developing instructional materials that would support execution. The plan should allow for flexible application by faculties and be modular in nature so that instructors have a menu of resources to consider. This suggests making available model programs of instruction or lesson plans that could be adopted (and adapted as needed) by faculty. One type of curriculum could be tailored for integration into the core, another could support electives, and yet another could focus on candidate tabletop exercises. All could be supplemented by reading lists and other resources for faculty and students, such as a "deterrence primer" that captures essential readings, concepts, and analytic tools. It may also make sense to create an informal reachback resource for faculty who seek advice and assistance. Recently, senior leaders have called for greater institutional rigor in PME, noting that education is a key line of effort to offset competitors' military capabilities and that our PME system is a strategic asset and an asymmetric advantage. To an educator and practitioner in the deterrence field, it seems self-evident that pressing this advantage must entail active engagement on the critical issues affecting deterrence and regional conflict. A "real-time" indicator of whether the DOD shares this view may come soon, as the military departments, in coordination with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Office of the Secretary of Defense, undertake a study to identify policy and resource approaches to ensure that PME graduates are properly prepared to understand and contend with the doctrine and capabilities of increasingly sophisticated adversaries. Findings of this study were to be briefed to the deputy secretary of defense and vice-chairman of the James Quest's Beale Air Force Base during the Cold War, part of Arcadia Publishing's Images of America series, combines plenty of vintage photographs with a minimum of text to explain their significance. The author does an adequate, though unbalanced, job of capturing the Cold War sights and flavor of Beale AFB, located in Califomia. The introduction relates the Army's use of the base during World War II as Camp Beale and the early Air Force's utilization of it as a bombing and gunnery range after the war.
Chapter 1, "SCARWAF," discusses the Special Category Army Reassigned with the Air Force units there, with photos ofthese Army engineering forces honing their skills as they developed the base. Focused on the building of the flight line, chapter 2 offers some delightful photographs of the runways and control tower under construction. Chapters 1 and 2 depart somewhat from the book's title insofar as the SCARWAF was a renamed program that started during World War II and ended in the mid-1950s; it was not created for the Cold War. The building of flight lines occurred before, during, and after that era.
Chapter 3, "Titan I Missile Sites," examines Beale's brief tenure as host to intercontinental ballistic missiles and briefly introduces the Titan I and the three local missile sites. The chapter includes a nice selection of photographs of the locations under construction and those in use. Also well documented is a major explosion at one of the sites.
Chapter 4, "KC-135 Stratotanker," and chapter 5, "B-52 Stratofortress," concentrate on the Strategic Air Command tanker and bomber forces, respectively, and their basing at Beale, concisely summarizing the units involved. They include numerous photographs of the KC-135Q(specially adapted to refuel the SR-71 aircraft) but only one photo of the KC-135A. Quest also offers images of two of the three models of B-52 aircraft (E and G) stationed at Beale, omitting the B-52D. Aircraft buffs will be pleased that in most cases, he provides aircraft serial numbers in the captions. Readers will also find photos of the AGM-28 Hound Dog missiles and support facilities as well as a brief discussion of the filming of the movie A Gathering of Eagles at Beale, including mention of the swimming pool and roller skating rink donated to the base by Universal Pictures.
In "Scramble!, • the sixth chapter, the author addresses the matter of bomber and tanker crews pulling alert duty. Photographs depict the •mole hole• alert facility and crews responding to their aircraft. Chapter 7, "Vietnam War," covers the deployment of assigned B-52 and KC-135 aircraft, along with their personnel, to Southeast Asia. In a nice touch, Quest includes photos and information about the crew members involved in two B-52 aircraft losses and discusses their fates. Chapters 8 and 9, "SR-71 Blackbird/Habu," and "U-2 Dragon Lady," respectively, highlight these unique aircraft, which served at Beale. Readers leam about aircraft operations and the purpose-built SR-71 hangars but do not see those for the U-2. Quest offers a photograph of a chase car-a fascinating detail of the U-2 program-and includes, without explanation, images of T-38 trainer aircraft.
In "Desert Shield and Desert Storm," the subject of chapter 10, the author examines the base's contributions to those operations. Arguably, a dozen pages of photographs taken in Southwest Asia are out of place here but may be appreciated by Beale veterans of that era. Chapter 11, "The End of an Era," closes out the book with photographs ofKC-135Qaircraft
Dlsdalmer: The views and opinions expressed or implied in the journal are those of the authors and should not be construed as carrying the official sanction of the Department of Defense, Air Force, Air Education and Training Command, Air University, or other agencies or departments of the US government This article may be reproduced in whole or in part without permission. If it is reproduced, the Air and Space Power journal requests a courtesy line departing Beale for the final time. Oddly, one of the captions for a 1994 photo of a KC-135Q observes, "That final symbol of Strategic Air Command at Beale AFB slowly climbed into the heavens" (p. 127) even though the U-2 continued to serve at Beale for many years.
Minor flaws include a photograph taken at "Alicia Airport (present-day Yuba County Airport)" rather than at Beale (p. 10). On page 61, wheel chocks are referred to as wheel "chalks." Moreover, a KC-10 is misidentified as a KC-135Q (p. 119). More seriously, the book fails to mention two Cold War facilities: the Semi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE) Direction Center (DC-18) and the PAVE PAWS (phased array warning system) radar complex, both of which proved significant to our defense during the Cold War and remain hardto-miss landmarks on Beale. The SAGE Direction Center was operational as such only from 1959 to 1963, but the building survives and has been used for several purposes since that time. The PAVE PAWS complex, employed only during the last decade of the Cold War, continues to operate. This reviewer would have preferred less emphasis on chapters 1, 2, 10, and 11 in favor of including these systems in the book. As it stands, parts of the text have only marginal Cold War interest.
I do not recommend Beale Air Force Base during the Cold War for the Air Force audience at large. Students of the Cold War who are familiar with the base will find good supplemental information here on the missile and aircraft missions. Readers new to Cold War history, however, will discover that this book presents a limited view of the base's role during that time. In Asian Maritime Strategies, Bernard Cole offers his readers an expansive, albeit worn, rendition of "trouble is brewing in Asia." Although his monograph is useful to individuals unfamiliar with the changing scene in the Pacific, it reveals little to those with a decent understanding of the growing tensions there. Regrettably, one finds no new insights in this study. He does, however, provide some handy facts concerning the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which has become the axis around which disputes revolve but, interestingly, has also added octane to what had previously been less combustible sovereignty issues.
The author charts a predictable path as he analyzes the Pacific "landscape" before delving into specific maritime strategies of the United States, Japan, China, and India, among others. He addresses the much-trumpeted American "pivot" to Asia, pointing out that it has been heavy on rhetoric and less so in any tangible sense, to date. As such, many states, most notably Japan, have begun hedging their bets by expanding cooperation with other Asian players to offset robust Chinese maritime defense spending.
The utility of the work can be boiled down to the intended audience. As an introductory volume, it does a relatively good job of casing the region and the inherent challenges. If, however, the audience is the academic community-specifically, those fully conversant about the area-then this book falls short because it does not push the boundaries; rather, it stays neatly within expected parameters of a prefatory exposition.
A more fruitful approach might have involved examining whether China can stay true to the maxim proffered by its most clairvoyant leader Deng Xiaoping, who wisely advised his countrymen to "hide your strength and bide your time." Undeniably, China's continued rise \1 BOOK REV I EWS to prominence depends on a tranquil environment in Asia. Yet, Beijing increasingly appears unwilling (or unable) to manage the oontradictory forces of pronounced nationalism and dynamic globalism . Domestic forces may significantly derail China's future progress just as Beijing appears to be in the initial stages of eclipsing Washington 's p ower in the region. Ironically, domestic frustrations, stirred in the past to deflect criticism of central government control and authority, may ultimately prove the downfall of the stellar rise orchestrated by Communist leaders. Logically, it is difficult to fathom why China would risk greatly heighte ned confrontation within or outside Asia. Then, again, logic takes one only so far. As is often the case, rational approaches can be short-circuited by primordial influences like fear, self-interest, and honor. Obviously, America is not immune to these influences. It would have been interesting if Cole had delved into how each side could potentially agitate the relatively placid waters by assuming too much, or too little, about the other.
Asian Maritime Strategies updates the on going r egional disputes and concerns, adding to the glut of coverage. However, it m isses the mark in terms of addressing the most crucial questions associated with an impen ding geopolitical shift of this magnitude. On the surface, Revolutionary Atmosphere is the history of the Altitude Wind Th.nnel (AWl'), built during World War II as the cen terpiece of the National Advisory Committee for Aeron autics' (NACA) new Aircraft Engine Research Laboratory (later the Lewis Research Center and currently the Glenn Research Genter), and then modified as a space vacuum chamber to test comp onents for the US space program. In the process, this book also illustrates the rapid postwar advance of US air and space technology, evolution of the NACA into the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the rise of the US space program.
The AWT was conceived after NACA and Army Air Corps experts toured German aeronautics research facilities in the late 1930s. With enthusiastic backing from Gen Henry "Hap" Arnold, NACA leadership successfully lobbied for a wholesale expansion of the committee's test capabilities, including an engine research complex in the aircraft-component manufacturing center of Cleveland, Ohio. The AWT was originally designed to meet the challenge of ground-testing large piston engines under realistic high-altitude conditions.
Completed in 1943, the AWT served its original purpose for only a few years, most notably supporting modifications to the B-29's fire-prone R-3350 engine. Very rapidly, though, work shifted to research and development of jet engines, starting with the first British Whittle engine installed in the Bell P-59. The AWT tested nearly every jet engine developed in the United States up through 1957 and conducted pioneering research on afterburners and variablegeometry nozzles.
In 1959 the AWT was decommissioned as a wind tunnel and modified to house a multiaxis control trainer for the Mercury program. TWo years later, it again underwent modifications to test rocket upper stages and spacecraft payloads in very high altitude and vacuum environments. Renamed the Space Power Chambers (SP C) in this role, the facility supported development, build out, and launch of space research payloads powered by the Atlas-Centaur until 1975. Rendered obsolete by larger and more modern NASA and Air Force facilities, the SPC was mothballed afterwards and eventually torn down in 2007.
Author Robert Arrighi, a contract historian at NASA Glenn Research Center, has published extensively on the center's history and its facilities. Along with the book, he created a DVD chronicling the history of the AWT as well as an interactive web page and illustrated online tour aimed at educators (see http://awt.grc.nasa.gov/). Typical of most NASA history publications with which the reviewer is familiar, the book is written very matter of factly and heavily illustrated with black-and-white photographs drawn from NASA's archives. Unfortunately, as is also typical of most NASA histories, the photo reproduction is mediocre and doesn't do the originals justice, but the same photographs in better quality can be found on the AWT web page. The first chapter provides a brief description of the NACA's role in US aeronautics development in the 1920s and 1930s, together with an overview of how wind tunnels fit into aeronautical research-essential background for casual readers if they are to appreciate the rest of the book. Although not light reading, Revolutionary Atmosphere offers a unique peek into a dynamic and inspiring time in US aviation history. War, Clausewitz, and the Trinity is a detailed analysis of Carl von Clausewitz's seminal book On War as well as selections from his other writings. The book's purpose is to offer readers a better understanding of Clausewitz and the context of his writing by building on previous secondary studies. Dr. Thomas Waldman, an Economic and Social Research Council Fellow at the University of York, interpreted Clausewitz's theory of war in relation to modern conflict for his doctoral thesis. His knowledge of Clausewitz's life and writingstogether with numerous secondary sources on the subject, which he references throughout this book-is impressive.
Here, he focuses on "passion, chance and policy" (p. 2), the three central elements or "trinity" that comprise war according to Clausewitz. The trinity is represented in the physical world by a secondary trinity: the people, commander and army, and government. Dr. Waldman also discusses a tertiary level to the trinity, which is historical context. He emphasizes the importance of context because the face of war is constantly changing. The author points out the discrepancy between Clausewitz's continued popular status with military historians and the lack of in-depth study of his work, a situation that has led to general misunderstanding or misinterpretation of his ideas.
The book consists of eight chapters, including a discussion of the theoretical foundations of Clausewitz's ideology and the historical context of On War as well as separate chapters on each of the individual elements of war and one that discusses their interaction. To understand or appreciate the author's argument, the reader need not have read Clausewitz or be familiar with any of the secondary sources discussed. Waldman does an excellent job of providing background information and synopsizing main points from the works of other historians who have written on the same subject. Consequently, the book serves as a good starting point for further study into Clausewitz's ideology.
A first look at the size of War, Clausewitz, and the Thnity would suggest a quick or easy read, but the content som etimes requires rereading to appreciate the author's point. Overall, the text is well written and detailed, featuring a compelling thesis. The book has no m ajor faults, but the nature of its subject matter makes it somewhat abstract at times. As long as Clausewitz is a focus of study by military historians, including members of the Air Force community, this book sh ould remain relevant. Dale Herspring's The Pentagon and the Presidency includes 14 chapters, the first and last providing a compreh e nsive backdrop and conclusion, respectively. Initially, the author introduces a historical outline through a variety of scholars while offering a segue for considering other alternatives to addressing timeless questions and issues concerning the presidency and the Pentagon. Consequently, the final chapter allows readers to arrive at their own conclusions. Herspring offers the notion that while the presidency is colored with vibrant personalities, it can become an inanimate entity and function of the US government.
Throughout US history, presidents have taken office without having served in the military. H er ein lies an important, understood expectation that they n evertheless n ot only support but also intimately understand military culture. Although the r elationship b etween the commander in chief and military leadership is delicate, H erspring inserts another playerthe US Congress. H e deftly discusses the sometimes volatile intersection b etween the military and politics during wartime regarding strategic affairs a s well as op erational and tactical matters. Furthermore, familiar historical figures appear in this study, illuminated by the daily behind-the-scenes drama.
Each chapter offers a personal, animated view of each president and his interactions with the chiefs of staff. Herspring reviews each of the 12 presidents from FDR to George W. Bush, examining divergences between them and the military. He steers the reader through the perils of civilian management of the military while tempering it with respect to the current atmosphere. The author clearly delineates between former military officers and lifelong private citizens who view the presidency through a wide lens.
All presidencies are plagued by fiscal woes and a constant trend of contention that frames the background of policy development during the waging of budget wars and political campaigns. The text illuminates the effects of endless budget battles involving the armed forces.
The Pentagon and Presidency is timely and well written, offered without any apologies and adding context to today's dynamic relationship between modern-day presidents and their chiefs of staff. It is a must-read for students of American and military history. Although the book can b e challenging since Mr. Herspring takes his time with the necessary details of history and happenstance, this well-appointed discussion is certainly rewarding. With Predators, historian Brian Williams adds an important study to the ongoing debate over the United States' drone policy. This thoroughly researched history focuses primarily on the development and employment of the RQ-1 Predator and MQ-9 Reaper, particularly in Pakistan. The work manages to remain balanced, providing a fair, sensible, and insightful look into this controversial topic. The author's research is meticulous and thoroughly documented. Williams read and addressed dozens of reports by authors of various nationalities involved with or interested in drone strikes from 2001 to 2012. Consequently, Predators speaks from multiple perspectives, from America's insistence on the importance and precision of drones, to the concerns of Pakistani civilians, to the claims of Taliban officials. Williams's research helps support his overall claim that although drones have caused considerable collateral damage, those incidents are isolated, and these platforms have proven exceptional in their ability to hunt and engage their targets. Furthermore, he argues that US insistence on secrecy and the inability to handle foreign-relations policy hurt the American cause. Williams notes that the Bush and Obama administrations simply failed to explain to the world-Pakistan in particularthe usefulness of these aircraft.
Air Force members, politicians, journalists, and the general public need to read this history. Williams does a brilliant job of addressing the facts, clarifying much of the conjecture and myth surrounding the use of remotely piloted vehicles. Whatever biases he holds are well concealed, and he never allows his feelings to sway the drone argument one way or another. Rather, Williams does exactly what a historian should do by letting the record speak for itself and drawing conclusions only when all research has been exhausted. Although the author makes a solid case in support of drone warfare, he holds nothing back, exploring not only the program's successes but also its failures.
Regardless of public opinion, drones are now an integral part of military operations. Predators is a must-read for everyone who wants to understand the virtues and vices of these platforms. Understanding the unique challenges of space proves difficult for many strategists, even those well versed in traditional, earthbound conflict and cooperation scenarios. In Crowded Orbits, James Clay Moltz provides an introduction to the basic hurdles within the space environment and across several political arenas. By emphasizing the importance of international cooperation to space, he tries to shed new light on this difficult area while keeping most topics at an introductory level. The book offers basic guidance and assumes that the reader has no previous experience with space topics or concerns. The introduction, flyleaf, \1 BOOK REV I EWS and press release repeatedly refer to the text as a primer; however, they also suggest that it may provide more detailed analysis regarding further cooperative th eories. The author's thesis maintains that any potential space scenario will result in the emergence of a military hegemon, piecemeal agreements between various players, or dedicated international governance. H e theorizes that all space conflict and cooperation proceed from the military's desire for control, an economic desire for wealth, or an altruistic, intemational-govemance approach that seeks to solve humanity's future space challenges. Crowded Orbits begins by examining both the physical issues and political developments that led mankind into the space age. Other chapters explore military, civil, and commercial advancements before addressing the changes that various political structures created within the space environment. Finally, Moltz summarizes his initial cnguments before concluding rather simply that conflict prevention remains everyone's responsibility.
Several strong points immediately appear within the text. All sections are clear and well marked by subject area, allowing easy reference throughout and a quick review if one wishes only to highlight an area rather than proceed from point to point. The repetition of most elements enhances rapid reference. Further, one can easily flip through the work without worrying about being dragged into specific details. The presen ce of multiple charts and graphs that compare physical characteristics such as launch capacity, first-ever space events, and existing booster-vehicle capability also facilitates easy reference. Additionally, Moltz uses numerous popular allusions to drive home his meanings. The clear section markings, useful ch arts, and popular approach all contribute to the text's value for readers who require only a cursory overview of space.
However, one wishes that the author had employed a more standardized approach to various high-level topics to permit an easier comparison of chapters. It is difficult to compare the advances that appear in the civil-approaches chapter to those in either the section on military strategies or the one on economic investment since n o unified approach standardizes analysis. For example, the chapter on civilian space primarily evaluates development application s of various national agencies, devoting only a couple of pages to civilian theories. Contrastingly, the chapter on military development emphasizes military strategic theory, offering only a few paragraphs on military operational applications. Concentrating on either theory or application from one chapter to the next would emphasize understanding within the scenarios. This dichotomy might appeal to beginners but fails to adequately support Moltz's thesis.
Although the author repeatedly returns to the main points, one feels that he makes no attempt to expand any particular perspective. His own views about considering only international govemance as a worthwhile approach lack sufficient evidence. Moltz spends more time on challenges arising from conflicted and crowded space orbits than on any actual conflict in space between either national militaries or civilian govemments. Repeatedly, the text stresses that cooperation would be preferable to conflict, but one feels that the latter could b e resolved quite adequately by a single hegemon as opposed to techniques of shared governance. The book presents no discussion regarding which method is preferable for either specific or grouped challenges. Moltz suggests no paths to follow in reaching particular goals; moreover, although he advocates that a shared space environment would be in humanity's best interest, the evidence is lacking.
The chapter on "Commercial Space Developmentsn seems the most useful. Moltz covers all of the areas in which companies seek economic growth, rapidly addressing communications, remote sensing, launch, mining, and energy without promoting any single position or specific development. Reviewing space problems, however, only highlights those areas already made evident in early chapters. The limited number of available orbits also drives radio frequency congestion and underlines the lack of any defined approach to new corporations within space. Without a military hegemon, piecemeal approach, or global governance, one can imagine the problems posed by the crowded environment. Although the economic potential is substantial, no methods for realizing that potential appear within the work.
Overall, Crowded Orbits is a worthwhile starting point for readers unfamiliar with either the space domain or the unique issues presented by today's international environment. It describes many countries' development methods and independent economic possibilities, but the absence of any standardized comparison prevents the advanced reader from following any specific launch path to a conclusion. Certainly, the discussion of problems such as congested orbits within the geostationary belt, limited launch capacity, and the failure to provide a unified global approach is useful. However, the lack of any solution beyond advocating further study severely limits the book's utility. One applauds Moltz's attempt to make a difficult topic accessible to beginners, but a more detailed look at any one section would have increased the text's value to intermediate and advanced students as well. Rebalancing U.S. Forces is a collection of essays relating to the Obama administration's "rebalancing" of forces to the Asia-Pacific region-or, as that action is frequently called, the "Asia-Pacific pivot." The collection-assembled by editors Carnes Lord and Andrew Erickson, faculty members at the US Naval War College-has a distinct naval flavor. That bias, however, does not detract from either the book's relevance or contribution, which is substantial. Arranged geographically, the eight chapters address, in turn, (1) "Guam and American Security in the Pacific," (2) "Japanese Bases and Chinese Missiles," (3) "South Korea: An Alliance in Transition," (4) "The U.S. Strategic Relationship with Australia," (5) "Singapore: Forward Operating Site," (6) "Diego Garcia and American Security in the Indian Ocean," (7) "U.S. Bases and Domestic Politics in Central Asia," and ( 
8
In the introduction, the editors point out the contrast between Americans' view of US military presence on foreign soil and that of non-Americans: Americans have long taken for granted the global network of military bases and facilities of all kinds that the United States acquired following World War II and has largely if not completely retained ever since. . . . But what Americans ignore or take for granted is neither ignored nor taken for granted by . . . friends and allies of the United States. For the latter, an American military presence on their soil raises inevitable questions of national sovereignty, often leads to frictions of various kinds with the host populations and political complications for their governments, and, not least, threatens to embroil them in unwanted military conflicts. . . . Potential adversaries . . . are keenly aware of the presence of American troops and warships on their doorstep and highly sensitive to their activities . . . as well as to any alteration in their numbers or makeup (p. 2).
These themes suffuse each of the essays, accompanied by a historical perspective on each geographic r egion.
In the fust chapter, Erickson and Justin Mikolay focus on Guam. They argue that this territory is an essential elem ent of US national security in the Pacific region because "there are n o n ew islands or n ew access points to be discovered in East Asia; the U.S. capability to use existing access points and bases must be increased. Building up the American presence on Guam is the single most important step that can be taken to effect this crucial transition" (p. 30).
Thshi Yoshihara then addresses US bases in Japan and their potential vulnerability to Chinese missiles and/ or coercive diplomacy backed by the threat of using these missiles. The author bases much of his research on publications ofthe People's Liberation Army and the "abundant, but largely untapped, Chinese open-source literature on naval affairs" (p. 39). The book's third chapter, by Thrence Roehrig, traces the history of American military basing in South Korea, past efforts to restructure or draw down the US forces there, the cost of those b ases, and their future, noting that "while U.S. bases are focused on deterrence and defense of South Korea, they also provide a base for power projection in th e region should that become necessary" (p. 72).
In chapter 4, Jack McCaffrie and Chris Rahman chronicle the long history of US engagement with Australia, b eginning with the arrival of the first American troops in 1942. Of recent arrangements, the authors write that "American use of Australian territory ... h as been built on three elements: the ongoing salience of ... joint facilities, expanded training and combined exercising, and access to Australian bases and facilities as points for transit, logistic support, and repair for U.S. ships or aircraft• (pp. 100-101). Despite the shared interest n oted in this passage, the presence of American bases in Australia has become the subject of controversy, m ostly due to the clandestine nature of the m ission s of some of those bases, which has even been kept secret from some of the highest government officials in Australia.
Of Singapore, Rahman writes in chapter 5 that although "the United States does not operate its own military bases in Singapore ... the island ... has become increasingly important to U.S. Pacific Command, particularly the U.S. Navy, since the end of the Cold War as the foremost Southeast Asian location for in-region support facilities" (p. 118).
Diego Garcia is doubtlessly the most important US military facility in the Indian Ocean region. Indeed, Walter Ladwig III, Erickson, and Justin D. Mikolay, the authors of the sixth chapter, argue that it is "one of the most strategic American bases in the world" (p. 136). This essay, the longest in the book and the most detailed, includes 15 pages of copious endnotes.
In chapter 7, Alexander Cooley writes about US bases in Central Asia-namely, those in Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. These bases came about as a consequence of the war in Afghanistan and h ave been e mbroiled in both internal and international p olitical controversy, primarily with Russia.
The last essay, by Sam Thngredi, addresses sea basing by observing that there is no consensus about the definition of that term. Rather, "in its broad vision, 'sea basing' refers to the capability to use the sea in the same way that U.S. forces use overseas regional bases for deterrence, alliance supp ort, cooperative security, power projection, and other forward operations• (p. 200). Thngredi concludes with four recommendations for the Department of Defense to consider regarding this capability.
Each of the essays in Rebalancing U.S. Forces is a valuable contnbution to the analysis of the United States' global strategy and the role that its bases play in the world , particularly in
Source: Missile performance data from National Air and Space Intelligence Center (NASIC), Ballistic and Cruise Missile Threat (Wright-Patterson AFB, OH: NASIC Public Affairs Office, 2013); and Duncan Lennox, Jane's Strategic Weapons Systems (London: Jane's Information Group, 2012). Inventory estimates based on International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), The Military Balance 2012 (Washington, DC: IISS, 2012); and Department of Defense, "Annual Report on Military Power of Iran" (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, April 2012), https://fas.org/man/eprint/dod-iran.pdf. Significant differences exist among open-source estimates of Iranian TBM inventories.
Source: Missile performance data from National Air and Space Intelligence Center (NASIC), Ballistic and Cruise Missile Threat (Wright-Patterson AFB, OH: NASIC Public Affairs Office, 2013); and Duncan Lennox, Jane's Strategic Weapons Systems (London: Jane's Information Group, 2012). Inventory estimates based on International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), The Military Balance 2012 (Washington, DC: IISS, 2012); and Department of Defense, "Annual Report on Military Power of Iran" (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, April 2012), https://fas.org/man/eprint/dod-iran.pdf. Significant differences exist among open-source estimates of Iranian TBM inventories.
a Reflects combined range of H-6 bomber and air-launched cruise missile (ALCM) b 85-95 estimate includes all variants of the DF-21 c Estimates of DF-21C inventory; subset of total DF-21 inventory Source: Table based upon data from Duncan Lennox, Jane's Strategic Weapons Systems (London: Jane's Information Group, 2012); Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China, 2011 (Washington, DC: Office of the Secretary of Defense, 2011), http://www.defense.gov/pubs/pdfs/2011_CMPR_Final.pdf; Zhang Han and Huang Jingjing, "New Missile 'Ready by 2015': Global Times," People's Daily Online, 18 February 2011, http://en.people.cn/90001/90776/90786/7292006.html; Doug Richardson, "China Plans 4,000 km-Range Conventional Ballistic Missile," Jane's Missiles & Rockets, 1 March 2011; International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), The Military Balance 2011 (Washington, DC: IISS, 2011); and National Air and Space Intelligence Center (NASIC), Ballistic and Cruise Missile Threat (Wright-Patterson AFB, OH: NASIC Public Affairs Office, 2013).
Source:
Source:
O' Lakes, Florida War, Clausewitz, and the Trinity by Thomas Waldman. Ashgate Publishing (http:// www.ashgate.com), 110 Cherry Street, Suite 3-1, Burlington, Vermont 05401-3818, 2013, 203 pages, $109.95 (hardcover), ISBN 978-1-4094-5139-6.
Munoz & Crosston
Disclaimer:The views and opinions expressed or implied in the Journal are those of the authors and should not be construed as carrying the official sanction of the Department of Defense, Air Force, Air Education and Training Command, Air University, or other agencies or departments of the US government. This article may be reproduced in whole or in part without permission. If it is reproduced, the Air and Space Power Journal requests a courtesy line
Admiral 
Haney (BS, US Naval Academy
MS, National Defense University; MS, Naval Postgraduate School
US Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM)
US Pacific Fleet and served as deputy commander of USSTRATCOM. Admiral Haney also commanded a submarine group
Naval Warfare Integration Group
Submarine Warfare Division
Office of the Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)
Defense Superior Service Medal
Legion of Merit
Navy Commendation Medal
Navy Achievement Medal
Vice Admiral James Bond Stockdale Leadership Award
Heim sanctuary from Iranian TBM attack. Therefore, many basing options exist, and although they are further away than some other locations, they remain well within the effective combat radius of US fighters. T his study considers the problem of nuclear deterrence and crisis stability in a multipolar nuclear world with special attention to policy options for prompt attack for the United States and Russia. Russian experts in national security recognize, as do Americans, that a Cold War framework no longer suffices either to define or explain their nuclear relationship. Neither Moscow nor Washington officially fears a nuclear surprise attack despite the determination of both states to maintain their nuclear arsenals as uniquely capable for purposes of military deterrence and dissuasion, as well as for the political spillovers symbolic of great-power status. Notwithstanding President Barack Obama's call for nuclear abolition in his Prague speech of 2009, neither Russia nor other nuclear weapons states appear ready for drastic reductions in their nuclear forces. 
1