# ID: fbaad5432d364a76b8c03809b075835d
# Title: Airpower in the Next Millennium
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1997.0
# Fulltext:
What should the United States Air Force be able to accomplish in the next millennium? Should we acquire new weapons systems that will cost the United States hundreds of billions of dollars? What part should airpower doctrine play in weapons system acquisition? How will changes in technology drive changes in operations and weapons system acquisition. How have airpower doctrine changes occurred in the past? Can we draw accurate conclusions of what the future should or could be by looking to the history of airpower? Chapter One looks at the development of Airpower Doctrine from the early days of the Army Air Corps, up through the end of World War II. Chapter Two addresses the issue of Airpower Doctrine by analyzing and tracing the history of Air Force Doctrine since World War II. This chapter includes recommendations for sweeping changes to prepare the United States Air Force to meet the challenges of the next millennium. Chapter Three looks at the United States Air Force in the Next Millennium. Primary focus of this chapter is future Air Force weapons systems, and their acquisition. The objective of the research is to determine what capabilities the Air Force should have in the 21 st Century-this is most easily defined in terms of weapons systems.
The primary method of research for this project was extensive review of past, current and future
In the Command of the Air, Giulio Douhet wrote "…for now it is possible to go far behind the fortified lines of defense without first breaking though them. It is airpower which makes this possible. The guiding principle of bombing actions should be this: the objective must be destroyed completely in one attack, making further attack on the same target unnecessary." 
1
While there were hundreds of battles, campaigns, and issues to consider, it was imperative that the focus of this research be limited to airpower doctrine. I selected this subject because there is potential current day value to further discussions about airpower doctrine. What we learn of the past will assist in our search to develop a cohesive doctrine for the US Air Force that ties the capabilities at the tactical level to the strategic level via a new operational level doctrine that has yet to be established.
Dr. Thomas Greer points out in the monograph, "The Development of Air Doctrine in the Army Air Arm 1917-1941," that WWI ended before airpower advocates in America had a chance to demonstrate the full capabilities of airpower. Unfortunately for Brigadier General William (Billy) Mitchell and other airpower leaders, WWI was predominately fought and won by land armies. In his book, Winged Defense, Billy Mitchell said that WWI, "…the European War, was only the kindergarten of aviation. It had machines that were just invented, the possibilities of their use were just beginning to be understood by the aviators themselves, while others looked on them as strange creations that were defying all known laws of science, of custom and of war." 
2
3
4
One of the early airpower proponents of strategic bombardment was Major General Sir Hugh M. Trenchard from Great Britain. The German Zeppelin bombing raids against London in 1917 led to the establishment of the Royal Air Force (RAF). On 5 June 1918, General Trenchard became the Independent Air Force Commander. From 6 June 1918   until the end of WWI, five months later, Trenchard's newly independent RAF dropped 550 tons of explosives on German targets. The British effort was four times greater than the bomb load dropped by the American flyers during the same amount of time. General Trenchard's actions and leadership as a proponent of airpower firmly established him as the key airpower leader of his day. Trenchard's early efforts greatly influenced the other airpower enthusiasts, such as Billy Mitchell and Giulio Douhet. 5 However, Trenchard was not the only strategic bombing advocate. In a paper, many years later, Major General Laurence S. Kuter described the writings of Lieutenant Colonel Edgar S. Gorrell as "the best early exposition of this doctrine…the earliest, clearest, and least known statement of the American conception of airpower." 
6
7
While on the advance team, Gorrell came to believe that the US should pursue an aggressive build-up of a bombing fleet. This fleet would be used eventually to join in on the war with Germany. Colonel Gorrell identified a requirement for approximately 3,000 to 6,000 bombers.
Mr. Futrell points out that in October 1917, Gorrell corresponded with Italian aircraft manufacturer Caproni. Apparently, "…sometime during October, Caproni collaborated with his friend Giulio Douhet in the preparation of a "Memorandum on the 'Air War' for the US Air Service;" which urged that mass attacks made at night by long-range allied bombers against industrial targets deep within Germany and Austria definitely could overwhelm the enemy by substantially reducing his war production at the same time that Allied production was increasing. That same month, Caproni gave Gorrell the book, "Let Us Kill the War; Let Us Aim at the Heart of the Enemy." The book was apparently written by a journalist to represent Caproni's views on the concept of strategic bombardment. 8 Mr. Futrell was not the only author to make the Caproni connection.
Robin Higham pointed out in the book, Airpower, A Concise History, that "…American officers had had some contact with Caproni, who tactfully had his doctrine printed in English. Strategic bombing and the concept of an independent air force for them went hand in hand." 
9
10
11
12
13
Many of these same principles were also included in Billy Mitchell's campaign for an independent air arm. He clearly argued for the concept of taking the battle to the enemy's heartland. He stated that "…now an attack from an air force using explosive bombs and gas may cause the complete evacuation of and cessation of industry in these places." 
14
15
16
However, he argued that airpower was proven to be the only effective defense against aerial attack. The way you would achieve victory was through air-to-air combat.
Mitchell argued for seizing the initiative, attacking the enemy's aircraft on the ground to force them into the air to defend themselves. 
17
As stated earlier, one of the many challenges for General Mitchell was that WWI was over before the claims of airpower dominance could be validated. He boasted about the great capabilities of airpower. He argued that airpower would be able to strike at the heart of the enemy's country and establish air superiority; to be able to fly at will over the enemy's homeland. He prophesied great air armadas attacking the enemy's centers of production, transportation networks, ports and shipping, and even agricultural areas.
Primarily, Mitchell saw airpower as a way to destroy the enemy's means of making war.
He argued that in future wars a nation that fully developed their airpower would have lightning capability to win rapid victories that would produce a lasting peace. In the process, Billy Mitchell proposed drastic reductions in the Navy. He anticipated that, except for the submarine, there would be no need for surface ships. The elimination of all of that unnecessary shipping would save tremendous amounts of money because you would no longer have to support such a large infrastructure. 
18
19
Another challenge for Billy Mitchell was that he saw the rest of the world, all the great nations, establishing independent air forces and a completely separate doctrine for employment of airpower that was separate from army and navy doctrine. He saw the air force as a "special class of people, like the armored knights in the Middle Ages." 
20
It is obvious that Billy Mitchell had done much thinking about an independent air arm. In Winged Defense, he lays out a command structure and also addresses roles and missions issues. He indicated that pursuit aviation was the primary fighting force. Their role was to seek out and destroy the enemy to establish air superiority. The role of the bombardment force was to destroy enemy ground or water targets. He also perpetuated the myth that the bomber would always get through saying that anti-aircraft artillery was ineffective and never stopped an actual attack. However, in stark contrast, he also said that pursuit aviation always had to support the bombers. 
22
Major General Haywood S. Hansell, Jr., wrote in The Air Plan That Defeated Hitler, that the fighter versus bomber debate raged on at the ACTS. The divisive controversy developed as a polarizing argument. The bomber versus the fighter issue became the center of doctrinal development. The ability of the bomber to make it to where they could drop bombs on target, and return safely, was key to the debate. However, the debate raged on, since the lessons from WWI were anything but conclusive. 
24
25
26
Personnel from the Air Corps Tactical School participated in flying exercises to test the tactics they were teaching at the ACTS. However, while some may have questioned the lessons learned, it never stopped them from becoming the gospel to reinforce the current teachings at the school. In May of 1929, Major Walter H. Frank, assistant commandant of the Air Corps Tactical School, served as chief umpire at the annual Air Corps maneuvers in Ohio. His impartial findings after the exercise were:"…there is considerable doubt among the umpires as to the ability of any air organization to stop a well organized, well flown air attack. The difficulty that pursuit had, not only in attacking but in finding some of the missions that were sent into hostile territory during these maneuvers, would make it appear that a well planned air force attack is going to be successful most of the time." 28 Mr. Futrell indicated that Major Frank obviously had studied Douhet's writing, since he observed: "Douhet, a well known Italian writer, says that 'now that aviation has entered the ranks as a means of carrying on war, more than ever war is going to be a question of give and take.' It emphasizes the fact that air force is principally an offensive weapon rather than a defensive one." 
29
30
While the Air Corps Tactical School was busy training students in the finer aspects of strategic bombardment, the senior leadership in the Air Service was busy trying to solidify the mission of the service. In the book, Foulois and the US Army Air Corps, John F. Shiner indicates that when Foulois took over as Chief of the Air Service, "air doctrine was in a state of confusion; despite years of thought, Air Corps officers had developed no comprehensive statement on the employment of airpower." 
32
Through the early to mid 1930s, strategic bombardment continued to be the primary warfighting concept at the ACTS. The school solution of bombardment doctrine prevailed. They concluded that "pursuit or fighter airplanes operating from front line airdromes will rarely intercept modern bombers except accidentally." 
34
35
36
Additionally, the Air Corps Technical Committee identified interceptor characteristics in 1936. In 1937, the Air Corps Board recommended the immediate development of an interceptor. The interceptor requirements identified by the Air Corps Board included an aircraft cannon and at least 20 percent greater speed than proposed bombardment planes.
These actions eventually led to the P-38 and P-40. 
38
39
40
The United States Strategic Bombing Surveys credit allied air power for being decisive during WWII. 
41
42
General Foulois was credited with establishing an official air Service Bombardment Doctrine developed at the ACTS in the mid 1930s. However, it was not until 21 July 1943 when Command and Employment of Air Power, FM100-20, was published; that the Air service finally had formalized doctrine. 
44
Yet, it carried the weight of a document 1,000 times its size. The revelations put forth in this tiny document was that, at last-land and air were equals! 
45
46
47
The question remains, how well were the three propositions proven in this chapter?
The first: the US entered WWII with a strategic bombardment doctrine based on faulty assumptions that were not fully operationally tested and validated. The bombardment doctrine was not proven during WWI. During the inter-war years, the questionable results of the Ohio maneuvers justly prove this point. The results were flawed. The "favorable" judges established unrealistic exercise rules that virtually guaranteed the success of the bombers. The results of the Ohio maneuvers were validated and sold as, the foundation of the strategic bombardment campaign…all based on invalid data…or at the very least, questionable results. Proposition number two: US entered WWII with airpower doctrine that did not fully integrate potential tools, tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTTP). One of the major inhibitors that precluded successful integration of warfighting TTTP, (fighter/bomber composite team), were the lack of flying resources.
Not just the lack of aircraft, but the lack of the right types of aircraft. Available equipment drove employment concepts. Range, bombload, and fighter escort range limitations dictated how these resources would be employed. Number three: blind loyalty to the dogmatic belief that the bomber will always get through to the target. Blind loyalty to the bombardment doctrine precluded open investigation of alternative solutions.
Prominent leaders at the ACTS created a self-fulfilling prophecy. We know the bomber will always get through-then exercises are designed to showcase the bombers capability, possibly due to an over zealous attempt to sell airpower. I question if there were ever any serious attempts by ACTS personnel to freely, openly, and aggressively pursue the operational concept of composite fighter/bomber operations. If the pros from ACTS did not pursue a radical new operations concept, and the leading airpower thinkers of the time were all proponents of strategic bombardment; then I submit, they were destined for the failures they experienced through the 1943/1944 period. We are very fortunate that the axis powers suffered even greater setbacks.
Chapter 2
In November 1945, General Arnold presented his final report to the Secretary of War. After a distinguished career in which he was a key player in building the world's largest and most respected Air Force, General Arnold: Warned against complacency…national safety would be endangered by an Air Force whose doctrine and techniques are tied solely to the equipment and processes of the moment. Present equipment is but a step in progress, and any Air Force which does not keep its doctrines ahead of it equipment, and its vision far into the future, can only delude the nation into a false sense of security…the basic planning, development, organization and training of the Air Force must be well rounded, covering every modern means of waging air war, and the techniques of employing such means must be continuously developed and kept up to date. The Air Force doctrines likewise must be flexible at all times and entirely uninhibited by tradition. 
1
In this chapter I will trace the history of Air Force Doctrine development since World War II (WWII). I did not address each nuance of every revision of the Air Force Doctrine Manual. However, this paper does highlight some of the more significant issues and challenges associated with both, the doctrine development process, and types of Air Force Doctrine. Next, I present a proposed model for consideration that establishes a doctrine development process. I then look at some mission employment concepts with doctrinal overtones. A discussion follows that offers some recommendations for sweeping changes to prepare the United States Air force to meet the challenges of the next millennium.
The need for effective doctrine is well documented in Robert Frank Futrell's Ideas,   Concepts, Doctrine; Basic Thinking in the United States Air Force 1907-1960 [vol. I],   1961-1984 [vol. II]. An early example was on 3 March 1943, Colonel Charles G.
Williamson, Chief of the Bombardment Division offered the following comment:
In military maters, especially those of the magnitude of the operations of the present war, where mistakes and inconsistencies cost thousands of lives and millions of man-hours, it is all the more important that there be clearly expressed guiding principles which are clearly understood by all planners, as well as by all who are charged with the handling of the forces in the field. 
3
Colonel Williamson saw the need for an effective set of principles to guide everyone in the chain of command to ensure our forces would be successful on the battlefield. The United States Air Force struggle to define doctrine is now, as it was then, a never-ending challenge. The correct method to develop doctrine has been debated within the Air Force for decades. The June 1946 Air University (AU) mission summary stated "The Air University reviews, revises, and prepares publication of Army Air Force (AAF) basic doctrine. . . develops basic doctrines and concepts for the employment of airpower." 
4
5
6
The Air Force should develop an airpower field manual which will establish the place of airpower in the armed forces and define our policies, doctrines, strategy and tactics.…The theory or strategy of airpower, particularly strategic bombing, has never been adequately put on paper…A strong and logical framework must be developed from which can be provided appropriate manuals for the provisional education of officers of all ranks in all of the armed forces, and policies to guide our public relations and dealings with Congress. 
7
9
He felt that the unification of the services, which also meant a separate Air Force, would best serve the United States military and the nation. 10
The passage of the National Security Act in 1947 established the Air Force and removed the political risk associated with revising FM 100-20. Now as an independent Air Force, plans were made to move forward on the development of official Air Force Doctrine. In August 1947, representatives from Air University, Air Defense Command, Tactical Air Command, and Strategic Air Command gathered to outline the "Air Force position on air defense procedures, doctrine and organization." 11 Air University was tasked to overhaul FM 100-20 and develop a set of doctrine publications. Two seminars from Air War College were selected to meet this challenge. The seminars' findings indicated that Army Field Manuals were too inflexible and did not provide adequate coverage. Developing doctrine-like many other transitional challenges, required radical new thinking. The new Air Force needed to stand on its own, totally independent from the Army, both in form and fashion. The students recommended the Navy model be followed to develop Navy type air employment instructions. 
12
The last thing the Air Force wanted to do was to develop a new independent Air Force that resembled the old Army Air Force. The Air War College students recommended air instructions be developed that addressed three basic categories. "First, a basic book on airpower; second, an outline of the fundamental principles and basic doctrines; and third, a section that would address operations, tactics, and techniques." 
13
14
15
16
The issue of semantics and confusing terms had been a recurring problem in attempts to define and implement doctrine. Part of the Air Force problem was with our very foundation. Historically, Air Force personnel were more prone to identify with a specific platform-a specific airplane type, rather than a set of principles or warfighting concepts. 
19
20
22
23
25
26
Future Air Staff review was limited to issues of "substance only." 27
Yet, the debate over Air Force doctrine was still inextricably tied to the roles and missions discussions and had significant influence over the acquisition process.  
in 1948. 31
32
33
In 1951, the massive Soviet military build up was the driving force in the airpower debate; how would the United States respond. Arguing for limited ground support to be provided in defense of Europe, General Spaatz said that "The prevailing 'wall of flesh strategy' philosophy in Washington today will not motivate the Europeans to build up their strength…the Soviet Union had built up a 10-to-1 superiority in jet fighters over the United States…we are losing the first and crucial battle in any possible war with Russia-the battle for command of the air." 
35
36
airpower was given priority. Both SAC and TAC would gain new forces. Included in new aircraft buys were B-52As, and RB-52s, B-57s and RB-57s. Jet fighters ordered by the Air Force included: F-84s, F-86s, F-89s, F-94s and F-100s. 
37
38
39
Unfortunately, with this great American military build up; something was lost.
General Arnold's challenge to ensure that doctrine led our technology was not being met.
In 
The importance of Air Force doctrine was reinforced when, on 1 July 1966, the Directorate of Doctrine, Concepts, and Objectives (HQ USAF/XOD) was established.
Their mission was: "To do hard thinking about the Air Force of the future…because of a continuing need for original, creative thought to help reason and guide the way to the future." 
44
45
Lieutenant General Loving, who had served in XOD as a staff officer, branch chief, and then as the division director said: "Papers would come to be coordinated, and we would look at them from a doctrine viewpoint. Fundamentally, we were defenders of the faith;
that was one aspect of the job, to try to defend our roles and missions in a rational way that would serve the Air Force and the country well." 
46
50
Staff Office, there could have been as many as two or three turnovers of personnel involved with this critical document. This lack of focus reinforced comments by other doctrine division personnel that they were employed, just like another staff directorate, tasked to put out brush fires. The one positive aspect of the review process was the requirement for senior Air Force leadership to review Air Force Doctrine before it was published. 
51
The 1974/5 manual was titled, Aerospace Doctrine: United States Air Force Basic Doctrine. The manual included doctrine sections on basic, operational, functional, joint, and for the first time, combined doctrine. The foreword by General Jones read:
USAF Basic doctrine is derived from knowledge gained through experience, study, analysis and test. It evolves from changing military environments, concepts, and technology; and through continuing analysis of military operations, national objectives and policy. This evolution must be a continuing process so that basic doctrine can remain a useful guide for the conduct of aerospace operations. 
52
53
Prior to the next version of AFM 1-1 being published in 1979, several issues were raised about the overall process. There were periods when up to seven years would lapse between versions, the average time between revisions was approximately three and one half years. The AFM 1-series addressed basic doctrine; while the AFM 2-series addressed operational doctrine; and, the AFM 3-series addressed mission employment tactics. The question asked was since AFM 1-1 was revised periodically, why did the 2and 3-series languish un-revised? The answer suggested that there were little, if any ties between the basic doctrine manual and subordinate documents. 
54
56
57
A fundamental problem with Air Force doctrine is the absence of any real consensus as to what doctrine is and just what it is supposed to do. We want doctrine to reveal not only the capabilities of air forces but also to offer guidance on how best to use these capabilities. We demand that doctrine be both enduring and flexible, that it be valid over time yet responsible to change. We look to doctrine to provide guidance to Air Force personnel, while insisting that it remain open to interpretation. We want it to provide direction, yet not be too restrictive in its direction. We expect doctrine to guide research and development while at the same time it adjusts to technological innovations. And we insist that doctrine set out fundamental principles for the employment of air forces, while demanding it remain subordinate to national policy. . . By trying to stretch a single term, "doctrine," to accommodate all things, we wind up with an amorphous concept that falls short in all areas. This criticism is not merely quibbling with semantics: The inability of Air Force people to understand the essence and purpose of doctrine is largely the result of trying to include too much under one umbrella word. 
58
Historically, the Air Force challenge has been the lack of this type of integrating vision. 
65
66
The general feeling is that AFM 1-1 meets the Air Force needs for strategic level doctrine, and the Multi-Command Manual 3-series satisfies our needs at the tactical level. However, the one area in need of development is operational level doctrine. Dr.
James A. Change that "before the Gulf War, some Air Force officers seemed to believe that the sole purpose of theater air power was to support the ground commander's scheme of maneuver." 
69
70
The perception of General McPeak's plan is that it would mean that Army long rang artillery and patriot batteries would remain silent and Army attack aviation would have little room to maneuver. 
71
In his April 1996 address to the Air Force Air and Space Doctrine Symposium, the new Air Force Chief of Staff, General Ronald R. Fogleman stated that: Doctrine provides a common foundation for us to use in employing our forces in peace, war, and the numerous gray areas in between.…Our primary audience for doctrine ought to be the war fighters.…Air Force doctrine should provide an integrating framework to tie together the various elements of the Air force team, to show how these elements work together, and to provide a basis for integrating airpower with other forms of combat power in joint operations.…Doctrine may support "why" we have certain weapon platforms, but its real value lies in providing our people a coherent framework for employing airpower as a team. 
72
We cannot let our enthusiasm for our primary mediums of operations blind us to the advantages that can be gained by using airpower in support of land and naval component objectives.…Not enough airmen have a basic concept of what's required to integrate air and space sensors; command and control; Army aviation and [the] Army tactical missile system; Navy and Marine strike aircraft and cruise missiles; our own fighters, bombers, and tankers. The ultimate goal or our doctrine should be the development of an airman's perspective on joint warfare and national security issues-not just among our generals, but among all airmen in all specialties. 
73
Part of the problem with Air Force doctrine is that in the past we have not had a standardized process for its development. Over the years we have had different offices tasked for doctrine development. Some were located at the Air Staff, tasked to develop doctrine, along with normal air staff duties. At other times, doctrine was written at other various locations, even being developed by each command for their operations. We have always had a review process for doctrine, but never a real methodical approach to developing doctrine. 
75
However, the political budget implications and inter-service rivalry may be too great to overcome, unless the revision cycle is greatly reduced from the three and one half year average the current system provides. 77
The Air Force is making significant progress on our doctrine journey. Consolidating all Air Force Doctrine activities in a Doctrine Center located adjacent to Air University is a quantum leap forward that will be a highly successful move. This action is reminiscent of the spirit of the Air Corps Tactical School. There is no better place and no better time in the Air Force history to begin this journey anew. We are approaching the end of the military drawdown with the last of the cuts expected to be finalized after the upcoming Quadrennial Defense Review. These changes will carry us into the next millennium. The change in international relationships brought about by the demise of the Soviet Union make this a more difficult world. Without a peer competitor, many suggest that the U.S.
Military of the future needs to take on an expanding role to become the worlds' police officers. One such proponent of a new U.S. military role is Carl Builder.
Mr. Builder has long been an advocate of expanding the official role of the Air Force to include police-like operations. He argues that our current operations in Bosnia and Iraq are, in many ways, "constabulary" operations. The problem he has with our current operations is that we are still using our war fighting doctrine to conduct policing of a no fly zone. He has four recommendations for updating our doctrine and acquiring new systems to accomplish this mission. First, we need the ability to conduct an immediate surgical strike against heavy weapons fire without producing collateral damage. Second, we need an effective doctrine and weapons system to employ against aircraft flying slow at low altitudes. Third, we need the capability to conduct "non-lethal" riot control.
Fourth, we need all weather ingress-egress systems for personnel and equipment, something larger and with longer legs than current helicopter technology. The synthesis of his argument is that our doctrine has become stale, that we need to think outside the box and apply the result to a law enforcement mission. 
78
In today's world, the U.S. Military does not have a peer competitor vying for the hearts and minds of fledging democracies. In addition, we continue to conduct peacemaking or peacekeeping operations. It would stand to reason that expanding our current doctrine and developing tactics, techniques, and procedures for these types of missions would be wise. The problem is that these types of missions do not seem to support large military budgets. No one wants to sign on to support a $250 billion military budget to keep peace in Haiti. The only way we can continue our current path is to buy systems that support major regional contingencies; and then, use those systems and personnel as best we can to police the streets of Mogadishu. 
My proposal is to completely overhaul the curriculum for all three schools to incorporate a, back-to-basics program on being an "AIRMAN!" No one should ever graduate from SOS, ACSC, or AWC, without a thorough understanding of our airpower history; where we were, where we are, and where we are going. Each and every student should be steeped in airpower doctrine. The current Air University approach results in students being exposed to information that is an inch deep and a mile wide. I realize there are competing challenges for a limited number of student contact hours and only so much material can be covered. The mission of each department is critical; everyone has their requirements. I agree everything that we have been taught has been important. The education we have received is priceless. Yet, there is still a deficiency. What I am addressing is not an issue that Air University alone can solve. This is an issue that will only be resolved for the Air Force with the combined efforts of the Doctrine Center and the Air University. The number one priority for the premier schools in the Air Force should be to teach airpower. The faculty will say that we are spending a large percentage of academic time on airpower already, and this is a true statement. However, if you evaluate what we really are working on, you would realize there is very little time for serious reflective thought and "outside the box-visionary thinking." For me, I was able to clear this hurdle by selecting as two of my elective courses, the pre-and post-1945
Strategy, Doctrine, and Airpower courses. The greatest challenge in this process is that there are so many outstanding courses to choose from-you just can not register for all the classes you are interested in taking. Again, I realize everything taught is criticalnothing could be reduced. However, the focus of the academic program should be refined. I suggest that the curriculum suffers from the same affliction that challenges Air
Force Doctrine-we are trying to be all things to all people. When you do that, everyone usually gets short changed.
The great opportunity laying at the Air University doorstep is the second part of my The U.S. Air Force in the Next Millennium
As shown in previous chapters, in the early days of military aviation, men of great courage and vision attempted to establish a separate and independent Air Force. This was a Herculean task considering they had an uphill battle to fight against both the Army and Navy, as well as the majority of public officials. Airplanes were altogether too new a concept for the average person to support. Like the automobile before, the airplane needed to mature before it would be accepted as a full fledge member of either the civil or the military sector of society. The early visionaries, Mitchell, Douhet, Trenchard, all charted their own course toward fulfilling aviation's destiny. In the U.S. Army Air Corps, Brigadier General Billy Mitchell proved the worth of aerial bombing-and set in motion, a struggle that would beset airpower enthusiast for the next fifty years. Strategic bombing, a mission only aviators could accomplish, was for many-the ticket to an air corps, independent of both the Army and the Navy. Defining strategic bombardment as the doctrine and strategy of an independent Air Corps were one of the few times in our military history where American military doctrine was ahead of our technology.
In many cases, doctrine was rarely developed for weapons employment before forces were fielded. In the future, the doctrine and technology struggle will be one of our greatest challenges in building and equipping an Air Force for the 21 st Century. the challenges in the future? Do we have an integrated approach to weapons system acquisition and deployment for the 21 st Century? Or are we just doing the same old thing; each service being myopic in their view of the future? Will parochial battles continue to be waged? Will each service seek to feather their own nest at the expense of our sister services? Do we have the appropriate tools to wage this debate? Is the Air Force still fighting the battle for an independent air arm? Are we seeking to prove that as an independent Air Force we will still be relevant in the 21 st Century?
Major Gary Cole (USAF) raises some interesting points in a 1994 article, The B-2 and F-22: Are They Needed? In his writing, Major Cole points out that the F-22 is the single most expensive weapons system program in Pentagon history. He indicates that the original advanced tactical fighter concept was borne from the realization that the aging F-15 would be an inadequate match for the new Soviet fighters to be developed in the 1990s. 
1
6
7
8
ally, the gas deal is in the best interest of their country; they had no options that would have produced a badly needed gas supply that also generates significant income for their country. 
9
Chandler and Trees argue very effectively for employment concepts and doctrine that calls for long-range precision strikes. They point out that stealth bombers can operate with little or no support can be effective on the battlefield, and then recover at their home base, far away from the threat of WMD. The authors clearly believe that pursing the F-22, F-18E/F and Joint Strike Fighter instead of bombers and long range cruise missiles is a serious mistake. 
10
11
Unfortunately, it appears that everyone with an opinion also has an agenda. Yet there are some excellent studies and analyses that are worth reviewing to gain further insight into this issue.
Examples from one such study are found in the 2025 Study Executive Summary, which indicates that current and programmed weapons platforms will be adequate for the anticipated threats of 2010, and that little more than expected systems modifications that normally occur in the life-cycle of a weapons system will be required. 12 Of course this means that, even though there is still a food fight occurring in Congress over full funding for all three tactical fighter programs, if all three programs go to full production, then we should be able to meet and vanquish any future adversaries on the battlefield. By today's standards, the tactical fighter program only provides two truly new designs, the F-22 and the Joint Strike Fighter. The F-18 E/F is only slightly modified from its current base platform. However, even the two totally new designs (F-22 and JSF) are not considered to be cosmic. In the Summary Volume for the New World Vistas, Air and Space Power for the 21 st Century, the F-22, while considered to be superior to existing aircraft, will not be of such a radical change in technology to represent a quantum leap into the future. The F-22 "…will not produce a discontinuous change in the nature of aerospace warfare." 
13
Notice I did not say a sixth or seventh generation fighter or air defense system. Weapons systems being produced today can be using no better than today's technology, but what about tomorrow?
Moore's Law states that "…the [computer chip] average rate of capacity increase-is a doubling about every eighteen months." 
14
In addition to new, as yet unknown technology, being available to future adversaries;
we are pursing a course of action that will aid future enemies on any battlefield by allowing the Global Positioning System (GPS) to become an open source that anyone with a GPS receiver can use to navigate with. GPS was a distinct coalition advantage during the Gulf War. However, the playing field may be level in the future. In a January 1997 Air War College Paper written by Captain George E. Slaven Jr., (USN), GPS, A Former Military System?; the point is well made about changes that are occurring in the Global Positioning System.
There are basically two types of GPS receivers, military and commercial. While the military receiver is inherently more accurate, there are situations where the commercial GPS receiver can be more accurate that its military counterpart. 
19
20
21
22
March 1996 Presidential Decision Directive delayed the final decision on giving full civilian access until the year 2000, it appears that the political pressure will be great enough to ensure full commercial access and exploitation of the Global Positioning System. 
23
Fulghum points out in a 6 February 1995 Aviation Week and Space Technology Magazine article that "…some defense researchers believe a reasonably sophisticated foe or weapons exporter such as Iran, Iraq, North Korea or China, might find it possible to foil GPS-aided weapons systems with something as simple as a broad-band low-power jammer." 
24
In the future, American warriors will not only have to face adversaries with space technology, but we will also be challenged with a new generation of fighters, every bit as capable as the next generation of U.S. fighters, assuming that the next generation of U.S.
fighters are funded for full production. The big difference with these fighters, they will be highly lethal and non-U.S. or non-Russian made.
Funding for the F-22 is far from guaranteed. A 13 March 1997 story by Ernie Freda and Mark Sherman in the Atlanta Journal/Atlanta Constitution emphasized that even those in congress that are pro-military have grave concerns about the F-22 program.
Representative Stephen Buyer (R-Indiana), "…a self-described defense hawk, brought a distinct chill to a room of congressional supporters of the F-22 stealth fighter project
[recently] when he questioned General Ronald Fogleman, the Air Force Chief of Staff, on the plane's cost. "I don't want another overbudget plane that we have to think twice about deploying because losing one costs so much," said [Representative] Buyer, Chairman of the military personnel subcommittee.
[General] Fogleman said the F-22 would be a "buy at $71 million," the projected cost of each of 438 planes, slated for service in 2004." 
25
fighters. The research team indicated that the F-22 would be the only U.S. fighter that would enjoy superiority over next generation European fighters. 
26
27
However, Matthews also quoted others in his article who do not necessarily share the same view as Generals Lorber and Hawley, "…many defense experts ask why the Air Force's fleet, which provides the U.S. with air dominance today, cannot continue providing it…according to the General Accounting Office, no other country comes close to challenging U.S. air power now or in the foreseeable future." 31 Eric Pages, from Business Executives for National Security indicated "…the primary issue is that since there is no threat, should we build a new plane with current technology or leapfrog to the next generation…with a defense budget that is still shrinking, affordability has become a much more important argument." 32 General Hawley counters that "…during the peak productions years for the F-22, the program will only consume two percent of the defense budget." 33 While these senior Pentagon officials claim that the F-22 program is effectively and efficiently run, not everyone in Washington agrees with this position.
Senator John Warner (R-Virginia) recently disclosed that the F-22 program is $15 billion over budget. 
34
35
However, the F-22 does represent a significant advance in aviation technology.
David A. Fulghum points out in a 6 January 1997, Aviation Week and Space Technology article, "Expanding Roles May Shield F-22," that F-22 capabilities are being more openly discussed to ensure that the public, media, and congress are aware of its potential lethality. In addition to speed and stealth, system capabilities are now being advertised to include F-117 stealth bombers roles, F-4G Wild Weasel radar killer capabilities, and the reconnaissance missions currently being performed by RC-135 Rivet Joint electronic warfare aircraft. 
36
37
39
March 1997 Air Force Times. In his story, General Hawley pointed out that future adversaries have studied the way America goes to war, and are preparing to defeat us on the battlefield by developing complex air defense systems that employ advanced technology surface-to-air missiles, like the Russian SA-10 and SA-12. Any enemy would know the value of eliminating the U.S. ability to gain and maintain air superiority.
General Hawley cited recent studies by the Institute for Defense Analyses, which states, "…they examined the ability of various aircraft to engage targets in the face of defensive systems that we can expect to encounter in 2015. They concluded that the F-22 will be able to attack 12 times the number of targets that could be engaged by conventional aircraft such as today's F-16-without exposure to attack by the surface-to-air missiles that will be the foundation of those 2015 defenses." 
42
43
Thirty years ago when the F-15 was on the drawing board, few visionaries would have forecasted Pentium laptop computers and the Internet revolution. However, the counter-argument is very simple, do we dare to not go into full production of the F-22?
General Hawley points out the cyclical process for aircraft modernization, "…in the early 1970s we began to replace the Vietnam-era fighter force with the F-15, F-16 and A-10.
In the 1980s, we turned attention to the bomber force and developed the B- Mr. Wilson feels that the mountain of research on the defense issue will never be waded through by all 535 congressional defense experts or by the 40+ congressional defense committees. His argument, borrowed from President Carter's national security advisor, Mr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, is that "…it is kind of ridiculous for the Pentagon to decide how many wars we are going to fight…for all I know, maybe all we need is to fight just one regional war and maybe no longer worry about nuclear war or two regional wars…then maybe we need to fight one nuclear war and three regional wars…but until we decide that, there's no basis for any review…once the political leadership, not the Pentagon, decides how many wars the American military should be able to fight at once, it is the task of Presidential leadership to say to the country, this is what we need over the next decade or so, it will cost roughly so much, and then the Congress can decide whether the country is prepared for it." 46 This argument follows the logic that the best way to prepare for the future is to first define the requirements, to shape the strategy for the future-then define the doctrine for the future; once that is all accomplished, then-and only then-will we be ready to make the best decisions about where we should spend our defense dollars. Mr. aircraft of all types. He believed that to define the types of planes, one must first define the kind of war. The aircraft he felt would be needed to defeat the Soviet Union was a four-engine strategic bomber, which he called, the 'Ural Bomber'. 
48
Much like Douhet, he described a strategic air war as, "…the destruction of the enemy air force, his army, his navy, and the source of supply of the enemy's forces, the armament industry…cautioning that only the nation with strong bomber forces at its disposal can expect decisive action by its air force.…Subsequently, Wever made production of heavy four engine bombers his number one priority." 49 Fortunately for the allies, possibly the greatest airpower visionary for Germany was killed in an aircraft accident on 3 June 1936.
In April of the following year, Herman Goering canceled the Ural Bomber. This was a great strategic error on the part of the German Air Force senior leadership. 
50
51
An important question about American weapons production is, are we buying the systems necessary to ensure the Air Force is capable of meeting wartime requirements in the next century? Franklin C. Spinney points out in "Anatomy of Decline," that the average airlift and bomber aircraft in 2011 will be thirty-one years old. However, the average tanker aircraft will be forty-eight years old in 2011. The youngest aircraft in the Air Force fleet will be fighter/attack aircraft at twenty two years or age, partly because of the deployment of F-22 aircraft starting in 2004. 
52
53
That is of course, assuming that the capabilities of the platform are still valid and the system still meets mission requirements.
The question to be put to the public and members of congress is, do you want your sons and daughters flying operational missions at 400+ knots, 200 feet above the surface of the earth, in a seventy year old aircraft? Unfortunately, Air Force heavy bombers are being eliminated from the Air Force inventory at a faster rate than any other aircraft type.
While they are old and have millions of miles in their log books, heavy bombers are still the weapons platform of choice for senior Pentagon officials and war planners, because they offer a full range of effective options. They are extremely flexible, can deliver weapons with near pin-point accuracy-or can deliver a heavy bomb load thousands of miles from American shores, and then recover without needing forward basing rights; or before weapons delivery-can be called back without the enemy ever knowing that the bombers were enroute, unless we chose to tell them. 54
John A. Tirpak addresses some key issues about the U.S. ability to project power in the future in a July 1995 Air Force Magazine article, The Pentagon Declines More B-2s.
He points out some startling revelations from the Heavy Bomber Force Study mandated by Congress and conducted by the Pentagon. Unfortunately, the significance of bomber able to fight two nearly simultaneous major regional conflicts (MRC). However, Mr. Force Deputy Chief of Staff for plans and operations said after the wargame that future enemies will not be inclined to engage the U.S. directly in a force-on-force campaign.
Rather, he felt that having learned the lessons of Desert Storm, that future enemies will pursue a protracted conflict without the benefit of six months to deploy supplies and build up force strength. 
65
The Army War College conducted an exercise from 27 January to 6 February 1997, which simulates a war that takes place in the year 2020. As one would imagine, a war that occurs 25 years from now heavily involves space operations. In this future war, a  members within the Air Force. One of the most obvious was the fighter and bomber debate. 
74
States can be expected to face in the early decades of the 21 st Century…airmen must not only grasp the strategic promise of aerospace power…but must become more effective in articulating this promise to their military peers, to the country's civilian leaders, and to the American public." 
75
Fortunately, the technological developments embodied in the B-29 were seen as necessary to the long term defense of America and the B-29 was not lost in the political conflicts of the time. 
76
In "Global Engagement: A Vision for the 21 st Century Air Force, Section IV, Air and Space Power for the Next Century it states that "…full spectrum dominance depends on process needs to be streamlined to take advantage of the revolution in technology. We cannot afford to continue buying equipment that is outdated when it reaches the Soldier, Sailor, Airman, or Marine in the field.
One issue that is obvious, we must have a clear vision of the future and need to take steps to establish doctrine easily comprehended and articulated by all Airmen. This Airpower Doctrine should be a defining aspect of our technology, which in turn, should lead the acquisition process.
As far as the acquisition of the platforms discussed in this paper is concerned-yes, we need to buy them all. The question is, in what order. While there may be a better mouse trap just around the corner, few would be willing to bet the farm on that probability. Investing in the future requires hard decisions be made. Each decision has an associated opportunity cost. Every choice you make results in an option not exercised, a path not taken. Again, we need to get on with the business of being Airmen. The F-22 appears to be the best we can acquire with the most current technology available. If a revolution in technology occurs before the full production is complete, then modify the aircraft as required and as taxpayer's dollars will allow. The Joint Strike Fighter and F-18 E/F should also be pursued. Both aircraft have their place in the tactical fight. The real question is, can we afford to not purchase these aircraft? While the Russians may have Mig-29s sitting on the ramp in Moscow, that does not mean that they will be there tomorrow, and after all, we are in the business of fighting and winning our nations wars.
Should we be forced to use outdated equipment when viable alternatives exist? However, pursuing tactical fighter replacements should not be at the expense of all other platforms.
We should ensure that the modernization cycle continues to keep all required weapons systems viable. To this end, we should accelerate the modification and replacement of tanker, airlift, surveillance, and bomber forces. Sooner or later everything breaks, wears out, or just stops working as it should. In the meantime, the United States should aggressively fund research and development of emerging technologies. We need to remain tied to commercial development, always looking for military applications for commercial technologies.
Only through an aggressive program will we be able to demonstrate worldwide leadership and forward presence. We will still have to be prepared to deploy into a theater. Yes, there is an associated risk for forward deployments, and we should do everything possible to minimize that risk. At the same time, we can never allow anyone outside the U.S. to restrict our options or attempt to dictate our international policy.
However, we can not deploy hopes and dreams of a new fighter or bomber. Flexibility is the key to airpower and success on the battlefield. We must never take counsel of our fears or allow an enemy to write our operations orders. Even though new weapons systems are expensive-the alternative is even more costly.
Since it appears that the Global Positioning System will be open to worldwide commercial access, we should seek ways to use that for our advantage. Rather than shutting the system down during an international crisis, we should develop ways to introduce false signals targeted to specific units or locations that drive our enemies into traps that we set on the battlefield. The tie-in for further military application could be significant. One of the greatest shortfalls during the Gulf War was our inability to eliminate Iraq's Scud Missiles. While they were, militarily insignificant, we expended inordinate amounts of resources against this "non-threat."
The technological improvements that will evolve will change this situation drastically. Scuds will become relevant; it is just a matter of time. The overall threat is the proliferation of missile technology. The 2010 Wargame may be more realistic than many would like to admit.
We need the ability to locate, target and destroy missiles immediately after launch, while they are still over the enemy's territory, so that they can reap the benefits of what they sew. Missiles may be the greatest emerging military threat we will face on the battlefield or in our cities. Our pursuit of a military answer to the missile threat may best be routed through space, in defensive and offensive weapons. We need to continue funding research in this vital area to ensure battlefield and battlespace dominance in the future.
These are very expensive platforms, $350 billion. That amount of money is almost incomprehensible. Yet, when you factor in the time line and compare that to the overall defense budget (two percent), and the weapons modernization budget (sixteen percent); the figure is not nearly as compelling. Much of the debate about the tactical aircraft modernization plan is that there are so many segments of the Department of Defense that are in serious need of attention. Not only is the tactical aircraft buy very expensive, but it comes at a time when a peer competitor, and the subsequent threat they might present, just is not there. This does not mean that there are no threats in the world. As Chandler and Trees pointed out, the world is still a very ugly place. The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a grave international concern. Moore's Law made us aware of the unbelievable growth in commercial computer technology, which will occur in the next few decades. While this anticipated growth gives rise to concern about investing $350 billion in today's technology, when we do not know what tomorrow's threat will really be. One of the main themes is the United States should strive to take advantage of this significant growth in the computer technology. Key to success in this arena is two foldone, take advantage of commercial endeavors. There is no reason to spend government dollars to acquire technology that will be developed for free in the commercial sector.
Second, given that point one is valid-the U.S. still needs to expend resources in computer technology research and development. However, the R&D effort should be limited to strictly military applications which the commercial sector will not support.
We also saw in Chapter 3, that the global positioning system, which was critical to our success in the Gulf War, will be a challenge in the future. Commercialization of the GPS will crate some challenges for military users. However, if we plan well and expend some R&D dollars to develop the technology, we should still be able to exploit this system during the next war. Meaconing, Intrusion, Jamming, and Interference works for the good guys as well as the bad guys.
The Gray Threat from European fighters, which may possibly end up in the hands of future adversaries, was determined to be another reason to fund the tactical aircraft modernization. The strength of these programs, the quality of the platforms should drive future decisions before it is too late to do anything about them. There are too many developing nations with funds available to purchase these weapons systems, to not build our new tactical fighters.
One of the main themes of Chapter 3 was the debate about doctrine and technology.
General Arnold's admonition to make doctrine drive technology still has merit, even fifty two years after he made his final report. The reality is that, while we are doing the best we possibly can, there is always room for improvement. This is an area where the Doctrine Center could pay big dividends. One of the significant concerns that make the $350 billion decision so hard is that the rest of the Air Force Fleet is also aging very fast.
A concerted effort needs to be maintained on the modernization of all platforms, but especially, tankers, airlift, and surveillance platforms.
At the outset of this research, the author was skeptical of the need for a new generation of fighter. The main reason for this belief was the tremendous success during the Gulf War. An inordinate amount of combat air patrol sorties were flown, to no avail.
This left an indelible stamp of superiority on many people's mind. Yet, after researching hundreds of documents, the author reversed his opinion. The interpretation of the evidence supports this reversal. The great mistake made by many warriors and
42
40
services. Ten years later, the Air Force published AFM 1-3, Doctrine and Procedures for Airspace Control in the Combat Zone.
48
services. Ten years later, the Air Force published AFM 1-3, Doctrine and Procedures for Airspace Control in the Combat Zone.
62
59
1979 version was soon labeled. The focus of the 1979 version was widely questioned.
1979 version was soon labeled. The focus of the 1979 version was widely questioned.
Center at Maxwell AFB; this will all change. Being located adjacent to Air University will give the new Doctrine Center access to the best and brightest in the world. One of the most significant aspects of this relationship can be achieved with some forward thinking by the Doctrine Center; specifically, establishing a direct relationship with Air War College,
proposal. I recommend that Air University develop an integrated program with the Doctrine Center for all professional military education programs. Some of the academic challenges-test, book reviews, papers, etc., could be revised, or eliminated in favor of airpower research projects. The Doctrine Center should host a quarterly airpower doctrine symposium where students could present their research to the audience,
based on the results of the Gulf War? Is the Gulf War relevant to this debate? What should the Air Force look like and be able to accomplish in the next Century? Do we need the F-22, the Joint Strike Fighter and the F-18E/F? Considering current aircraft systems, planned replacements and upgrades-what is the greatest Air Force need to meet
information. Current expectations in the computer industry call for a new type of memory-holographic memory that will hold terabytes of characters in less than a cubic inch space. This means that this type of memory, no larger than a baseball or softball could hold the entire contents of the Library of Congress. Another comparison is the expense of computing. Today the average top of the line laptop computer cost $2,000, yet the laptop computer of today can do more than a $10 million IBM mainframe computer could in 1977.
information. Current expectations in the computer industry call for a new type of memory-holographic memory that will hold terabytes of characters in less than a cubic inch space. This means that this type of memory, no larger than a baseball or softball could hold the entire contents of the Library of Congress. Another comparison is the expense of computing. Today the average top of the line laptop computer cost $2,000, yet the laptop computer of today can do more than a $10 million IBM mainframe computer could in 1977.
This scenario had Iran invading Kuwait and Saudi Arabia with the United States trying to evict them as we did Iraq in the 1991 Gulf War. Lieutenant General John Jumper, Air
Giulio Douhet, The Command of the Air, trans. Dino Ferrari (1942; new imprint,  Washington D.C.: Office of Air Force History, 1983), 9,  
I wish to express my deep appreciation to my faculty advisor, 
Dr. James
Mowbray, for his guidance, feedback, and patience. Without his assistance and tutelage, this project would never have seen the light of day. I would also like to thank 
Dr. Grant Hammond
Air Force
82][83][82][83][82][83] 37
United States Strategic Bombing Surveys
37-39
100-20
Command and Employment of Air Power, July 1943
1-11
Robert Frank Futrell
Ideas
Doctrine: Basic Thinking
United States Air Force
1961-1984
Volume II, (Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University Press
Harry G. Summers
New World Strategy, A Military Policy for America's Future (New York
Simon & Schuster
1995
Basic Aerospace Doctrine of the United States Air Force
16 March 1984
Basic Aerospace Doctrine of the United States Air Force
Basic Aerospace Doctrine of the United States Air Force
The views expressed in this academic research paper are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the official policy or position of the US government or the Department of Defense. In accordance with Air Force Instruction 51-303, it is not copyrighted, but is the property of the United States government.
The Air Force has long struggled with the issue of defining, not only airpower doctrine, but the very unifying principles required to justify a separate Air Force. I submit that we have spent the last fifty years waging a war we had already won. Air Force leaders may not have been insecure about the stability of our independence, yet I suspect they were nervous. However, when you consider the roles and missions debates, we progressed beyond the fighter bomber debate which started as an internal struggle and ended up being a national strategic issue as a result of the atomic bomb.
The Air Force has actually been fighting the same battle as our sister services-each year seeking relevance and validation via the defense budgeting process. When all is said and done, the perennial struggle for as big a share of the Department of Defense budget as possible, will never end. By the very nature of our existence, all branches of the service want the same thing; the best equipment and the brightest people our nation can provide.
Our goals are the same. We all want to ensure America is always free; we are all willing to fight and die for that cause.
No one should confuse inter-service rivalry with lack of support for our sister services. What we need to do as the only full service, full time Air Force; is to meet the Chief's challenge. We should put our differences aside, cease the bickering and think outside the box. How can we combine the talents and capabilities of each service to achieve the best force packaging to defeat any enemy, any time, any where? This all starts with our own operational foundation. You cannot build onto a foundation that has not yet been established. At the O-3 level, we should begin integration with our sister services-beyond the operational exercises we now conduct. The next step is to take for a Quality Symposium, surely we can do the same for airpower. I also recommend that the annual symposium not be held at a time when Air University students could not attend, which is the challenge presented by the current annual Air Force Doctrine Symposium schedule. Achieving this level of airpower thinking would allow Air University students to analyze and evaluate outside the box thinking. This process would also expose the greatest new minds to the senior Air Force leadership, and in turn, would allow a more personal opportunity for today's leaders to shape the future of the Air Force.
Step two of this process would be to establish quarterly working groups and an annual cross flow symposium between the Doctrine Centers in all four branches of the military. The synergistic potential of the mental gymnastics in this type of "Doctrine Olympics" is unlimited. This would be the ultimate in benchmarking; an academic equivalent to gathering the best from Fighter Weapons School, Top Gun, Gunsmoke, William Tell, and other competitions to fly an expanded Green Flag.
The recommendations made in this paper are ambitious; costing both time and money. Yet, the benefit to future AIRMEN is beyond measure. This program would refocus the heart of the Air Force on the most important aspect of all that we do, all that we are and should be; preparing today's students for tomorrow's airpower leadership challenges. While many Air University personnel will say there is no slack in the program to add anything, I agree. However, I submit there is room to modify the current curriculum. This effort would have to begin slowly; it eventually would build up a significant head of steam, producing superior results. forces has been lost in the tactical air forces debate over the F-22, JSF, and the F-18E/F.
The study indicated that bombers are very important in the "halt phase" of operations as tactical air is enroute. After we have a secure base of operations, have rolled back the enemy and established air superiority, bombers are not as important. However, a major flaw in the Heavy Bomber Force Study is the assumption that we would have fourteen days' warning before outbreak of hostilities. We had less than one weeks indications and warning in both the case of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the North Korean invasion of South Korea. 
55
On 15 February 1996, General Ronald R. Fogleman, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, gave a speech at the Air Force Association Symposium, which stated, in part, "…we're procuring the C-17 in the near term to address the nation's most pressing military shortfall-strategic lift. Our investment in the C-17 has already been demonstrated in an active crisis where we've seen the ability of that aircraft to take C-5 and C-141 loads into C-130-type airfields." 
57
During the Gulf War, aerial refueling was critical to both the deployment and the employment phases of operations. A tanker fleet of over 100 aircraft established aerial refueling support over both the Atlantic and the Pacific oceans to ensure the deployment of 1,000 aircraft into the theater. During the war, Air Force tankers flew approximately 17,000 sorties. 
58
Like the venerable B-52 and KC-135, the diminishing fleet of airlift forces are a concern as well. We are fast approaching a critical phase point in the availability of strategic airlift. David A. Fulghum presents some compelling arguments for the acquisition of additional airlift in a 24 April 1995 Aviation Week and Space Technology Article, Airlift Studies Examine Need for More C-17s. The stated national policy is to be the inherent strengths of modern air and space power-speed, global range, stealth, flexibility, precision, lethality, global/theater situational awareness and strategic perspective." 
77
78
In this chapter we looked at key airpower issues, some of which, we have been struggling with for decades. Each service fights the same battle, looking into their crystal ball to try to guess the future, then-magically, coming up with just the right weapons system to meet the new threat. There is no doubt that the Department of Defense Acquisition process is in need of change. How much change needs to be the topic of an extended research by acquisition professionals. From a lay-person's point of view, the Chapter 4
In Chapter 1 we analyzed the development of airpower doctrine employed by the United States during World War II. The main emphasis during the years preceding WW II was strategic bombing. Information presented in Chapter 1 indicated that pre-war strategic bombardment doctrine was based on faulty assumptions which were not fully operationally tested and validated prior to becoming national military policy. It was also shown in the first chapter that the United States entered WWII with airpower doctrine that did not fully integrate potential warfighting tools, tactics, techniques, and procedures.
Blind loyalty by airpower leaders to the dogmatic belief that the bomber will always get through resulted in the misapplication of airpower. These faulty assumptions resulted in long range fighters not being available early enough in WWII to establish air superiority over the German heartland resulting in thousands of unnecessary losses.
Chapter 2 traced the history of the U. S. Air Force doctrine development since WWII. We found that airpower doctrine development has been an ongoing struggle since the earliest days of powered flight. Unfortunately, this struggle continues on today. In reviewing the development history of Air Force doctrine, we found a clearly defined need for a single integrated airpower doctrine early in WWII. The early Air University mission statement tasked AU to develop Army Air Force basic doctrine. Yet, in the middle of a world war, trying to develop any significant doctrinal change was a challenge too great for any one organization. The British had bought into night time area bombing and the United States had signed on for daylight precision bombing, little would change those concepts of employment doctrine. The political reality is that early airpower doctrine in the United States was driven to support an independent Air Force. Early airpower enthusiast knew that since strategic bombing was a mission that only an air force could accomplish; proving the validity of the strategic bombing mission would add much fuel to the fire in supporting an independent air force.
Chapter 2 also pointed out some of the underlying conflicts that has affected airpower doctrine development; the fighter bomber debate from before WWII raged long after the war was over. The nuclear bomb added much to the relevancy of strategic air forces and diminished the strength of fighter forces. The arms race with the Soviet Union supported large bomber forces at the expense of tactical air forces. A major problem is that General Arnold's challenge to ensure doctrine led our technology has often gone unheeded. Since our inception, the Air Force has been defined more by the tools of our trade than by the employment integration concepts for those tools.
Chapter 2 concluded with some recommendations of modification of the curriculum of the Air War College, Air Command and Staff College, and Squadron Officer School.
The establishment of the Air Force Doctrine Center at Maxwell Air Force Base presents some unique opportunities. A slight modification to the curriculums of the three Air University Schools to take advantage of the research and learning opportunities that the new Doctrine Center will present, would pay high dividends. Establishing quarterly Doctrine Symposiums with Air University School students participation would be an outstanding way to start "re-bluing" our air corps. The idea of establishing programs that would lead to critical doctrinal thinking by our premier schools is exciting. The thought is reminiscent of the days of the Air Corps Tactical School. This proposed marriage of ideas and talent could be the capstone learning event for our future Air Force leaders.
The competition of ideas, research, and presentations could culminate in an annual "bestof-the-best" competition at the annual Doctrine Symposium. Having the Secretary of the Air Force and the Chief of Staff of the Air Force present annual awards would be a defining moment in anyone's career. A panel of distinguished judges could have the final vote on who would take top honors. But even those who do not take an Air Force level award, this is one time, when just being nominated would truly be a career highlight.
Competing would motivate even greater efforts for our forces to go back to basics, to aggressively pursue the concepts of air and space power. This could evolve into the preeminent air and space power brain trust. When a combatant command or the air staff had a significant air or space power doctrinal challenge, they could sponsor research. This approach would tie in all services and all CINCDOMS. The ultimate reward would Chapter 3 presented a look at the future of military aviation. Considerable time was spent discussing the F-22, the Joint Strike Fighter, and the F-18 E/F modernization. commanders is that they prepare to fight the last war. Our future adversaries will surely study the lessons of the Gulf War, so should we. Doctrine should drive technology, which should drive acquisition-only the best for the brightest.
Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
Maxwell AFB, Al 36112