# ID: fbd44345eab54ca2bac526bc0a37466f
# Title: Military Innovation Through Lethal Logistical Capabilities
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
War is rapidly evolving, and the United States is at the forefront of innovation. The future of armed conflict is becoming ever more tied to technology and precision. What does the future of armed conflict look like for the US military and specifically the Army? This paper will argue an American Way of War and a need to modernize during an interwar period will shape the future of American armed conflict. The objective of defense capability modernization and innovation is to find a third offset. These forces, combined with technological revolutions in the civilian sector will logically influence the direction of future military capabilities. This paper will introduce three characteristics of the American Way of War and then show examples of how militaries innovated during previous interwar periods, leading to the advantage for subsequent conflicts. The paper will then present the idea of the third offset and how the US military will achieve it. Next this paper will show some of the efforts the military is making to automate logistics and illustrate the ways businesses are using autonomy to innovate. Finally, the monograph will make the argument that expresses what leading theorists believe the future of armed conflict will look like, and then make recommendations for how the US military can improve the future war-making concepts and capabilities.
Theorists have created different categories of war since the beginning of human conflict.
Limited and total wars are phrases used to describe campaigns. Cultures have even developed styles for how they conduct war, like the Western Way of War. Since 1941, the United States, comprised of a unique culture, has produced an American Way of War. 1 Some of the characteristics of this American Way of War are dependence on technology, a focus on firepower, and war that is sensitive to casualties.
The US military's dependence on technology is an asset that assists in enabling friendly forces to have an asymmetric advantage over the enemy. The military's reliance on technology was on display during Operation Desert Shield and Desert Storm. For example, during Operation Desert Storm, the US military had the technological advantage that gave them the ability to operate at night. Advances in night vision, thermal capabilities and the introduction of global positioning systems (GPS) provided US forces the ability to navigate in an open desert under cover of darkness to find, fix, and destroy the enemy. GPS allowed friendly units to develop more precise data for artillery, azimuths to objectives, and proper angles of approach for aircraft. 
2
The idea of a technology dependent military continues to ring true. Strategic problem solvers conclude that technological capabilities will help solve problems associated with mission command. General H.R. McMasters states that in "future armed conflict, increasingly capable and 1 Colin S. Gray, "The American Way of War," in Rethinking the Principles of War, ed. Anthony  D. McIvor (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2005), 13-37.
2 US Army Center of Military History, War in the Persian Gulf: Operations Desert Shield and  Desert Storm, August 1990 -March 1991 (Washington, DC: Center of Military History United States Army, 2010), 64, accessed October 31, 2017, http://www.history.army.mil/html/books/070/70-117-1/index.html. elusive enemies will attempt to avoid our strengths, (and) disrupt our advantages." 3 He continues by stating, "Our Army's ability to conduct expeditionary maneuver and Joint Combined Arms Operations depends on a Mission Command Network." 
4
5
The US dependence on technology also made it more prone to try to solve its problems and win wars through overwhelming firepower. The concept of overwhelming firepower is rooted in doctrine. Joint Publication 3-0, titled Joint Operations, defines the objective of the nature of warfare, "is to defeat an adversary's armed forces, destroy an adversary's war-making capacity, or seize or retain territory in order to force a change in an adversary's government or policies."
6
4
5
Joint Publication 3-0 continues and lists mass as a Principle of Joint Operations and describes its purpose, "is to concentrate the effects of combat power at the most advantageous place and time to produce decisive results." 
7
8
The liberal use of firepower to suppress the enemy and enable maneuver was again on display during Operation Desert Storm. The Air Force disabled the Iraqi air defense, air force, and command and control structure through an elaborate air campaign. 
10
News channels televised some of the US air campaigns and it illustrated the accuracy of precision-guided munitions. The advances in technology that expanded the reach of mission command and slashed the time needed to gain a situational understanding of the battlefield also made it possible for the American public to view war from a very close angle. The instant access to the conflict as the conflict unfolded on television sometimes contained unpleasant views of reality, the reality that casualties are a product of war. American culture is sensitive when the 7 US Joint Staff, JP 3-0 (2011), A-1. topic discussed is friendly military casualties. America's public sensitivity influences political and military leaders and can affect the way it fights wars.
On January 29, 2017, an American counterterrorism unit conducted an operation on an enemy safe house in Yemen. The action resulted in gathering sensitive intelligence and left several wounded, one dead, and destroyed one American aircraft. The newly elected President of the United States, Donald Trump, and the President's administration approved this operation.
Showing compassion to the family of the lost Navy seaman, the President invited the seaman's wife to a session of Congress and gave them a tribute during his address to Congress. This example reveals the level of importance one casualty can have on American society and politics.
Knowing this domestic sensitivity to casualties, enemies develop strategies on how to use casualty numbers against the United States to gain political leverage. In January 1991, during Operation Desert Storm, the Iraqi Army made one attempt to fight the US military. The intent of the battle from the Iraqi strategist's view was to force a bloody struggle, which they believed would weaken the US public's resolve to liberate Kuwait. 
11
The United States has been fortunate to have technological advantages over its competitors since World War II. Much of this position came to fruition from hard work through innovation and luxury of having public and financial support. Carl Von Clausewitz said, "War is nothing but the continuation of policy with other means."
12
Therefore, for them there is no need to invest in military innovation and future capabilities. When the people in power concluded there was no viable threat to their country's sovereignty, they often lacked a sense of urgency to modernize their military and expand its warfighting capabilities. Quite often the lack of innovation during the interwar period had disastrous effects, and these types of countries were behind when the next war started. Change during interwar periods was and is very critical to the future of the military and the state's future existence.
Between World War I and World War II, the German government supported its military financially which prepared them for battle at the onset of World War II. The German army was held in high regard with the public during the interwar period. The German Army leader during World War I, Paul von Hindenburg, was elected president after the war and he gave the military the political support they needed to revolutionize. 
13
14
The transformation mindset fosters internal debate and experimentation. The German military during the interwar period was an excellent example of an organizational culture that valued introspection and corporate review. After the invasion of Poland in 1939, the German Army examined its performance and determined it required reorganization and retraining prior to their invasion of France. 
15
In free economic markets, organizations that do not continue to adapt, innovate, and provide customers with the products they desire go out of business because other businesses are willing to improve their products to gain customers. A characteristic of free economic markets is they are self-correcting. Blockbuster is an example from recent history that demonstrates how free capitalist markets correct themselves. Blockbuster rested on their laurels, failed to innovate as technology improved and ultimately filed for bankruptcy. Customers were able to stream movies over the Internet and streaming eliminating the requirement to go to a store to rent a movie. The idea of a self-correcting free market is similar to war, because in war the loser is eliminated.
Russell King, the executive vice president of Anglo American, a 35.5 billion dollar company with 195,000 employees, said in a 2006 Business Strategy Review that entrepreneurial ideas in large organizations must be focused. 
16
A perfect example of focused entrepreneurialism was the US Navy's experimentation with naval aviation, which directly influenced today's design of the aircraft carrier. Through trial and error in simulation training, the US Navy realized the potential of the aircraft carrier. They understood that the navy that gained air superiority first would win the battle because they were able to spot enemy naval ships before identifying the friendly fleet. Air superiority gave the US Navy the element of surprise and the ability to directly attack or call in maritime gunfire on enemy ships. In the end, it gave the US Navy the advantage on the sea. Through wargaming, the US Navy was able to innovate and come to the conclusion that the more planes you had in the air, the more of an advantage you had at sea.
17
Additionally, it stored planes inside and on top of the vessel to improve capacity. Engineers angled the recovery landing strip off the side of the ship to give the aircraft carrier the ability to launch and recover aircraft at the same time, which meant more aircraft were up in the air for more extended periods of time.
Financial support by the people of the United States tied to a continued sense of urgency during the current interwar period is critical to further innovation and expansion of military capabilities. In preparation for the next major conflict, the US military is focusing its entrepreneurial spirit on finding and exploiting a third offset by communicating the importance of modernization in published documents like the US Army Robotic and Autonomous Systems Strategy. This key document provides a framework and construction of the plan that underpins how the US military will modernize to develop and exploit an asymmetric advantage.
David's battle against Goliath is an excellent biblical example that illustrates an asymmetric advantage or offset strategy. David who was a smaller opponent when compared to Goliath focused his efforts on Goliath's eye. By targeting Goliath's eye, David was able to defeat an enemy who was superior in size and strength. David's developed skill of precisely launching rocks provided him with standoff and the asymmetric advantage over opposing forces in battle.
Dr. Andrew Ilachinski, a research analyst at the Center for Naval Analysis, defines an offset strategy, "As a general set of competitive peacetime policies designed to generate and sustain a strategic advantage over one's main adversaries." 
18
The first offset strategy was known as "New Look" and was an effort to gain an advantage against the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe. Geographically and physically outnumbered by the Soviets in Germany after World War II, the United States positioned and developed its nuclear weapon program to counteract Russia's geographic and numerical advantage in Europe. Russia had 175 active duty divisions and 125 reserve divisions compared to the United States which only had twenty-nine active and seven reserve divisions. 
19
20
21
These developments set the stage for the military to establish a third asymmetric capability.
Former Secretary of Defense Ash Carter described the current environment as an atmosphere where "nations like Russia and China are trying to close the technology gap with the United States, and as I noted, high-end military technology has diffused-sometimes becoming available to countries like North Korea and Iran, as well as non-state actors. At the same time, our reliance on technological systems like satellites and the Internet has grown, creating vulnerabilities that our adversaries are eager to exploit." 22 A shift from the military leading innovation, as seen during the first two offset strategies, to the commercial sector being at the forefront of the developing technological market describes the current innovation environment. 
23
The third offset strategy is driving broad range experimentation and innovation in the military application of artificial intelligence (AI) and autonomous systems. Deputy Secretary of Defense, Robert Work outlined the five tenants that would shape the third offset strategy 
20
21
22 Ash Carter, "The Path to an Innovative Future for Defense" (CSIS Third Offset Strategy Conference, as Delivered by Secretary of Defense, Washington, DC, October 28, 2016), accessed November 1, 2017, https://www.defense.gov/News/Speeches/Speech-View/Article/990315/remarks-onthe-path-to-an-innovative-future-for-defense-csis-third-offset-strat/. 
23
24
The Army Robotic and Autonomous Systems (RAS) Strategy published in March of 2017 says, "The Army must pursue RAS capabilities with urgency because adversaries are developing and employing a broad range of advanced RAS technologies as well as employing new tactics to disrupt US military strengths and exploit perceived weaknesses." 
25
26
The RAS Strategy states that it will help the Army address three critical ways that are being pursued by adversaries to exploit US military perceived weaknesses: adversary investment in increased speed of detection and greater standoff, increased use of autonomous systems and amplified size and density of urban centers.
To address the issues listed above, the Army's RAS Strategy published five capability objectives to guide unmanned ground vehicles and unmanned aerial vehicles development. They are to increase situational awareness; lighten the soldiers' physical and cognitive workload; sustain the force with expanded distribution, throughput, and efficiency; facilitate movement and maneuver; and protect the force. 
27
28
Technological improvements over the next twenty-five years to AI, autonomy, and command and control are critical to the RAS Strategy. Increases in these three crucial areas are projected to improve information flow and lower the overall operating cost of the Army. The RAS Strategy defines autonomy as, "the level of independence that humans grant a system to execute a given task in a stated environment." There are three levels of autonomy: humans in the loop, on the loop, and out of the loop.
The location where the human decision-makers fall on the "observe, orient, decide, and act (OODA)" loop for lethal autonomous weapons systems defines whether a human is in, on, or out of the loop. At one end of the spectrum, when operators control much of the functionality of a machine, the system describes a human in the loop. Conversely, when a system is entirely automated with no human control or oversight, it is a human out of the loop system. There are not many human out of the loop machines in existence today, but they are ever present in science fiction cinemas. Retired Colonel John Boyd developed the OODA loop as a way to command and control continually changing, complex environments, such as war. The idea behind the OODA loop is to progress through the stages faster than the enemy. By acting quicker than the enemy, the aggressor can destroy the enemy's ability to process and act on information. 
29
Operators control many of the functions of a human in the loop system. Human operators can operate in any or all three facets of this system. They can serve as the essential operator, where the operator controls every action of the machine.
30
The operator can also act as a moral agent and restrict the function of the system to issues like the use of force, but the machine controls the majority of the system's operations. The moral agent is valuable for targets near civilians, where striking the mark comes with the likelihood of causing collateral damage. The platform relies on the moral agent to decide whether the aim is worth the potential collateral damage sustained by destroying the target. For example, if the enemy ambushed an autonomous combat patrol inside an urban population center while civilians were in the streets, the system would require the command to return fire before the combat systems would engage.
Lastly, humans can act as fail-safes for human in the loop systems. When working as a fail-safe, the human operator maintains the ability to intervene in the operation of the system if the system malfunctions or fails.
The on the loop system delegates the "observe, orient, and act" portions of the loop to the autonomous system while the human operator maintains control of the deciding portion of the loop. In the loop systems are also thought of as supervised-autonomous systems, because the machine performs its operations under the observation of a human. In the on the loop system, the platform's operations are autonomous. Using autonomous vehicles as an example to illustrate a human on the loop system, the vehicle's AI software would be able to turn the car on, off, and operate the automobile completely autonomously. In this system, the operator would also have the ability to change the final destination and act as the moral agent or fail-safe in the event there is an emergency. The Tesla Motor Company's Autopilot feature or the Waymo rideshare services are examples of human on the loop systems. An autonomous system where the human merely designates the destination or objective and the platform is responsible for achieving the mission, describes a human out of the loop autonomous system. Russia's speculated "dead hand" program is currently the best example of a human out of the loop system. 
31
32
One example of a human out of the loop system is the Israeli Defense Force's Harpy. The Harpy uses loitering attack munitions and launches into a specific area where it flies a search pattern over its target area and hunts for programmed targets. Example targets can range from tanks to radar systems and once identified the attack munitions will fly into the target and destroy it.
Common control is, "The ability for one common software package to control an array of ground and air systems . . . . Common control will allow one soldier to control multiple robots with one controller." Combining humans in the loop autonomy with common control will give units the capability to mass effects on the battlefield with fewer soldiers.
In the near term, a goal of the RAS is to improve sustainment with automated ground supply. Automating ground resupply operations will improve the Army's ability to sustain high tempo operations by increasing throughput, efficiency, and extending the Army's operational reach.
In the mid-term, the RAS Strategy will expand convoy operations by fully automating Leader-Follower capability install. Currently, vehicles with the Leader-Follower system installed on them are restricted to improved roads. Rough payment is the limit of operation for these trucks, which means the Army expects these vehicles to move in semi-permissive, developed environments.
The Army deduces the Leader-Follower program will make sustainment more efficient by saving fuel, reducing maintenance costs, and extending operational reach. The instant electronic communication between vehicles with Leader-Follower capability will enable simultaneous braking and acceleration. Coordinated actions between the trucks result in no accordion effect when groups of cars speed up or slow down at unpredictable times. A reduction of distances between vehicles will improve fuel efficiency through drafting. The lead vehicle breaks the air for the rest of the trucks in the convoy while follower vehicles mimic the velocity of the lead vehicle. The Army assesses the reduction in personnel needed to conduct convoy operations as a result of the Leader-Follower capability will allow for 24-hour services, provide commanders flexibility, and improve sustainment responsiveness.
A paper prepared for the Army Capabilities Integration Center by fellows at The College of William and Mary found the Army could save as much as 25,000 dollars per soldier per year for each deployed service member no longer conducting convoy operations. If the military no longer requires the service member, the Army could stand to save as much as 300,000 dollars per year. The study was based on a soldier with the rank of E-4 and took into account the pay, allowances, and the cost to train, deploy and sustain the service member. Based on the Full Cost of Manpower model the average of a specialist with four years of service stationed stateside is 117,000 dollars per service member and if he or she gets deployed the cost is as much as 300,000 dollars. These values do not take into account the additional expenses incurred by the government if a soldier is wounded or killed in action while deployed.
The study used the percentage of accidents and casualty rates for Iraq and Afghanistan incurred yearly by soldiers with a military occupational specialty of a truck driver (88M) for the study. The study assumed a Leader-Follower convoy construct with a gun truck escort to develop its findings. The study "used ST 4-1, page 4-14 to determine the daily distance planning factor for a convoy, which was determined to be 144 kilometers. It calculated the total pallets of the classes of supply required for each day of operations and then divided that number be the capabilities per vehicle platform. After determining the number of trucks required, the study calculated the total number of soldiers required to operate the trucks. For example, one Day 0 with the supported headcount of 22,209, this required 562 pallets which take thirty-two M915 trucks for a total of sixty-four soldiers needed to man the trucks (eighteen pallets and two service members per M915)."
33
Those were not the only savings the study found. The scenario also illustrated a potential 91 thousand dollar per soldier savings in medical treatment for every service member reduced in the MTOE and total military end strength. There was also financial savings in maintenance and fuel costs. Estimations assess there could be as high as a thirty percent reduction in maintenance costs and ten percent increase in fuel efficiency. The decrease in maintenance costs is directly related to the decline in accidents causing unscheduled maintenance. The majority of the fuel savings will come from the following vehicles drafting and conserving energy during convoy operations. 
34
The Army is also working to develop programs for medium and large unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) to assist in logistical operations. The Army and Marine Corps logistics capability developers have partnered to create the Joint Autonomous Aerial Resupply System to provide flexible, responsive resupply options for brigades and below. Joint Autonomous Aerial Resupply System will have the ability to carry an 800-pound payload and designed to remotely resupply platoon-sized elements in challenging environments, like a mountain, hilly, or high threat urban terrain. The system is intended to supplement current methods of resupply when current methods are not feasible. 
35
36
The UAS can also assist in non-standard casualty evacuation of soldiers. Currently, Army aviation lacks the adequate capacity to provide routine aerial sustainment of maneuver forces and insufficient aerial resources to conduct casualty evacuation. The reliance on aerial resupply is projected to increase as the Army transitions to combined arms air-ground operations. 
37
The Marine Corps is developing an unmanned aerial vehicle system that turns current manned helicopters into autonomous aircraft to provide an alternate means to time-sensitive logistics. On December 15, 2017, the Aurora Flight Sciences displayed its Autonomous Aerial Cargo Utility System (AACUS). The AACUS is a Bell UH-1H helicopter fitted with a sensor, software package that allows the aircraft to fly autonomously. The system is designed entirely with off the shelf hardware and is a universal package product that can get installed on any helicopter platform. This modularity allows installation of the system on other aerial platforms giving them autonomous capability. AACUS consists of laser/light detection and radar sensors on the nose, bottom, and tail of the aircraft to detect objects in its surroundings. The system has also been installed and tested on a Boeing AH-6 Little Bird. The AACUS communicates with software on a tablet that runs much like the Uber ridesharing application. The operator and ground crew load the cargo, input a destination, and then give AACUS the approval to fly the designated route. Once on the ground at the landing zone and unloaded the AACUS sends a request to the operator of the tablet on the ground asking permission to fly to a destination. The Office of Naval Research is still developing the algorithms that will instruct the helicopter how to land in unprepared terrain, avoid dynamic moving obstacles, conduct aggressive no fly-over approach landings, and conduct autonomous in-flight mission re-routing to negotiate restricted airspace. These are hard programming problems and require operators to collect a lot of data through hours of flying. It will be years before the AACUS can do these things, but it is a step in the right direction. 
38
The RAS strategy states, "Autonomy is a gateway technology that, once obtained, will be integrated into all ground vehicles, combat or otherwise. Ground vehicle autonomy increases force protection by having RAS conduct dirty and dangerous tasks. Immediate investment of semi-autonomous capability, such as automatic convoy resupply, will reduce the number of service members required to operate vehicles during convoy operations, thereby reducing the number exposed to risk." 39 Currently, the Army is working to develop the convoy capability where separate driverless vehicles can follow a lead vehicle's path in convoy operations. The Army's planned integration and evolution of autonomous convoys are similar to how John Deere evolved their current self-operating tracker capability. all while in motion. 
41
42
43
Alphabet, the owner of the search engine Google, is a leader in the autonomous vehicle revolution. In 2010, then called Google formally announced they were starting a self-driving car Three-dimensional mapping is critical to allowing autonomous vehicles like the ones Waymo operates to drive autonomously. Autonomous cars use a combination of sensors to create an understanding of their surrounding environment because currently, no single sensor can provide sufficient data under vastly different conditions. 
47
The systems work very similarly; they take a snapshot of their environment, assign positions to the all the objects detected in the picture, and assign coordinates to those objects. Distance, direction, and height define each objective. They then compare a new snapshot to the previous one to identify the location of the vehicle compared to the GPS data and track the proximity of the car to external objects. It requires vast stores of data for the computer to compare shapes of objects against an achieved record of items. This comparison is how the processor identifies things such as traffic signs, pedestrians, motorcyclist, horses, etc. The vehicle's software calculates and predicts the path of objects moving near and in the direction the car is going to determine and avert collisions.
For autonomous vehicles to plan routes, autonomous cars must acquire data about the trip by traveling along the course. The vehicle can collect this data by driving manually along the proposed route, or autonomously by allowing the computer to develop a solution to get to the destination. The ladder option is not ideal because, without prior data on the route, the vehicle will operate much like a Roomba vacuum and feel its way to the objective. Once the car has traveled the path and gathered the data required, autonomous vehicles could operate in conditions humans cannot. Environmental conditions such zero illumination, dense fog, and dust, are not obstacles like they are for human beings.  
48
Technology will continue to change how humans fight wars. The difference is with the advancement of future technology standoff will continue to grow. Robots will continue to perform tasks overall directed by humans, but with a change in how they are commanded and controlled. An autonomous car example can help illustrate the point. Drivers give autonomous cars more control of car functions by allowing them to navigate themselves from one location to 
48
another but operate under human direction to conduct the journey. Simple tasks continue to be automated, while human control remains in the reasoning behind the decision.
Regarding automation, there are a lot of instances where the human is the limiting factor for the system. Eliminating the human occupant will allow engineers to design machines that are smaller, more maneuverable, need less protection, and can operate for longer durations than a single human occupant. Therein lies the friction because by removing the human from the system, the system loses the most "advanced cognitive processing system on the planet: the human brain." 
49
50
A typical situation that illustrates this concept is the trolley problem. There is an out of control trolley driving down the tracks, and you are standing at a railway junction box with the ability to move the trolley to another adjacent track. On the rails directly in front of the cart are five people who are tied up and lying across the train tracks. On the adjoining set of train tracks is one tied up person who is also lying across the train tracks. You as the person standing at the railway junction box must make a decision, whether to pull the lever and divert the trolley and only harm one person or not pull the lever and harm five people. Choosing to not consciously make a decision and not participate or intervene, counts as making a decision. Decisions of this magnitude are a reality for military professionals. As it stands today, computers are good at gathering the data needed to assist in decision makers to make an informed decision, but do not have the intelligence required to make the decision alone.
If humans are in the loop and making decisions for autonomous systems, secure communications become vital. The large bandwidths of satellite dependent communications pipelines are unrealistic when operating in anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) environments of our near-peer competitors. Deliberately jamming satellites and targeting communications with large bandwidths is relatively simple. The military employs jam-resistant communication packages called low probability of intercept/low probability of detection in contested areas. 
51
Dr. Scharre argues that because of the reasons listed above the future of US military armed conflict will have humans managing swarms of unmanned autonomous vehicles.
Autonomous combat platforms will collect and pass targeting information to manned combat vehicles an echelon behind the front line of troops. The future combat vehicles will be expendable, small, and hard to detect. These autonomous drones will find and recommend targets 
51
Manned combat capabilities will be around for the near future. If the F-15 and F-16 are the example, they came into service in the 1970s. 
52
Unmanned combat vehicles will play an essential role in the military's ability to project power through mass. As the number and size of megacities grow daily, the military will still need humans to provide the face-to-face solution to problems in urban environments. Constrained by caps to the military force structure, with a requirement to win in an A2/AD environment, unmanned autonomous vehicles provide an affordable solution to power projection and mass.
Autonomous combat vehicles will work in tandem with manned platforms to fight alongside or forward to conduct reconnaissance, target, and strike military targets. These capabilities will not be completely autonomous. They will have enough autonomy to operate independently, establish a line of sight network, to maintain an element of stealth, and resist jamming in an A2/AD environment. Human operators will make the lethal decisions and command and control the combat operations. Similar to how previous revolutions in military affairs changed how to fight battles, the current innovation in autonomy will change how conflicts soon get resolved. Just as the tank after World War I revolutionized ground combat during World War II, autonomous combat vehicles will do the same for fighting in the future.
When multiple decentralized platforms organize to conduct collaboration, it is swarming that is inspired by the behavior of animals in nature. 
53
52
53 Ilachinski,
AI,
Robots,
and Swarms,
105.
54
55
56
Artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithms imitate honeybee swarms. Honeybees perform specific dances to communicate and collaborate on where to find nectar, create honey, and protect their hive. Each type of dance can communicate distance, abundance, and direction of nectar. For example, if the target flowers are within one hundred meters a bee performs a round dance or bees wiggle if the plants are further. If a bee's stomach is full of nectar, it will tremble to let the worker bees know they have nectar to transfer to the hive. 
57
54 Ilachinski,
AI,
Robots,
and Swarms,
105. 55
56 Ibid.,
111. 57 Ibid.,
113.
58
When authorized, the algorithm would determine what capabilities they need to kill the target and terminate the threat (act).
Swarm intelligence algorithms can coordinate multiple different weapons platforms simultaneously. A swarm intelligence platform with various weapon systems will be able to use direct fire to suppress the enemy and launch drones to fix or destroy an enemy that takes cover behind structures. 
59
The technological advances by US near peer threats, the responsibility to modernize during the interwar period, and the directives laid out in the RAS strategy make armed 
58 Ilachinski,
AI,
Robots,
and Swarms,
113. 59
Insurgent organizations capitalize on the ability to blend in with the local populace to use civilians as shields. Fighting from urban population centers provides insurgents an added level of protection from precision-guided munitions because of the collateral civilian damage the munitions can cause. Counterinsurgency warfare requires a human-to-human interaction, and if the recent battles against the Islamic State in Aleppo and Mosul have anything to teach us, it is urban warfare will remain close quarters, street-to-street battles for control. General Milley says, "After the shock and awe come the march and fight . . . to impose your political will on the enemy requires you . . . to destroy that enemy up close with ground forces."
60
As communities around the world continue to migrate toward megacities, counterinsurgent warfare in urban environments will continue to present military forces problems.
Currently, the world contains twenty-nine megacities with populations of at least ten million inhabitants. By 2040 two-thirds of the world's communities will live in urban areas. 
61
62
63
Urban warfare in a megacity would become the sole focus for defense forces and provide near peer threats free time and space to expand their military capabilities. The US Global War on Terror is an example of giving time for competitors to close the gap on military capabilities. An article about technology in warfare published by The Economist said, "While America and its allies have spent much of the past 15 years fighting wars against irregular forces in the Middle East and Afghanistan, its adversaries have been studying the vulnerabilities in the Western Way of Warfare and exploiting technologies that have become cheaper and more readily available." 
64
65
It is unlikely that Russia and China would seek an inter-state conflict with the United States, but are also unwilling to continue to accept the paradigm of American global dominance.
The unwillingness to accept the current global power distribution provides the friction that could lead to conflict. Both countries have demonstrated an inclination to utilize the military instrument of national power to expand their spheres of influence. For example, Russia continues to occupy South Ossetia and the Abkhazia region of Georgia and occupies the Donbass and Crimean territories in Ukraine. China is militarizing artificial islands in the South China Sea to extend their A2/AD bubble, which undermines the US ability to protect the vital commercial shipping lanes of the region.
Both countries are increasing their ability to project power beyond their borders. China is investing in their long-range anti-ship missiles, naval ships, and expanding their submarine force. 
66
67
Arming autonomous logistical vehicles with anti-armor capabilities and operators acting in a human in the loop will provide commanders options in multi-domain battle. The ground force commanders will be able to bypass sections of enemy anti-armor platforms while still preventing them from targeting logistical lines of communication freely. This capability will also eliminate the requirement for logistical escort patrols. Ideally, a three-soldier team consisting of a driver, truck commander, and gunner could control a seven-vehicle logistical convoy. A logistical vehicle convoy utilizing a human on the loop algorithm in the Leader-Follower has the potential to move supplies more efficiently for less cost of current capabilities.
Arming the autonomous supply convoys with anti-armor common control weapons platforms and cheap expendable drones will benefit maneuver, audacity, and tempo. An ABC algorithm that controls all the mounted direct fire weapon platforms and drones employed in a human in the loop system can maintain 360-degree security, identify potential targets, and engage targets. Commanders will have more latitude to bypass armored formations knowing their logistical convoys have an anti-armor capability.
The gunner will primarily monitor the integrated weapon system. An ABC algorithm will orient weapon systems to scan the area around and ahead of the convoy, identifying and nominating potential threats. The gunner will verify selected targets, allowing the autonomous algorithm to determine which vehicles from the convoy should engage the threat. AI can coordinate the engagement of direct weapons systems better than multiple independently operated weapons systems and allow fighting formations to apply the principles of direct fire control more effectively. Additionally, the weapons platforms not engaging the enemy will conduct parallel operations and continue to scan for additional threats to maintain security. The AI may also decide to launch expendable drones in swarms to overwhelm targets that utilize cover for survival. Swarms of expendable unmanned aerial vehicles launched from the logistics vehicles could assist in destroying threats while suppressing them with the direct fire weapon systems of the convoy. When gunners are unsure if a nominated target is a threat, the service member can direct closer investigation of the potential target and launch drones to investigate the danger while they are still on the move.
Engineers can incorporate the data archived from these autonomous vehicles and integrate it in future autonomous combat vehicle platforms. These concepts will facilitate expansion into unmanned anti-armor platforms teamed with manned armored combat platforms.
The AI algorithms used to allow vehicles to operate autonomously can also facilitate target acquisition. The algorithm that identifies obstacles, other vehicles, and routes can also determine enemy combat platforms. Human-machine teaming will facilitate economy of force while not relinquishing the ability to overwhelm the enemy by maintaining the ability to maneuver and overpower him with mass at the objective.
In much the same way John Deere identified a potential for autonomy in an unregulated space, the military has an equal opportunity. The military must court leading civilian businesses by offering the industry an unmonitored area to develop autonomous capabilities and assist the government in developing the Third Offset. Implementing these capabilities on logistic vehicles provides a semi-permissive environment to work through unexpected problems and a launching pad to expand into more focused combat capabilities. In the future unoccupied autonomous platforms will conduct high risks tasks such as combined arms breach and clearing minefields under direct fire.
Uninhabited autonomously operating vehicles with a human in or on the loop offer vast possibilities over current capabilities. Autonomous systems are more persistent than their human counterparts. Autonomous systems will be cheaper and easier to manufacture because engineers will not have to design with protection of human occupants in mind. Machines also do not get tired and can operate for much longer and more frequently than their human counterparts.
9 Ibid.
9 Ibid.
19  
19  
US Department of Defense, Joint Publication (JP) 3-0, Joint Operations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2011), I-5.
Keaney and Cohen, "Was Desert Storm a Revolution in Warfare," 248.   
Carl Von Clausewitz, On War, ed. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton, NJ: Princeton  University, 1984), 69.
Williamson Murray, "Armored Warfare: The British, French, and German Experiences," in Military Innovation in the Interwar Period, ed. Williamson Murray and Allan R. Millett (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 16.
Ibid., 10.   
S. J. Lewis, "Reflections on German Military Reform," Military Review (August 1988): 63, accessed November 1, 2017, http://cgsc.cdmhost.com/cdm/ref/collection/p124201coll1/id/509.
Russell King, "Entrepreneurial Hearts and Minds," Business Strategy Review  
17, no. 4 (Winter 2006): 89-91, accessed November 1, 2017, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/busr.2006.17.issue-4/issuetoc.
Murray, "Armored Warfare: The British, French, and German Experiences," 10.   
Robert Work, "CNAS Defense Forum" (Delivered by Deputy Secretary of Defense, Washington, DC, December 14, 2015), accessed November 1, 2017, http://www.defense.gov/ News/Speeches/Speech-View/Article/634214/cnas-defense-forum.
The Maneuver, Aviation, and Soldier Division Army Capabilities Integration Center (ARCIC), The U.S. Army Robotic and Autonomous Systems (RAS) Strategy (Fort Eustis, VA: U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, March 2017), 1, accessed November 2, 2017, http://www.tradoc.army.mil/ FrontPageContent/Docs/RAS_Strategy.pdf.
Ibid.   
ARCIC, The U.S. Army Robotic and Autonomous Systems (RAS) Strategy, 1.
Ibid., 2.
Everett Dolman, Pure Strategy: Power and Principle in the Space and Information Age (New York: Frank Cass, 2005), 133.
Ilachinski, AI, Robots, and Swarms,[147][148][149][150][151][152] 
The Economist, "Man and Machine: Autonomous Weapons Are a Game-Changer," accessed January 25, 2018, https://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21735472-ai-empowered-robots-poseentirely-new-dangers-possibly-existential-kind-autonomous.
  32  Ibid.
Major General James Wright Fellows et al., "Force 2025 Application of Robotics and Autonomous Systems (RAS) to Operational and Tactical Logistics" (The College of William and Mary Mason School of Business, August 2017), 41.
Ibid., 42.   
LTC Jeremy Gottshall, "JTAARS -Building a Responsive, Organic Aerial Resupply Capability" (JTAARS Capability White Paper, May 2017), 2.
Lockheed Martin, "Javelin: Fire and Forget Multi-Purpose Combat System," 2006, 1, accessed November 2, 2017, https://www.lockheedmartin.com/content/dam/lockheed/data/mfc/pc/javelin/mfcjavelin-pc.pdf.
  37  Gottshall, "JTAARS -Building a Responsive, Organic Aerial Resupply Capability," 5.
Amy Kluber, "Aurora Demos US Marine Unmanned Cargo-Delivery Huey in Final Test," Rotor and Wing International, December 15, 2017, accessed December 18, 2017, http://www.rotorandwing.com/ 2017/12/15/aurora-demos-us-marine-unmanned-cargo-delivery-huey-final-test/#.Wl6llCPMzOQ.
Big Ag, "Autonomous Tractors -The Future of Farming?," July 2017, accessed December 18, 2017, http://www.bigag.com/topics/equipment/autonomous-tractors-future-farming/.
pmcmann, "Tractors and Technology: John Deere's Self-Driving Tractors," Harvard Business School, November 2016, accessed December 18, 2017, https://rctom.hbs.org/submission/tractorstechnology-john-deeres-self-driving-tractors/.
43 Gina Anderson, "How NASA and John Deere Helped Tractors Drive Themselves," Nasa.gov, November 2016, accessed December 18, 2017, https://www.nasa.gov/feature/directorates/ spacetech/spinoff/john_deere.
Sebastian Thrun, "What  We're Driving At," Google: Official Blog, October 2010, accessed December 18, 2017, https://googleblog.blogspot.com/2010/10/what-were-driving-at.html.
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, "The DARPA Grand Challenge: Ten Years Later: Autonomous Vehicle Challenge Led to New Technologies and Invigorated the Prize Challenge Model of Promoting Innovation," March 2014, accessed December 19, 2017, https://www.darpa.mil/newsevents/2014-03-13.
  46  Waymo, "Journey: We've Been Working on the Self-Driving Technology Since 2009," accessed December 19, 2017, https://waymo.com/journey/.
Esa Jokioinen et al., "Remote and Autonomous Ships: The Next  Steps" (The Advanced Autonomous Waterborne Applications Initiative, Whitepaper, June 2016), accessed December 20, 2017, http://www.rolls-royce.com/~/media/Files/R/Rolls-Royce/documents/customers/marine/ship-intel/aawawhitepaper-210616.pdf.
Paul Scharre, "Yes, Unmanned Combat Aircraft is the Future," CNAS, August 2015, accessed December 22, 2017, https://www.cnas.org/publications/commentary/yes-unmanned-combat-aircraft-arethe-future.
  50  Ibid.
The Economist, "House to House: Preparing for More Urban Warfare," accessed January 25, 2018, https://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21735473-much-fighting-future-wars-likely-takeplace-cities-preparing-more.
  61  The Economist, "The New Battlegrounds: The Future War," accessed January 25, 2018, https://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21735477-war-still-contest-wills-technology-andgeopolitical-competition-are-changing.
The Economist, "Pride and Prejudice: The Odds on a Conflict Between the Great Powers," accessed January 25, 2018, https://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21735480-great-powers-seemhave-little-appetite-full-scale-war-there-room.
  67  Ibid.